Trevor Siemian threw a touchdown pass in place of the injured Jameis Winston and PJ Williams made a clinching pick-six of Tom Brady as the New Orleans Saints defeated the Tampa Bay Buccaneers 36-27 on Sunday. Siemian replaced Winston in the second quarter, completed 16 of 29 for 159 yards and drove the Saints (5-2) 70 yards to Brian Johnson’s 23-yard field goal that gave them a 29-27 lead with 1:44 remaining. On the second play of the ensuing possession Williams stepped in front of a Brady pass and ran 40 yards for a touchdown. Brady, who threw a go-ahead 50-yard touchdown pass to Cyril Grayson with 5:44 left, completed 28 of 40 for 375 yards and four touchdowns with two interceptions as the Bucs (6-2) saw their lead over New Orleans in the NFC South slip to half a game. Pittsburgh Steelers 15-10 Cleveland Browns Ben Roethlisberger handed Cleveland yet another loss as the Pittsburgh Steelers survived losing kicker Chris Boswell for the entire second half. Roethlisberger threw a touchdown pass and rookie Najee Harris had an eight-yard TD run after halftime for the Steelers (4-3), who were handicapped by Boswell suffering a concussion on a blown trick play. The Browns (4-4) had plenty of chances, but wide receiver Jarvis Landry had a costly fumble and then couldn’t handle two passes from Baker Mayfield in the final six minutes. The injury to Boswell, who got hurt when he was drilled by Browns tackle Jordan Elliott after throwing an incomplete pass, influenced Steelers coach Mike Tomlin’s play-calling throughout the second half. Punter Pressley Harvin III is Pittsburgh’s backup kicker, but he was having enough trouble with kickoffs and never even attempted to kick the ball into the sideline net. New England Patriots 27-24 Los Angeles Chargers Adrian Phillips intercepted two passes, returning one for the go-ahead touchdown against his former team, Nick Folk kicked four field goals, and the New England Patriots rallied for a 27-24 victory over the Los Angeles Chargers. It was the first multi-interception game for Phillips, who played six seasons for the Chargers (2014-19) before signing with the Patriots last year. With 10:20 remaining in the fourth quarter, he picked off a pass intended for Jared Cook, who was not on the same page as Justin Herbert, and returned it 26 yards to put the Patriots back in front. Rookie Mac Jones then connected with Jakobi Meyers on the two-point conversion to give New England a seven-point advantage. Los Angeles Rams 38–22 Houston Texans Matthew Stafford threw for 305 yards and three touchdowns in three quarters, and the Los Angeles Rams dominated the inept Houston Texans in every way. It was the fourth straight victory for the Rams (7-1) and the seventh loss in a row for the Texans (1-7), their longest skid since dropping the final 14 games of the 2013 season. Cincinnati Bengals 31-34 New York Jets Shaq Lawson gave the Jets their first interception of the season and Mike White outdueled Joe Burrow as New York rallied late to pull an upset over the visiting Cincinnati Bengals. Lawson deflected a screen pass and caught the carom for the interception with 4:32 to go. Two plays later, White hit Tyler Kroft with a 13-yard, go-head touchdown. White caught the two-point conversion pass from Jamison Crowder on a trick play and the Jets led 34-31 with 3:50 left. Cincinnati (5-3) punted from their own 40 with 2:19 remaining and never got the ball back after a third-down personal foul penalty extended the Jets’ last possession. The Jets (2-5) snapped a two-game skid and won for the first time in the last four meetings against Cincinnati. Tennessee Titans 34–31 Indianapolis Colts Randy Bullock made a 45-yard field goal with 4:03 left in overtime to cap a wild game, giving the Tennessee Titans a 34-31 victory and control of the AFC South. The teams combined for two touchdowns in the final 86 seconds of regulation to set up overtime and Colts quarterback Carson Wentz threw two interceptions in the final eight minutes after throwing only one all season. Tennessee (6-2) have won four straight overall to take a three-game lead in the division and also have the third season sweep of the Colts in franchise history. Indianapolis (3-5) have lost three straight in the series this one coming in improbable fashion. After the Colts forced a punt with less than two minutes left in regulation and taking over on their eight-yard line, Wentz was in danger of being sacked for a safety. He made an ill-advised, left-handed forward flick that rookie Elijah Molden snatched out of the air and scored on a two-yard return to break a 24-24 tie. It was Tennessee’s first interception return for a score in 38 games. Jacksonville Jaguars 7–31 Seattle Seahawks Geno Smith ran for one score and threw a pair of touchdown passes to DK Metcalf, and the Seattle Seahawks snapped their three-game losing skid by thumping the Jacksonville Jaguars. In what may be his final start while Russell Wilson recovers from finger surgery, Smith was terrific picking apart the Jaguars defense for one of the best performances of his career. Smith completed his first 14 passes the longest streak to start a game in the NFL this season. He finished 20 of 24 for 195 yards, and his 83.3% completion percentage was a career best with at least 20 pass attempts. Miami Dolphins 11–26 Buffalo Bills Josh Allen tossed a go-ahead touchdown pass to Gabriel Davis to lift the host Buffalo Bills over the Miami Dolphins. Davis’ score was the first touchdown of the game for Buffalo (5-2). Allen added a fourth-quarter touchdown pass to Stefon Diggs, and the Bills’ ferocious defense held on for the win. Miami (1-7) lost their seventh straight game overall and seventh consecutive contest in the series against Buffalo. San Francisco 49ers 33–22 Chicago Bears Jimmy Garoppolo passed for 322 yards and ran for two touchdowns and Elijah Mitchell rushed for a career-best 137 yards and a score to help the visiting San Francisco 49ers defeat the Chicago Bears to snap a four-game losing streak. San Francisco (3-4) used an 18-point fourth quarter to surge ahead of Chicago (3-5), who have lost three straight. The 49ers scored on seven successive possessions before a series of kneel-downs to close the game. Philadelphia Eagles 44–6 Detroit Lions Boston Scott and Jordan Howard each had two touchdowns on the ground, helping the Philadelphia Eagles run over the Detroit Lions. The Eagles (3-5) ended a two-game losing streak against a team that was very accommodating. The Lions (0-8) go into their bye week as the NFL’s only winless team. The break gives first-year coach Dan Campbell extra time to figure out how to avoid leading the league’s first 0-17 team after being a tight end on the first 0-16 team in Detroit 13 years ago. Washington 10–17 Denver Broncos Justin Simmons and Denver’s defense held firm after a fumble gave Washington the ball back, and the Broncos blocked two field goals on their way to a 17-10 win that stopped a four-game slide. Melvin Gordon III caught a touchdown pass and ran for the go-ahead score from 7 yards out with 4:31 remaining. He also fumbled with 21 seconds to go, giving Washington the ball at the Denver 24-yard line. The defense forced Taylor Heinicke to throw the ball out of the back of the end zone on the last play of the game. Carolina Panthers 13-19 Atlanta Falcons Zane Gonzalez kicked four field goals and Chuba Hubbard scored on a six-yard run to seal Carolina’s 19-13 win over the Atlanta Falcons, snapping a four-game skid for the Panthers. Carolina’s defense stuffed Matt Ryan and the Falcons, who managed just 213 yards total offense. Ryan had one of the worst games of his career, throwing for just 146 yards with two interceptions.Relations between the EU and the UK risk further deterioration after the Brexit minister accused Brussels of behaving “without regard to the huge political, economic and identity sensitivities” in Northern Ireland. David Frost said the bloc had “destroyed cross-community consent” with an “overly strict” enforcement of the arrangements hammered out in the withdrawal agreement of January 2020. His comments, in a foreword to a new paper for the Policy Exchange thinktank, were published days after a second week of talks between both sides ended in deadlock. He also articulated, in the plainest terms yet, a view held in Downing Street that the protocol’s terms were foisted upon Britain owing to the weakness of Theresa May in the first phase of negotiations in 2017. Lord Frost said the EU-UK joint report, which set the terms for the article 50 process of divorce from the EU, was a result of the UK failing to make “the necessary mental shift from being a member of the EU to negotiating exit from the EU”. The joint report was a landmark moment in the history of Brexit, marked by the humiliation of May by Northern Ireland’s Democratic Unionist party in December 2017 just as she was about to co-sign it with the European Commission president Jean-Claude Juncker. The then-DUP leader Arlene Foster, who was propping up May’s government, told her she would not support clauses which meant Northern Ireland would remain in regulatory alignment with the republic if the border problem could not be solved in second phase of negotiations. Days later the section of the joint report was changed to accommodate the DUP but the sequencing of Brexit was set in stone, putting the Irish border solutions into the legally binding withdrawal agreement – Dublin’s point of maximum leverage – rather than future trade relations. The faultlines generated by the sequencing appear to be driving Frost’s demands for fundamental changes to the protocol. He says he considered resigning from his role as foreign affairs special adviser to Boris Johnson, then foreign secretary, after reading the terms of the joint report and realising “a crucial pass had been sold”. Frost said the protocol agreed that December was a result of the “extreme weakness” of the UK government after the June 2017 election. “We must return to the protocol and deliver a more robust, and more balanced, outcome than we could in 2019.” The Policy Exchange paper – The Northern Ireland Protocol: the origins of the current crisis, by Roderick Crawford – provides a chronology of Brexit negotiations and what went wrong in 2017. It argues that commitments, particularly on the Irish border, in the joint report were “a diplomatic triumph for Ireland and the Commission” but that “failing to secure adequate reciprocal concessions was a staggering failure for the UK”.For many it is the most stressful meal of the year to get right and can make or break Christmas Day celebrations, but in 2021 there is the added anxiety that vital ingredients could be scarce or nonexistent on supermarket shelves. But one company believes it may have solved both problems in one fell swoop with its “Christmas dinner in a can”. The days peeling potatoes, prepping sprouts and basting turkey could be numbered if this new festive offering catches on. The dinner, or more accurately soup, from Heinz, contains “big chunks” of turkey, pigs in blankets, brussels sprouts, stuffing balls and potatoes, with a gravy and cranberry sauce. Heinz will produce only 500 cans of its Christmas Dinner Big Soup this year, but has hinted it could roll out greater numbers next year if it proves a hit with shoppers. The cans, which cost £1.50 plus post and packaging, are available online from Monday. Anke von Hanstein, the brand manager for Heinz Soups, said: “It is made for those with a big love for hearty festive flavours and tastes just perfect with a slice of warm crusty bread. Any soup that includes pigs in blankets and roasties is a winner in our eyes.” A survey of 2,027 UK adults conducted for the brand found that 36% of those who celebrate Christmas prefer the traditional dinner to any other meal. About 42% said they would eat it more often if it did not take so long to cook, and 36% said they would have it more often if it were not so expensive. Research into last year’s festivities by MoneySuperMarket found that nearly a third of those surveyed expected to spend between £30 and £60 a head, while 8% were willing to splash out between £70 and £100 a head. Experts have said this year’s festive fare could be the most expensive ever with supply chain issues, among other problems, hampering stock control. Michael Caines, the chef-owner at Lympstone Manor in Devon, said of the soup: “At first I thought this was a joke, the chef in me thinking: ‘That’s no way to serve a Christmas dinner!’ But then I reflect on the fact that many people out there might not be able to afford a Christmas dinner. Maybe it is not such a bad idea after all.”Almost a quarter of workers are actively planning to change employers in the next few months, a report has claimed, as part of a “great resignation” prompted by a high number of vacancies and burnout caused by the pandemic. A survey of 6,000 workers by the recruitment firm Randstad UK found that 69% of them were feeling confident about moving to a new role in the next few months, with 24% planning a change within three to six months. The company said it would normally expect up to 11% of workers to move jobs every year. It has warned that such a move will have considerable cost implications for employers – as much as £25,000 for each worker – and said it has been advising clients to start looking at whether they needed to improve pay and other conditions to help them retain their best staff. Victoria Short, CEO at Randstad UK, said some of those looking for new jobs were workers who during the pandemic had stayed in roles they were unhappy with. She said: “Another factor is burnout. Some teams have been running too hot for too long. The pandemic has changed how some people think about life, work, and what they want out of both. It’s made people step back and rethink their lives. Covid has reminded them that life is too short.” The research found that only 16% of workers described themselves as worried about trying to get a new job. Workers currently employed in construction, tech and logistics were all confident they would find new opportunities, with workers in manufacturing being the most confident. Randstad warned the mass resignations will come at considerable cost to the UK’s private sector. Research carried out by Oxford Economics found that it takes recently hired professional workers 28 weeks to reach optimum productivity – which has an attached cost of £25,200 per employee, it said. Short added: “The Great Resignation is going to be tricky for those industries that can move workers around. It is going to be very difficult indeed for industries where employees are trying to get out altogether. A shortage of workers in some industries has led companies to offer signing on bonuses of up to £10,000 to attract recruits, although some surveys have suggested many do not plan to increase wages. The latest Lloyds Bank Business Barometer, published on Monday, found that 48% of businesses said it had become easier to hire people with the right skills or experience since the end of the furlough scheme. When asked about wage growth, 43% of firms said they were expecting a 2% increase in average pay over the next 12 months, while 25% anticipated a 3% rise. Overall, Lloyds said business confidence in October was at its second highest level since March 2020, and that staff shortages suffered in some sectors may be starting to ease. Hann-Ju Ho, a senior commercial banking economist at Lloyds Bank, said businesses are feeling relatively buoyant and overall business confidence is above the long-term average. “With 60% of firms saying that they expect to bring all their furloughed staff back to work, and a further 30% intending to bring back more than half, it should bode well for the labour market as we head into the winter.”The prime minister should no longer be the only person who can give permission for ethics investigations into his own conduct and that of ministers, according to a wide-ranging review by the independent committee on standards in public life. The committee, chaired by former spy chief Jonathan Evans, found that the rules around the conduct of ministers need strengthening, arguing they currently fall “below the bar” for effective standards regulation. In its “landscape review” of standards in public life, it made nine recommendations, including major changes to the ministerial code of conduct, which is overseen by the prime minister. It follows widespread calls for reform of the system after Boris Johnson’s previous adviser on ministers’ interests, Sir Alex Allan, resigned after a report into the conduct of Priti Patel, the home secretary, was ignored. Following an investigation into allegations that Patel engaged in bullying behaviour, Allan found she had “not consistently met the high standards expected of her”, but a government statement said the PM had full confidence in her and considered the matter “closed”. Since then, Johnson has appointed a new adviser, Christopher Geidt, a former senior aide to the Queen, whose first task was investigating the controversial Downing Street refurbishment that involved Johnson borrowing money from a Tory donor via the Conservative party. Lord Geidt concluded that Johnson had acted in an “unwise” manner without having breached the rules. At the moment, the PM is the only person with the power to order investigations into the conduct of ministers, including himself, and is the one to appoint the independent adviser who carries out investigations. However, the committee on standards in public life said the independent adviser on ministerial interests should instead be appointed by a panel made up predominantly of independent members. It also recommended that the adviser should be able to initiate their own investigations, have the authority to determine breaches of the code and see their report published within eight weeks of submission to the PM. On the ministerial code itself, the report said it needed to have a constitutional footing laid down in law, with any revisions subject to advice from the independent adviser, and possible sanctions for breaches should be set out including apologies, fines and asking for a minister’s resignation. The committee also recommended a strengthening of the advisory committee on business appointments (Acoba), which governs the revolving door between government and the private sector by advising on lobbying and jobs taken on by former ministers and officials. It said the current ban on officials and ministers lobbying for two years after leaving their post should be able to be extended to up to five years, and any work for a lobbying firm should be included in the ban, rather than just a prohibition on direct lobbying. “The lack of any meaningful sanctions for a breach of the rules is no longer sustainable,” the report said, suggesting injunctions against lobbying work could be sought or means of recouping severance or pension payments. Thirdly, it said there needed to be further reforms to the powers of the commissioner for public appointments, which oversees jobs for top civil servants and at public bodies, to make sure appointment panels are independent. Evans, a former director general of MI5, said the committee had concluded that the “current system of standards regulation is overly dependent on convention”. The recommendations were necessary to “restore public confidence in the regulation of ethical standards in government”, he added. In response, Dave Penman, the general secretary of the FDA union for senior civil servants, said the recommendation that the independent adviser should be able to initiate investigations was “essential if the code is to have a meaningful independent function”. “There can be no hiding from the fact that the current prime minister has undermined confidence in the ministerial code as a meaningful regulator of ministerial conduct,” Penman said. The recommendations were endorsed by Sir John Major, the former Tory prime minister who first set up the committee. In a foreword, Major said the committee “makes many important recommendations that I hope will be approved by the government – and, where necessary, parliament – and then implemented”. Angela Rayner, the deputy Labour leader, said her party welcomed the report, and many of its recommendations had previously been called for by Labour. “Boris Johnson and his Conservative colleagues’ actions have repeatedly undermined standards in our public life,” she said. “The system that is supposed to uphold the ministerial code, lobbying rules, business appointments, public appointments and transparency is clearly unfit for purpose. “Ministers have disregarded the rules and it is about time for a radical overhaul of the system.”Covid booster jabs are now being given at walk-in clinics in England as the NHS aims to increase vaccine uptake before what is expected to be a challenging winter. From Monday, anyone in an eligible group who had their second dose of a coronavirus vaccine at least six months ago can turn up at one of hundreds of sites to get their top-up without making an appointment. The walk-in centres are also offering vaccinations to 12- to 15-year-olds. The move follows criticism of the booster campaign, with only about half of the 12 million people in England eligible so far for a third vaccine dose having received one. The vaccine rollout to teenagers has lagged behind that of countries including France, Italy and Spain. People entitled to a booster jab are: those aged 50 and over, people who live and work in care homes; frontline health and social care workers; people aged 16 and over with a health condition that puts them at high risk of getting seriously ill from Covid-19; those aged 16 and over who are a main carer for someone at high risk from the virus, and; people aged 16 and over who live with someone who is more likely to get infections. Nikki Kanani, a GP and the deputy lead for the NHS Covid-19 vaccination programme, said: “NHS staff are making it as easy as possible for people to get their top-up vaccination, and from today people can now go online, find their nearest site and go and get their booster without delay. “The booster is not just nice to have. It is really important protection ahead of what we know will be a challenging winter.” People are advised to use the NHS online walk-in finder to check where their nearest centre is and whether it is offering boosters, and vaccines for 12- to 15-year-olds. NHS England said almost everyone registered with a GP practice lives within 10 miles of a fixed vaccination site. On Friday clinical guidelines were amended to allow care home residents and some vulnerable people to get their Covid booster vaccine a month early, in an effort to boost immunity during the winter. The booster campaign is a central part of the government’s strategy for limiting hospital admissions because immunity from the initial two doses wanes over time, particularly in older adults and at-risk groups. Protection against symptomatic illness falls from 65% up to three months after the second dose to 45% six months after the second dose for the Oxford/AstraZeneca vaccine and from 90% to 65% for the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine, according to the latest evidence from the government’s scientific advisers. Protection against hospitalisation is estimated to fall from 95% to 75% for Oxford/AstraZeneca and from 99% to 90% for Pfizer/BioNTech. On Sunday a further 38,009 people were reported as testing positive for Covid-19 in the UK in the previous 24 hours, with the seven-day total down 14% on the previous week, and 74 deaths were reported, with the seven-day total up 16%. A total of 45,697,856 second vaccine doses had been administered as of 30 October, while a combined total of 7,925,851 booster and third doses had been delivered, a day-on-day rise of 361,428.It has been criticised for trotting out cliches about France and the French and mocked for its idealised portrayal of Paris. But now the Netflix show Emily in Paris will focus on diversity and inclusion for its second series, according to its star, Lily Collins. The actor, who stars as Emily and is also a producer on the series, said she had heard viewers’ concerns about the show, which first hit our screens last year, and efforts had been made to address them. In an interview with Elle UK, for its December issue, Collins said: “For me as Emily, but also as a producer on [the show], after season one, hearing people’s thoughts, concerns, questions, likes, dislikes, just feelings about it, there were certain things that spoke to the time that we’re living in and what is right, and moral and correct and should be done. “And I really wanted diversity and inclusion in front of and behind the camera to be something that we really put our focus on, in a lot of ways. Hiring new people in front of the camera, also giving new storylines to different characters, which was really important.” Created by Darren Star, who is best known for Sex and the City, Emily in Paris tells the story of Emily Cooper, played by Collins, an ambitious American marketing executive who lands her dream job in the French capital. And while the series has been a hit for Netflix, it did not find favour among the French when it premiered in October last year. The French news outlet 20 Minutes opined: “The berets. The croissants. The baguettes. The hostile waiters. The irascible concierges. The inveterate philanderers. The lovers and the mistresses. Name a cliche about France and the French, you’ll find it in Emily in Paris.” Charles Martin, critic for Première, was equally irritated. “Frankly, watching Emily in Paris there’s plenty to feel insulted about,” he wrote. “When they decided to caricature us, the authors didn’t hold back.” RTL radio added that in between “the berets, the cocktail dresses and the invariably spotless streets, Parisians will not find it easy to recognise their daily lives”. Filming for the second series, which took place during the pandemic, meant the French capital was “very empty”, said Collins, who is the daughter of singer-songwriter Phil Collins. “There weren’t any Americans around because they weren’t allowed,” she said. “So that felt even more strange, because the only accents you would hear were French – which was also really lovely.” Discussing her father, Collins, 32, added: “Starting out, when I was younger, I had lots of things taken out of context in interviews. “I couldn’t be a more proud daughter, a more loving daughter. I love him and I am in awe and I respect him and I’m inspired by him. “But as an individual, I’ve always wanted to be me, and to have my own path and my own journey and my own failures and successes and all those things, like any individual wants.” The second series of Emily in Paris is scheduled for release in December.Sydney airport has become the scene of tearful family reunions, with fully vaccinated Australians able to fly home and walk straight out of the airport for the first time in 583 days. Many of the passengers who were onboard the first flights from Singapore and Los Angeles walked into the arrivals terminal shortly after 6am on Monday morning to be greeted by emotional family members and loved ones. Returning Australians were handed Tim Tams and hakea pincushion flowers as they made their way through a crowd of reporters. “I’ve got to get to my daughter, I’ve got to hold her,” one woman said as she pushed through the throng to embrace her daughter. Carlie Boyd was one of the first Australians to push a trolley of suitcases into the arrivals hall – clearing the heavily sterilised customs area at 6.28am and breathing in the crisp Sydney morning air for the first time in more than three years. Boyd’s brother Ryan Boyd and sister Clare Lyons had arrived at the airport before 6am with a balloon and sign to welcome her, and raced to hug her. “It’s been pretty stressful, so just to be able to come home without having to go quarantine is huge,” Boyd said. She had been living in New York, and after being unable to secure a flight home during the months of quarantine arrival caps, bought her Qantas ticket to Sydney three days ago. She and her siblings planned to surprise their parents at their Blue Mountains family home. “There were a lot of people on that flight who have loved ones who are about to die or had people who died this week, so for them to be able to get off the plane and go and see them straight away is pretty amazing,” Boyd said. Other passengers Guardian Australia spoke to said there were only about 70 people on the first Qantas flight, and that many were visiting dying loved ones. When Ethan Carter walked into the arrivals hall and on to Australian soil for the first time in two years, he had only one thing on his mind. His mother, Joy. “I’m anxious and excited and can’t wait to see her.” Carter, who lives in Chicago, said he was desperate to see his mother, who has fallen ill and been moved into permanent care. “She’s in WA, so I don’t want to talk about their laws … I might not ever be let in,” he said. “I’m really scared and emotional because I really want to see my mum.” He choked up as he added: “The doctor said that she hasn’t got long.” He then approached border officials to discuss how he could fly to Perth to quarantine before visiting his mother. He also issued a plea to the Western Australian premier, Mark McGowan: “Mark, think of the people that are suffering mentally to see their family, that’s also a health issue … You’ve got to bring families together again, you have to – everybody needs to be together, it’s so important. “We respect that you’re trying to be safe, but everyone needs to be together, please.” Elsewhere in the arrivals halls, some were meeting new family members for the first time. Moments after her son Robert walked out of the customs hall with his partner, Ivan, and daughter, Pia, Deb d’Apice picked up her two-year-old granddaughter, held her up to her face, and stared into her eyes. “It’s fabulous, I just feel fabulous,” she said. Upstairs at the departure gates, travel-hungry Australians were gathering to make the most of the international travel freedoms that also came into effect on Monday. After hearing that international trips would be allowed without an exemption – and knowing tht she would not have to quarantine on her return – Nicole Forrest booked tickets with United Airlines to travel to Mexico with her daughter, 12-year-old Olive. They will fly through Los Angeles before travelling to Tulum, where the pair from Cronulla are planning to enjoy beaches and visit local sites. “It’s fucking exciting,” Forrest said. “It’s going to be a spiritual experience.” Olive said she was most excited to sample the food in Mexico. Miad and Zahra Zandabi were flying to Boston, where they are moving to for a job that Miad organised more than a year ago but for which they had been unable to secure exit approvals. “To be honest, we’re sad to be leaving Australia, but after the lockdown it’s very exciting to start anew,” Miad said. The Pagewood couple have family overseas, and hope to be able to visit them more easily. Melanie Carrier posed for a photo at the Sydney departures sign before farewelling her partner, Richard Peake, and walking to her flight’s departure gate. She is travelling to visit family in Montreal who she hasn’t seen for more than two years. “I just want to be able to go home,” she said. “We’ve missed weddings and birthdays, and I want to hug my parents again.” The experience of dropping someone off at departures felt strange to Peake, who noted that there was none of the typical congestion and parking shortages of pre-pandemic days. While airline officials reported queues in the international terminal being the longest they’d been all year, the airport is far from its full capacity. On Monday there will be 16 international flight arrivals and 14 departures, up from the average of 10 arrivals and departures each day since July last year. But while most arriving flights have been limited to 10 passengers, flights on Monday had no limits on how many vaccinated passengers they could carry. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning As Australians walked into the arrivals area and into the arms of their loved ones, airline executives and politicians held press conferences. Most struggled to hold the attention of media, who were instead focused on speaking to travellers. “Today Sydney has reopened Australia to the world,” said the New South Wales tourism minister, Stuart Ayres.It wasn’t clear that Emmanuel Macron would stop when encircled by a small party of Australian journalists after he had finished his press conference at the conclusion of the G20 summit in Rome. His minders clearly wanted their waylaid boss to keep on walking. But the French president chose to stop and entertain questions. Having been invited politely to reflect on the nuclear submarine fracas, Macron took aim at Scott Morrison, and he did not miss. Morrison has been shadowed by the Aukus controversy ever since his departure from Australia last Thursday. Macron’s opening submarine sortie came in a phone call just before the prime minister boarded his plane for the G20. Diplomatic relations between Canberra and Paris have been in the deep freeze since Morrison dumped the $90bn contract with the French Naval Group, and whipped Aukus out of his back pocket. Facing the prospect of having to front two international summits with Macron, where any obvious snub would grab headlines, Morrison attempted to repair the relationship by reaching out to the Élysée Palace. Macron consented to a phone call. During the call last Thursday, Macron told Morrison that ditching the submarine contract had broken “the relationship of trust”. Canberra needed to propose “tangible actions” to heal the rift. Macron also hoped Morrison had packed lashings of ambition before arriving at the G20 and the Cop26 in Glasgow. Australia, he said, needed “to cease production and consumption of coal at the national level and abroad”. We know all this because Macron got his official record of the conversation out first. In the time-honoured diplomatic game of duelling readouts, first movers always establish the terms of any ensuing narrative. Macron’s version was splashed prominently across Australian news outlets while Morrison was winging his way slowly north. Journalists travelling on the plane with Morrison were not given a heads-up. We found out when the news of the call broke. The tenor of the call established that any rapprochement between Paris and Canberra would be gritted teeth at best. By the time Morrison touched down in Rome, the “optics” got worse. On the evening before the G20, Joe Biden (another one of the Aukus traitors) embarked on his own performative rapprochement with Macron. During a tête-à-tête at France’s Vatican embassy in Rome, Biden acknowledged the handling of the submarine fracas had been “clumsy”. Biden wasn’t done. He told his French counterpart he’d been “under the impression” that France had been informed long before Aukus (surprise!) day that the contract was going to be terminated. It was possible Biden was rebuking his own senior staff. Morrison insists the Biden administration was kept informed of all the twists and turns in Australia’s long conversation with France about the troubled Naval Group contract while the secret Aukus planning was under way. The Canberra version of this story is senior White House aides failed to manage up. But it was also possible Biden had just landed a very public blow on Morrison. With Angela Merkel, the political titan of Europe, bowing out of public life, Macron is very important to Biden. If Macron wanted a scalp to restore dented French national pride perhaps it better be that “fellow from down under”. Thank you very much pal. Being berated in Rome wasn’t on Morrison’s G20 plan. The plan was to raise the alarm about people being nasty on Facebook, and block any inconvenient language presaging a phase-out of coal in the final communique. But instead of Roman Holiday, Morrison found himself on the receiving end of a Malachi Crunch from Biden and Macron. Things got even worse on Sunday night when Macron accused Morrison of lying during his impromptu chat with Australian journalists – an extraordinary charge in diplomatic terms. The obvious question to ask – is Macron’s lying charge fair? Morrison was ropable when he learned of the accusation. He says he didn’t lie. Morrison says he gave Macron a significant hint in June that the contract was in strife. The prime minister says he wasn’t in a position to be any more candid because the Aukus pact needed to be secret squirrel right up until the time Biden, Boris Johnson and Morrison decided to fess up. This rings true. There aren’t many countries in the world that would dare pre-empt an American national security announcement if the US expressly forbade its disclosure. Morrison was in a difficult position. But it’s fair to say Morrison put himself in a difficult position by choosing to pursue US nuclear-powered submarines while still contracted to a French alternative. Aukus wasn’t foisted on him. He wasn’t a victim. This was an opportunity Morrison hunted down for Australia. Another question to ask, apart from what on earth Morrison can do to make things right, is how this fracas reads domestically. Morrison is very obviously trying to insulate himself from reputational damage by declaring he has prioritised Australia’s national security ahead of French national pride. If France must be humiliated in the process of keeping Australians safe – then bring on the humiliation. Who is that uppity Macron to poke an Australian prime minister in the chest? Nationalist parables like this one write themselves. Morrison clearly believes he has a viable means of discounting Macron’s very undiplomatic attack on his character and integrity, and perhaps that will work. But the risk for Morrison is Macron’s precision demolition plays right into pre-existing voter unease that Australia’s prime minister doesn’t always play it straight, and very rarely cops it sweet.After much Sturm und Drang, Australia’s prime minister Scott Morrison has finally jetted off to attend the global climate talks in Glasgow with a vague and hastily assembled commitment to net zero carbon emissions by 2050. The growing international pressure and voter concerns over the devastating climate impacts Australia has endured in recent years appear to have finally dragged the government kicking and screaming to this position, despite a rearguard action by the government’s Coalition partners, the National party, against any such commitment. However, last week Morrison triumphantly waved a pamphlet proclaiming his government’s commitment to net zero under the banner of the “Australian Way”. Long on promises and short on details, the government’s commitment relies upon the viability of dubious future technologies, most notably carbon capture at massive scale, rather than any mandated reduction in emissions, let alone a price or tax on emitted carbon. As Morrison said: “Our plan works with Australians to achieve this goal. Our plan enables them, it doesn’t legislate them, it doesn’t mandate them.” While business groups, including those representing the country’s coal industry like the Minerals Council of Australia, praised the announcement as providing certainty, overseas observers have noted this commitment is the weakest among developed nations attending the Glasgow talks, and lacks any change to the government’s existing emissions reductions targets of 26% to 28% by 2030 (half what other industrialised nations such as the US, the UK and the European Union have committed to). Indeed, recent analysis suggests Australia is at the back of the pack among developed nations in terms of cutting its greenhouse gas emissions and transitioning away from fossil fuels. While this commitment, even if reluctant, to net zero emissions by 2050 is to be welcomed, in reality it needs to be seen within the broader context of the Australian government’s continued coddling of the fossil fuel industry. Australia is among the world’s largest fossil fuel exporters (ranking just behind Russia and Saudi Arabia) and the largest in the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, making up 7% of global fossil fuel exports. After decades of government-sponsored expansion, Australia’s coal and gas industries make the country the fifth-largest miner of fossil fuel carbon in absolute terms (larger than India, Indonesia, Canada, Iraq and Iran). Added to that, domestic emissions are significant, ranking 14th globally, and on a per capita basis the highest in the OECD. This fossil fuel addiction stems from the close support by government of the industry over decades, with considerable assistance from the Murdoch media empire, who have presented fossil fuel extraction and use as inherent to Australia’s national identity and economic wellbeing. While growing concerns over climate change have prompted attempts at policy reform (most notably the former Gillard Labor government’s introduction of carbon pricing legislation a decade ago), these moves have been strenuously opposed by the Coalition and the mining industry. However, as outright denial of climate change becomes untenable in the face of record-breaking droughts, fires, and floods, industry and its abettors in government and the conservative media have engaged in what one of us has termed the new climate war. This war on climate action involves an array of tactics that fall short of outright denial, but are nonetheless aimed at blocking, or at least slowing, the transition of fossil fuels. In Australia, a chief tactic of the forces of climate inaction has been to call for a “measured response” which in no way constrains fossil fuel expansion. If Australia were to limit its coal exports, the inactivists argue, buyers would source coal from elsewhere (a variation of the “drug-dealer’s defence”). Or they assert that Australian coal helps bring developing nations out of “energy poverty” (a tagline developed by US coal giant Peabody Energy and promoted by climate inactivists). Coal is “good for humanity” they insist. Indeed, Morrison in a previous incarnation as the country’s treasurer in the hot summer of 2017 famously waved a lump of coal at opposition politicians on the floor of parliament, declaring: “This is coal … don’t be afraid!” Well, we should have been afraid. Very afraid. After all, look who is now prime minister. Given the Coalition’s history of defending the dominance of fossil energy in Australia, what are we to make of their belated acceptance of the net zero agenda? Overall, it appears the song remains the same! The failure to commit to increased emissions reduction targets, as well as the recent disclosures that the Australian government has sought to water down a UN recommendation to phase out coal- and gas-fired power stations, and rejected a call to join a US and European-led pledge to cut methane emissions, and that the country’s energy minister will be spruiking the benefits of Australian gas investment at the Glasgow talks, all seem par for the course. While Morrison has swapped the lump of coal for a flashy pamphlet, there appears little substance to the government’s purported commitment to climate action. Like other nations and companies committed to a continuation of business-as-usual fossil fuel extraction and use, it appears the name of the game is delay and inaction. Unfortunately, the time for delay is well past and the window to avoid catastrophic climate disruption is rapidly closing. We can’t afford further inaction and obfuscation by the current Australian government. • Michael E Mann is a distinguished professor of atmospheric science at Pennsylvania State University. He is author of The New Climate War: The Fight to Take Back Our Planet. Christopher Wright is a professor of organisational studies at the University of Sydney Business School and author of Climate Change, Capitalism and CorporationsJapan’s ruling conservative party defied expectations in Sunday’s general election, with a comfortable victory that will boost the prime minister, Fumio Kishida, as he attempts to steer the economy out of the coronavirus pandemic. Kishida’s Liberal Democratic party secured 261 seats in the 465-member lower house – the more powerful of Japan’s two-chamber Diet – slightly down on its pre-election 276 seats. The party and its junior coalition partner, Komeito, together won 293 seats, more than the 261 required for an “absolute stable majority” that gives them command of parliamentary committees, making it easier to pass bills. Japan’s Nikkei share index rose 2.3% on Monday to a one-month high. Kishida said his administration would attempt to compile an extra budget this year that would support for people hit by the pandemic, including those who lost their jobs and students struggling to pay tuition fees. “The lower house election is about choosing a leadership,” Kishida told public broadcaster NHK. “With the ruling coalition certain to keep its majority, I believe we received a mandate from the voters.” The Constitutional Democratic party of Japan, the biggest opposition group, lost more than a dozen seats. But the rightwing populist Japan Innovation party, whose base is in the western city of Osaka, quadrupled its presence to 41 seats to become the third-biggest party in the chamber. Some exit polls had predicted an uncomfortably close night for Kishida and the LDP, which has governed Japan almost without interruption since the mid-1950s and last lost a lower house election in 2009. Kishida, who became prime minister last month after his predecessor, Yoshihide Suga, decided not to run in the LDP leadership race, said he would prepare Japan’s health service for a possible wave of winter Covid-19 cases and tackle income inequality as he attempts to revive the pandemic-hit economy with a multi-trillion yen stimulus package. “The overall trend is in favour of stability. The LDP cleared the hurdles it absolutely had to,” said Tobias Harris, senior fellow at the Center for American Progress. “We’ll see a lot of stimulus.” Kishida, 64, had hoped that his focus on a vaguely defined “new capitalism” that would redistribute wealth to Japan’s struggling middle classes would help his party retain its healthy majority in parliament. He had also promised a more responsive leadership amid criticism that Shinzo Abe, who stepped down last year, and his short-lived successor, Suga, had lost touch with voters, particularly during the coronavirus pandemic. Voter apathy was reflected in the turnout, which at just under 56% was the third lowest since the end of the war. Unusually for an incoming leader, Kishida did not enjoy a political honeymoon, with approval ratings about 50%, the lowest in two decades for a new administration in Japan. Several opposition parties had attempted to capitalise on unusually close cooperation, with five of them, including the communists, agreeing before the campaign not to compete against each other in marginal constituencies in an attempt to consolidate the anti-LDP vote. They called for more help for low-income families, as well as to allow married couples to use separate surnames and for the legalisation of same-sex marriage – two changes Kishida has said he opposes. “I focused on the candidates’ policies on same-sex marriage and LGBT issues. I have many friends in gay or lesbian couples. I hope public understanding on these issues will deepen,” said Eko Nagasaki, an 18-year-old woman who voted for the first time. Several polls had indicated that Kishida, a softly spoke centrist whose rise had been met with indifference by many voters, lacked the profile to lead the LDP to a convincing victory. Last month he defeated three rivals to become party president – effectively securing him the premiership – including Taro Kono, a reformist whose popularity among voters was not shared by many party MPs. Kishida, who had delayed a decision on his attendance at Cop26 summit until the election results were in, will now come under pressure to offer more details of his plans for the world’s third-biggest economy, as well as ensure that Japan’s medical infrastructure is better able to cope with a possible rise in Covid-19 cases. On the foreign policy front, he backs party plans to dramatically raise defence spending in response to an increasingly uncertain security environment in north-east Asia. The LDP included in its election platform a pledge to double defence spending to 2% of GDP, citing rising tensions between China and Taiwan and North Korea’s resumption of ballistic missile tests. Japan, whose postwar “pacifist” constitution forbids it from using force to settle international disputes, has traditionally kept spending on defence to within 1% of GDP. Any attempt to break through that symbolic barrier could encounter resistance at home and spark protests from China. Yoshihiko Suzuki, who voted for opposition candidates, said he hoped Kishida’s win would bring an end to the “arrogance and complacency” that had characterised his predecessors’ administrations. “I hope this election comes as a wakeup call for them,” the retired 68-year-old said. “If it does, the LDP will become a better party, considering the number of talented lawmakers they’ve got.”Just a brief update before we close this blog. Berejiklian spoke outside of the Icac not long ago. She told the media she was now “stronger than ever” and said it was an “honour and privilege to serve you in my role in public life”. Now I intend to get on with my life and I want to thank everybody for their support. My position has not changed. Every day that I have dealt with the public, every day I have made decisions [that have] been in their best interest. For the public, the government, the community. It has been my honour and privilege to serve the community in that way. She said she respects that it is the job of the Icac to “look at these matters”. The commission adjourns for the foreseeable future. The next step in its investigation is for submissions to be made by the parties. Then we’ll eventually receive the commission’s report. For now, let’s summarise what was an explosive morning of evidence. The commission revealed text messages in which Maguire urged Berejiklian to get a “private phone” and download the secure messaging app WeChat. He had just been subpoenaed to appear at Icac. Berejiklian refused. The former premier was pressed on her decision not to report her knowledge of Maguire’s dealings to Icac. She said repeatedly that she trusted him, believed him, and didn’t think she had any knowledge that would have been useful to the commission. That’s despite Maguire’s appearance at Icac suggesting to her that he had lied about the nature of his involvement in a money-making scheme between a Canterbury City Council member and property developers. She said she “never suspected him of being corrupt” and “did not join the dots”. She denied being influenced by her feelings for Maguire when deciding whether to make a report to Icac. Berejiklian gave another startling account of the reality of grant funding. She said it was common practice to divert funds to seats for political gain during by-elections. She said that had been one of her main motivators in funding both the Riverina Conservatorium of Music’s new recital hall and the Australian Clay Target Association’s new facilities. Berejiklian denied she had funded the conservatorium project to give Maguire a “legacy” upon his resignation. Berejiklian was pressed on what she told her then chief of staff, Sarah Cruickshank, about her relationship with Maguire in 2018, after he was embroiled in the Canterbury council scandal. Cruickshank recalls her saying the relationship was “historical”. Berejiklian says she did not intend to give that impression and only sought to convey the relationship was “on again, off again” and was close. Thanks again for sticking with me. And that’s the extent of her evidence. Berejiklian is released from her summons. So is Maguire. Callan asks Berejiklian: What do you say to the suggestion that you had a “private interest” – Maguire’s relationship with her – that influenced your public duties? Berejiklian responds: I completely reject that suggestion. Berejiklian’s lawyer, Sophie Callan, SC, is now asking questions. She begins by asking how often Berejiklian would have had concerns, roadblocks, or problems raised with her by MPs. Berejiklian says that happened all too often. That was her leadership style, she said. It would have been telephone, SMS, some would have dropped into my office when parliament was sitting ... formal correspondence ... there were a myriad of ways. She’s asked about the funding of the Australian Clay Target Association project. She had previously said Daryl Maguire’s advocacy may have been a factor in her support. Berejiklian says the overriding factor was the Orange by-election loss and the government’s problems with regional voters. But she says you always consider the views of the local member. There’s no point strongly supporting a project which has statewide significance or otherwise if the local member doesn’t support it. Former Berejiklian chief of staff Sarah Cruickshank’s lawyers now begin their examination. They are confirming that Berejiklian holds Cruickshank in high esteem. She confirms she does. Berejiklian is asked about their conversation in July 2018, in which the then premier told her about the relationship with Maguire. Cruickshank says the premier told her the relationship was over. Berejiklian does not recall that. Berejiklian: It is not uncommon for two people to have two different versions in their head. Cruickshank’s lawyers are attempting to make it clear that she did not report anything to Icac because she was told the relationship was over. Berejiklian denies she wanted to fund the conservatorium to give Maguire a legacy when he resigned. I think Mr Maguire’s legacy was not relevant then, because we had a new Liberal candidate then. Anything we announced would have been her legacy. And that’s the end of Robertson’s questioning. The commission is played a recording of a call between Maguire and Berejiklian on 30 July 2018. Berejiklian tells Maguire that she needs to go because Maguire is “stressing” her. He responds: I’ll go and chill, you just throw money at Wagga. Berejiklian says: I’ll throw money at Wagga, don’t you worry about that. Lots of it. We’ve heard this before. Another recording is played. Berejiklian says: I’ll throw money at Wagga, you just have to do what’s right at your end, or else you’ll kill me. Maguire tells her to fund a stadium in the city. He complains that the “bureaucrats” killed off the proposal. Berejiklian says: Yes, but I can overrule them. The calls end. Berejiklian is asked whether the phrase “throw money at Wagga” meant spending money to win a by-election, regardless of the merits of individual projects. The former premier says she doesn’t believe the two are mutually exclusive. They can benefit the community and be politically beneficial. Gladys Berejiklian is shown a letter from her office to John Barilaro, guaranteeing the conservatorium project $20m from the regional communities development fund. The grant was a competitive fund. The effect of that was to carve out the $20m so that it could only be used for the conservatorium’s new recital hall. Berejiklian says she made a “high-level, strategic” decision to fund the project and left the detail of how the money was awarded to others. She said her decision would help the community and improve the prospects of the Liberal candidate in the looming by-election. It’s a regular political activity that governments try to win seats, try to keep their seats, as does an opposition. I don’t think it would be a surprise to anybody that we throw money at seats to keep them. The former premier is shown departmental advice on the funding for the conservatorium’s new recital hall, which suggested it did not have widespread support and could be seen as a “political announcement”. Berejiklian says the department is not expert at “winning byelections”: At the end of the day, whether we like it or not, that’s democracy. She said she would not disregard what Maguire, who had held the seat for two decades, thought would win the byelection. Berejiklian concedes Maguire suggested to her that she should fund the Riverina Conservatorium of Music’s new recital hall before the byelection caused by his resignation. She was evidently shown evidence to that effect during the private hearing just now. She replies: The answer is yes, but I wouldn’t have remembered it unless you showed it to me. She says the project had wide community support: It’s not uncommon during byelections to make announcements that are going to get you wide support. Berejiklian says she can’t remember who in her office supported the project, if anyone. Robertson asks whether Maguire gave any advice to Berejiklian on what she should do about the scandal enveloping him in July 2018. She says she’s “sure he did”: He was never backward in giving his advice on these matters. The commission goes to SMS from 16 July 2018 in which Maguire urges her to “get stuck into me ... good for party morale”. Maguire announced his resignation from parliament the following Saturday. Robertson asks, given that Berejiklian was encouraging others to come forward, why she didn’t reflect on her own need to make a report to Icac? Berejiklian said she had already given the matter “considerable thought” from 13 July 2018, the date Maguire appeared at Icac: I obviously didn’t have any information to report. I commend and congratulate whoever provided this information, but clearly they had something specific. Robertson again asks if her decision not to come forward was affected by her fear that she would be caught up in the scandal. Berejiklian replies: “Absolutely not.” If there was any suspicion of corruption, any information I thought I could have passed on to this body, I would have. Robertson asks if her failure to report was due to her feelings for Maguire: No, gosh. We’re back from the private hearing. The commission hears that the former premier was given a ministerial briefing about Maguire and the ongoing Operation Dasher, the probe into Canterbury City Council that led to his resignation. She’s asked whether she assumed at the time that the information being provided concerned Maguire. All I’m saying is it was a very general note, I assumed it was about that inquiry, and of course I encouraged my department to pass on any information, allow anyone to report what they needed to report. Berejiklian said she wrote a note on the briefing to encourage others to proactively go to Icac to give evidence. Scott Robertson wants to keep pursuing this topic. But he wants to do so in private, away from the public eye, at least in the first instance. He says he is attempting to balance what is in the public interest with the protection of private matters. This inquiry has had to walk a fine line in that respect. The commission goes into private hearing mode, with lawyers for Sarah Cruickshank and Gladys Berejiklian allowed to stay in the room. We’ll be back with you shortly. Robertson again asks for an answer to the “question I asked you about 10 minutes ago”. He asks Berejiklian about her claim that it wouldn’t have mattered politically whether the relationship was ongoing in July 2018. She replies: In terms of the political controversy, that’s for others to determine. But I’ve been very open to this body that it was on again, off again, of different intensity. The former premier continues to say she can’t recall whether she told Cruickshank that the Maguire relationship was ongoing or historical: I remember telling her how close we were. The time that we spent together. She says she didn’t intend to convey that the relationship was over but suggests she may have said she had more free time when she was treasurer, compared with when she was premier. Robertson is pressing Berejiklian on her claim that it would have made no difference, politically, if her relationship with Maguire was ongoing or historical in July 2018, when he was caught up in the Icac scandal: You’re not seriously suggesting, are you, that the question of the timing of the relationship was a completely irrelevant matter in relation to the issue of political risk that you and I have discussed? Berejiklian said she had a close relationship with Maguire, regardless of the timing, and “either way that was a political consideration”. Robertson brings her back to the question. Berejiklian says she made it clear to Cruickshank that the relationship was close. Gladys Berejiklian describes the period of Daryl Maguire’s 2018 Icac appearance as “very scary” and says she kept racking her mind over whether she knew anything that she needed to report to Icac. She came to the conclusion that she didn’t but also that she needed to tell her chief of staff Sarah Cruickshank, she says: Politically, she had a right to know. And I imparted that information to her. But having said that, because of what had transpired that day, I did question what I knew and what I didn’t know, and pored over, in my head, was there anything that I needed to do. And I came to the conclusion that there wasn’t. Berejiklian says Cruickshank told her to “not have anything more to do with him”. The former premier says she did not follow that advice. She says she told Cruickshank that the relationship was “off again, on again”. She can’t remember telling Cruickshank that the relationship was “historical”: I left her in no doubt that I was close to Mr Maguire, the exact words or what we spoke about, I can’t confirm. That’s just my recollection. Scott Robertson: Did you lie to Ms Cruickshank regarding the timing of the relationship? Berejiklian: No that’s just my recollection ... I can only tell you what I recollect, and I did tell her about the closeness of the relationship. Commissioner Ruth McColl suggests that, at that point in time, it was a crucial fact that she was still engaged in a relationship with Maguire, which would have been “politically explosive”. Berejiklian said it would have been explosive, whatever the timing of the relationship: I can’t remember all the details of our conversation but I made it known that I was close to him, it was on again, off again, I tried to convey as much as I could. The hearing has resumed. We’re now hearing about Gladys Berejiklian’s actions after forcing Daryl Maguire to resign in July 2018. That took place after his appearance at Icac, where the nature of his involvement in the Canterbury city council scandal was revealed. Berejiklian called Sarah Cruickshank, her chief of staff, who was on leave, on 13 July 2018. We’ve previously heard that this call was when Cruickshank first learnt of Berejiklian’s relationship with Maguire: I just wanted to make sure that she knew that whatever had occurred that day was a complete shock to me, and I just felt like I needed to share how close we were. Why didn’t she share it earlier? Berejiklian said she was shocked at what had transpired. Scott Robertson asks whether Berejiklian told Cruickshank because she was concerned that if the relationship became public, the premier would also be caught up in the “cloud” surrounding Maguire? Berejiklian: It wasn’t my main concern. Robertson: Was it at least a consideration? Berejiklian: It could have been. We’ve taken a short adjournment after a lengthy line of questioning about Gladys Berejiklian’s decision not to report Daryl Maguire to Icac. Let’s take stock of what we learned this morning: Berejiklian was pressed, repeatedly, on why she did not tell Icac about her conversations with Maguire in July 2018, once she realised he had been lying to her about the nature of his involvement in a “money-making scheme” involving property developers and the Canterbury city council. She said she “never suspected him of being corrupt” and “did not join the dots” between his appearance at Icac and other questionable land dealings he had spoken to her about. She said she assumed he had been caught up in something unintentionally and that the commission’s investigation had not yet run its course. Berejiklian denied that her failure to report Maguire was influenced by her feelings for him or her fear of being enveloped in the scandal herself. She said she would have reported him if she had any information or suspicion that he was engaged in corrupt conduct. She repeatedly asked: “What would I have reported?”. Counsel assisting Scott Robertson suggested she could have reported her conversations with Maguire and told the commission she believed him innocent of wrongdoing. The commission heard that Maguire, after being summoned to Icac in 2018, urged the premier to get a “private phone”. The premier said she did not do so. Maguire also told her he had “more info and data than them”. Berejiklian forced Maguire to resign from the party and his parliamentary secretary position after his appearance at Icac in July 2018, when the nature of his involvement in the Canterbury council scandal was revealed. Despite that, she maintained that she had not suspected him of corrupt conduct. She said only that there was a “cloud” surrounding his activities at the time. We’ll be back shortly. Scott Robertson asks whether Gladys Berejiklian didn’t report to Icac because she feared that she would be enveloped in the “cloud” surrounding Daryl Maguire. She replies: No, because I knew in my heart of hearts that not only was I incapable of doing anything that I felt was wrong, but I’m always someone who stands up for my actions and there was nothing I was concerned with. Was her failure to report Maguire influenced by her feelings for him? No, because I sacked him. Was it influenced by any aspect of their relationship? It was based on the fact that I didn’t feel I knew anything. Gladys Berejiklian says what Daryl Maguire had told her during the phone call of 5 July 2018 was “insignificant” and that she wouldn’t have “retained” it: The question I asked myself was did I know anything? ... and the answer very strongly in my mind is that I didn’t know anything about what this commission was looking at … I chose not to be interested or involved in his personal matters. Scott Robertson says Berejiklian could have said all of that in a report to Icac. She could have told the commission that she believed Maguire when he protested his innocence. Berejiklian says she didn’t have any information of value. Robertson suggests to her that Maguire had told her other details, not related to the then inquiry into Canterbury council, that she could have given to Icac. He raises the Badgerys Creek land deals that Maguire had discussed with Berejiklian. Berejiklian: I did not join the dots, I did not think there was anything untoward. She said she wouldn’t have recalled or retained that information, because she didn’t think there was any wrongdoing. I didn’t suspect him of corrupt conduct. That to me was, completely, not the person I knew, not the person I trusted. Commissioner Ruth McColl presses on this point. Why, after Daryl Maguire’s testimony to Icac, didn’t Gladys Berejiklian report her earlier phone conversation, during which she warned him against engaging with “dodgy” associates? Berejiklian: With all due respect commissioner, what would I have reported? McColl says she could have reported all of the detail that Maguire had given her about his associations and interactions with the Canterbury city council and property developers. Berejiklian: But what he told me was that he wasn’t doing anything wrong. Scott Robertson asks her how her belief that he had not done anything wrong could be true, given she removed him from his parliamentary role and issued a public statement condemning him. Berejiklian says she knew only that Maguire was under a “cloud”. Robertson reminds Berejiklian that, during her 52-minute phone call with Maguire before his Icac appearance, she repeatedly insisted she believed him, trusted him and therefore did not think he was engaged in wrongdoing. Had that not “exploded” when his later Icac appearance showed to Berejiklian that he was lying, Robertson asks. The former premier again says that she only thought Maguire had been caught up in something unintentionally and had associated with people engaged in wrongdoing: I certainly did not know of anything, if I had I would have reported something. What came to fruition on the 13th [July] was on public display. Scott Robertson gets to the nub of this line of questioning. Did you suspect Mr Maguire had been engaged in corrupt conduct, he asks. Gladys Berejiklian: I didn’t. She says she thought Maguire had been caught up in something unintentionally: I didn‘t put it past him that he was caught up in something that he wasn’t totally aware of ... I never suspected him of being corrupt. Given that Berejiklian removed him from his role and put him on the crossbench and issued a public statement saying Maguire had “let down his constituents”, hadn’t she at least suspected he was engaged in corrupt conduct? She says she knew he was under “a cloud” but said the Icac investigation, Operation Dasher, still had to run its course. Robertson asks Berejiklian whether she should have told Icac everything she knew about Maguire at this point: I had nothing to report. There was nothing that I knew, nothing that I remembered, nothing that I thought was of any relevance. Robertson is pressing Berejiklian on whether she thought Maguire had been lying to her, after his evidence to Icac on 13 July 2018. Remember that, before that hearing, Maguire had assured the premier he had done nothing wrong. Berejiklian: I kept racking my brain, firstly to what extent he had been truthful and secondly to what extent the investigation was going to reveal anything further about his activities. She says she was “overwhelmed with the shock and grief of what had transpired in the hearing, because he had assured me there was nothing to worry about and that he had done nothing wrong”: I questioned everything. I questioned anything that I might have known... I can’t express how much of a shock it was to the system. Berejiklian is now asked about her reaction to Maguire’s evidence at Icac on 13 July 2018. That evidence showed Maguire was involved in a “money-making exercise” involving a member of Canterbury city council and property developers. She is asked whether the evidence “upset and shocked” her. Berejiklian said it did. Robertson suggests it became clear from that hearing that Maguire had been closely associating with people engaged in wrongdoing. Berejiklian agrees: Yes, that was my concern. She said she was concerned that Maguire was in their “orbit” but said she didn’t know how closely they were involved: I was very concerned as to what might be occurring. I wasn’t sure and I was extremely concerned. Did Berejiklian think Maguire had been lying to her? She responds that she thought something was “awry” but wasn’t sure what had transpired. At the very least, she realised he was “under a cloud”: I was shocked at what had transpired and I had assumed he was caught up in something but I wasn’t sure of the extent of it. From a public perspective, clearly there were questions to be answered. Berejiklian is saying that she suspects Maguire was simply complaining about the presentation of the budget, and the lack of a separate line item for Wagga Wagga hospital, rather than the lack of actual money. That was normal, she said, because MPs want to be able to demonstrate to their constituents that they’re being represented. We’re hearing new evidence about the $170m that Maguire sought for Wagga Wagga hospital in 2018. You might recall that, in an intercepted call from May 2018, Maguire had complained to Berejiklian of the lack of funding for the hospital and Berejiklian had called treasurer Dominic Perrottet to “fix it”. The commission now hears that the funding had already “been in play” and that a decision was made to fund it a year in advance to that phone call. It hears the funding was already a line item in the preceding budget papers, well before the conversation with Maguire. It didn’t appear as a line item in the looming budget that Maguire was complaining about. Berejiklian says: The money was already allocated in the budget. But members of parliament like to see it as a separate line item ... the money was already there, it’s how it was presented. She says there is “absolutely nothing unusual” about that. As to the dollars, they were already in the budget. Nobody on this planet could get that amount of money ... I would never have been able to pluck that amount of money out in five minutes. That’s just absurd. Absolutely absurd. A very interesting exchange: Berejiklian suggests that she’s had to listen to the entirety of the 52-minute phone call between her and Maguire, in which he discusses a looming Icac appearance. Robertson corrects her, says they’ve only heard “excerpts”, and then kindly offers to play the whole thing. Berejiklian responds: No, I think we heard enough, thanks Mr Robertson. McColl offers Berejiklian some water. The former premier declines. She’s taken to another message from Maguire, which says: Means I got more info and data than them [beaming face with smiling eyes emoji]. Robertson asks whether that means Maguire has more information than “big brother” or whatever investigative agency they had been discussing. No, that’s certainly not my recollection. Ruth McColl asks whether it struck her as “curious” that, despite Maguire’s insistence he didn’t do anything wrong, he still wanted her to get a private phone. Why did he now want to switch phones presumably for some added protections...? Berejiklian assumed he was doing it for privacy reasons. I can’t speculate as to what was going through his head. McColl: I’m just asking if you ever put two and two together? Berejiklian: No Wasn’t she concerned at Maguire’s suggestion that she get a private phone? No not really, that’s a privacy issue. It’s not just him that’s suggested that to me. She’s taken to a further message, in which Berejiklian responded to Maguire asking whether “everything was OK?”. Wasn’t she concerned? Berejiklian: I can’t remember what I thought at the time. Doesn’t that message show you are concerned at the suggestion that you needed to get a phone? Berejiklian: If I was so concerned, I would have done it. Icac is discussing texts in which Daryl Maguire tells Gladys Berejiklian to download WeChat, the messaging service, which is encrypted. In one message, Maguire tells her: You need to get a private phone. Scott Robertson asks if Berejiklian has any recollection of that. She says she doesn’t and didn’t get a private phone: He may well have said it to me, but other colleagues did as well because I was someone who never had a separate phone. Robertson asks whether between her call with Maguire on 5 July 2018 (about his looming Icac appearance) and his evidence of 13 July 2018, she asked her chief of staff Sarah Cruickshank for any advice on what to do. Berejiklian said she did not. She’s taken to a comment on that call, where she asked Maguire whether recordings of their conversations were “going to be a problem?”. Robertson: Did you ultimately reflect whether ‘big brother’ or some investigative agency was listening to your calls with Mr Maguire? Berejiklian: Not really. She said she hadn’t done anything wrong and so didn’t have anything to worry about. Maguire had assured her that he hadn’t either, and she believed him: I was very confident that he didn’t do anything wrong. And I was certainly confident that I hadn’t done anything wrong. Berejiklian says she “unequivocally” can say that she didn’t think Maguire was engaged in wrongdoing: I did not assume any wrongdoing and I assumed that where he had any private interests of any description that they would be disclosed in the appropriate way. She adds: Certainly my radar didn’t go off, I wasn’t concerned. Robertson mentions that she had a 52-minute phone call with Maguire about his looming appearance at Icac and asks: Why isn’t your radar coming up in relation to this issue? Berejiklian again says she trusted Maguire and had known him for a long time: I did not assume anything was wrong because I had pressed him a number of times. This is someone I trusted. Someone my colleagues trusted. Scott Robertson asks: Do you accept at 5 July 2018, you had been told by Mr Maguire that he had been introducing properties to developers, do you agree? Gladys Berejiklian: No I can’t confirm that I knew that. Robertson brings up another transcript of an intercepted call, in which Maguire discusses “providing a whole list of properties” to Chinese property developer Country Garden. Berejiklian: I don’t think I would have absorbed that, but obviously this is black and white in terms of what he told me. Robertson suggests Berejiklian also knew Maguire may be receiving payments for the work. Berejiklian asks to be reminded of where that evidence has come from. She’s taken to another transcript. Scott Robertson is going through a list of instances in which Gladys Berejiklian might have had cause for suspicion of wrongdoing by Daryl Maguire. He suggests to Berejiklian that she was aware that Maguire was trying to influence a planning decision on behalf of Louise Waterhouse, the racing heiress. Berejiklian responds: I don’t even know if I was listening to the conversation properly. He also suggests she knew Maguire was threatening to “go feral” during an important trade mission to China. The commission has previously heard Maguire was seeking an intervention to save a business of his associates: I wouldn’t have thought anything about that. In fact, on that occasion I referred him to my office. If I thought he was engaged in wrongdoing, why would I refer to him to my office? Robertson says to Berejiklian that she was aware that Maguire was seeking to represent property developers and obtain favourable planning decisions. Berejiklian says she wasn’t aware of the extent of Maguire’s activities. She’s taken to a transcript of a phone intercept from July 2018, in which Maguire tells Berejiklian about making representations on behalf of one or more property developers. Berejiklian said she didn’t know who Maguire was talking about or that he was a property developer: I didn’t know the person, I didn’t know what was going on. So if you’re asking me if I actually knew what was going on, the answer is no. Robertson presses Berejiklian, who eventually says: In this instance, he’s told me, but I don’t know what he means. Gladys Berejiklian is taken to an earlier phone intercept of a conversation between her and Daryl Maguire, during which the former Wagga Wagga MP describes his efforts to help Louise Waterhouse with the construction of a road near her land near the site of the western Sydney airport, which would fundamentally alter its value. In that call, Maguire said: Then ah, then I had coffee with Louise Waterhouse ... she’s got a big problem so I took her up to your office and said, ‘Can you help solve it?’ She’s got a lot of property out at Badgerys Creek. Berejiklian continues to insist she had no suspicion Maguire might be engaging in wrongdoing. She is redirected to the question by Ruth McColl: Ms Berejiklian it would be better if you ... answered the question, rather than looking around corners. The questions quickly go back to that wiretap capturing Maguire telling Berejiklian he had been summoned to appear before Icac. Robertson asks whether Berejiklian reflected on the potential Maguire had been engaged in wrongdoing: I took him at his word. He asks whether Berejiklian suspected Maguire might make a $1.5m commission from a Badgerys Creek land deal, due to what he told her in an earlier phone call. She replies: The conversation is what it was, but I certainly did not assume or presume ... I don’t even think I was paying attention. And we’re off. Gladys Berejiklian is reminded of her oath. And the questions from counsel assisting Scott Robertson begin. The dynamic between Berejiklian and commissioner Ruth McColl was interesting to observe on Friday. McColl repeatedly reminded Berejiklian not to “make speeches” during her answers. McColl grew frustrated by the former premier’s answers veering away from Robertson’s questioning. In another exchange, Berejiklian told the commission that the “threshold question” for whether she should have disclosed was whether she felt the relationship was significant enough. McColl quickly rebuffed her: I think we’ll decide the threshold questions, Ms Berejiklian. During parts of the questioning, Berejiklian’s memory faltered, particularly on the critical issue of the two grants – $5.5m given to the Australian Clay Target Association’s clubhouse and convention centre in 2017, and $30m for the Riverina Conservatorium of Music in 2018. The former premier was unable to answer clearly what her role was in approving either grant. She sat on a cabinet subcommittee that considered the proposals and did not disclose her relationship to Maguire, who had been advocating for them. Much of the questioning early on Friday concentrated on the nature and closeness of the relationship between Maguire and Berejiklian. This may have seemed intensely personal to some, but the commission is forced to explore the issue because Berejiklian has claimed she never disclosed the relationship as a potential conflict because it wasn’t of “sufficient status” or importance. The commission was shown a text message on Friday in which Berejiklian described Maguire as being like “family”. The former premier sought then to distinguish her relationship with Maguire from the relationships with her mother and sisters. She denied Maguire was like family, saying it was a “turn of phrase”. Instead, she said, he was part of her “love circle”. Scott Robertson, the counsel assisting Icac, replied: “So when you say ‘you’re my family’ you didn’t mean ‘you’re my family’?” Expect more questions on this issue today. So what did we hear on Friday? Well, as it so often does, Icac played damning wiretaps of phone calls – in this case between Gladys Berejiklian and her then lover Daryl Maguire. In one, Maguire complained of the lack of money for his electorate in the looming 2018 budget, particularly the absence of a $170m commitment he wanted for the Wagga Wagga hospital. Berejiklian told him she would “fix it” and called the then treasurer Dominic Perrottet. Within five minutes, she said, she’d secured Maguire the $170m. She is recorded saying: I said, ‘Just put the $140m in the budget.’ He goes, ‘No worries.’ He does what I ask him to. Maguire responds simply: It is supposed to be $170m. In another call, perhaps the most shocking, Maguire complains of being subpoenaed by the commission to give evidence about his involvement with the Chinese property giant Country Garden and its dealings in Sydney’s inner west. Berejiklian asks repeated questions about what Icac is pursuing and what he will say to them. Maguire uses the call to rail against the commission, likening it to the “Spanish fucking inquisition”, and lament the transparency and anti-corruption oversight MPs face: Nobody can have a conversation, nobody can make representations. What’s happening is that MPs and others are being muted by the fact that you have all this overseeing … in a way that paints you as fucking corrupt if you have a conversation. At one point, he suggests Icac might even be recording their phone call. Berejiklian responds: “Is that going to be a problem?” She also describes Maguire’s associates as “dodgy”, prompting the former Wagga Wagga MP to reply: Everyone’s dodgy. Gladys, that means you can’t mix with anybody. Hello and welcome to our live coverage of the second day of Gladys Berejiklian’s evidence to the Independent Commission Against Corruption. If Friday is anything to go by, we can safely expect more explosive evidence from the former premier about her dealings with her former partner, the ex-Wagga Wagga MP Daryl Maguire. The commission is exploring what Berejiklian might have suspected about Maguire’s alleged corrupt conduct and whether she gave him favourable treatment as premier, particularly over two grants he was seeking for projects in his electorate. Berejiklian has always denied she suspected Maguire of wrongdoing and said she did not regard the relationship as being of sufficient status to declare. The hearings begin at 9am and will, as always, be livestreamed for the public. Not long to go now until proceedings get under way.Icac has heard Daryl Maguire told then premier Gladys Berejiklian to get a “private phone” and use the Chinese instant messaging app WeChat in the days after he was first summonsed to appear before the New South Wales anti-corruption watchdog because, he told her “they can read texts”. But Berejiklian denied that the request made her suspect Maguire may have been involved in any corrupt conduct, telling the Independent Commission Against Corruption that it was “normal human nature” not to want “your private conversations being listened to”. On the final day of Icac’s public hearings into her conduct, Berejiklian was grilled by counsel assisting the commission, Scott Robertson, on her actions in the days after Maguire first revealed to her that the watchdog had called him to appear as a witness in a separate investigation. Icac previously heard that on 5 July 2018 Maguire told Berejiklian he had been summonsed to appear before Icac during a 52-minute conversation. During the conversation, played before Icac on Friday, Berejiklian asked repeated questions about the nature of Maguire’s involvement in the probe, and described some developers involved in that separate investigation as “dodgy”. When Maguire raised the prospect that their phone calls might be tapped, she asked: “is that going to be a problem?” A key plank of Icac’s investigation is whether Berejiklian breached the state’s Icac Act by failing to report conduct by Maguire she had reason to suspect on “reasonable grounds” may have been corrupt. She has repeatedly denied any wrongdoing, and on Friday told Icac the phone call did not raise suspicions because “he told me he’d done nothing wrong and I believed him”. On Monday, Robertson took Berejiklian to the days between the 5 July phone call and Maguire’s appearance before Icac eight days later. He revealed that four days later, on 9 July, Maguire sent a text to Berejiklian instructing her to download the Chinese messaging app WeChat, telling her: “you need to get a private phone”. “They can read texts but not the little green man, leaves no trace,” he wrote, in an apparent reference to the green WeChat icon. In another message, Maguire told the then premier that he had “got more info and data than them”, using an emoji that Robertson described as a “beaming face with smiling eyes”. Berejiklian again denied that the text messages raised concerns with her, saying it was common for MPs to have “two phones” and that she believed Maguire was concerned about “privacy”. She said she had not acted on his suggestion to get a private phone. Questioned on whether she thought it was “curious” that in the days after telling her he had been summonsed to appear before Icac, Maguire wanted her to get a private phone, Berejiklian said that was “certainly not my recollection”. “I wouldn’t have taken it as any more than privacy issues,” she told Robertson. “I was very confident that he didn’t do anything wrong. And I was certainly confident that I hadn’t done anything wrong.” After Maguire appeared before Icac on 13 July 2018, he was forced to move to the crossbench, eventually resigning after the watchdog revealed he had discussed the possibility of earning commissions on the sale of development sites which he wanted to help broker. Icac made no corruption findings in relation to Maguire but recommended he face charges for allegedly giving false evidence. Following his evidence, Berejiklian released a statement saying the MP had “let down” his constituents and urging him to consider stepping down from the parliament. She told Icac that she was “mortified” after he gave evidence, saying the “shock of what happened made me question everything” including whether Maguire might have lied to her. But under questioning from Robertson, Berejiklian again denied his evidence meant that she suspected he may have engaged in corrupt conduct, saying only that there was a “cloud” around him and that she did not “join the dots” with information he had previously given her about hoping to make $1.5m from a Badgerys Creek land deal. “The question I asked myself was did I know anything [and] the answer very strongly in my mind is that I didn’t know anything about what this commission was looking at,” she said. Pressed on why she did not at least report the 5 July phone call she said: “I had nothing to report. There was nothing that I knew, nothing that I remembered, nothing that I thought was of any relevance.” Monday marked the final day of Icac’s public hearings into Berejiklian’s conduct, which has been centred on her role in the awarding of two grants which Maguire had lobbied for as an MP: $5.5m for a shooting range and conference centre in 2017, and $30m for a conservatorium of music, both in his seat of Wagga Wagga. ICAC is investigating whether she “breached the public trust” by failing to declare her relationship with Maguire. She has denied any wrongdoing.” Icac has previously heard evidence Maguire and Berejiklian remained in contact following his resignation in July, including a phone call in which she told him that she would “throw money” at his seat during the by-election prompted by his resignation. In a series of recordings taken from tapped phone conversations between the couple, Berejiklian told Maguire that funding for one of two grants at the centre of the probe was a “done deal” after he complained about “roadblocks” on his “money projects”. “I know but you’re still getting everything. We ticked off your conservatorium the other day, that’s a done deal now,” Berejiklian told Maguire about a grant to fund the relocation of the Riverina Conservatorium of Music during a phone call in 2017. On Monday she conceded that he had encouraged her to support the project, but denied that was the reason for her government’s decision to give $20m to fund the second stage of the project despite some within her office and the public service not supporting it. Berejiklian told Icac it was a “high-level, strategic” decision to fund the project, based on her belief that it enjoyed a lot of community support. “It’s not uncommon during by-elections to make announcements that are going to get you wide support,” she said. “It’s a regular political activity that governments try to win seats, try to keep their seats, as does an opposition. I don’t think it would be a surprise to anybody that we throw money at seats to keep them.” After the commission had adjourned, commissioner Ruth McColl said lawyers for the parties would present written submissions before the release of her final report into both the conduct of Maguire and Berejiklian. There is no timetable for the release of the report. Outside the commission Berejiklian told reporters in Sydney that “every decision I took was in the public’s best interest”. “I stand by that today stronger than ever, and I just want to say to everybody that it’s been my honour and privilege to serve you in my role in public life,” she said. “I don’t want to say too much more than that at this stage, just to say, obviously, what’s occurred to me is a difficult situation but I know many people do it tough in the community. “And now I intend to get on with my life and I just, again, want to thank everybody for their support.”If you grew up in an Indigenous community, you would have heard someone say, “they’re out today, aren’t they?” And you would ask, who? And they would reply, “the cops.” You would have this interaction with different people throughout the week, and it would sometimes feel like the police never leave. Our communities are still some of the most impoverished in Australia. Why do Indigenous people keep being represented in the criminal justice system at a higher rate than non-Indigenous people? Does policing Indigenous communities work? The New South Wales Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research (2016) tells us that between 2001 and 2015, the number of Indigenous people in NSW prisons doubled. The rise was a result of higher rates of arrest resulting in conviction, a greater likelihood of being sent to prison given the conviction, and a higher rate of being refused bail, the research found. If all these people are being arrested and sent to prison, why are our communities still over-policed, and why has nothing in our communities changed? Why are crimes still being committed? It’s simple: police patrols do not reduce crime. Controlled trials in the US have found that while police patrols are effective at improving the image of the local police force, they are not effective at reducing crime. Moreover, hotspot policing has been shown to have adverse effects on communities. When an area is over-policed, it becomes stigmatised and associated with delinquency. We do not need to be told that our people are committing crimes in our community – we live there, we know who are committing these crimes. They are our sons, daughters, cousins, uncles, aunties, and we still love them. Police officers may arrest the ones we love, but it does not solve the underlying cause of why crime is committed, which is poverty. Wherever there is poverty, there are high property and petty crime rates. These crimes are committed out of necessity, not malice intent. For 60,000 years, we had our own set of laws and punishments. Still, in the last 200 years, we have had a legal system imposed on to us from the other side of the world. The results have been catastrophic. Indigenous adults are 12.5 times more likely to be incarcerated, Indigenous children are 26 times more likely to be incarcerated, Indigenous women are becoming the fastest-growing prison population in Australia, and more than 470 Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples have died in custody. What is the answer? Indigenous communities are aware of the complexity associated with crime. The perspective of our people should be considered when our Mob are sent to stand before the judge. Our communities must also be permitted to identify critical issues and implement culturally informed solutions that will keep Indigenous people out of jail and be a part of our community without the stigmatisation of having been sent to prison. So does deploying police officers in our communities work? The answer is no. It does not combat poverty; it just results in overrepresentation, incarceration and death. There is so much to be proud of in our communities, such as kinship, culture, being able to pop around to anyone’s house for a cuppa tea. But this isn’t how our communities are portrayed to the general public. I’ve had white friends tell me they’re not allowed to travel to “that” part of town because that’s where all the crime happens. This is just blatantly false and racist. Crime can and does happen in every community, from North Sydney to Moree. Still, it isn’t the white-collar criminals committing tax fraud demonised by the media and general public. It is us. • Ash Dahlstrom is a Gamilaraay and Ngarabal man from Moree in NSW, who is passionate about police reform and Indigenous rights, and is an Indigenous student advisor at Western Sydney University.Southwest Airlines announced an internal investigation after a pilot was reported to have signed off a message to passengers by saying: “Let’s go Brandon.” The apparent non-sequitur is in fact a rightwing meme, based on a NBC sportscaster’s apparent mishearing of a chant of “Fuck Joe Biden” by a crowd at a Nascar circuit in Alabama at the start of October. On a Southwest flight from Houston, Texas to Albuquerque, New Mexico on Friday morning, an Associated Press reporter heard the pilot end a message over the public address system with the phrase, prompting gasps from some passengers. The reporter, Colleen Long, said she tried to ask the pilot about his comment but was “almost removed from [the] plane”. As discussion of the incident proliferated online, Southwest said in a statement it “takes pride in providing a welcoming, comfortable, safe and respectful environment for the millions of customers who fly with us each year. “Southwest does not condone employees sharing their personal political opinions while on the job, serving our customers. And one employee’s individual perspective should not be interpreted as the viewpoint of Southwest and its collective 54,000 employees. “Southwest is conducting an internal investigation into the recently reported event.” Predictably popular among supporters of Donald Trump, the man Joe Biden soundly beat for the White House last year, “Let’s go Brandon” swiftly reached the halls of Congress. Among uses by House Republicans, the Florida representative Bill Posey ended a floor speech with a fist pump and the phrase while Jeff Duncan, from South Carolina, wore a “Let’s Go Brandon” mask at the Capitol. In the Senate, Ted Cruz of Texas posed with a sign at a World Series game while the press secretary for Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the Senate minority leader, retweeted a photo of the phrase on a construction sign in Virginia. Trump’s fundraising committee now sells a $45 T-shirt featuring “Let’s go Brandon” above an American flag. One message to supporters read: “#FJB or LET’S GO BRANDON? Either way, President Trump wants YOU to have our ICONIC new shirt.” Southwest said it would “address the situation directly with any employee involved while continuing to remind all employees that public expression of personal opinions while on duty is unacceptable. “Southwest does not tolerate any behavior that encourages divisiveness as it does not reflect the Southwest hospitality and inclusiveness for which we are known and strive to provide each day on every flight.”So Houston overcome a first inning grand slam from Adam Duvall to take Game 5 with pieced together pitching performances and three RBI’s from an unlikely source: Martin Maldonado. So there will be no “piece of metal” awarded tonight, but perhaps Tuesday will be different. Join us for our live, rolling coverage of Game 6 in Houston. Until then, wherever you are, good morning, good afternoon and goodnight. Here’s the report from Game 5: Soler chases high heat for strike three and the ball game is over. The Astros win, and the 117th World Series will go to a Game 6. Astros 9-5 Braves, bottom 9th A line shot to center by Adrianza, but it’s right at Tucker for the second out. It’s up to Soler to extend Game 5. Astros 9-5 Braves, bottom 9th Last licks in Cobb County for the Braves, who barring some kind of all-time World Series finish, will be heading to Houston for Game 6 at least. The sold out crowd of car driving suburbanites with no train option to get to the stadium are up as Swanson steps to the plate. Swanson flies to right, one down. Two more outs for Graveman, and here comes pinch hitting Ehir Adrianza. Email Here’s David Athya, who has no idea how clueless I am with actors. Evening Dave. I’m shocked you don’t know who Eh Helms is. One of the cast of the US version of The Office (both versions are among the best TV series ever.) Thankfully I’m not in the office tomorrow as lack of sleep and a likely Braves defeat here not the best combination for productivity! Was never going to be done in 5 though was it?! Astros 9-5 Braves, top 9th Graveman looks at strike three and we go to the bottom of the ninth, with the Braves needing four to tie. Place your bets. Astros 9-5 Braves, top 9th Bregman bounces out to third for the first out. Her’s Maldonado, who is the MVP of this game, thus far: 1-2 with three RBI’s. He strikes out, two down, and here’s the pitcher Graveman, with a rare plate appearance. He will probably not even swing. Astros 9-5 Braves, bottom 8th d’Arnaud strikes out, and Graveman survives a leadoff base hit. Inning over. Astros 9-5 Braves, bottom 8th Now Duvall grounds to third: Bregman has to hurry and he gets the runner by a step. Riley moves to second and there’s two down for d’Arnaud. Astros 9-5 Braves, bottom 8th Roario pops out to center where Siri, the new center fielder is. One down. Here’s Duvall. Astros 9-5 Braves, bottom 8th Here’s Kendall Graveman who was traded to Houston from Seattle while Seattle were fighting for a playoff spot, nearly causing a revolt in the Mariners clubhouse. He starts off facing Riley, who slices a base hit to center. That will wake up the crowd as the Braves get a leadoff runner. Now Rosario comes to the plate. Astros 9-5 Braves, top 8th Tucker flies out to left, inning over. Astros 9-5 Braves, top 8th Gurriel singles to center - he’s 3-5 tonight. Correa moves to second, and here’s Tucker. Email Here’s Thomas Coleman, who is a bit upset. Braves should be embarrassed. Staked to a 4 to nothing lead there is no way a championship caliber team should relinquish that lead at home even if it means bringing in starters or whoever can get get people out...going back to Houston should be something they would want to avoid at ALL costs. They should have played this game like a game 7. Could have been different if Morton was starting this game though... Correa, a single to left and that will score Altuve, a manufactured run that adds to their lead. It’s quite quiet in Altanta. Still just one out and the slumping Alvarez is up with Correa at first. And Alvarez strikes out. That means there’s two down for Gurriel. Astros 8-5 Braves, top 8th Hard grounder to second and Albies throws to first for the out. That would have been two had Altuve not stolen that bag. Instead, he’s at third with one out. Astros 8-5 Braves, top 8th Altuve is ruled safe, which makes sense. Can Brantley send him home? Astros 8-5 Braves, top 8th Altuve starts out the inning with seeing eye single up the middle. Here’s Brantley. Wait - Altuve is picked off, but Smyly was so slow to first that Altuve stole second anyway. Wow! So runner in scoring position with nobody out now. But hang out, the replay folks are looking at it...it’s very close. I don’t think they overturn it. Astros 8-5 Braves, bottom 7th Albies is blown away and Stanek gets through a tough part of the Atlanta lineup quite easily. To the eighth! Astros 8-5 Braves, bottom 7th Freddie bounces to first: Gurriel tosses to Stanek who is covering: two down. Albies is next. Astros 8-5 Braves, bottom 7th So if the Braves want to celebrate that title at home, they’re going to need to score some runs. Otherwise, we’re right back here on Tuesday night for Game 6. Ryne Stanek, who has been busy this post-season, faces Soler, who skies one to left where Alvarez is to make an easy play. One down, here’s Freddie Freeman, who at some point hit a home run in this game, although I can’t quite remember when. Seventh Inning Stretch I don’t know who Ed Helms is but he’s going to sing Take Me Out to the Ballgame for you. Seventh Inning Stretch I don’t know who Ed Helms is but he’s going to sing Take Me Out to the Ballgame for you. Astros 8-5 Braves, top 7th Chas McCormick is pinch-hitting and he takes a big swing through a curveball to even the count at two. Now he waves at another curve and that’s strike three! A big run in for Houston as we hit the seventh inning stretch. Maldonado - a line shot past the diving Swanson! Here comes Tucker to score and Maldonado moves to second on the throw home. That’s three RBI for the light hitting catcher and the Astros tack on here in the seventh! Astros 7-5 Braves, top 7th Bregman also goes after the first pitch and it’s an infield pop out for the second out. Big out there for Smyly who can get out of here unscathed if he can get past Maldonado. Astros 7-5 Braves, top 7th Drew Smyly, his big sweeping curve, and his ERA of six plus runs is in to face the Astros in the seventh. The 2-3 Guriell is first up and waves at one of those slow curves for strike three. One down, here’s Tucker, who is first ball swinging and he lays into one. Tucker is into the right field corner and that’s a double for the center fielder. Now Bregman, coming off an excellent defensive play, steps in with a one-out runner in scoring position. Astros 7-5 Braves, bottom 6th Pederson pops into foul ground on the left hand side, Bregman is charging, he’s got a long way to run, and he’s got it! Alex runs into his own dugout wall after making a solid play on a long run to end the mini-threat for the Braves, who are down in their half of the sixth. Astros 7-5 Braves, bottom 6th Pederson waves at the first two pitches he sees from Maton. It’s 0-2... Astros 7-5 Braves, bottom 6th Swanson is ahead 3-1 here and this at-bat feels a bit dangerous for Houston. Meanwhile Stanek warms in the pen. Next pitch and Swanson swings hard and through a fastball and here’s another full count. Here it comes and Swanson goes after the high heat, strike three! Brent Strom comes out to chat with Maton with Joc Pederson stepping in to pinch hit. Big at-bat right here... Astros 7-5 Braves, bottom 6th Now d’Arnaud laces a single to left to wake up the hometown crowd as Swanson heads to the plate with one out and one on. He’s 0-2 so far tonight. Astros 7-5 Braves, bottom 6th Maton is back out for more this inning and starts off with the dangerous Duvall. He’s ahead 1-2 before throwing a ball back to the backstop, that was, you guessed it, just a bit outside. Here’s the 2-2 - boom! A heavy fastball on the corner sinks Duvall. One down. Astros 7-5 Braves, top 6th What’s this? A 1-2-3 inning? Alvarez pops to left: Rosario makes a tidy sliding catch to end this speedy halfinning. Astros 7-5 Braves, top 6th Correa grounds out to short. Do these guys have a plane to catch? Here’s Alvarez. Can he wake up this quiet sixth? Astros 7-5 Braves, top 6th Brantley bounces to first for out no1. Here’s Correa, who is 2-3 tonight. Astros 7-5 Braves, bottom 5th A harmless comebacker to the pitcher Maton, ending the inning and the threat by the Braves. Astros 7-5 Braves, bottom 5th Riley lines a shot to deep left center - that’s going all the way to the wall. Riley cruises into second with a two-out double. Maldanodo heads to the mound to chat with Maton with the dangerous Rosario coming to the plate. Astros 7-5 Braves, bottom 5th Maton is bringing it - Albies whiffs on the cheese for out no2. Here’s Riley. Astros 7-5 Braves, bottom 5th One pitch, one out for new pitcher, the rubber-armed Phil Maton. Freeman lines out to right. Now it’s Albies. Astros 7-5 Braves, top 5th Some of us thought it was going to be an eight inning party in Atlanta after Duvall’s grand slam in the first, but that may have been the low hanging fruit. Top of the lineup now for Altuve, who has runners at first and second with two outs, looking to add onto that Astros lead. Oh, righty Chris Martin is the new pitcher, which was not the plan. Altuve takes a huge rip on 2-1 and misses. He wanted it all but got nothing. Here’s the 2-2: low and away, so now the count is full. The chop is a bit half hearted suddenly, but the crowd awakens as Altuve chases strike three. Inning over, but it was a big one for Houston, who have their first lead of the night. Pinch hitting Marwin Gonzalez misses a barrel but floats a left to center, right in front of Eddie Rosario! Two runs score and the Astros are up! Snitker is out to get Minter, and this has all gone Pete Tong for Atlanta. Minter walks the light hitting Maldonado and that means Carlos Correa strolls in to score and tie this game. Wow! Rick Kranitz is out to talk to Minter and ask him some very hard questions, like, how do you walk Martin Maldonado. Astros 4-5 Braves, top 5th Tucker grounds to first - it’s easy for Freeman who steps on the bag for the second out. The runners move over, and now they’re going to intentionally walk Bregman to load the bases, leaving it up to Maldonado. That makes a lot of sense of course...but you never know. Astros 4-5 Braves, top 5th Minter, a little more vulnerable than usual tonight as he allows a base hit to Gurriel - Correa holds at second but the Astros have something cooking here in the fifth. Here’s Tucker with two on and one down. Astros 4-5 Braves, top 5th Minter freezes Alvarez on an inside cutter: strike three, Alvarez is done and now 1-14 in this WS. Gurriel is next, one out and one on for the Cuban first baseman. Astros 4-5 Braves, top 5th Minter is ahead 0-2 on Correa before the shortstop floats a ball into center field, and that’s a leadoff hit off the Braves reliable reliever. Here’s Alvarez, who is 1-13 in this series. Astros 4-5 Braves, bottom 4th Full count to Soler who hits a SCREAMER that is just foul! Wow did he rip that ball, the loudest of strikes! Now what? A foul ball, less loud, bouncing to the left side. Finally he bounces to second: Altuve steps on second for the force out, inning over. Astros 4-5 Braves, bottom 4th Righty Jose Urqidy, a starter, is in for some length presumably, on three days rest. Travis d’Arnaud greets him rudely, with a base hit up the middle. So the leadoff man is on for Swanson who is first pitch swinging: it’s a fly ball to center, easy for Tucker who puts it away. It’s even easier, for the catcher Maldonado, who catches a bunt gone wrong off the bat of Minter for the second out. It’s up to the leadoff man, Jorge Soler. Astros 4-5 Braves, top 4th Good morning, good afternoon and goodnight to Mr Brantley. Three pitches, three strikes. Side retired. And that’s why Snitker saved Minter for tonight. Email Here’s “Sir Richard” from afar... It’s Monday morning here in China and I’m trying very hard to get on with my work. However, it’s become another way to fascinating game. Ah well. Priorities. Astros 4-5 Braves, top 4th Ground ball to second: Albies has it, has time, and bounces it to first. Good play by Freeman to dig it out. It’s the pitcher due up, but instead it’s Zack Greinke, who is a pitcher but now is a pinch-hitter. You follow? The veteran hurler gets up there and smacks a base hit to right! It’s his second hit of the series, and that means a shared smile between Freeman and the Astros pitcher at first base. Very nice. One out, one on for Altuve, who pops out to right. Two outs, and Snitker is out. Chavez is done and here comes AJ Minter, who will be the third Braves pitcher of the night and who will be expected to get the Braves to the sixth, I’d guess. He’ll face Brantley when we resume. Astros 4-5 Braves, bottom 3rd A ten pitch war between the new pitcher, righty Yim Garcia and Duvall. Did I say 10? I meant 11. Another pitch is fouled off. And after all that, Duvall pops out in the infield: inning over. We’re flying into the fourth! Astros 4-5 Braves, bottom 3rd The 3-2 pitch is way inside to Rosario and that’s an always dangerous two out walk. It’s especially so when Adam Duvall comes to the plater - he had that grand slam you may recall. Dusty Baker knows Framber is done and the Houston skipper comes to get his man. Cue the organ... Astros 4-5 Braves, bottom 3rd Riley bounces to shot, easy play for Correa, and there’s two down for Rosario. Astros 4-5 Braves, bottom 3rd Good lord, I am still getting over that home run - 460 feet, the longest this season for Freddie, so says FOX TV in the United States. Meanwhile, Albies grounds out to third for the first out of the inning and Riley steps in. Freddie is up and faces a 3-2 pitch he absolutely crushes and sends to right Pluto. Good grief did he pound that baseball. The home team is back on top, and so much for the settling in Framber Valdez. We have ourselves a track meet. Here’s Albies. Astros 4-4 Braves, top 3rd Bregman pops to left: easy out for Rosario, and the side retired. But Houston are alive and well after putting up two consecutive two spots to tie it up. Buckle up. Astros 4-4 Braves, top 3rd It’s another walk: Tucker is on, and Bregman, who had that big RBI double to get Houston going in the second inning, is at the plate with runners a the corners and two out. Chavez, tatted up righty, glasses, threw 2.2 innings of scoreless ball v the Dodgers in the NLCS. He runs the count full to Carlos Correa. The payoff pitch is ripped to left center! That’ll score Altuve and move Brantley to third. It’s an RBI double for Corrrea, and Houston are within a run! Then Alvarez quickly flies out to shallow left: it’s not deep enough for Brantley to tag. But Brantley does come around to score after Gurriel grounds out to short: Houston have come all the way back to tie this game! Runner on third, two down for Tucker. Astros 2-4 Braves, top 3rd The crowd boos after home plate umpire Ted Barrett calls ball three on a pitch that was most definitely low. Now it’s ball four, and that means Davidson is out. Brian Snitker takes the ball from the rookie and hands it to Chavez, who has some work to do in the third. First and second, nobody out, for Carlos Correa. Astros 2-4 Braves, bottom 2nd Davidson is back out for more but Jesse Chavez is warm in the Braves bullpen should the rookie get into trouble. Altuve was up 2-0 in the count, but after a swing and a miss on a big curveball it’s 2-2. He fouls off the next pitch and then takes a slider low and in to run the count full. Davidson up to 47 pitches. Here’s 48, and it’s grounded to short but Swanson can’t handle it! That was a routine ground ball that kind of flew out of his glove as his arm moved upwards. Houston has the leadoff man on for Brantley as the clock ticks on Davidson. Email Andrew from Houston chimes in: This is the first season that I’ve actually kind of gotten into baseball—even that now-infamous/still-famous-depending-on-who-you-talk-to World Series we won, I just let it all happen in the background and enjoyed the victory. But I have to say, there’s something fun about watching the game (on TV), trying to work out whether the umpire is going to call a missed pitch a ball or a strike, and trying to remember that if an outfielder(?) catches the ball, that’s still an out (which kind of seems unfair for the batter, I mean they could do everything right and just because some chucklehead was in the right place with their glove out, all that effort is for nothing? But then, the game’s been played this way for decades and I just started paying attention in the last week or two, so maybe I should shut up). The Series so far has certainly been… something. Disappointing? So far, yeah. I want to see at least one Astros win on the board—though, of course, I’d LIKE the trophy. But if we can get at least one win, then no matter what else happens, we have our dignity. And hey, if there’s one thing this year’s ALCS taught me, it’s that you can’t take your eye off the Astros (well, these Astros) for a second, because they’re always ready to turn the game around on you, they just need the chance. That trophy is definitely still up for grabs. Astros 2-4 Braves, bottom 2nd Soler grounds out to short, and the Braves go down in order in their second inning. That’s a badly needed scoreless frame from Framber, who didn’t make it to the third inning in Game 1. Astros 2-4 Braves, bottom 2nd So now Valdez can step onto the hill knowing that the fire he dumped his team into is no longer as hot, and maybe he can put it together and try to give his club some decent innings. Swanson, who had a huge home run yesterday in Game 4, is at the platte, and the shortstop takes a 1-2 pitch into the hole at short : Correa ranges to his left, makes the stab, spins and fires, in time to get Swanson! Fantastic play right there from Correa for the first out of the inning. Now here’s Davidson, who will take his at-bat and strike out swiftly. Two down. Now here’s Soler, who is a wee bit on sizzling at the moment. Astros 2-4 Braves, top 2nd Valdez strikes out looking, but a big inning for the Astros as they slice into the Braves lead. Perhaps more importantly, Bregman put together a good at-bat and drove the ball to the deep part of the park, something that’s been missing from this lineup. It’s a 2-2 count to the Astros catcher, who then skies a ball to center that’s deep enough for Tucker to tag. He comes home, while Bregman moves to third. Two runs in this inning to calm the nerves of Astros fans a touch. Valdez is next. Control is becoming a bit of a factor here as Davidson falls behind 2-0 on Bregman, missing outside. Great hitters count right here, but Bregman lets a slider go by, that’s a strike. This time he’s swinging: foul. So the count is at 2-2. That looked like a pitch to hit right there, but Bregman missed it. But Bregman didn’t miss the 2-2! He hits a ball deep into the gap in right-center field! Guriell is coming around to score, while Tucker stops at third! That’s the biggest hit for Bregman this series. Here comes Maldonado with runners at second and third with one out. Astros 0-4 Braves, top 2nd Davidson, wearing his socks pulled high, has himself a 2-2 count after Tucker fouls off a good fastball up in the zone. Now the lefty is inside to the left-handed Tucker and we have a full count. Tucker deals a slider that’s again inside. So now the Astros have a two on, one out situation with the ice-cold Bregman at the plate. And wouldn’t it feel good for Houston to come right back with something right here? Astros 0-4 Braves, top 2nd The Astros have a knock in the form of a line drive base hit to center by Gurriel. Here comes Tucker. Astros 0-4 Braves, top 2nd So Houston have 24 outs to figure this all out. Actually, make that 23: Alvarez gives it a ride to left but Rosario has room and puts it away. Here’s Gurriel. Astros 0-4 Braves, bottom 1st So the Cobb County crowd goes bananas as their Bravos jump on top. Meanwhile, d’Arnaud grounds out to end the inning, but that won’t stop the party. Duvall lifts it to right and it’s up and over the wall! The Braves slugger has put the home team up 4-0 in the first inning! Astros 0-0 Braves, bottom 1st With first base open, Valdez is being careful with the dangerous Rosario. Very careful: Rosario is walked to load the bases, and now it’s up to Adam Duvall to make Houston pay. Astros 0-0 Braves, bottom 1st Braves batters aren’t waiting around for Valdez - he takes the second pitch he sees and slaps it into left field! Albies slides into third while Riley glides into second base! So it’s second and third with two down and NLCS MVP Eddie Rosario at the plate, trying to put the Braves on top! Astros 0-0 Braves, bottom 1st Now it’s Framber’s turn, as the Astros lefty faces the tall, lanky Soler. And Soler lines a screamer towards third and Bregman can’t handle the short hop (who could?). The Braves are in business with a leadoff single. Freeman steps in, and he swings first pitch, lifting the ball to center where Tucker makes the catch. So Freeman quickly comes and goes and now Albies is also first pitch swinging: he grounds to short: Correa throws to second for the force but can’t get Albies, who reaches on a fielder’s choice. Now Riley steps in. Astros 0-0 Braves, top 1st Golly: Correa is hitting just .143, and he didn’t quite hit his weight in the ALCS either. And on top of that, he’s down in the count to Davidson, 0-2. Correa gets a fastball that he lines through the legs of Davidson and up to second where Albies makes the stab: he steps on second for one, and then fires to first for the double play! So the kid faces the minimum in the first, which is music (hopefully not chop music) to Brian Snitker. Side retired - here come the Braves. Astros 0-0 Braves, top 1st Davidson runs the count full to Brantley before losing the Astros right fielder to a fastball low and away. That’s a one-out walk, and an opportunity for Carlos Correa to make the kid pay for the free pass. Astros 0-0 Braves, top 1st Davidson, wearing a high Spring Training number of 64 in a significantly higher stakes environment, throws a high fastball that Altuve chases and lifts to shortstop - it’s an easy put away for hometown hero Dansby Swanson, and that’s the first out of the night. Michael Brantley is next. And away we go! Tucker Davidson deals a slider over the plate to to Jose Altuve and Game 5 is on! Script writing So yesterday I tweeted into this blog about seeing an upper case “E” amongst the lowercase letters on the Braves uniform. Somehow, I had never noticed that before. In ending this topic once and for all, I have some feedback that I thought I’d leave right here: National Anthem A local singer/songwriter Lauren Alaina is singing in an acoustic version of the Star Spangled Banner. I am ignoring the acoustic guitar because although I find it super annoying, I’m here to judge Ms Alaina on her rendition. And you know what? She was pretty classy overall, keeping her focus as some military dude skydived onto the field, just at the end of the song. He stole some of the attention, but I’m giving her 7/10. Atlanta Braves Lineup Right fielder Joc Pederson is out in favor of Jorge Soler who had the enormous pinch-hit home run last night. Plus, the Cuban is raking. 1. Jorge Soler, RF 2. Freddie Freeman, 1B 3. Ozzie Albies, 2B4. Auston Riley, 3B 5. Eddie Rosario, LF 6. Adam Duvall, CF 7. Travis d’Arnaud, C 8. Dansby Swanson, SS 9. Tucker Davidson, P Houston Astros Lineup We have changes: Alex Bregman is dropped to seventh, presumably for hitting like a pitcher, and Correa, who also hasn’t hit much, is moving up to third. So let’s see if this little shakeup helps energize this dormant lineup. 1. Jose Altuve, 2B 2. Michael Brantley, RF 3. Carlos Correa, SS 4. Yordan Alvarez, LF 5. Yuli Gurriel, 1B 6. Kyle Tucker, CF 7. Alex Breegman, 3B 8. Martin Maldonado, C 9. Framer Valdez, P Insight We have it, from Braves pitching coach Rick Kranitz: he discusses the call to put ice cold armed Tucker Davidson on the mound on what is an enormous occasion for the franchise. The Starters So, who is starting for the Braves as they bid for their first World Series title since 1995? No, it’s not Charlie Morton: he would’ve been on the hill if not for fracturing his right fibula in Game 1. So instead, it’s that household name, Tucker Davidson. If you’re wondering who he exactly Tucker is, well, he’s a rookie who hasn’t appeared in the big leagues in 138 days. That’s breaks a record for time not appearing prior to a World Series start set by none other than Kyle Wright, another rookie, who started Game 2 for the Braves: he hadn’t pitched in 126 days. So perhaps the Braves are on to something with cold arms and rookies: Ian Anderson, who started Game 3 is also in his first season of Major League Baseball. So we’ll se how long Tucker can go tonight. One thing we do know is that AJ Minter should feature for the Braves this game as he did not appear last night. On the hill for the Astros was Game 1 starter Framber Valdez, who was reasonably awful against the Braves in their first tilt: two innings, five runs allowed. He’ll need that slider working tonight to give Houston that something special they’ll need to win on the road in a hostile environment. More to come. Stick with us... Hello folks and welcome to our coverage of Game 5 of the 117th World Series! We’re extra excited because, as they say, the “piece of metal” is in the house, and that of course means that we could crown a champion tonight. The Braves are up three games to one in this best of seven series, and that means that veteran Houston manager Dusty Baker is on the precipice of an 11th playoff ousting and a second defeat in the Fall Classic. Yet, there is still hope for Houston. The Bravos have to piece together another game out of their bullpen, and if the Astros bats suddenly spring to life, as they are more than capable of doing, and eek out a victory tonight, they’ll be awarded with a trip home for Game 6 and a possible Game 7. A is most definitely possible and so nobody should even think about getting ahead of themselves. That said, these Braves, despite the uncharacteristic series of mistakes last night, are a steady, solid outfit, with playmakers all over the diamond, and will benefit from their chopping crowd for their last home game of the 2021 season. And so as we wait for the first pitch we all wonder: will the Braves life the piece of metal tonight? All will be revealed as Game 5 unravels before your pixels. For now, why not get comfortable and prepare by joining our live blog? Tweet me, @LengelDavid. Or, alternatively, why not drop me a line with your thoughts and feelings about anything you like. Yes, you can get your name in the paper quit easily. We’ll have lineups, and other drops for you shortly. Stick with us! David will be here shortly, in the meantime here’s how Game 4 played out: A guy who spent most of the season in the minors kept the Braves in it. Then the offense finally came to life. Just like that, Atlanta are one win from their first World Series title in 26 years. Dansby Swanson and pinch-hitter Jorge Soler connected for back-to-back homers in the seventh inning Saturday night, propelling the Braves to a 3-2 victory over the Houston Astros and a commanding 3-1 Series lead. The Braves can wrap up the championship on their home field, just as they did two stadiums ago when they beat the Cleveland Indians in 1995. That triumph at the old Atlanta-Fulton County Stadium remains the franchise’s only World Series crown since moving to the South in 1966.Climate change experts have warned that New Zealand has employed “accounting tricks” to create a target for greenhouse gas emissions cuts that looks far more ambitious than it really is. On Sunday the country pledged to halve its emissions by 2030 aspart of the Paris agreement to limit global warming to 1.5C. The announcement was made on the eve of the United Nations Cop26 climate conference. The previous target, known as a nationally determined contribution (NDC), was to reduce emissions by an average of 30% from 2005 levels, over the 2021-2030 period. The updated NDC, has a target of reducing net emissions by 50% below the gross 2005 levels come 2030, or to reduce average annual net emissions over the next decade to 41% below 2005 gross levels. The target roughly aligns with commitments by the European Union, Newsroom reports, the primary difference being that the European Union aims to reduce most of its emissions within its own borders. New Zealand, on the other hand, expects that less than a third of its emissions will be reduced onshore. While New Zealand’s share of global greenhouse gas emissions is small, its gross emissions per capita are high and it is one of the world’s worst performers on emission increases. Emissions in New Zealand rose 57% between 1990 and 2018 – the second-greatest increase of all industrialised countries. Earlier this year, data showed New Zealand’s emissions had increased by 2% in 2018-19. The Climate Action Tracker has given the country a “highly insufficient” rating, pointing out that despite net-zero emissions by 2050 being enshrined in law, the government’s policies focus too heavily on offsetting carbon overseas and through forestry, rather than addressing the root causes such as agriculture. Bill Hare, from Climate Analytics, a partner organisation to Climate Action Tracker said New Zealand’s latest announcement employs “various accounting tricks”. “The headline target that the government has put forward as a 50% reduction from 2005 levels of emissions is what the general public hears, however the government has taken a number of unusual accounting approaches that, when analysed, indicate that the real emission reductions achieved compared to 2005 levels of net emissions is only 22-23%,” he said. “The allowed net emissions in 2030 are calculated as a percentage of gross emissions in 2005, essentially comparing apples and oranges. Gross emissions in 2005 was significantly higher than 2005 emissions.” Global industry campaign manager at Oil Change International, David Tong, said it was similar to the difference between looking at gross income, and pay after tax. “What’s been compared is a total emissions in 2005, to our total emissions, if we achieve this target, in 2030, less the sequestration from forestry and other carbon sequestration within New Zealand. So those are two different data sets.” Part of the problem, is that the government is using Kyoto Protocol accounting rules, which have become less common, rather than the International Panel on Climate Change data method. “If you want to compare our targets to what is necessary for 1.5C, as both the prime minister and minister James Shaw have done, then it’s really important that you use the same numbers as the world’s top scientists,” he said. Professor Bronwyn Hayward, from the University of Canterbury and an author for the IPCC report, said Climate Action Tracker has long argued that if New Zealand’s commitments are to be consistent with limiting warming to 1.5˚C, the country should set a 2030 target to reduce gross emissions by at least 44%. “What we have done instead is to set an estimated net target of 41%. There will now be political debate about whether this meets the 1.5 target.” Lawyers for Climate Action NZ Inc spokesperson, James Every-Palmer QC, said that while the target sounded good and is a significant improvement on the current NDC, it is not as good as it sounds. “The climate does not care about our clever accounting choices, it cares about the level of net emissions. And our failure to walk-the-talk will be apparent to our trading partners in our United Nations framework convention on climate change reporting.” The climate minister James Shaw said while the first priority was to reduce emissions domestically, the country will also boost its emissions reductions through buying overseas carbon credits. “We will then add to this by working to reduce emissions in other parts of the world. The priority here will be to support developing countries in the Asia-Pacific to meet their sustainable development goals. But Professor Ralph Sims, from Massey University said: “forest sinks only buy us time, and buying international credits is yet to be agreed under Paris COP rules and remains questionable with double-counting a risk”. Forest and Bird’s chief executive Kevin Hague said the government was relying too heavily on other countries to do the work. “Unless the government delivers a much better plan to cut emissions that what we have seen so far this target will be mostly met by buying carbon credits from other countries. That’s a government subsidy to polluters like the dairy industry.” With the target set, and the country’s emissions reduction plan due in May 2022, the most important thing now was for action to back up the ambitions, Hayward said. “It’s meeting them that is the big challenge as we work to make these cuts to our emissions real in all sectors of the economy, and to dramatically increase our efforts to protect people and businesses from increasingly chaotic climate futures.”A suspect has been arrested for attempted murder after 17 people were injured in a knife and fire attack on a train in Tokyo that was carried out by a man wearing a Joker costume. Witnesses told public broadcaster NHK how petrified passengers had fled to adjoining carriages and jumped out of windows during the attack, which occurred on Sunday, when the Japanese capital was full of Halloween revellers, many in costume. The suspect, who has been named as 24-year-old Kyota Hattori, told police he “adores” the Joker character from the Batman films, according to the Kyodo news agency. He was quoted by police as saying he had wanted to kill multiple people and receive the death penalty, it added. Photos and videos posted on social media showed a man wearing a green shirt and purple suit. He allegedly attacked passengers on the Keio Line train with a knife and started a fire inside the carriage using lighter fluid. Kyodo said a male passenger in his 70s was in critical condition after being stabbed in the chest. Sixteen other people suffered minor injuries, including smoke inhalation. Top government spokesman Hirokazu Matsuno described the incident as “atrocious and brutal” on Monday. A video clip published by NHK showed panicked passengers running down the train as smoke filled the carriage, with flames also visible. Another video posted on Twitter showed people climbing through windows to escape the train at a station. The line operator said services had been partially suspended after “an incident involving injuries” took place just before 8pm near Kokuryō in the city’s western suburbs. The express train had been bound for Shinjuku, the world’s busiest railway station. “At first I thought it was something like a Halloween event. But I rushed away as a man carrying a long knife came in. I was very fortunate not to be injured,” a man who was on the train told NHK. The perpetrator showed no emotion during the attack, a female passenger said. “He held a knife and started spreading liquid,” she said. “He was committing this act without showing any emotion, just mechanically. I think that brought fear to everyone.” Dozens of firefighters and police officers were seen working outside the station. Violent crime is rare in Japan, but in August nine people were wounded, one of them seriously, in a stabbing on a commuter train in Tokyo, with the suspect fleeing the scene and later handing himself in. In a separate attack in August, two people suffered burns in an acid attack at a Tokyo subway station. Japan has strict gun laws, but there are occasional violent crimes involving other weapons. In 2019, a man killed two people, including a schoolgirl, and wounded more than a dozen in a rampage that targeted children as they waited for a bus. And in 2018, a man was arrested in central Japan after stabbing one person to death and injuring two others on a bullet train.When Senait Lara, a 28-year-old video producer in Los Angeles, was confronted by her friends about her lack of communication in their group chat, the accusations were as follows: she only caught up every few days; when she did, it was barely an interaction – Lara spent time “hearting” messages instead of responding with words; and sometimes she would never respond at all. Lara did not deny it. She knew she sometimes preferred to throw her phone in a corner and completely avoid it rather than deal with the onslaught of requests. It wasn’t until Lara addressed her behaviour in therapy that she realized she felt anxious from texting because of her tendency to please those around her. As her therapist described, people-pleasers are less likely to have boundaries around communication, which smartphones barely provide. “I never understood why I would be so difficult to communicate with, but then I realized it was all online,” she said. In person, Lara felt comfortable talking with people, but when communication came down to a text message, an email, or a direct message, she wanted to tap out. While social media and messaging apps claim to keep us more connected to each other, many younger users are finding themselves exhausted from receiving constant notifications, balancing numerous exchanges at once, and carrying conversations that can last all day – and sometimes over the course of a week. The after-effect? Delayed responses, forgetting to get back to someone entirely, and a need for frequent phone breaks. In fact, a 2020 study exploring the effects of information overload and online conversation dynamics found that “over-exposure to information can suppress the likelihood of response by overloading users, contrary to analogies to biologically-inspired viral spread”. It makes sense that millennials are feeling extremely overloaded. While social media use has increased among older adults, they are less likely to use multiple social media platforms, or to highly engage in them, making them less susceptible to technological burnout. Instead, studies show that older generations use social media platformsto keep up with family and to compensate for missed in-person interactions, rather than branding themselves or seeking opportunities, which results in less time and less engagement. Some avoid social media platforms completely because of technological disadvantages or fear of security breaches. Millennials, on the other hand – people born between the early 1980s and mid-1990s – have been described as the burnout generation. It’s a generation that has matured in a technological world that allows for work, information, and communication to follow them everywhere. Throw in the increase we have seen in ways to communicate since the pandemic and you have gridlock. People are overwhelmed. From Zoom meetings and FaceTime dates to Slack blurring the lines between work and casual chat, connecting online has grown rapidly since 2019. There was a 61% increase in social media engagement during the first wave of the pandemic, and that wasn’t just for the love of it: 73% of users expressed a negative sentiment towards social media in the past year. With vaccination rollouts and pandemic precautions easing, there is some relief on the horizon, but people are feeling burned out from spending much of 2020 online. The average American has 47 unread text messages and 1,602 unopened emails. And yet, the average phone screen time for American adults is 4.2 hours per day – more than ever before. This suggests people are spending more time on their phones, and still have less time to complete conversations. Now people are faced with social media apps like Instagram, Twitter, and Facebook which encourage interaction through likes and shares; instant messaging apps like WhatsApp, Snapchat, and Messenger, which encourage long threads of conversation and group chats; and the traditional forms of communication like email and text messaging. The resulting number of conversations is almost unbelievable: the average person checks their phone 262 times a day, a major increase from the 80 times a day average in 2016. The frequent digital contact leaves people feeling overwhelmed and unable to participate at all. Like ghosting a date – common on dating apps, where it’s the norm to have many conversations going at once – people stop responding to acquaintances, loved ones and friends. Emily Balcetis, an associate professor of psychology at New York University, recommends creating communication boundaries to manage the onslaught. This might include investing in an old-school alarm clock to have by your bedside so you can leave your phone charging in another room, or having cut-off times for email communication. Switching off around bedtime hours, she says, means “you can give your brain a break before you fall asleep and have a gentler start to the day.” On email, people increasingly feel obliged to be constantly responsive, especially when all sorts of assumptions are made based on your email etiquette – like how much of a “competitive edge” one has. Balcetis suggests deciding on a reasonable window of time to check on and respond to emails, and using email signatures to flag in-office hours and days you don’t check emails. Smartphones have quickly transformed into handheld storage units for our conversations, thoughts,music and everything else. That shift to feeling constantly attached to our phones as if they were a limb, relates to the burnout, says Balcetis. Now there’s an app for everything, and with most apps come push notifications and ways to connect with other users, even when communication isn’t the leading purpose of the app. Take Glow for example, a period and fertility tracker app. The app, which functions as a calendar, also encourages users to join group chats to compare experiences with its community of over 15 million women. Everything from fitness apps like Strava to recipe apps like BigOven encourage people to do the same. We could all just opt out of push notifications, but an unspoken obligation remains: to always be available as long as your phone is within reach. Ultimately, it boils down to belonging, which Balcetis says is an inherent need for humans. People have a sense of fomo – a fear of missing out – when they are not engaged. The term was originally popularized to reference anxiety about missing social events, but with smartphones acting as our society’s primary mode of communication, this has extended to being online. It speaks to why Lara’s friends felt rejected by her lacklustre responses: they sent a distorted message to her friends, that she was not invested in their relationships. According to Balcetis, the negativity dominance effect – our brain’s natural tendency to intensify perceived negativity or threats – results in this assumption. “Any sort of negative feedback, which can take the form of just non-responsiveness; people not putting a heart on something; or somebody not responding quickly enough, is going to loom large in our mind’s eye and have a disproportionate impact on our wellbeing,” Balcetis explained. Once Lara was able to accept her uncomfortable relationship with her phone, she started to tell her friends that she steps away from it at times, which has led to some friendships weakening – but others fared better. As smartphones have become essential devices, adaptions are constantly made to help users connect faster, and more frequently. In 2016, Apple launched Tapbacks, or emoji reactions for messages. Instead of responding with a written text, people can now place a heart, a thumbs up, a thumbs down, a ‘“haha!”, a double exclamation point, or a question mark on a text message. Similarly, Instagram this year implemented sticker reactions to Stories. The update allows users to react to a story with laughing, surprised, heart eyes, teary-eyed, clap, fire, celebration or the 100 emoji. These features allow users to respond to someone’s post or message in less than a second. It also means opening communication with people we wouldn’t hold conversations with in person, blurring the lines between who is a friend and who is just an acquaintance. Kirsten Chen, a 24-year-old creative editor in New York, describes the outreach from people she isn’t close to, mostly frivolous connections on social media, as annoying and entitled. “All of these people are asking me for so many things and think that they know me on this level where they get access to me,” she says. The constant communication also makes her feel guilty: “I would like to help as many people as I can, and be a good friend or acquaintance, but I don’t have the bandwidth to deal with all y’all,” she explains. Chen’s response rate is reflective of who is most relevant to her. If the message isn’t urgent, but comes from someone she talks to frequently, she might respond in six to 10 hours. And if the message is from someone she isn’t interested in or is about something she doesn’t care about, it could be a few days or a week before she offers a response. Even with this method, she’s recently racked up 12,460 unopened emails, 182 unread texts, and an unmeasurable number of Instagram DMs. To some people, the sight of multiple unread notifications can trigger feelings of anxiety. Kevin Schoenblum, a 25-year-old UR designer in Washington, mass deletes emails and text messages once a week to avoid the red unread bubble on their phone screen. Sometimes it results in missing messages. “The idea that I owe a response to someone or that someone’s waiting to hear back from me creates this cycle of guilt and shame and stress,” they said. Fortunately, those who are close to Schoenblum are aware of their communication habits and don’t expect immediacy in response time unless it’s urgent. Recently diagnosed with ADHD, Schoenblum says the diagnosis gave them more understanding as to why notifications do not hold their attention as much as seeing someone’s face and hearing their voice. As the pressure to be online and always available continues to grow in our society, in-person interactions provide far more authentic communication than digital ones. From body language and tone of voice to eye contact and all the other social cues that exist in real life that aren’t available in a text message, it’s far easier to be present when you’re face-to-face. As Balcetis notes: “At the end of the day, I think what we’re looking for is not more ways to stay connected, but higher quality ways to be connected.”Liberal MP Christian Porter will be formally asked by a powerful parliamentary committee to explain his declaration that legal fees for his defamation case were part-paid by a trust with funds from unknown sources. Guardian Australia understands the privileges committee decided last week to write to Porter offering him a right of reply to a complaint from shadow attorney general, Mark Dreyfus, that the former attorney general’s failure to declare the ultimate source of funds breached disclosure rules. The committee also confirmed to Dreyfus it is considering the complaint. Both moves suggest that despite the Morrison government using its House of Representatives majority to defeat a motion to refer the issue, the member for Pearce’s declaration is nevertheless being scrutinised. On Monday a spokesperson for Porter told Guardian Australia: “The member will respond to any correspondence received from the committee in due course.” In September, Porter disclosed that the “Legal Services Trust” had part-paid fees arising from the private defamation case he instigated against the ABC. The former attorney general said that as a “potential beneficiary” of what he described as a blind trust he had no access to information about the source of the funds. The Dreyfus complaint, sent on 18 October, noted that the register requires gifts worth more than $750 to be declared and that, despite Porter’s disclosure, the House has no idea who or what the ultimate sources of funds were. In parliamentary debate, Labor’s Tony Burke labelled the trust a “brown paper bag stitched together by lawyers”. Burke noted Porter’s public assurances that no “foreign donors” or people on the lobbyist register had donated to the trust. “So he has made clear that he can find out whose money is in this trust, from which he has personally benefited for a personal bill,” Burke said. Dreyfus’s letter similarly argued that Porter’s reasons for not disclosing are not valid, and queried whether he had “acted contrary to House resolutions on the registration of members’ interests”. Porter maintains he has properly disclosed his interests in accordance with both the rules and the ministerial standards, but resigned as a minister in September on the basis the issue had become an “unhelpful distraction” for the government. On the day he resigned, Porter said in a statement he was “not willing to put pressure on the trust to provide me with any further information … to which I am not entitled”. Porter said he did not want to expose people who donated to the trust to “become targets of the social media mob”. The leader of the House, Peter Dutton, has asked the privileges committee to consider clarifying the rules around disclosure of donations for legal cases, a request that could encompass consideration of how members are interpreting the rules, but did not ask for a ruling on Porter’s declaration. Because Dreyfus’s complaint accused Porter of breaching the rules, the committee resolved, in line with standard procedure, to offer him a right of reply. The committee also received a written complaint from the Greens senator Larissa Waters. The committee has not ruled out making findings against individual MPs. In considering whether to allow debate on the motion to refer Porter, the former speaker Tony Smith found there was a “prima facie case” to investigate Porter for an alleged breach, but added that “does not imply a conclusion that a breach of privilege or contempt has occurred”. In October Scott Morrison sought to manage fallout from the government blocking the attempted referral of Porter, by insisting the broader consideration of clarifying rules around disclosure when members are faced with defamation proceedings would look into the controversy. “The suggestion that somehow things are not being looked into, that things have not been referred to [the committee], is not the case,” Morrison told the House in question time. “We’ve referred these matters directly to the chair of the privileges committee to consider these issues.”Early on Monday morning, the normally quiet capital of the Pacific country of Tonga, Nuku’alofa city, was packed with cars. There were long queues outside vaccination centres, as well as banks, Western Union outlets and shops as people rushed to prepare for the tiny nation’s first proper lockdown. It came four days after the Kingdom of Tonga recorded its first ever Covid case. The country of roughly 100,000 people 2,000km east of Australia, has made it through nearly two years of the pandemic Covid-free, largely by keeping its borders closed to international arrivals. But after a repatriation flight from New Zealand last Wednesday brought in the first case – a young Tongan missionary returning from Australia on mission work with the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints – Tonga is bracing for the worst. The case has sent people scrambling. The government confirmed on Monday that the number of those who were fully vaccinated had jumped from around 35% before the first case was confirmed to 62% by Monday, as people who had received their first dose but not returned for their second jab rushed to get vaccinated. Eighty-eight per cent of people had had their first dose. “There is definitely more urgency now to be vaccinated,” said Dr ʻAmelia Afuhaʻamango Tuʻipulotu, the health minister. The government announced a seven-day lockdown to cover Tongatapu, the main island, with restrictions that will stop public gatherings, stop work except for essential services and keep people at home. But many frightened people put themselves into lockdown well ahead of the government’s announcement. “My husband and I decided to get the two daughters [aged 14 and 15] vaccinated ASAP rather than wait for their scheduled school one. We also made a decision to go into voluntary lockdown immediately,” said Ofa Gutteinbeil Likiliki, who works as the director of the Women and Children Crisis Centre (WCCC) in Nuku’alofa. “I thought about my son who has asthma and wanted to get him out of school ASAP and my daughters who were at school. Only one had been vaccinated at that time, I wanted to get them out of school. “I was also shocked that government took some time to announce what was happening, especially after so much had been leaked on social media… [and] that they didn’t make a decision to lockdown immediately after, especially after what we have seen happen in other counties such as Fiji and New Zealand, who are closer to home.” “I decided that the lockdown announced by government can come later, I’m locking down my family on Friday and I would urge people to lockdown at home, wear your masks and be safe,” said Ramanlal Vallabh, who is the president of the Media Association of Tonga. “I was worried because we have the first case of Covid-19 in Tonga and after having seen and witnessed what it has done in places like Fiji, New Zealand, Australia and the United States of America.” Meanwhile, more than 200 people who were onboard the flight with the infected passenger, as well as all the airport staff who were working when the plane came in, and health staff, are in government-managed quarantine. “When we found out we acted straight away and carried out the work we needed to do. The positive case was isolated and others have been monitored closely,” said Tuʻipulotu, the health minister. “I just spoke with our doctor, sister in charge and our first Covid-19 case. They are courageous, caring, humble and respectful. They are doing their outmost best for our first case and all passengers,” Tuʻipulotu said. “I also spoke to our first case and shared my love and compassion to him and his family.” Announcing the case on Friday, Prime Minister Hon Dr Rev Pohiva Tuioneto’a said: “We ask that you do not panic nor be afraid but that you stand together with us to carry out the duties given us. We pledge to do our best to continuously share correct and reliable information regarding the response.” The prime minister also asked people not to disseminate wrong information “that is untrue and misleading, as this will affect the trust and support needed for this important work”.The International Handball Federation has responded to widespread accusations of sexism by changing its rules around women’s uniforms to allow bike shorts and tank tops instead of bikini bottoms and crop tops. The sport’s global governing body has been the subject of international pressure since July, when the European Handball Federation made headlines for imposing a €1,500 fine on the Norwegian women’s beach handball team for wearing shorts like their male counterparts during the Euro 21 tournament in Bulgaria. At the time, the EHF described the shorts as “improper clothing”. At some point over the past month the IHF has quietly altered its regulations for beach handball, which now stipulate that “female athletes must wear short tight pants with a close fit”. Male athletes can still wear regular shorts as long as 10cm above the knee “if not too baggy”. It follows a campaign by Norway-based Australian activist Talitha Stone, whose petition – supported by gender equality organisation Collective Shout – attracted 61,000 signatures. “I hope this is the beginning of the end of sexism and objectification of women and girls in sport,” said Stone, who led Collective Shout’s 2012 campaign against the Lingerie Football League. “And that in future all women and girls will be free to participate in sport without fear of wardrobe malfunctions and sexual harassment.” In July, US pop star Pink threw her support behind the Norwegian team, tweeting her pride in them “protesting the very sexist rules” and offering to pay their fines. The country’s minister for culture and sport, Abid Raja, described the ruling as being “completely ridiculous” and women’s sports associations across Europe also called for the resignation of the presidents of both the IHF and the EHF. Last month, the sports ministers from five European countries – Denmark, Norway, Sweden, Iceland, and Finland – wrote a joint letter to the IHF urging them to update archaic dress regulations “not only to accommodate current female athletes, but also to support and encourage all athletes regardless of their gender or background to remain in sport”. At the time, the IHF rules stated that female players playing beach handball must wear “tops and bikini bottoms and eventual accessories”, while male players wear “tank tops and shorts and eventual accessories”. Even now, there are differences in terms of requirements for women to wear uniforms that are “body fit” and “tight” when there is no corresponding rule for men. Female athletes have spoken out against uniform double standards numerous times. Women are required to wear more revealing outfits in several sports, including track and field, beach volleyball and tennis. In 2011, the Badminton World Federation decreed that women must wear skirts or dresses to play at the elite level in order to help revive flagging interest in women’s badminton. A decade later, in July this year, double Paralympic world champion Olivia Breen said she was left speechless and outraged after being told that her competition briefs were “too short and inappropriate” by an official while competing at the English Championships a few weeks before the Tokyo 2020 Paralympic Games.The rain began before dawn, with heavy drops tearing at the moss on the roof and threatening to block the gutters and downpipes, which gurgled ominously. With little wind, the insistent thundery downpour dragged on until a faint line of light began to outline the eastern hills. My sleep confounded, I watched as the morning seeped into view through the mist hanging over the valley. Squally winds followed, stripping the first leaves from the beech trees and starting to dislodge the last of the apple crop. These final russets, swelling now from plentiful moisture, have been one of the beneficiaries of this wet early autumn. For some other apple varieties the rain came too late, and, added to the spring storms that damaged the setting fruit, the yields have been disappointing – with little scope for cider-making. Growing a number of different apple cultivars gives us some insurance against the vagaries of our unpredictable weather – they flower at different times, offering pollinators broader access, and respond to rain and drought in subtly different ways. If a season favours one variety, we will at least get the benefit of that part of the crop – while a monoculture might fail completely. As the day progressed, the cloud thinned and pale sunlight began to filter through the trees, highlighting the turning leaves against the uncertain outlines of the hills beyond. Then, suddenly, brilliant sunshine escaped from behind a passing shower and a full rainbow emerged across the north-eastern sky. In the fading light, more substantial banks of cloud began to build – bulky, dark and threatening. When the full moon rose over the Cambrian Mountains soon after nightfall, the freshly washed atmosphere, now almost devoid of dust, added barely any warmth to its colour – even close to the horizon. As the disc of the moon was repeatedly occulted by patches of heavy cloud, the strata were separately illuminated as though from within – giving an impressively three dimensional effect and showing the complexity of the cloudscape. It is just before dawn, heavy rain has begun to fall. Again. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryThe short-term forecast is for a storm – or maybe a squally shower – of Cop26-inspired Tempests. On 7 November, BBC Radio 3 is fielding a soft-spoken Ian McDiarmid as Prospero in Shakespeare’s island reverie and here in Glasgow, as the climate delegates assemble, director Andy Arnold has put together an 11-strong, all-female Tempest, led by Nicole Cooper. Neither production overstates the eco connections, each preferring the story does its own work. This is a play about a man-made weather event leading to a bunch of Europeans taking over a foreign territory, exploiting it, then getting out again. The latter idea is picked up by Arnold, who leaves Itxaso Moreno’s athletic Ariel and Liz Kettle’s proud Caliban forlorn and abandoned at the end of the 90-minute show. They have been used and discarded, the dream-like visions of their visitors a lingering nightmare for them. The set by Jenny Booth, which gets an environmental tick for recycling prop-store furniture, places Cooper, dramatically, on the sill beneath one of the exposed stained-glass windows on the theatre’s back wall. This is Prospero’s high-level library, a vantage point to cast his spells over the supernatural inhabitants, the shipwrecked sailors and Titana Muthui’s Miranda, a surly, eye-rolling teenager rather than the sweet-natured ingenue of tradition. There is something of the sociopath in Cooper’s portrayal. This is a Prospero who is all charm and charisma when things are going his way, but step out of line and he turns vicious. Blaming Ariel for the sprite’s own misfortunes feels like gaslighting. Abusing Caliban is the colonial mindset at its most arrogant. There are more reasons than adolescent hormones to make Miranda sceptical about her dad, a man who combines suave assurance and callous control. With Benny Goodman’s lighting splashing fiery reds and stark whites from the wings, it is a dreamy, fluid production, but one that skates over some of the key moments. Where is the wonder when Miranda sets eyes on her first eligible man, or the shock when the sailors encounter Caliban? But if such transitions are underplayed, a show that boldly questions the means of production is also thoughtful and imaginative. The Tempest is at Tron theatre, Glasgow, until 13 November.The UK automotive industry is privately lobbying against the proposed 2040 introduction of a ban on sales of new diesel trucks, amid a split between manufacturers over when heavy goods vehicles should abandon fossil fuels. In July the government revealed plans to ban internal combustion engines in new lorries after 2040, following a ban on petrol and diesel cars after 2035 to help tackle the climate crisis. It is now consulting on the measure. The automotive lobby group, the Society for Motor Manufacturers and Traders (SMMT), says publicly that the proposed ban is a “bold commitment” that would require financial support from the government. However, it has told MPs privately that a ban should be delayed, according to responses to the official consultation. The responses were obtained through a formal request by InfluenceMap, a thinktank that tracks climate lobbying, which shared them with the Guardian. The Road Haulage Association (RHA), which represents trucking companies, said the ban should be delayed until 2045 for lorries over 32 tonnes in weight. It supported earlier bans for smaller lorries. Some individual truckmakers do support bans on fossil fuel internal combustion engines in heavy goods vehicles in 2040 or earlier, the responses show. They include Volvo Trucks and Renault, both owned by Volvo Group, the world’s second biggest truckmaker, as well as DAF Trucks and Tesla. Car sales are already moving rapidly to electric power, but heavy goods vehicles are much harder to electrify because of the heavy loads they carry over long distances, making batteries much less effective. Lorries were responsible for 19m tonnes of CO2 equivalent in 2019, 16% of UK emissions from transport, according to government figures. Ben Youriev, a transport analyst at InfluenceMap, said: “Cutting emissions from road transport will be critically important for the UK achieving its net zero targets, yet the UK’s automotive industry group is lobbying to make that task harder. The SMMT is siding with its most regressive members to oppose a 2040 UK phase-out date for heavy-duty vehicles, despite the recommendations of the UK’s Climate Change Committee.” The SMMT consultation response said: “Without clarity on the viable future solutions required for zero-emission HGVs, we do not support setting an end-of-sale date.” It said the industry was committed to zero-emission HGVs “where technology options are viable and the business case for investment allows”, but that “some specific use cases are likely to be more challenging”. Mike Hawes, the SMMT’s chief executive, said in a statement: “SMMT and its members do not oppose setting an end-of-sale date, but we need plans before bans. The HGV sector is committed to be fossil fuel free by 2040 and in some use cases it will be possible to switch to zero-emission trucks before this date – but at present there is no clear alternative technology available for every single HGV operation.” Rod McKenzie, the managing director of policy at the RHA, said more time was needed for the largest lorries only because the technology to power them was not yet available. He said that would mean small delivery companies were faced with financial risks when buying new vehicles. “It’s not that we’re against cleaner air or phasing out diesel lorries,” he said. “The question has always been the timescale.” Tesla, the world’s most valuable automotive company, was a notable advocate in its response for the earliest ban possible, arguing for 2035. Controlled by Elon Musk, whose stake has made him the richest man in history, Tesla is aiming to produce the Semi, a heavy goods vehicle powered by batteries. However, the Semi is still “in development” despite Musk in 2017 saying it would start production in 2019. • This article was amended on 1 November 2021. A reference to truckmakers supporting bans on “internal combustion engines” in heavy goods vehicles in 2040 or earlier, should instead have referred specifically to fossil fuel internal combustion engines.Venus has returned to the evening sky and will spend the month trekking through the constellation of Sagittarius, the archer. In the late afternoon of Sunday 7 November, a waxing crescent moon will meet the bright planet low down in the sky as the twilight deepens into night. The chart shows the view looking south-west from London at 5pm GMT. The pair will be conspicuous to anyone with a good south-eastern horizon. Venus will be a bright, star-like point of light but unlike a star it will not be twinkling. Instead it will be a steady beacon. The moon will be particularly beautiful, with just 11% of its visible surface illuminated. If the weather is clear and you intend to look for the pair, don’t hang around as they will be well on their way to setting by 5.30pm. Start looking any time after 4.30pm but never look at the sun directly if it is in the sky. This pairing is a much easier spot from Sydney, Australia, well placed in the west after sunset, with the moon setting around 10pm AEDT. Use it as a practice run for next month when the grouping will appear again on 6 December and Venus will be at its brightest for this particular apparition.Children in affluent areas of England are twice as likely to have access to youth clubs and other out-of-school activities as those in poorer locations, the first national snapshot of youth services in more than a decade has revealed. The gulf emerged in a survey by the National Youth Agency (NYA) of close to 8,500 organisations providing youth services including national groups such as the Boys’ Brigade, the Woodcraft Folk, YMCA and the Marine Society &amp; Sea Cadets, as well as councils. The majority of provision was offered by Scouts and Girlguiding. The survey also found youth buildings are more than twice as likely to be purpose-built for or aimed towards young people in affluent areas than in deprived areas, where facilities are more likely to be shared. The survey, funded by the Youth Futures Foundation, comes after official figures last week showed that close to 13,000 children in England were identified by social services in 2020/21 as being at risk of criminal exploitation by gangs, which Anne Longfield, chair of the Commission on Young Lives described as “extremely troubling”. In the top 10% most affluent postcode areas there were twice as many youth groups compared as in the 10% most deprived, it found. The largest clusters of the most deprived areas in England are in Greater Manchester, the West Midlands, the north-east, Yorkshire and parts of London. The most affluent postcodes, often suburban and rural, include ares in counties such as Berkshire, Cheshire and Devon. The chancellor, Rishi Sunak, last week announced a settlement for youth services, badged as delivering “up to 300 youth facilities” but which youth leaders now fear could result in an overall reduction in funding previously pledged. The £560m offered over three years appears to include a £500m youth investment fund announced in 2019 and funding for the National Citizen Service, which offers residential trips to 16- and 17-year-olds. The NYA estimates £1bn less is being spent on youth services annually than a decade ago. The YMCA has previously calculated that youth services in England have experienced a 73% real-terms funding cut from local authorities since 2010. “There needs to be equal access to youth provision and it shouldn’t depend on postcode or [whether you live in] an affluent area,” said Leigh Middleton, the chief executive of the NYA, who described the figures as “very stark”. “The priority should be set by where the need is greatest and supporting all young people to have equal access to youth provision.” The survey was dominated by responses from uniformed groups – 45% were from Girlguiding and 41% from Scouts – but the NYA said while this may overstate their role in youth services, they are likely to account for a majority of provision. In total, 16% of the organisations that responded were local authority youth services, faith groups and smaller community organisations. The snapshot also revealed how demand for youth services that address mental health are being swamped by demand. Two-thirds of organisations supporting mental health, wellbeing and related issues had waiting lists, rising to three-quarters in the most deprived areas. By contrast, half of those offering physical health and sport had waiting lists. Waiting lists were longer for providers of almost all kinds of services in deprived areas, with almost half of organisations addressing youth employment having a waiting list in the poorest areas, compared with just over a quarter in the wealthiest ones. A DCMS spokesperson said: “Last week we announced plans to invest £560m to make sure youth services get the support they need, and this includes funding the construction or refurbishment of up to 300 youth facilities in the most deprived areas of the country. “We also confirmed a £500m extension of our schemes to help young people find new opportunities and better paid work, over £200m to continue the holiday activities and food programme, and a further £1.8bn to support schools’ recovery from the pandemic and help the most disadvantaged pupils – which takes overall funding dedicated towards pupils’ recovery to almost £5bn.” • This article was amended on 1 November 2021. The survey in question was wholly funded by the Youth Futures Foundation, and not “part-funded by the Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport” as an earlier version said due to information provided by the National Youth Agency. It was further amended on 29 January 2022 to replace the main photograph.Sometimes one kind of pain can bring to light another. Stuck in hospital for a month, Petra Wenham resolved to confront an unease she had carried throughout her whole life. She was 68 and had lost 30kg as a result of severe colitis. “My family were very worried. I was evaluating my life.” Between morphine injections, Wenham, a retired cybersecurity consultant, had time to wander online, where she found a blog whose author had decided to transition after treading on a shard of glass. Something about the way the pain, vulnerability and sense of mortality galvanised the blogger spoke to Wenham. “I realised that your past … you look at it and realise all of the pain. You’ve had all this pain and you really need to do something about it and at least get a bit more out of life,” she says. In 2015, Wenham was discharged to await bowel surgery. “I came out and my first thing to do was to sit down with my wife, Loraine. She knew that I did cross-dressing from before we were married. At the time we put it down to transvestite traits. We had no other knowledge. That odd bit of cross-dressing brings sufficient mental relief that you can carry on. But in the end it doesn’t. You have to do something about it. I said to Loraine, ‘Look, I believe I’m transgender. This is what it means.’” Wenham believes Loraine probably understood the truth before Wenham herself did. This year they celebrated their 48th wedding anniversary, having married six months after their first date (a dinner at the Institution of Electrical Engineers). Wenham was only a little nervous proposing. “We were soulmates.” And now? “The personality of the person doesn’t change,” Wenham says. “I subscribe to the view that all of us love and love knows no gender or sex.” Together they joined a local support group. By the time Wenham referred herself to the London transgender clinic in October 2017, she was already living as a woman, though not fully out to all family and friends. Her children – two sons in their 40s – and grandchildren, still call her Dad and Grandad. “There is no point in confusing the kids. It might confuse the world, but that’s fine,” Wenham says. As a child, Wenham was shy. “You become a loner. As you go through school the society norm for gender starts kicking in and the girls start moving away from you because you are seen as a boy. Nevertheless, you are not part of the boy set.” Now Wenham has found her voice. In July, she was the first transgender woman to grace the cover of WI Life, the Women’s Institute magazine (as a member of the Cake and Revolution group in Suffolk). She has delivered many talks to other WI groups and local organisations, including NHS trusts, on her experience as a trans woman, and joined Pride marches. “I don’t particularly feel like an activist, although I’ve sort of fallen into that role,” she says. “What I’m doing is trying to educate. I want to help people to get a better understanding of the transgender condition.” Does she ever regret how long it took her to transition? “If the internet had been there when I was in my late teens, early 20s, would I have done it? The chances are yes, I probably would. But then again, I would have missed out on Loraine, the family, the grandchildren. It’s a difficult call.” Wenham never did need that bowel surgery. After she took probiotics, the colitis began to vanish. She and Loraine believe she was suffering from stress caused by decades of unacknowledged pain. “Because they never found a cause for my colitis. They were looking for some sort of infection. There wasn’t one.” Now, more than ever, she says, “I’m very, very comfortable in my skin.”If Caroline Lucas has always seemed an optimistic sort of politician, that outlook is being pushed to breaking point. Sitting through the budget last week was, says Lucas, “an unbelievable experience. It was like being in some weird parallel universe where there wasn’t a climate emergency, and we weren’t about to host the world’s nations at this big climate summit.” It should have been a moment when the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, “was turbocharging the funding for the net zero programme”, says the Green party MP, ahead of the Cop26 climate summit in Glasgow, which opened on Sunday. “It should have been the point where he reversed that unforgivable cut in aid, where we demonstrated some strong climate policies. Instead, the headlines were about cutting the cost of short-haul flights.” Her voice rises. “It’s almost as if he was thinking: ‘What can I do to send the worst signal ahead of this Cop?’ If I were Alok Sharma [the president of Cop26 and Conservative MP], I would be extremely angry because it feels as if he is being undermined by his own government.” She pauses, and gives a brittle laugh. “So objectively, it’s quite hard, looking at the evidence, to feel optimistic.” I had asked if Lucas felt positive about the summit, and she had given a long list of reasons why she didn’t – including the government’s slack approach to diplomacy, as host. She says Covid-19 has made it harder, but our efforts to get countries such as China on board still pale compared to what French politicians were doing ahead of the 2015 Paris conference. “We know that if you add up all of the different so-called nationally determined contributions – the individual countries’ assessment of how much they are going to cut their emissions by – that ought to be a minimum 45% cut by 2030. And if you add up what we’ve got so far, it’s leading to a 16% increase. “So on the emissions reductions, we’re not there. On the finance, we’re not there. Since 2009, we’ve said we will be providing $100bn to the developing countries by 2020, and we’ve still not got to that amount either.” On top of that, Lucas says, “The richer countries have not provided the [Covid] vaccines that they promised to poorer countries. I think the developing countries are going to arrive in Glasgow feeling incredibly let down.” Still, she says, smiling as she speaks via Zoom from her home in Brighton, there are glimmers of hope. “The public pressure and movements are gathering like never before. We know the public want leadership on this – they want the government to go further, they are absolutely up for bolder and more ambitious action. I take some hope from that, but on the evidence right now, I think it’s not too late, but it’s going to be tough.” Lucas has called Cop26 “our last best chance”. What will happen if it’s not successful? “This is the moment where it feels like public pressure and awareness is at its greatest. We know that this decade is going to be just about the most consequential in human history if we are serious about the existential threat that the climate crisis poses to humanity. But I’m also aware that if we don’t get a good result, it doesn’t mean we should all pack up, go home and give up. Every single fraction of a degree makes a difference in terms of climate impact, every single tonne of carbon emitted makes a difference. So we still have to keep fighting for the next best moment.” Lucas also knows we are running out of “moments”. Her biggest fear is, “That we don’t act fast enough. That we exceed 1.5 degrees, that we get towards two degrees of warming and more of the extreme events that scientists have been warning are linked to the climate emergency really accelerate.” One of her favourite films is Franny Armstrong’s docudrama The Age of Stupid, set in 2055 – with its cities under floods or on fire, it looks more familiar this year than it did when it came out in 2009 – and she says a line from it still makes the hairs stand up on the back of her neck: “‘Why is it, knowing what we knew then, we didn’t act when there was still time?’ And frankly that is the question I go to bed thinking about, and wake up thinking about.” Lucas was elected as the MP for Brighton Pavilion in 2010, and is still the country’s first and only Green MP. She grew up in Malvern, where her father ran a small business – her parents were “most definitely Conservatives” and politics wasn’t part of her childhood. “I came late to it,” she says. As a bookish child, she was most interested in poetry and novels; she went on to do a PhD in 16th-century literary romance. In the early 80s, at university in Exeter, Lucas got involved with the anti-nuclear movement and the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament (CND). “That’s what got me into politics more broadly,” she says. Although she never stayed at Greenham Common, visiting the protest “was my kind of introduction to the broader political world”. When she worked in the CND bookshop in Exeter, Lucas read Jonathon Porritt’s book Seeing Green, “which put together concerns around the anti-nuclear movement with concerns around the women’s movement and poverty and environmental policies. For the first time in my life, I saw some of the connections. It was a sort of a lightbulb moment, coming across that book and realising there was actually a political party that linked to these different symptoms of a wider problem, which is basically an economic model that puts profit and growth above people and planet.” One of the problems environmental campaigners face, apart from terrifying us, is how to sell the big changes we all – or at least those with affluent lifestyles – need to make. This is one of Lucas’s strengths, I think, because she is both clever and practical, and always seems pretty cheerful despite her dire warnings. On rampant consumerism, she says: “People are still going to need – and want – to consume things but there’s a lot of evidence to suggest that people get very frustrated, for example, when products have built-in obsolescence. A very popular policy that comes up again and again is a proper right to repair.” It would be great to have repair cafes everywhere, she says, where you can get your broken toaster mended “while you’re having a coffee, chatting with friends”. Not upgrading your phone every other year, she says, “is not seriously going to undermine people’s quality of life, but will give us a better chance of a life that’s liveable for everybody into the future”. There are always ways to design fair policies “that people buy into”, she says. Take flying, for example. “The citizens’ assemblies came out really strongly for a frequent flyer levy. That means if you were to take one flight a year, it will be much the same price as it is now. But as soon as you start taking the second, third, fourth, fifth, the price ratchets up steeply – that reflects the fact that 70% of flights are taken by just 15% of the population. It’s a small number, relatively speaking, taking a hell of a lot of flights that is driving the biggest rise in emissions.” What is frustrating, she says, is how so many of the policies that would also “get us off our current collision course with catastrophe” wouldn’t be about giving things up, but about improving life. “What is not to like about the vast majority of this agenda? Yet still we have governments who aren’t moving in the right direction.” The recently announced heat and buildings strategy – the one that said we should all have heat pumps – made Lucas furious, she says. Not only were the subsidies insufficient, but: “They put almost nothing into home insulation. It’s utterly inefficient and wasteful, and doesn’t work. If we had a comprehensive street-by-street, local authority-led home insulation programme, that would get people’s fuel bills down, improve people’s health, get climate emissions down, create millions of jobs all around the country. There are so many win-wins.” It was the same with other green initiatives. “It feels like you cannot underestimate this government’s ability to balls up good ideas,” says Lucas. About Boris Johnson, she is scathing. “He’s an absolute disaster as a prime minister. He doesn’t do what is right, he does what he thinks is popular.” On the Covid-19 crisis, “It has been so apparent that he waits until the last moment to act. He is utterly indecisive, doesn’t want to be unpopular and doesn’t want to take leadership. And, as a result, Britain has had one of the worst total death rates in the western world.” It also makes Johnson, Lucas believes, “uniquely ill-equipped to deal with a crisis like climate change, where you need public trust. At a time of crisis, whether that’s Covid or climate, you need leaders who have integrity, consistency and courage. And those are three words I would not associate with Boris Johnson.” As for the conference speech made by the Labour leader, Keir Starmer, “You had to wait over an hour to get anything on climate and it felt like it was one issue among many that needed to be addressed. It wasn’t the context within which all of those other announcements and decisions were being situated.” The government’s messaging is all over the place, says Lucas. In the summer, the Cop26 spokesperson, Allegra Stratton, was mocked for saying people should take small steps to combat climate change (she acknowledged it was not the whole answer) such as not rinsing dishes before putting them in the dishwasher. Lucas laughs, incredulous. “It insulted people’s intelligence – people know that the actions we need have to be commensurate to the scale of the crisis. You cannot say that this is the greatest threat to humanity, and then [advise] not rinsing dishes before you put them in the dishwasher. It’s the inconsistency that is so debilitating.” When Lucas boards the train to Glasgow this week, she says it will cost her four times more than if she were to take a cheap flight. “Lots of people aren’t in the privileged position I’m in to be able to say, ‘OK, in spite of that, I’ll go for that option.’ So let’s make it easier for people to do the right thing.” Does she think there will be a Green government in her lifetime? She smiles. “Yes, I do. Because if there isn’t, then unless there’s a Damascene conversion of the other parties, the future is looking pretty grim. I’m not saying that the Green party is the only party that has the answers, but we’ve been asking the right questions for a hell of a lot longer.” The party is hampered by the voting system: “Clearly, a change in the voting system is what is necessary before Greens can take the position I would say we should rightfully have, if you look at the level of support for the party.” But it’s also a party with divisions over issues such as gender, as well as its frequent leadership changes – Lucas, who was leader between 2008 and 2012, is still probably its only recognisable face – and complicated internal democracy. It had record local election results this year, but the Green party still looks far from a meaningful power. What does she think of Insulate Britain’s tactics? Last week, the protest group, which is campaigning to insulate all British homes by 2030, blocked roads on to the M25. “I think the tactics have become the story, so actually, we spend much less time talking about the need to insulate Britain and more time about whether or not it’s legitimate to take the actions they are doing,” says Lucas. “Although I’m absolutely a supporter of peaceful direct action, and have been arrested and acquitted myself for doing the same thing [in 2013 during a protest against fracking], I would feel more comfortable protesting on the issue of insulation outside the Treasury where they’ve got the money to be putting into those programmes, rather than on the M25 where motorists don’t have a lot of say over what policies get rolled out.” One of the biggest lessons from her decades of environmental activism, she says, “is that change can sometimes happen very suddenly and in unpredictable ways”. Sometimes, change is almost overnight. One recent example was the government’s U-turn over sewage spills last week, placing a legal duty on water companies to reduce sewage discharges into rivers and the sea from storm overflows. “We were told it was absolutely impossible to change, that it will cost far too much and, in any case, the government’s policy was just fine. Then, within a matter of days, that changed. The thing that keeps you going is the idea that things can happen fast and sometimes you don’t know what will bring about that breakthrough.” Change, says Lucas, doesn’t have to be slow. Which is just as well.The oil companies know it. The car dealers selling top of the range Porsches get it, as do the hoteliers and the restaurateurs. Change is coming to Aberdeen: the UK centre of North Sea fossil fuel production since the 1970s is trying to avoid becoming the city of stranded assets. The Granite city became Scotland’s boom town almost by accident. It was Dundee down the coast that was originally identified as a probable hub for offshore production when exploratory work established large reserves of oil and gas under the continental shelf. Aberdeen has never looked back. Kirsty Blackman, the MP for Aberdeen North and the Scottish National party’s Westminster spokesperson on the economy, says there are more cars with personalised number plates on the city’s streets than anywhere else in the UK bar central London. Aberdeen is the one city where taxi drivers can quote the spot price for a barrel of crude oil. “Everybody knows people who go offshore,” Blackman says. Yet the UK government’s decision to target net carbon zero emissions by 2050, a deadline the Scottish government has advanced by five years, has forced a change of direction. As delegates descend on Glasgow for the Cop26 climate summit, Aberdeen is looking to a future without fossil fuels. Sir Ian Wood, who became one of the country’s wealthiest men through the oil and gas activities of his Wood Group, notes that crude production is barely one-third of the 4.5m barrels a day (B/D) at its peak, and will be down to just 400,000 B/D by 2050. He says the Wood Group is already diversifying out of oil and gas, which now account for just 25% of its activities. “The aim is to turn Aberdeen from the oil and gas region of Europe to the all-energy region of Europe,” he says. Wood wants the city and the wider Grampian region to diversify into renewable energy life sciences, food and drink, the digital economy and tourism. A proposed energy transition zone – sited next to the city’s new south harbour development – is expected to create 2,500 green sector jobs by 2030 in high-skills areas such as hydrogen manufacturing and refuelling facilities. Some say it has taken a long time for the penny to drop in Aberdeen. “They should have been thinking about this ages ago,” says Andrew Carter, the chief executive of the Centre for Cities thinktank. “I never got the impression they were fully committed or serious about it.” But Carter says Aberdeen is better placed to weather structural change to its local economy than other cities. “Our data shows a pretty dynamic economy. Business startups are good. There is a fair-size stock of activities going on and more than 50% of people have a degree or higher. It is better placed than some one-industry towns, such as Sunderland were Nissan to leave.” Fraser Milne is the engineering and products director of the Balmoral Group, which was set up in 1980 when the oil boom was at its height. He says the company is now pivoting its subsea products business towards the renewables sector. At the moment 7% of Balmoral’s £100m turnover is from the offshore wind sector, but Milne says: “We expect growth to be 30% in the next three years – possibly higher.” Oil and gas account for at least one-third of the local economy once all the knock-on activities are taken into account. There was a time “when every time the oil price went up the cowboy hats went back on again”, says Russell Borthwick, the chief executive of the Aberdeen and Grampian chamber of commerce. The aim now is not just be a net zero city but to help other cities achieve net zero as well, he says. Ever since the first barrel of crude was brought ashore in 1975, oil has been a political issue, with a long-running dispute over whether the proceeds should go to Scotland or the UK. The argument now is over whether the 10bn-20bn barrels of crude that could be pumped should be left in the ground. The Scottish Green party, which is in coalition with the SNP at Holyrood, wants the transition away from fossil fuels accelerated, with no further licences for North Sea oil production. The Greens say two-thirds of Scots back their plan to start winding down extraction, adding that the way ahead is to provide alternative futures for communities that rely on fossil fuels and not leave them “waiting until we’ve extracted every last bit of oil”. The oil industry says the transition cannot be rushed without causing damage to jobs and increasing dependency on imported fossil fuels. Deirdre Michie, the chief executive of the trade body Oil &amp; Gas UK, says steps are being taken to decarbonise the supply of oil and gas from the North Sea through carbon capture and storage, and hydrogen as a power source. “I don’t want to see us stop overnight because we have been there with the mining industry. We want it to be a glide path,” she says. The Unite union has 9,000 members working offshore, and its regional organiser John Boland worries that few of them will find jobs servicing giant wind turbines. “We find ourselves in uneasy agreement with the industry,” he says. “There has to be a transition but it has to be smooth and there have to be jobs at the end of it. There’s a lot of talk about it but I am tempted to ask: what are the green jobs?” Where there is agreement is that investment in renewables needs to accelerated and transition needs to be planned. Phil Kirk, the chief executive Europe for Harbour Energy, the largest UK-listed independent oil and gas company, says the government must encourage the next generation of North Sea development – everything from hydrocarbon production and carbon capture and storage to floating wind turbines and green and blue hydrogen. “It is, I expect, a huge political regret that we missed out on a manufacturing windfall from wind. We have massively invested in wind but we don’t make a lot of the kit here,” Kirk says. “Transition won’t happen overnight unless we want to turn off the lights and shut down our industry and the hospitals. We are going to have plan carefully and understand the consequences of any hasty decisions – for the UK and not just for Aberdeen.”How will this age be remembered? After the stone age, the bronze age, the steam age and the information age, what material or innovation will most define the current era? According to a new exhibition at the Design Museum, the most ubiquitous hallmark of the Anthropocene is not a gamechanging material, nor the mastery of technology. It’s trash. “We are arguably living in the waste age,” says Justin McGuirk, the London museum’s chief curator, who has spent the last three years rifling through rubbish with co-curator Gemma Curtin to put together this timely show. “The production of waste is absolutely central to our way of life, a fundamental part of how the global economy operates. We wanted to show how design is deeply complicit in the waste problem – and also best placed to address it.” Opening on the eve of the Cop26 climate summit, Waste Age is a powerful wake-up call, not so much to consumers, but to the manufacturers, retailers and, most crucially, government regulators. It is not intended to be a slap around the face for buying that takeaway coffee on your way to the museum, or forgetting your cotton tote bag yet again, but an eye-opening look at the sheer scale of the issue, and the people working on ingenious solutions. The exhibition begins with a useful reminder that we didn’t get here by accident. Humans are not inherently wasteful creatures. Throwaway culture was something we had to learn – indeed, it was a lifestyle choice, marketed from the mid-20th century onwards as a decadent release, following the austerity of wartime. It was the intentional opposite of “make do and mend”. One advert from the 1960s extolls the wonders of the new-fangled polystyrene cup: “New and very in! The party ‘glass’ you just enjoy … and throw away.” It hangs next to a plastic carrier bag from the 1980s, printed with descriptions of its many advantages over paper. Little did we know that, four decades later, the world would be consuming more than a million plastic bags a minute. Generating waste, the curators argue, has long been a primary engine of the economy. The history of the lightbulb is an illuminating case in point. In the 1920s, bulbs were so long-lasting that they were deemed commercially unviable. General Electric, Philips and others formed the Phoebus cartel in 1924 to standardise the life expectancy of lightbulbs at 1,000 hours – down from the previous 2,500 hours. And so the culture of planned obsolescence was born. Almost a century later, similar practices continue: last year Apple agreed to pay up to $500m, after it was accused of deliberately slowing down older phone models to encourage consumers to buy the latest handsets. A striking installation by Ibrahim Mahama brings home the reality of where such defunct electronics end up. He has erected a giant wall of old TV monitors that play clips from Agbogbloshie in Ghana, for many years the world’s largest e-waste dump, where informal workers burn electrical cables to harvest the copper wire and other precious metals. Mahama has commissioned them to cast the salvaged metal in the form of TV screen surrounds, which frame footage showing this toxic process. The scenes are desperate, but the message is clear: waste is precious. About 7% of the world’s gold supplies are trapped inside existing electronic devices, meaning that, according to some estimates, by 2080 the largest metal reserves will not be underground but in circulation as existing products. What’s more, one tonne of extracted gold ore yields 3g of gold, whereas recycling one tonne of mobile phones yields 300g. So waste dumps and landfill sites are the new resource-rich mines. “In many ways ‘waste’ is a category error,” says McGuirk. “It’s often perfectly good material that’s simply undervalued.” The exhibition includes designers who are already working on what a future of “above-ground mining” might look like, exploring how objects and buildings can be dismantled and their parts reused. There is the work of pioneering Belgian group Rotor, a team of architects who set up a demolition company to carefully remove materials and components from buildings slated for the wrecking ball. Their Brussels warehouse brims with everything from marble slabs to vintage lamps, the spoils of what they call “forestry in the city”. It is shown alongside the refurbishment projects of French architects Lacaton &amp; Vassal, for whom demolition is “a waste of energy, a waste of material, a waste of history [and] an act of violence”. At a time when global construction waste is set to double to 2.2bn tonnes a year by 2025, their joint calls to re-use what we already have couldn’t be more urgent. In the consumer goods sphere, the re-use cause is championed by the likes of iFixit, an online global repair platform that publishes free repair guides and sells spare parts and tools, like a screwdriver to disassemble the iPhone. It has been lobbying governments for repairability legislation since 2003, with some success. France is the first country in Europe to implement a Repairability Index, adopted in January, which requires manufacturers to provide clear information on the repairability of smartphones, laptops, washing machines, televisions and lawnmowers, and award their products scores out of 10. The iPhone 11 may include some recycled rare earth elements, but it got a repairability score of 4.5 out of 10. The final section of the exhibition moves beyond fixing and recycling to imagine a “post-waste” world, where materials are grown rather than extracted. Design exhibition regulars might be familiar with the wonders of hempcrete or mycelium insulation, but this show includes a dazzling range of innovations, from water-soluble electronic circuit boards made of natural fibres, to “sea stone”, a concrete-like material made from crushed seashells. Also featured are Sony’s packaging made from bamboo and sugarcane (embossed rather than printed, to save ink waste), Notpla’s seaweed-based sachets for liquids and condiments, a polystyrene substitute made from sunflowers, and a new kind of leather made from coconut water – alongside things made from algae, corn husks and organic pulps of all kinds. Such biodegradable solutions come with their own pitfalls: how many times have you thrown a plastic container in the recycling bin, before realising it was actually compostable Vegware? And should it go in the compost bin or landfill? Behaviour and expectations will have to adjust to meet the brave new bio-future. “Our aesthetic sensibilities may have to adapt,” McGuirk writes in the exhibition catalogue. “After nearly a century of appreciating the hard-smooth-shiny perfection of plastics, we may begin to embrace irregularity, imperfection, decay and decomposition.” Your future organo-laptop might not overheat, slow down, or need its battery constantly replaced. But it might start to go mouldy instead. Waste Age is at the Design Museum until February.When things look especially bleak for humankind, it’s worth reminding ourselves who we are – what makes us such a special species. Beyond our machines and our buildings, beyond our fiery conquests, beyond all of it, we’re exceptional creatures because we are capable of love. And not just one to one and within our families, but on a massive scale. This is especially pertinent as we face the climate crisis. It’s easy to get caught up in the excitement of our technological transition, which dominates the climate adaptation narrative. We are the technological ape, and our technologies will be vital in solving this crisis: windmills to decarbonise our energy systems, flood defences against rising seas, and air conditioners to survive brutal heatwaves. We will need many more technological fixes, and much faster. Just as essential to our survival, however, are social fixes. Love is often seen as a charming but irrelevant characteristic in our species’ story – an evolutionary quirk, relegated to a footnote for poets and playwrights to ponder. But love is what draws us together to forge the strong, caring societies that make us so successful as a species. And it is what will, ultimately, save us from this crisis. For citizens of rich countries, the climate crisis is primarily a social crisis – and we have not begun the social adaptation required. Indeed, we’re not even discussing the extent of the problem. We face a catastrophic failure of our social systems to protect the most vulnerable people from the devastating impacts. The biggest issue will be poverty, and the solution is not technological but social. Take food. Climate change will hit crops around the world – heatwaves, droughts and extreme storms will cause harvests to be lost regularly, potentially slashing crop production by a third by 2050. We’re already experiencing problems. Canada’s pea production is down by about half, and wheat harvests reduced by more than a third compared with last year’s, for instance, because of extreme weather. This means food prices will go up around the globe. Wheat failures will make a range of products more expensive in UK shops – pasta prices are expected to rise by about 50% in the next month. Rice and other cereals, fruit, vegetables, oils, cotton and coffee will all be similarly affected over the coming decade. Heat and drought also make crops less nutritious, so families will struggle to afford their weekly shop and get less benefit from what they do buy. The climate crisis demands resilient food systems. Logistically, this means large-scale storage and adapting to new food sources, including insect proteins and algae. Just as importantly, it means strengthening social systems so that everyone has access to nutritional foods, whatever their circumstances. We can’t lurch from crisis to crisis hoping the charitable sector will provide. When food prices rise – as they will – food banks will receive fewer donations at a time when demand is greatest. Food poverty is already shockingly prevalent, and disproportionately affects people with disabilities and minority groups. The past year in Britain has seen a vast rise in the use of food banks. Unless we manage deep societal adaptation to climate breakdown, the coming crisis will make hunger worse. That takes planning for adequate welfare systems for a hotter world with less reliable agriculture. There is no shame in being poor or hungry; the shame lies with a government that allows people to struggle with basic needs while others accumulate obscene wealth. Inequality is a killer. We’ve seen this through the Covid pandemic; we will see it to an even greater extent as the climate crisis deepens. Climate change is a threat-multiplier. Londoners may not die directly from storm surges that wash away their homes, or stronger cyclones, as people in equatorial regions will. But they may well die from a social system that cannot adapt to accommodate regular flood damage, higher food prices and incapacitating heatwaves, and people are already weakened by poor healthcare and underfunded services. Today, a lack of regulation means we’re continuing to build poor housing stock without adequate insulation and buildings unable to generate their own energy through heat pumps or solar installations, which are highly vulnerable to extreme weather. This means that the poorest families risk being stuck in uninsurable, unsaleable houses. As flood-prone areas depopulate and businesses move away, the poorest people will be left behind – needing to travel further for schools, for work and for every other amenity. Safer places outside flooding zones will experience climate gentrification, in which richer people move in and push up the property prices, or pay huge sums to shore up their properties. When people in the hardest-hit tropical regions of the world are forced to flee their climate crisis – and not in their hundreds but in their hundreds of thousands – that will become our climate crisis too. We need to plan today for the influx of large numbers of traumatised people, with preparations for adequate housing and healthcare, so they do not overwhelm our ability to take them in. Managed well, climate migration could help revive depopulated towns and boost our economies. Done poorly, it could end up swelling the population of desperate and homeless people on our streets. A resilient society is one in which people have their basic needs met, including universal access to healthcare, shelter and nutrition, so they can cope with the climate challenges we know are coming. We must create societies that are confident and flourishing so they are not threatened by disaster and migration, but are resilient and welcoming. That means ensuring people don’t feel disenfranchised, but included. Love is itself an evolved human survival adaptation. We see evidence of compassion in our ancestors, dating back hundreds of thousands of years, including in their care for disabled people. Love and empathy are what enable us to cooperate with complete strangers and create the social networks on which we all depend. These intergenerational systems, through which we also transmit our technological knowledge, are the scaffolding around which we weave our system of care and support for each other. The solution to our climate crisis lies in deploying this power. Dealing with the challenges of the climate emergency requires a strong society. None of us could survive alone. Social resilience involves creating stronger communities that care for one another in times of disaster. The acute crisis of the Covid pandemic showed us how communities could band together to protect the vulnerable. But this is no substitute for responsible governance. We must love ourselves enough to demand more of our leaders. This climate challenge demands a strong, responsive societal adaptation, which needs leadership and vision to build. As humanity faces its biggest challenge, we need to adapt our societies by retrieving the love for one another that is the very basis of our humanity. Gaia Vince is an author, journalist and broadcaster. Her latest book is Transcendence: How humans evolved through fire, language, beauty and timeBefore he leaves his house to walk his dog these days, Rick Barron’s 12-year-old-daughter reminds him that he needs to keep an eye out because she worries her dad could be the target of an attack. Barron, 55, is the director of voting and elections in Fulton county, which includes Atlanta and is the most populous county in Georgia. For the last year, he’s been subject to a barrage of voicemails and emails with threats, including some threatening violence and death, as Donald Trump and his allies have falsely claimed the election was stolen. “You will be served lead,” someone said on a voicemail left for Barron in recent months. It’s an experience being shared by state and local officials across the United States. For decades, those officials have largely been invisible, working out of the public spotlight to ensure the machinery of elections runs smoothly. But as Trump and allies target that machinery as part of an effort to insist something was amiss in 2020, those officials have been thrust into the national spotlight and subject to vicious harassment. Nearly one in three election officials feel unsafe in their job, according to an April survey commissioned by the Brennan Center for Justice. “It’s been a barrage every day,” Katie Hobbs, Arizona’s secretary of state, told the Guardian. She said the threats have bombarded virtually every part of her office, including services that have nothing to do with elections. Hobbs, a Democrat who is running for governor, testified last week at a Senate hearing on the threats, telling lawmakers her family had also been threatened, with calls coming in to her husband’s employer to fire him. Al Schmidt, a Republican election official in Philadelphia, told senators the threats were “domestic terrorism” as he read messages calling for the murder of him and his family. Barron has overseen elections in Fulton county since 2013 and has been working on elections for more than two decades. He said he’s never experienced the kinds of attacks that he’s seen over the past year. “I’ve done election observations overseas and you see how in those emerging democracies, former Soviet countries, how people are afraid to vote certain ways and so they all vote for the person. You can see now that possibility on the horizon at some point,” he said. Barron and other election officials said that partisan websites as well as elected officials who continue to spread misleading and false information were facilitating the harassment. Barron described a spike in threats against him between Christmas and New Year’s last year after Trump played a video of Barron to supporters at a Georgia rally. They also said they’re deeply concerned that so many election officials are choosing to leave the profession, creating openings for people with little experience or nefarious motives to get into positions where they could exercise enormous power over how elections are run. “There are a lot of people leaving the profession. So I think you’re gonna end up with more inexperienced people running these offices. You’re going to see people in these types of jobs for a shorter period of time because the stress, after a while, it’s hard to ignore it all the time,” Barron said. “I think part of the purpose of these threats and this ongoing lie is to get people to quit their jobs,” said Claire Woodall-Vogg, the executive director of the Milwaukee election commission, who has also received a wave of threats since the election. “So that then you have either elections that aren’t as well run and you get people in who you can control.” In Milwaukee, another place where Trump has falsely claimed fraud, Woodall-Vogg linked threats she has received to misleading stories published in the Gateway Pundit, a far-right news site that frequently published false information about elections. Last year, she began getting some angry calls after the site ran a story inaccurately saying she “lost” a USB drive on election night. She started receiving death threats this summer after the site published an email from election night in which she jokingly responded to an elections consultant about the timing of when Milwaukee released its election results. “I should have not responded,” she said. Threats began pouring in over email, saying things like Woodall-Vogg deserved to go before a firing squad and calling her “treasonous”. She received a letter at home and threats to her personal Gmail account. Woodall-Vogg wasn’t persuaded the callers would actually act on the threat, but went out of state for 10 days last summer as a precaution. She also got an alarm system and a Ring doorbell for extra security at home. At work, the office layout is being reconfigured to adjust the point at which someone coming in first interacts with a staff member. Workers are also installing security glass that is harder to break, Woodall-Vogg said. “I always liked that my job was non-partisan. I really don’t like politics,” said Woodall-Vogg. “I feel like in the past year, the threats are a direct result of the same political rhetoric that’s made my job as partisan and as contentious as it is. It’s all resulting from this facade of election fraud, that the election was rigged.” As election officials face threats across the country, Republican lawmakers have inserted provisions into several new laws that impose steep penalties for officials who run afoul of election rules. In Iowa, a new Republican-backed law authorizes a fine of up to $10,000 on officials who commit “technical infraction”. A new Texas law similarly authorizes criminal punishment and $1,000 fines on election officials who fail to follow rules. Law enforcement across the country has struggled to respond to the threats against election officials, a Reuters investigation from September found. The investigation identified 102 threats of violence or death against election officials in key battleground states, but could only document four instances in which someone had been charged, though it’s possible there may have been more arrests. The justice department launched a taskforce to address threats against election workers in July. In August, the official in charge of the taskforce told secretaries of state that “the response has been inadequate,” according to Reuters. Federal officials lacked the infrastructure to constantly monitor threats against election officials nationwide and relied on those who were aware of them to report them. “A lot of these law enforcement agencies are relying on us to report. And it’s hard for us to know what we should be reporting, because we’re not trained in threat assessment and it’s hard for us to know and to have the time to sort through,” Hobbs said. “There’s always the possibility that we’re missing something.”The government’s flagship green homes grant scheme to help people install energy efficiency measures resulted in just 15,182 households on low incomes improving their property’s insulation, it has emerged. The £1.5bn scheme was designed to improve 600,000 properties but, according to data uncovered by the Liberal Democrats, only a small number of homes benefited from funding for much-needed improvements. In total 41,300 measures were installed, according to the figures, with low-income households benefiting from around half of the jobs. Launched in a blaze of publicity last year, the scheme offered homeowners in England vouchers worth up to £10,000 to make their homes more energy efficient or to replace old boilers. While those in work were offered a maximum of £5,000 a household to cover two-thirds of the work, those on low incomes and certain benefits could claim the entire cost, up to £10,000. However, almost immediately the scheme ran into difficulties with claimants saying it was impossible to find accredited installers who were either willing or able to do the work. The scheme was scrapped in March, and in the same month a select committee of MPs said it had been “botched [in] implementation” and that the administration had been “nothing short of disastrous”. According to the figures seen by the Lib Dems, 15,182 home insulation measures have been installed for low-income households, including 2,063 loft insulations, 4,752 pitched roof insulations and 5,153 external solid wall insulations. Low-income households also installed 2,359 heat pumps and 5,257 solar thermal panels. In total 41,300 measures were installed, according to the data. While applications made before March are still being processed, the Lib Dems said the scheme’s withdrawal has left home owners no meaningful government support for insulation. The government’s recent announcement on green homes included a proposal that mortgage lenders be set targets to improve the average energy performance rating of the properties that they lend on. Wera Hobhouse, the Liberal Democrat spokesperson for climate emergency and energy, said: “We know home insulation is the easiest way to cut energy bills. But this scheme was a complete disaster, and now the government appears to be passing the buck on to mortgage lenders and homeowners. Serious questions need to be asked about how such an important programme for the environment and household bills was allowed to fail like this.”Omid Masoumali – the Iranian refugee who set himself on fire on Nauru in protest at his indefinite detention – would almost certainly have survived if he had been better cared for, or transferred more quickly to an Australian hospital, a coroner has found. It took nearly 30 hours to bring Masoumali, suffering burns to 57% of his body, to Australia, after he doused himself in petrol and self-immolated in protest at his indefinite detention, telling those watching: “I cannot take it any more.” Ineffectively treated and monitored at Nauru’s hospital, which lacked the equipment or specialist doctors to care for him, he suffered a heart attack before leaving the island and could not be revived. His coronial inquest heard from a burns specialist there was a 95% chance he would have survived had he been promptly and effectively treated, and had access to a tertiary hospital. Queensland coroner Terry Ryan said Masoumali’s initial injuries were not life-threatening if properly treated. “If Omid received appropriate monitoring and ventilation before he was transferred [to Brisbane] … his chances of survival, while not assured, would have been greatly increased.” Masoumali’s mother, Elham Arouni Hesari, said her son “loved Australia, but the way Australia rejected him and took his life will forever torture me”. “My son had serious burns and then internal bleeding. Why did they operate on him in a place that did not have adequate medical facilities to deal with his burns?” In 2014, the Australian government was told in a report there were “deficiencies” in Nauru hospital’s ability to care for critically ill patients, with no blood bank, or working ventilator, or staff trained to use it. In February 2016, two months before Masoumali’s death, the Australian Border Force’s chief medical officer, Dr John Brayley, alongside other doctors, inspected Nauru’s hospital. A report from the visit stated there was no intensive care unit, and the high-dependence unit was “ill-equipped”. The Queensland coroner said that beyond the substandard medical facilities and treatment, the indefinite nature of detention within Australia’s offshore processing regime was damaging to refugees’ mental health. Masoumali had been held on Nauru for more than 950 days at the time of his death. “I consider that his actions were those of someone who had given up hope and felt powerless as a result of his prolonged placement on Nauru.” Arguing indefinite detention was inherently harmful, the coroner urged the government to provide certainty to those it detained, and more rapidly find settlement solutions for them. “I consider that there is a need to provide more certainty to refugees to ensure those who are successful in their asylum applications are resettled in third countries expeditiously and that refugees are given some assurance that will be achieved.” Omid Masoumali arrived in Australia by boat in September 2013, and was sent to Nauru 10 days later. His claim for protection was formally recognised in 2014: he had a well-founded fear of persecution in Iran and Australia was legally obliged to protect him. His death was one of the most traumatic episodes during a period of catastrophic mental health for many of those held on Nauru. Acts of self-harm and suicide attempts were common, and children began to exhibit signs of the rarely seen “resignation syndrome”. Video of Masoumali’s self-immolation shows him standing in a clearing, soaked in liquid, and shouting to the people around him. “This is how tired we are,” Masoumali reportedly shouted. “This action will prove how exhausted we are. I cannot take it any more.” In the footage Omid then uses a lighter to set himself on fire. Onlookers scream, tackling him to the ground, smothering the flames with sheets and removing his burning and melted clothing. He is conscious. Later vision shows Masoumali at the hospital pacing up and down screaming with severe burns apparent to his arms, legs, chest and back. Distressed friends can be seen and heard pleading for him to be given assistance. His fiancee, who can not be named for legal reasons, was held on Nauru with Masoumali. Now living in Australia, she launched legal action against the Australian government for negligence. She told the Guardian in 2017: “I will forever miss Omid. “I will miss how he made me feel safe and looking forward to a better future. I wish I could feel that way again.” The coronial inquest into Masoumali’s death heard from Dr Jason Miller, a Royal Brisbane and Women’s hospital burns specialist, who testified that, based on Masoumali’s age and the extent of his burns, his injuries would have a death rate of 5%-10% under his care. “At the stage of all my discussions, he was stable,” Miller said. “So, certainly it appeared the burn was very survivable at that point. But Miller said that surviving severe burns was “fully dependent on the care that he received in a timely fashion”. “The only chance he had was to have more effective care in an earlier timeframe. Unfortunately, that couldn’t be provided.” Miller said conditions at the Nauru hospital were “wholly unacceptable from a clinical point of view”. George Newhouse, principal solicitor with the National Justice Project said Masoumali’s death was evidence of the systemic failures of Australia’s offshore processing regime which, he said, left asylum seekers and refugees languishing for years in indefinite detention. “The current system is a failure and is intensifying the cruelty, pain and anguish being suffered by men, women and children left on Nauru and in PNG and all those who remain in limbo in Australia.” Graham Thom, refugee adviser for Amnesty International, said Masoumali’s death was “totally avoidable”, but was the result of years of neglect by the Australian government and an “appalling medical response”. Human rights advocate, and former Socceroo, Craig Foster, said Masoumali’s death “encapsulates the appalling harm that successive Australian governments have inflicted on thousands of refugees over the past eight and a half years”. A spokesperson for the department of home affairs said the department was considering the coroner’s findings and recommendations closely. “The Australian government works closely with the government of Nauru to ensure transferees have access to health and mental health services,” the spokesperson said. “The government of Nauru is responsible for the healthcare of individuals residing in Nauru under regional processing arrangements.” Australia has provided $54.9m in medical services upgrades to Nauru, including a surgical facility at Nauru hospital. • In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is on 13 11 14. In the UK Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. Other international suicide helplines can be found at www.befrienders.orgJoanna Lumley and the Human Swan 9pm, ITV All hail our husky-voiced national treasure, whose wide-eyed enthusiasm for meeting “the human swan” – AKA paramotorist and conservationist Sacha Dench – is the reason for that warm, fuzzy feeling growing deep within as you watch. Dench proves herself to be equally iconic, zipping around Britain, encouraging people to tackle the climate crisis. As Lumley joins her (behold: she takes flight at one point) they encounter climate threats and the good people fighting against them. Wholesome content. Hollie Richardson The Political Slot 7.55pm, Channel 4 A week of brief but punchy state-of-the-nation political pronouncements from representatives of all Britain’s big parties. We begin with Conservative Festus Akinbusoye, the Bedfordshire police and crime commissioner, who will discuss community policing. Tomorrow, Labour’s Bridget Phillipson on the party’s ideas for the post-Covid, post-Brexit economy. Phil Harrison Save Money: My Beautiful Green Home 8pm, ITV The heavily sponsored series spotlighting UK eco-build projects wraps up. Host Ranvir Singh heads to Cambridgeshire to see how a 1960s house is being revamped into an energy-efficient home while design expert Kunle Barker channels his inner Bond villain by visiting an underground lair. Graeme Virtue The Outlaws 9pm, BBC One As the club of law-breaking misfits start to form friendships, we learn more about the personal demons that brought them to community service – providing some genuinely tender moments. But watch out for an “intimate” closeup of Stephen Merchant at the start, filmed to make you wince. HR Succession 9pm, Sky Atlantic With sibling rivalry intensifying, Kendall’s behaviour is becoming more erratic (one TV host describes it as “a severe case of what doctors call caucasian rich brain”). Meanwhile, Logan summons his arsenal as the FBI closes in on Waystar, and Tom makes him a potentially life-altering offer. HR Frankie Boyle’s New World Order 10pm, BBC Two Frankie Boyle’s attempt to make sense of current affairs via comedy returns at a time when the state of the world offers plenty of perplexing material. The deadpan comedian is joined by a panel of celebrities to take on the week’s biggest stories through standup, debate and audience participation. Henry Wong Live sport Snooker: English Open 12.45pm, Eurosport 1. Day one from Milton Keynes.Top story: G20 leaves stiff task for Glasgow Morning everyone. I’m Martin Farrer and these are the top stories today. Boris Johnson will warn today that the world is at “one minute to midnight” in terms of keeping warming below 1.5C as he prepares to host the Cop26 climate summit in Glasgow. With the UN predicting a catastrophic rise of 2.7C on the current trajectory, almost 200 national representatives, including US president Joe Biden and India’s Narendra Modi, will gather in Scotland. But the summit is at serious risk of failure because countries are still not promising enough to restrict global temperature rises to below 1.5C, the prime minister has warned. Little was achieved in two days of preliminary talks at the G20 meeting in Rome, Johnson conceded, leaving the chances of success in Glasgow as “six out of 10”. Only 12 of the G20 countries have pledged to reach net zero emissions by or around 2050. Several key nations – China and Saudi Arabia – are only formally pledging to meet that goal by 2060. The commitments being made so far were a “drop in the rapidly warming ocean”, Johnson added. The UK’s only Green party MP, Caroline Lucas, says the summit is “our last best chance” to tackle the climate emergency, but warns that Johnson is “uniquely ill-equipped to deal with a crisis like climate change, where you need public trust”. Aberdeen has long been the centre of Britain’s fossil fuel industry so our economics editor Larry Elliott has been speaking to business and civic leaders in the Scottish city to see how it can transition to a net zero model. * * * The great resignation – Almost a quarter of workers are actively planning to change employers in the next few months, a report has claimed, as part of a “great resignation” prompted by a high number of vacancies and burnout caused by the pandemic. A survey of 6,000 workers by a recruitment firm found that 69% of them were feeling confident about moving to a new role in the next few months, with 24% planning a change within three to six months. Victoria Short, chief executive at Randstad UK, said: “The pandemic has made people step back and rethink their lives. Covid has reminded them that life is too short.” * * * Train collision – A train driver and a number of passengers are recovering in hospital this morning after two trains collided in Salisbury last night. Emergency services declared a critical incident when a carriage on the 17.08 Portsmouth Harbour to Bristol Temple Meads service was derailed after hitting an object. The 17.20 London Waterloo to Honiton service then crashed into it when signalling was damaged. The line will be closed on Monday affecting SWR trains between Exeter and Basingstoke, and GWR trains between Westbury and Portsmouth. * * * Youth gap – Children in affluent areas of England are twice as likely to have access to youth clubs and other out-of-school activities as those in poorer locations, the first nationwide survey of youth services in more than a decade has revealed. The National Youth Agency looked at 8,500 organisations including the Scouts and Guides, Boys’ Brigade, Woodcraft Folk and YMCA. The survey also found youth buildings are more than twice as likely to be purpose-built for or aimed towards young people in affluent areas than in deprived areas. * * * ‘I’ve got to hold her’ – Covid booster shots will be available for people who had their second shot more than six months ago at walk-in clinics in England from today. There were hugs and tears at Sydney airport overnight as families were reunited after the ban on mandatory quarantine following international flights was lifted in Australia. The nation’s strict Covid rules were relaxed to allow fully vaccinated Australians to walk freely out of the airport for the first time in 583 days. “I’ve got to get to my daughter, I’ve got to hold her,” one woman said as she waited at the terminal. Many, like Ethan Cater, were returning home to visit sick relatives. “I’m really scared and emotional because I really want to see my mum,” he said, adding: “The doctor said that she hasn’t got long.” Thailand has also dropped some restrictions which means fully jabbed tourists can visit the country again from today. Tonga has gone into lockdown and is rushing to vaccinate its population after recording its first ever case of Covid. * * * ‘End of sexism in sport’ – The International Handball Federation has responded to widespread accusations of sexism by changing its rules around women’s uniforms to allow bike shorts and tank tops instead of bikini bottoms and crop tops. The governing body has been under pressure since the Norwegian women’s beach handball team was fined €1,500 for wearing “improper” shorts. Activist Talitha Stone said she hoped it was the “beginning of the end of sexism and objectification of women and girls in sport”. Today in Focus podcast The majority of those dying of Covid-19 in the UK and the US are have not been vaccinated. Bereaved relatives tell their stories to try to convince others to get their jabs. Lunchtime read: Joe Root: ‘I probably got too desperate’ With the Ashes series in Australia only a few weeks away, England captain Joe Root talks exclusively to Barney Ronay about what makes Test cricket the greatest format, the return to the squad of his close friend Ben Stokes, and battling the old enemy. Sport Nuno Espírito Santo’s future as Tottenham manager is in serious doubt after the chairman, Daniel Levy, and managing director, Fabio Paratici, held crisis talks after Saturday’s 3-0 defeat at home to Manchester United. West Ham retained their place in the Premier League’s top four with a convincing 4-1 win over Aston Villa in which Ezri Konsa was sent off at 2-1. The new UK Athletics chair, Ian Beattie, has said the management exodus that occurred on his first day means he can draw a line under the past 18 months of turmoil. The Arsenal manager, Jonas Eidevall, described the chance to lead his team out in the FA Cup final at Wembley as “surreal” after Beth Mead helped the Gunners sweep aside Brighton with a dominant 3-0 win. At the T20 World Cup, India’s hopes are hanging by a thread after defeat to New Zealand left them on the verge of elimination. Eddie Jones has defended his coaching methods and high turnover rate of backroom staff in response to criticism of his England rugby union regime. US Open champion Daniil Medvedev said he is eager to play in the Australian Open in January but could not confirm his participation if only players who have been vaccinated against Covid-19 are allowed in Melbourne. And England Women cemented their world No 1 ranking for the 2022 Rugby World Cup after Abbie Ward set them on the way to a record 43-12 win over New Zealand. Business The UK automotive industry is lobbying against the proposed ban on sales of new diesel trucks from 2040, amid a split between manufacturers over when heavy goods vehicles should abandon fossil fuels. A ban on petrol and diesel cars is planned after 2035. Japan’s Nikkei index gained overnight after new prime minister Fumio Kishida’s conservatives won a surprise election victory. The FTSE100 is tracking for a modest gain this morning while the pound is on $1.367 and €1.184. The papers The Cop26 meeting takes centre stage for most of the papers. The Guardian says “Johnson to world leaders: we are one minute to midnight”, while the Scotsman has “Johnson says Paris deal will fail without COP26 success” and the FT’s main headline reads “Limited G20 curbs on coal leave ‘huge way to go’ at climate summit”. The Times goes with “PM: It’s last chance on climate”, the Mail splash is “Boris: We can’t let COP26 be a cop-out” and the Mirror says “Heat is on”. The Telegraph focuses on the fishing row with “EU chief accuses UK of seeking Brexit clash”, and the Sun boasts a showbiz exclusive: “Cowell quits telly role”. Sign up The Guardian morning briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekendOne of the enduring mysteries of the last few decades is how Judy Sheindlin became the highest-paid woman on American television. Towards the end of Judge Judy’s 25-year run, Sheindlin was hauling in $47m a year (her estimated net worth is about $440m). Since the show only required her to work for 52 days a year, that meant she earned $900,000 just by showing up. And this was Judge Judy, for crying out loud. It was a televised small-claims court. It was, by its very nature, mundane and repetitious. And now it is over. Earlier this year, Sheindlin made the decision to hang up her gavel. You might not have noticed, since Judge Judy has been airing in reruns since then, and every episode is absolutely identical to every other episode. But while you or I might take this downtime as an opportunity to kick back and enjoy our mountains of unimaginable wealth, Sheindlin has not. For she already has a new show on IMDb TV. It’s called Judy Justice. And if you liked Judge Judy then, oh boy, are your rock-bottom expectations about to be expertly filled. Judy Justice – very much the Hollywood Hogan of minor arbitration shows – has been described as a “flashier” version of Judge Judy, although only the top percentile of Judge Judy acolytes would be able to spot any difference. Sheindlin isn’t wearing the lace collar of old, and her robe is now burgundy instead of black, but this is by no means a reinvented wheel. The format of the new show remains exactly the same as the old one: a procession of dirtbags line up to publicly air their petty disputes, and Sheindlin interrogates them before making a decision. The show is so identical to Judge Judy, in fact, that the first episode falls into line without any real explanation. We see a courtroom. We see two bozos who got drunk and had a fight. And then we see Sheindlin pull a vaguely unamused face. A narrator announces “This is Judy Justice” and then we’re off to the races. And since IMDb TV (and, honestly, who knew that was a thing?) is ad-supported, we even still get the old pre-commercial “coming up” buffers to gee up our flagging interest. At first glance, it’s hard to know who – other than Sheindlin’s accountants – Judy Justice is for. Indeed, it has been reported that her main competition here is herself; CBS is aggressively broadcasting a series of reruns (which have traditionally always got high ratings) during the first volley of Judy Justice episodes, in the hope that casual viewers would prefer to watch easily accessible old episodes rather than seek out a new and hellishly obscure streaming service. And if your viewing tendencies already default to streaming, then why would you watch Judy Justice at all? You have every amazing television programme ever made at your disposal. Why, given the depth and breadth of the major streaming services, would anyone choose to watch a daily half-hour lowbrow courtroom show? Even once you’ve taken Sheindlin’s extraordinary salary demands into account, this is still a filler show that has to find a home in a media landscape that no longer requires filler. Having said that, of course, I have to confess to enjoying Judy Justice a little. It’s an aggressive throwback to the bad old days when television was full of exploitative little shows where grubby fools would line up to broadcast their idiocy on television, knowing full well that they were likely to come out of it looking terrible. And, remember, this exists at the classier end of the spectrum. Yes, the first episode is about a couple who fought so much that they lost their children. And, yes, the second episode is about a woman who attacked another woman with a bottle. And, yes, an upcoming episode is entitled Backyard Fist Fight. But Sheindlin remains a watchable presence; still sharp, still wry, still outwardly hating every second of her time onscreen. She’s a compelling character, even after all these years, and that’s what will draw people back to the show. Surely nobody on the face of the Earth is going to watch every new episode of Judy Justice on a daily basis. But to dip in and out of now and again, it’s going to be just fine. This is enough, though. If the Roku Channel happens to be planning a reboot of The Jerry Springer Show any time soon, it might be time to rethink things.Queensland senator Gerard Rennick will withhold his vote from the Coalition until the government stops supporting vaccine mandates and provides immediate assistance to people who have suffered adverse affects from Covid-19 vaccines. According to the Therapeutic Goods Administration, the protective benefits of Covid vaccines “far outweigh the potential risks of vaccination”, and serious side effects are “very rare”. Rennick has been highlighting cases of adverse effects over the past fortnight and he wrote to the prime minister, Scott Morrison, on Sunday advising he would withhold his vote in the Senate over the issue. The Liberal senator is calling for the government to scrap vaccine mandates and indemnities for the states, and improve the compensation scheme for adverse events. He also says children should be excluded from any mandates and that the “tyranny” of domestic travel restrictions should end. “No person in this country should be forced to lose their job because they don’t want to take a Covid vaccine,” Rennick says in the letter. He says a “fit and proper” compensation scheme for victims of adverse effects is needed, calling for the scrapping of the $5,000 cost threshold and for payments to begin immediately. “Many victims have been unable to work and are facing economic as well as health issues as a result of an adverse event from the vaccine,” he claims. “Victims should not have to wait until next year to receive compensation and income support.” He also suggests that people who have had an adverse event for a first dose have been unable to refuse a second dose, calling the scenario “completely inhumane”. In the letter, Rennick says the federal government is indirectly supporting vaccine mandates imposed by states and private employers by providing the indemnity scheme. “If as you say that the commonwealth doesn’t support mandatory vaccinations, then why are we paying for and indemnifying vaccines being mandated by the state?” Rennick has previously urged the government to support a fresh high court challenge against border closures, and told the Coalition party room last month he was considering withdrawing his vote. Parliament is scheduled to sit for one more fortnight this year, with several pieces of legislation still on the Coalition’s agenda for this term of government. This includes a bill to establish a federal integrity commission, a promised religious discrimination act, new cyber security laws, and controversial voter ID laws. The Coalition holds 36 of 76 Senate positions and needs three members of the Senate crossbench to pass legislation. If the government loses the support of Rennick in the Senate, it will need four of the five crossbench votes to pass legislation against opposition from Labor and the Greens. Rennick told Guardian Australia he would be contacting relevant ministers to argue his position, and said ending the indemnity scheme for vaccine mandates was among his “non-negotiable” demands. “I want this resolved, and we have got three weeks to sort this out,” Rennick said. The TGA says vaccination against Covid is “the most effective way to reduce deaths and severe illness from infection”. “Like all medicines, Covid-19 vaccines may have some side effects (also known as adverse events). The overwhelming majority of these side effects are mild and resolve within a few days.” As of 24 October 2021, about 34.3m Covid vaccine doses had been given in Australia, with 2.2 adverse events reported per 1,000 doses. There have been nine deaths linked to the AstraZeneca vaccine. Australia has recorded more than 170,000 Covid cases with 1,734 deaths, and 1,064 people currently hospitalised.The G20 is failing poor and vulnerable countries by not agreeing to a climate plan that would ensure their people’s survival, leading figures at the Cop26 climate talks have said. Leaders representing more than a billion of the people most at risk from the climate crisis told the Guardian they were “extremely concerned” and had hoped for more from the G20 summit in Rome. They said the prospect of limiting global heating to 1.5C above pre-industrial levels, a vital threshold that scientists say is a “planetary boundary”, was slipping away as the UN conference opened in Glasgow. Gaston Browne, the prime minister of Antigua and Barbuda and chair of the Alliance of Small Island States, which represents 39 countries, said: “From what I’ve seen it appears we are going to overshoot 1.5C. We are very concerned about that. This is a matter of survival for us.” He blamed the influence of powerful private-sector interests for the G20’s failure to come up with better plans, and said developed countries would also suffer the consequences of climate breakdown. “We are here to save the planet, not to protect profits. There are very powerful multinational firms and lobbies … who benefit from fossil fuel subsidies.” The G20 produced what some analysts said was significant progress in Rome, with a pledge to reach net zero emissions by around the middle of century and take action this decade to limit global heating to 1.5C, but poor countries said the promises were not accompanied by clear plans. They urged the G20 leaders arriving in Glasgow for two days of talks with more than 100 other heads of state, which will be followed by nearly two weeks of talks among senior officials, to come up with more ambitious plans to cut greenhouse gas emissions. “I’m extremely worried, but despite the disappointment I’m still hopeful,” said Browne. Sonam Wangdi, the chair of the Least Developed Countries group, which represents more than a billion people globally, said: “The progress is definitely not enough up to now. We are a long way from a 1.5C pathway. We need them to ramp up ambition. We have done our share, and we contributed least to the problem.” At more than 1.5C of heating, many small islands face inundation from rising sea levels and fiercer storm surges, but Browne said developed countries were also at risk. “Many of them have coastal areas too,” he pointed out. Steve Victor, the environment minister of Palau, said: “The G20 has lagged far behind where it must be to secure a safe future for the people of small island developing states. This is not an abstract concept or political issue for us. The threat of climate change, to us, can’t be overstated. We are now living it. The G20 makes up 80% of global emissions, they are the ones most critical for ensuring we can stay on a path to a 1.5C future.” He said the G20 should agree to phase out coal, which it has failed to do, though it did agree to stop financing new coal development overseas. It should also halt fossil fuel subsidies, he added. Bruce Billimon, the health minister of the Marshall Islands, said: “We live in a time in which the decisions we make will have impactful consequences in the future and coming generations, on our people’s health, wellbeing, safety and of course security. “Already, at 1.1C, my country can feel the climate change effects, and beyond 1.5C, unquestionably, the people of the Marshall Islands and other vulnerable nations will be in peril. And the impacts will not only be felt in states like mine, but also, I believe it will be a ripple effect, thus in years to come all of the countries of the G20 as well.” The UK said developing countries would have the opportunity on Monday to put these concerns to G20 leaders at a face-to-face meeting in Glasgow. Officials from within the G20 felt that substantial progress had been made in Rome. “There has been a shift in the zeitgeist, recognising the need to look at the science and that we need to accelerate action in this crucial decade,” said one, adding that more progress could be expected at Cop26 on countries making moves away from coal, the dirtiest fossil fuel. The G20 – which includes major fossil fuel producers such as Russia and Saudi Arabia that have long been hostile to climate action as well as the world’s biggest emitter, China – agreed to take action this decade on emissions, though they stopped short of pledging the 45% emissions cuts that scientists say are needed by 2030 to stick to the 1.5C limit. Browne, however, said rich countries should aim to reach net zero by 2040 and developing countries by 2050. Tom Burke, a co-founder of the green thinktank E3G, gave a positive assessment: “This is a shift from what they have previously said. The crucial words are on this decade. Previously they had only talked about 2050, which is too far away. “This is an expression of a growing sense of urgency in the G20, driven by both events and science. This is a political signal that will add momentum to the cop and help in reaching agreement at cop. We were not expecting this language.” Victor, however, said more was needed. “The message is simple. Show us your higher ambition. This decade is, perhaps, the decisive decade in history. If we fail to halve emissions by 2030, our chance to stay within the 1.5C limit will be lost, and with it the safe and secure future that the people of vulnerable countries deserve.”It’s not the expectation that is unbearable with Cop26; it is the hope. The world, faced with the urgency of the climate crisis, demands that this is the summit to surpass all summits. Those of us who have experienced (or endured) them know that won’t happen. There are seven stages to every Cop. This one is unlikely to be much different. 1 The arrival. Here we go again. Teams of jet-lagged lobbyists, diplomats, journos, bankers and business folk queue with delegations of indigenous peoples and youth groups, lawyers, NGOs and economists to enter the parallel universe that is a UN climate Cop. Within hours, the complaints will start about the price of coffee, the distance between meeting rooms, the Glaswegian accents, the rain, the trains, the traffic, the UN security, the heavy policing and the dearth of good restaurants. 2 The beauty contest. Prince Charles will welcome the world to Glasgow with three minutes of top-drawer blah blah to be followed by more blah blah by 100-plus leaders about the future of Earth, the plight of the poor, coral reefs, forests, and the need for compromise, radical ambition, vision and hope. Polite applause from some. 3 The great confusion. By day three, none of the 15,000 delegates or the public will have any idea what is happening, and those who say they do will be lying. The negotiations will take place behind closed doors and involve the obsessive drafting and redrafting of papers that either do reflect a country’s position or are “non-papers”, which don’t but might. The talks have their own incomprehensible language, with Bingos and Mrvs, Namas and Napas, BAs and BRs, Redds and Lulucfs. No one outside the negotiating rooms is supposed to understand. 4 The squeeze. The game of diplomatic poker is on. The dice are loaded against poor countries and by day four the low-lying states and least developed countries will be complaining loudly and publicly that the US, UK, EU and others are not putting up the $100bn (£75bn) a year that they pledged, and are shifting the goalposts of the Paris agreement by calling for all countries to adopt the same targets. The diplo-mud will fly. The sticking points will be over money, targets, scale of ambition, transfer of technology and timescales. The rich will be accused of being incompetent and negligent and will respond by saying, “Yah-boo, we’re all in this together now.” The conference chair, Alok Sharma, scurrying between groups of countries, will try to bridge the yawning divides that will have opened between the carbon haves and have-nots. 5 The cavalry. At a certain point, usually near the end of week one, the many charities and the environment, development, climate and church groups, along with scientists, activists, indigenous peoples and celebrities, will stage demonstrations and stunts: gluing themselves to doors and floors, singing, invading press conferences and hanging off roofs. Most will be chucked out of the halls and banned from re-entry by UN guards. It is a bloodletting, and relieves the tensions. The climate villains will now be named – usually the US for its bullying tactics, the Saudis for their defence of fossil fuels, Brazil for cutting down the Amazon, Australia for its coal and the EU for not offering enough. Britain, now out of Europe, can be expected to be accused of doublespeak – pretending to side with the poor but actually working with the rich. 6 The trick. In week two, the negotiators hand over the proposals drawn up in week one to incoming ministers and their teams of political advisers. The horse-trading now begins. The powerful will have already twisted arms, offered aid, threatened sanctions and squeezed the pips out of the poor to make them fall in behind. But equally, China, India and others will use their diplomatic clout to counter-offer and raise the stakes. Ministers furiously brief their media friends. It’s now a high-risk crapshoot. The tension will be unbearable as negotiations narrow down to a few paragraphs, then falter, stumble and inevitably nearly collapse. Rumours will fly that delegations are quitting, or that another draft has been agreed but rejected. Ministers will furiously brief their media friends. There will be a long and ghastly night as the corridors fill with exhausted delegates, the restaurants close, the coffee runs out and the long wait begins. 7 The sting. Cop should finish on the Friday night of week two, but – as with Cops in the past – this one is more likely to go to the wire on Saturday. A final text will be drawn up and a last plenary meeting will be called. An “awkward”, or “principled”, group of countries will now grandstand and call on the world for something better. In the end it may come down to Sharma calling the US, China and the EU, the world’s great emitters, into a room for a final haggle at 6.30am. An agreement, weak or strong, will or will not be struck. Sharma will summon all the diplomatic muscle he can and then invite all countries to agree. The world will pray. John Vidal is a former Guardian environment editorA holiday at the Cité des Électriciens in northern France may not sound like a glamorous getaway, but there are some genuine surprises to be discovered in the unspoiled region by the Belgian border, a short drive from Calais or Boulogne. The Louvre has established a satellite museum in Lens, while the lesser-known city of Béthune boasts fabulous art deco architecture, artisan breweries and exciting young chefs reinterpreting local recipes. The sandy beaches and dunes of the wild Côte d’Opale are never far away, but what really takes my breath away is discovering a vineyard halfway up a former slag heap, all that is left of the region’s coalmines. Fittingly, the vigneron has dubbed his crisp white wine not chardonnay but charbonnay – a pun on the French for coal, charbon. The Cité des Électriciens is actually all about miners rather than electricians. The village was purpose-built in the 1850s for local pit families – Émile Zola’s novel Germinal would later expose the conditions that miners were forced to endure. It was one of several model townships across the French and Belgium coal belt, built by mining barons. Its name dates from the turn of the century, when the local post office asked for streets to be named, for easier delivery of mail – hence Rue Edison and Rue Marconi, among others. The Cité today resembles a miniature toy town, with neat rows of houses in red bricks rather than Lego. It was officially reopened in 2019 after a six-year, €15m restoration, but then the pandemic intervened and only now is it finally fully open to visitors. The 43 houses that were once home to mining families have been transformed into an imaginative base for discovering the surrounding countryside. A tiny cottage is a comfortable B&amp;B (€60 a night), and a row of houses has been converted into four roomy self-catering gîtes, with retro furniture and wallpaper. There’s also space for artists working on community projects, who organise ateliers and talks for local schools. And, importantly, 10 houses are reserved for low-income families. Pride of place goes to two permanent exhibition halls. One is a modern, purpose-built space illustrating the long history of mining here up to its recognition as a Unesco world heritage site in 2012. The other recreates daily life in the Cité, in five original homes through oral history recordings, photos and numerous reminders that behind this utopian experiment, the mine owners were operating what the French call “controlled liberty”. So while there were opportunities for education, sport, vegetable gardens and modern housing, the workers were also encouraged not to drink, and to start families, so as to provide the next generation of miners. The mineworks and shafts once dominated the adjoining town of Bruay-La-Buissière, though most have been demolished since their closure in 1979. But the surrounding countryside is still marked by volcano-like slag heaps, rising up to 150 metres, albeit now covered in thick vegetation. However, the terril outside the hamlet of Haillicourt looks strangely different from the rest, with neat lines of steep terraces just below the peak, which turn out to be one of the world’s strangest vineyards. “It is now eight years since the first harvest on our historical terril,” says Flavien Desette from Haillicourt’s town hall, “and our chardonnay, which we have christened ‘charbonnay’, is getting respected reviews and featuring on the wine lists of restaurants around France, so now numerous other winemakers are looking at planting vineyards around here.” So far, production is limited to about 3,000 bottles, and tours of the vineyard and the tiny vaulted cellar beneath Haillicourt’s 18th-century priory can be organised through the town hall. Visit during the harvest and you will see 50 villagers picking grapes by hand, then hand pressing them. At certain times of year, the terril literally starts steaming, thanks to the combustible but fertile mix of schist and soil. It’s a quite unique terroir. The Cité des Électriciens lies between two very contrasting, historic northern French cities, Lens and Béthune. Both are near the great battlefields of the first world war, and had been largely razed to the ground by the time peace was signed. Béthune was beautifully rebuilt in art deco style, especially the opulent town square whose medieval belfry miraculously survived, and is now part of the Unesco world heritage site. The Grand Place is the life and soul of the city, lined with bistros, brasseries and traditional estaminet bars. And just off the main square, a magnificent mansion is being brought back to life by a creative young chef, Maxime Leplat and his wife, Noémie. The sumptuous ground floor with soaring ceiling and crystal chandeliers is split into a casual bistronomie-style dining room – offering a three-course set lunch for €29 – and a fine dining section where Maxime is determined to earn his first Michelin star. Adventurous foodies signing up for the tasting experience are led straight to the kitchen and a marble table opposite the imposing bearded figure of Maxime. While his enthusiastic assistants rush around prepping dishes, the chef conjures up half a dozen unexpected appetisers, often paired with local craft beers, that include a delicate macaron of tomato and shrimps, a molecular take on the traditional mackerel in mustard sauce, a beef carbonnade in a marshmallow and a mini croque-monsieur with pungent local Maroilles cheese topped with pickled herring. The biggest surprise, though, is the bill at €48 a head. During the long lockdown, Noémie and Maxime renovated four rooms above the restaurant into fashionable B&amp;B accommodation (doubles €95). Lens did not fare so well during its postwar reconstruction and is in a messy mix of styles that for a long time left the city best known for its fanatical football club. That all changed when an agreement was made with the Louvre to build its first satellite museum in France here, which opened in 2012. While the futuristic architecture of Louvre-Lens is breathtaking, what really surprises the visitor is the contrast, as a viewing experience, with the Paris musesum. The immense permanent collection, of which 20% rotates each year, is in a revolutionary single open area. I have certainly never seen a museum space like this: in one room you pass from paintings and sculptures dating from 3500BC to ones created in 1850. Benoît Diéval of the local tourism office says: “The museum has really changed Lens profoundly. Not just opening a new world of art for the population, but having an enormous impact on the local economy. That has meant not just jobs in the museum, hotels and restaurant, but stimulating a whole series of startup community projects in design, textiles and artisan ales.” The museum celebrates its 10th anniversary in 2022, so a visit this autumn could mean avoiding the inevitable big queues next year.The most important thing to say is that we can still beat the crisis – but we are against the clock. Emissions are piling up in the atmosphere every day that goes by, so we’re in a race against time to act. This is a marathon, not a sprint. There is no moment in time when we go from a world that’s fine to a world that’s a disaster. But every action, by every person, matters. Every bit of heating you prevent reduces human and planetary suffering, because that’s really what this will come down to. The good news is we have the tools, the knowledge and the technology – it’s just a question of developing it quickly enough that we make it accessible and affordable to the mass market. For this, political will is key, and at Cop26 we need to see a strong expression of political will. What’s important to note is that political will can be created, and one of the best ways to create it is via protest, in which people make their desire for change clear. What’s also increasing political will, unfortunately, is that the impact of the crisis is becoming more obvious. Green solutions are often better than the thing they are replacing – they are frequently cleaner, quieter, and they will be cheaper when produced at scale. So they will win out. Anyone who has ever driven an electric carwill know how fantastic they are to drive. They are also cheaper to run, maintain, and within a few years they will be cheaper to buy in the first place. Most models can now do 200 miles without stopping, which is probably ample for most journeys. Cellular meat is another good example of an exciting green solution – it’s grown in vats in factories and is much more efficient because horns, tails etcetera don’t need to be produced. People often recoil at the thought of lab-grown meat, but I wonder if they consider how meat is produced today. If it can be produced in a clean factory without the use of antibiotics, that’s good for the customer too. I’m in the fortunate position that I get to spend my working life informing people about what’s going badly, what’s going well, and what can be done. I’ve spent much of my career focusing on this issue, and having a sense of agency is important for me. The other big thing that keeps the gloom away is meeting lots of bright, enthusiastic, hard-working people who are striving to tackle this problem. Equally, I feel very fortunate to work for an organisation like the Guardian that takes this issue very seriously – and has done for a very long time – and is dedicating plenty of space and resources to keeping it top of the news agenda.Q I bought a flat in 2016 and lived there for a couple of years. I then got married in 2018 and moved in to my husband’s house, which he’d bought in 2015 and which remains solely in his name. I’ve been renting out my flat ever since. We now plan to sell the house we live in and buy a new one. If I keep my rental flat will I be liable for higher rates of stamp duty? NA A No, I don’t think that you will be liable for the higher rate of stamp duty land tax (SDLT) and this is why. As luck would have it, I came across an illuminating example in HM Revenue and Customs’ (HMRC) online Stamp Duty Land Tax Manual which describes your situation almost exactly (if it weren’t for the fact that it’s the husband who has the rental property and they both live in the wife’s house). Substituting you for Mr S (in the HMRC example) and your husband for Mrs S, this is how it reads: “Mr and Mrs A, a married couple, each own a residential property, with neither having any interest in the other’s property. They both live in the property owned by Mr A; the property owned by Mrs A is rented out. Mr A is selling his property and they are jointly purchasing a new one, which will be their new main residence. Mrs A will retain her rented out property.” I will spare you the next bit of technical explanation (but you can always look online if you’re interested) and move on to HMRC’s conclusion that: “The higher rates will not apply to the joint purchase by Mr and Mrs A of a new main residence. As they are married and have both lived in the property owned by Mr A as their main residence Mrs A will be treated as replacing their main residence. Mr A only owned one property at the end of the day of the transaction.” If you hadn’t lived in your husband’s house as your main residence before he sold it, you would have to pay the higher rate of SDLT as would an unmarried couple in the same situation as you (which forms the basis of the next online HMRC example).I’ve been covering climate and the environment for 17 years – it’s astonishing to me that so many positive things are happening in response to the crisis. Of course, we should have been bringing down emissions much sooner, and lots of the things that should have happened didn’t. In particular, I’d point to energy efficiency, which we all thought would be a big win early on, and fossil fuel subsidies, which have not come down as fast as we would have hoped. But in general we are seeing positive trends. Coal, gas and other fossil fuels are mostly on the way out, and clean energy is rising and rising. Renewables are a key part of the solution to this crisis. We need to shift away from fossil fuel energy to clean forms of power, and we need to do so urgently. Thankfully, their use is growing massively around the world, and the cost of this renewable energy has come down far faster than anybody had anticipated: now, in most parts of the world, wind and solar power are as cheap as – or cheaper than – building coal-fired power plants, which is fantastic news. It means the cost barrier to renewables that existed in the past has largely gone away, and we can see the cost of renewable energy, electric vehicle technology, and battery storage falling further. These will be hugely important at Cop26. I spoke to Alok Sharma, the president of the summit, earlier this week, and one thing he is very anxious about is that Cop addresses the real economy. The messages cannot just be political and high level about global action, but how this plays out on the ground with real people. It’s vital that we don’t see this as an abstract problem, but that it translates into greener business and personal decisions. It really is essential that we hold businesses to account because they are holding the purse strings and they are the ones who make the world go round. We need to be vigilant against greenwashing, make sure we hold businesses to account on the targets, and ensure they are not wasting time with off-setting but making genuine reductions. The more businesses we have on board, the more successful the outcome is likely to be. What would success at Cop26 look like? For me, strong ambitions on emissions cuts, from all national governments, as well as at state and regional levels. Banks need to put their money where their mouths are too, in terms of green investments. There is hopefully going to be a deal on methane, a powerful greenhouse gas, and forests – we need to be planting more trees and restoring degraded land as a priority. The long-term goal of net zero by mid-century is key, and we need to see countries putting nationally determined contributions (NDCs) in place, which are stringent 2030 goals. We may fall a bit short, but narrowing the gap would still be a positive outcome. After all, the world doesn’t stop after Cop. But what we really do need is a plan. In my years reporting on this issue, I’ve seen so many triumphs and disasters. The bottom line on our struggle against climate catastrophe is this: we don’t have a choice but to win, and we absolutely can. There was a time when it seemed impossible to solve the problem of acid rain, but we did. It’s true that greater challenges lie ahead, and they will require action from the whole global economy, but we have the technology and the ingenuity. I have no time for people who say this is too expensive – if we don’t have a planet then we don’t have an economy. So solving these problems is a question of “how”, not “if”.Five months after narrowly surviving a terrorist bomb attack, the former president of the Maldives Mohamed Nasheed will arrive at the Cop26 summit with a defiant message: no compromise on 1.5C. That level of global heating is the most ambitious target on the table at Glasgow. It will require a global mobilisation of resources at a scale not seen outside wartime and at least a halving of fossil fuel emissions and tree burning by the end of this decade. Many oil exporting nations are reluctant to move this quickly, but Nasheed says small island states cannot accept anything less because they are already losing land and people to rising seas. “I think 1.5C must be asked for again and restated and never left. Anything above 1.5C and the Maldives will not be there. We cannot sign a suicide pact,” he told the Guardian. Small island states such as the Maldives are often seen as the conscience of the Cop process because they are most at risk of climate chaos and push hardest for deep emissions cuts. But Nasheed said it would be a mistake for people in other parts of the world to think they were safer. “This is not a distant problem for little coloured people in the Indian Ocean, it is all of our problem,” he said. “The whole thing is framed as if it is just these tiny, sad islands losing land and people. But no, we are losing people everywhere. Usually you hear about flood deaths in Asia. Now we are getting the same news in Europe. If you don’t listen to us, listen to your own people, who are dying in front of your eyes.” Nasheed was almost killed in very different circumstances this year. A bomb attack on his home in May left him critically injured. He needed 16 hours of surgery and was then transferred to Germany for further treatment. No organisation has claimed responsibility, but police have arrested several Islamic State-linked religious extremists. “I was on the brink of death. I feel there must be a reason why I survived,” he said. “One of the outcomes will hopefully be that I can work harder to advocate in favour of measures against climate change. I must try to work harder and impress the gravity of issue on everyone else.” Now serving as the speaker of parliament, Nasheed said he had been shocked at the latest report from the Maldives environment committee, which said weather disaster alerts had increased more than fourfold over the past 20 years and more people were being swept out to sea due to storm surges and rough weather. In addition, coastlines are being eroded and more acidic water is destroying coral reef systems and the fisheries that depend on them. Nasheed said one entire island had been lost in the Baa Atoll, which is a Unesco biosphere. “We are losing ground. We are losing people. We are losing our livelihood. We are losing our culture,” he said. “This is happening now. It is upon us.” Nasheed is among the most outspoken climate advocates on Earth. He has often suffered for his belief in democracy and opposition to destructive modes of development, which are all the more remarkable in a politically turbulent nation that has often been ruled by dictators. He has spent six years in jail where he was tortured and thrown into solitary confinement for months at a time. He has been similarly brave and outspoken on global heating. The veteran climate activist Bill McKibben has described him as one of only a handful of true world leaders in the fight to save the planet. Whenever he is not in jail, he said, he has attended Cop conferences. This has convinced him of the need for structural reform of the UN’s climate change framework. “We cannot go on and on talking while the planet is burning or we will lose credibility as politicians and the UN will lose credibility as an institution. It should be able to deliver solutions,” he said. “Now, because of the need for unanimity, we have a situation where if two countries agree on greater ambition but a third country says no, then the two countries reduce their targets to those of third country. We end up with the lowest common denominator.” Top of his wishlist for Cop is for countries to align their climate plans with 1.5C. That is a long way off. Current commitments are putting the world on track for a calamitous 2.7C, according to the United Nations. Nasheed says he is frustrated by some leaders, such as the Australian prime minister, Scott Morrison, who describe 1.5C as a very tall order because of the possible impact on jobs. “Listening to these people sometimes sounds like madness. For God’s sake, if you want to protect jobs and a way of life, then you need climate action.” He is frustrated by the world’s biggest emitter, China. “They still think it is their right to poison the planet because Europeans have done it in the past. This is a mad idea, as if they are saying ‘the west has brought us to the brink and now we have arrived to push everyone over the edge’. Two wrongs don’t make a right, especially now there is new technology as an alternative to fossil fuels.” But he says a younger group of civil servants in China appear to hold more progressive views than the old guard. Nasheed hopes rich nations fulfil their promise of $100bn a year in climate finance starting from 2020, but said cash should not be a substitute for emissions-cutting action. “I hope they don’t say we will give you more money if you accept 2C and we can keep rubbishing the planet. You can build a big wall and sit back and say isn’t this a beautiful thing.” He said it would be up to the UK, as the host government, to push for an ambitious agenda that supports the most vulnerable nations. “Sometimes the UK seems to think that just because they are the presidency they can’t take a side. But no, they need to take our side to start the game. This should be about safety and survival. I think they should open the Cop by saying that.”In September 2006, shortly before the annual UN climate talks to be held that year in Nairobi, Kenya, I looked for hope amid the predictions of ecological collapse and the total failure of countries to act on emissions. It was hard going. The best I could manage was to argue that political, social and technological awareness of the climate crisis was growing and starting to translate into action. It was now a race between new ideas and political realities. A personal revolution was taking place, I wrote. “See how far we have [all] come in a generation … Have you thought about installing solar panels or bought renewable energy? Have you chosen not to take a plane or bought a less powerful car? Have you voted for a political party or an individual because of their record on the environment? Have you tried to recycle more? Have you linked heatwaves and hurricanes with climate change, or wondered what kind of physical world your children will inhabit?” Yes, it was thin, but then it seemed unlikely that an oil-addicted, carbon-illiterate world could, or even wanted to, ditch fossil fuels. Hopelessness was rife. Net zero was on few agendas. Renewable wind and solar power barely registered, and disinformation by denier and free-market thinktanks had paralysed the debate. Even the most cautious predictions warned of climate change accelerating fast as populations and wealth grew, with more extreme and unpredictable weather, sea level rises, water and food shortages, and effects on biodiversity. I concluded: “Within most of our lifetimes there will be at least 2 billion more people – another China and a half – all being encouraged to consume as much oil, water, land, minerals, wood and stone as we in Britain do today. That will mean something like 1,000 times as many aeroplanes, 10 times as many cars and half as much food and water again being needed. Forget it. This will require several new planets.” Worryingly, few people seemed to understand the scale of the catastrophe-in-waiting. That year, the Royal Society in London declared there was scientific consensus of man-made warming, the 692-page Stern review showed how it could lead to the greatest recession in history, and the then UN secretary general, Kofi Annan, told world leaders that those who questioned climate change were “out of step, out of arguments and out of time”. But the media were barely interested enough to even send reporters to Nairobi, and it would be many years before the Murdoch empire, the BBC and even Channel 4 TV stopped giving equal air time to deniers. Even worse, despite climate being on the international agenda since 1992, the Kyoto protocol – the only binding global treaty that stipulated cuts in greenhouse gas emissions – had been in force for a year and then only obliged a handful of industrialised countries to cut emissions by 5.2% on 1990 figures. Meanwhile, the world’s two largest emitters – China and the US – were not even signed up. 2006 was possibly the lowest point in attempts to get the world to reduce emissions. More than 6,000 diplomats and NGOs went to Cop12 in Nairobi in 2006 and saw the US, Australia and other countries delay and undermine progress. A modest last-minute consensus was scrabbled together to take forward a five-year “plan of action” that allowed the EU, US and other governments to congratulate themselves. The British environment secretary, David Miliband, returned from Africa to tell parliament that “good progress” had been made. But to anyone outside the Cop bubble, progress had been negligible and ambition minimal. In truth, the talks were going at snail’s pace and a few rich countries that had helped create the climate crisis had once more chosen not to act decisively, nor provide the technology or the finance for others to help themselves. In the words of Greta Thunberg in 2021, the climate talks were just “blah, blah, blah”. And most of those gloomy predictions have already become real. Since 2006, world population has grown 20%, or by more than 1 billion people. By 2050, it is expected to reach 9.7 billion, a 50% rise in just one generation. There are 500m more vehicles now than there were then and air passenger numbers have more than doubled. Instead of 1.2 billion people being affected by water shortages in 2005, there are now more than 3 billion. In that short time, too, CO2 emissions have risen nearly 23%, and the last decade has been the warmest on record. Meanwhile, many millions of people have died in natural disasters, there have been catastrophic fires, droughts, floods and heatwaves, and nature is in clear decline. How Rio changed the world Climate talks have been strained to breaking point since 1972 when the UN Conference on the Human Environment in Stockholm first put the issue on the international agenda. By 1992, when diplomats at the Earth summit in Rio de Janeiro started negotiating a treaty to cut emissions, the enmity between rich and poor nations was running deep. Nearly one in two people in heavily indebted Africa, Asia and Latin America were living in extreme poverty, while consumerism in the rich world was rampant. The north wanted to talk about the global atmosphere and the felling of forests in Brazil and Indonesia, but the rest of the world demanded they first talk about development and poverty. There was deep resentment at the inequalities and those gaps between countries have never fully closed. By the time the then UK prime minister, John Major, arrived at the Riocentro convention halls in June 1992, weeks after being unexpectedly elected, any hope that cuts could be negotiated had been dashed. With the favelas in lockdown and military helicopters thundering up and down Copacabana and Ipanema beaches, US negotiators were under orders to water down previously-agreed positions to reduce greenhouse gases, and flatly refused to sign a treaty to protect biodiversity. It was the shape of things to come. The US – responsible for one quarter of the world’s emissions – had decided there should be no binding targets or timetables for cuts, that only a paltry $75m should be given to the world’s 4 billion poor to help them adapt, that action to cut emissions should be delayed for at least eight years and be voluntary. It got its way. Nevertheless, a weak climate convention was adopted and hailed by the rich world as a landmark agreement to save the planet. In truth it was almost meaningless and effectively ensured no action had to be taken for a decade. But in one respect Rio did change the world. As tens of thousands of local Cariocas joined western environmentalists, indigenous peoples, charities, women’s and faith groups, poverty campaigners and youth, there was a real sense of an impatient global grassroots climate movement emerging, demanding action and giving a voice to nature as never before. Two short speeches – one political, one emotional – captured the Rio mood. The Cuban president, Fidel Castro, expressed the anger felt by the south at the rich countries’ abuse of nature. “An important biological species – humankind – is at risk of disappearing due to the rapid and progressive elimination of its natural habitat. It must be said that consumer societies are chiefly responsible … They have poisoned the seas and the rivers. They have polluted the air. They have saturated the atmosphere with gases, altering climatic conditions with the catastrophic effects we are already beginning to suffer,” he said to thunderous applause at the opening session, before ending: “Enough of selfishness. Enough of schemes of domination. Enough of insensitivity, irresponsibility and deceit. Tomorrow will be too late to do what we should have done a long time ago.” The second speech came a few days later, from 1992’s equivalent of Greta Thunberg. The 12-year-old Severn Suzuki, daughter of one of Canada’s best-known environmentalists, shamed world leaders, saying: “I am only a child, yet I know if all the money spent on war was spent on finding environmental answers ending poverty and in finding treaties, what a wonderful place this Earth would be.” A third speech is possibly apocryphal, but has been quoted widely and has came to define the direction of future climate talks. A combative George HW Bush, leader of the world’s remaining superpower, flew to Rio on Air Force One for 24 hours and declared the US to be the world’s leading environmental nation, reportedly adding that “the American way of life is not up for negotiation. Period.” It was a reality check for optimists and from then on, the US was cast as the leading climate villain, a role it has played in most talks since. Unspectacular progress … until Paris In the 29 years since Rio, CO2 emissions have risen nearly 60% and are still rising, leaving some commentators to argue that the meetings are a circus, and because so few cuts have been made negotiations should be ditched in favour of radically different talks outside the UN process. The opposing argument is that blame for consistent failure should not be put on the complex, inclusive UN process, so much as the lack of political will from big emitters to act. Climate change is a global issue, so everyone must have a say and consensus via the UN is the last best hope to progress, it is said. Both arguments have merit. The talks have indeed been marked by mistrust and rancour but also by extraordinary initiatives and great gatherings of civil society. All meetings since 2001 have run overtime, many ending at dawn with last-ditch compromises, brinkmanship and dramatic rescues from abject failure. Angela Merkel, the then 38-year-old German environment minister who chaired the first Conference of the parties (Cop1) in Berlin in 1995, is said to have single-handedly pushed through proposals for what would become the Kyoto protocol, the cornerstone of all international action on global warming. Two years later, John Prescott, the British environment secretary, is credited with taking charge at Kyoto in Japan and banging heads together to secure an agreement to bind developed countries to cuts of about 5% by 2012. Disaster loomed on the final night of Cop17 in 2011 in Durban until, in a moment of genius, the South African presidency employed a traditional African mediation technique known as an indaba to bring together opposing people in small huddles. There have been villains, too. Bernarditas Muller, lead negotiator for China and the developing countries group, was widely disliked by western negotiators but admired by developing nations for her refusal to be bullied into watering down legal commitments. Al Gore, awarded the Nobel prize in 2007 for his work on climate, was the lead US negotiator in 1997 who demanded loopholes to allow rich countries to buy their cuts from poor countries, so evading the moral responsibility to act themselves. Saudi Arabia, Canada and Australia have all been accused regularly of trying to wreck, block or dilute commitments. But despite the dramas, most Cops since Berlin have only managed to grind out unspectacular progress. Cop6 in The Hague in 2001 failed to agree anything significant at all; Cop8 in Delhi may be remembered merely for agreeing to call for technology transfer; Cop11 in Canada just extended the life of the Kyoto protocol beyond 2012; Cop16 called for developing countries to be handed $100bn a year to adapt. The lowest point may have been in 2009 when Cop15 in Copenhagen descended into chaos and recrimination as rich countries were found negotiating secret deals. High points such as Cop21 in Paris in 2015, when a new treaty was signed binding all nations to make cuts, are very much the exception. The cause of a generation And yet. Despite the snail’s pace and the failures, I am far more optimistic now than in 1992 or 2006. In the early climate talks, the science was a side issue for many countries and negotiations were a political battleground, with groups of like-minded countries playing out ideological agendas to maintain influence or economic domination. For years, the US, EU and UK splashed foreign aid to keep former colonies onside and tried to prevent China from growing its economy. Equally, China could “buy” the support of countries with promises to invest in their economies. Now all governments have plans and self-interest today is redefined as rapid decarbonisation. In just 15 years, too, there has been a renewable power revolution, led by solar and wind. Green hydrogen is now roughly where solar was in 1992, and battery storage technologies and marine power are developing fast. With China no longer funding foreign coal plants and electric car sales taking off, the end of fossil fuels is nearly in sight. It will not be enough to hold temperatures to a rise of 1.5C-2C, but the revolution has started. There are other reasons to be optimistic. Every country has now had a taste of climate change. Social media, too, has sharpened the world spotlight and leaders will not want to return from Glasgow empty-handed or be branded as climate laggards or wreckers. Money issues, so long a stumbling block in the talks, may now be resolved, too. Since Covid, which has already cost countries trillions of dollars, the $100bn a year pledged but not provided by rich countries in 2009 to help vulnerable countries adapt does not look that much. The Glasgow Financial Alliance for Net Zero alone has brought together hundreds of the world’s biggest banks and finance groups. To not find the money now would only make countries look cruel and self-destructive. Above all, that global hunger for action, which I first saw expressed in Rio 29 years ago, is now insatiable. The fight for the climate has become the cause of a generation, joined by worldwide movements of youth, indigenous peoples, faith and justice groups, businesses and local governments. Climate now embraces science, human rights, health, environmental justice, race, gender and equity. The arguments have been won, the science is certain, the solutions found, and people want progress. There’s still far to go, but the future is not set in stone as it appeared to be in 2006 – the old walls of doubt are crumbling, the momentum is building and there will be no going back from Glasgow. Support urgent, independent climate journalism Make a contribution from just £1 Become a digital subscriber and get something in return for your moneyIn 1964, Germaine Greer arrived in Cambridge from Australia to study for a PhD in English Literature. The subject of her thesis was love and marriage in Shakespeare’s early comedies, but in truth, Petruchio and co were not her only preoccupations. Cambridge, with its large population of men in what she described as “the full flower of their potency”, seemed to Greer to be “an ideal spot for the dedicated practitioner of the arts of love”. By her own admission, she was elated at what she saw as “the vastness” of the opportunity for “proselytising”. But, alas, the male fleshpots of Cambridge – otherwise known, I assume, as pubs – turned out to be a disappointment: “For six months after I arrived, the only sex I experienced directly, apart from endlessly repeated discussions in which I found it necessary to explain that there had been improvements upon coitus interruptus as a contraceptive method … was the sight of three grubby, scrawny men in their 40s, who derived some satisfaction from exposing to me their genitals, pallid and bluish in the frosty air.” If she were to “infiltrate the wilds of Bohemia”, she realised, she would have to travel to London, where the sexual menu was altogether more “promising” – and where, having chosen from it freely, she would eventually publish an article in Richard Neville’s underground magazine, Oz, called In Bed With the English. It probably goes without saying that Greer was a swashbuckler; her bravado, which would endure long after the 60s ended, should always be taken with a pinch of salt. But still, this story of corduroy trousers, unyielding even in the face of so much antipodean determination, illustrates rather neatly the difference between perceptions of the 60s and reality – a yawning gap that Peter Doggett makes the most of in Growing Up: Sex in the Sixties, his fascinating but deeply strange new book about the decade. As he notes, the montages so beloved of TV documentary-makers – the fuzzy clips of gyrating hippies with flowers in their hair – don’t tell even half the story. Decades are not neat. Just as the 60s would not really get going for most people until some time in 1975 (at least), the 50s hung about like a bad smell long after 1960. The so-called revolution walked hand in hand with something altogether more repressive: a backwards tug that enabled the old double standards so far as men and women go not just to survive, but to thrive. In the same year that Greer found herself explaining birth control to bearded men in polo necks, the designer Rudi Gernreich unveiled his “monokini”, a swimsuit that left the breasts uncovered. Bare breasts were, seemingly, all the rage; in the Daily Mirror, Marjorie Proops informed her readers that – good news! – Carnegie Models’ topless crepe dress had already been ordered by more than one London store. But really, who was ever going to wear such things? As a reader of Tit-Bits (not as naughty as it sounds) put it: “I wouldn’t show my figure to anyone – not even my husband.” Swerving the obvious territory of the Chatterley trial and the Profumo scandal, Doggett sets out to show that in 60s Britain, most radical concepts were only notional, the revealing of too much flesh to the world among them. He doesn’t buy, or not wholeheartedly, the liberation that came, for women, with the pill, legalised abortion and (yes) tights. The sexual revolution was, he believes, a smokescreen for a more problematic and enduring change, one that objectified women’s bodies like never before, establishing underage girls in particular as legitimate subjects of adult desire (he traces this back, in part, to Nabokov’s Lolita, Stanley Kubrick’s film of which was released in 1962). If “filth” of the kind that Mary Whitehouse made it her mission to outlaw seems quaint now – an innocent BBC comedy drama called Swizzlewick, set in a fictional Midlands town, shrivelled and died when she objected to it – life for many women in the 60s must still have felt, at moments, pretty unbearable. Doggett’s speciality in Growing Up is to provide detailed accounts of court cases involving sexual assault and murder where the male offender inevitably gets off with little more than rapped knuckles, though, as he also makes clear, such attitudes were hardly restricted to stodgy judges and juries. The liberal intelligentsia was just as bad. In films such as Alfie, A Kind of Loving and Room at the Top, sex inevitably spells doom – for women at least. The philosophy espoused by Emmanuel Petrakis, which had it that men are pre-eminent, and women there to serve them, was particularly prevalent in the 60s underground. It has to be said that the reader of Growing Up must plough through some quite peculiar and gratuitous stuff: on our behalf, he has (making like Kate Millet, only without the theory) reread John Updike’s 1968 novel Couples, with its lavish descriptions of “ivory rods”, and even Leslie Thomas’s ghastly bestseller, The Virgin Soldiers. But I think, in the end, that I’m prepared to forgive its author these strange interludes. He understands, better than many, that half of the human race is still paying the price for the insurgency that started, and then stalled, in this period. “If it were possible at this moment for women to take their masochism and radicalise it, there would be the bloodiest revolution ever,” said Jane Arden, whose play, Vagina Rex, was staged in London in 1969. In Growing Up, women’s suffering can be found on almost every page, the new, guilt-free lives they’ve read about only ever, for them, a chimera. • Growing Up: Sex in the Sixties by Peter Doggett is published by Vintage (£25). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyI’m standing on the wrong side of the viewing platform glass at the top of ArcelorMittal Orbit in Stratford, east London. The standing area here at the UK’s largest freefall abseil is narrow, and feels like the crow’s nest of a ship. The sunny day has clouded over. It’s gusty, 80 metres (262ft) in the air. Two wind-buffeted safety crew, Sian and Jack, hook me to ropes. My life is in their hands, and I don’t even know their surnames. Looking out over the head-spinning edge, I feel afraid. In a few seconds I’ll be descending unsupported but for a rope, from almost the height of the Statue of Liberty. To give me “my full Zen moment” I won’t have an instructor with me. I’ll be alone. The building itself lends a trippy, out-of-your-head element to this. Sir Anish Kapoor and Cecil Balmond’s sculptural oddity looks like a tentacle enveloping a can of Spam, or a pulled-apart Slinky. Does Kapoor know thrill-seekers are walking all over it from the outside? Is this what he wanted? I didn’t know people were allowed to do this, and wish they weren’t so I wouldn’t have to. It feels like tempting fate. What kind of people do this? And why? “It’s urban exploring – seeing London from a new angle,” said Max earlier, as we gazed up at the disorienting loops from ground level, the sky still blue. Max works for Wire &amp; Sky, which runs urban aerial adventures, in which anyone can traverse recognisable landmarks such as the O2 in Greenwich, or Brighton’s i360, in terrifying new ways. “It’s exhilarating to conquer fear. Makes you feel alive,” he says. Maybe. Waddling in my punishingly tight harness, festooned in carabiners and clanking like a discordant bell, I sound more like Jacob Marley’s ghost. Then again, life can be a gift. A group of abseilers here today are raising money for Keech, a children’s hospice in Bedfordshire. My harness helper Fran tells me she recently assisted a group of jelly-legged midwives, raising money for their local hospital. (She told them to breathe, which must have felt ironic.) Some people are here simply because their loved ones are fond of edgy presents. “This is my dad’s idea of a joke for my 30th birthday,” admits Jordan, who is going before me. Is his dad here for the punchline? “Nah.” Despite having two safety ropes, when you’re told to lean backwards off a ledge at a height like this, your brain and (very) nervous system can’t help but protest. I look down. It’s dizzying. I’m wearing a GoPro, rented for an additional fee, and trying not to swear. “Keep your feet on the platform and lower yourself until your feet are above you,” says Jack. I’m a lobster clinging to the lip of a pot, upside down. I think about asking Jack what his surname is, or his favourite colour. Establish a connection. Oh, that’s hostage negotiation. “You need to step off now,” he shouts. Was it like this for Neil Armstrong, with Buzz Lightyear over the radio telling him to step off? Aldrin, not Lightyear. Haha! How do I stop this happening? I can’t. I step off. As far as mankind goes, it’s a tiny step. People do this all the time. But for one man, it’s huge, a moment of absolute trust. I surrender to Jack and Sian, to the air, to life. They hold me. And my God, the view. London arrayed before me in all directions. The metal fungi of the city offices, bursting skyward. A halo of unbuilt space around St Paul’s. The moss-like preponderance of treetops and greenery. I forget this city was built on rivers. But even more than the buildings, it’s the tiny people I see. They flow like water too, over bridges and through streets, carrying their individual stories. I see the connected stream, the blood of a living city. I realise a torrent of them are heading towards me. To my left, London stadium is filling up, ahead of West Ham’s game against Spurs. Fans swamp the boulevard. Jump by Van Halen blasts upward, hardly the soundtrack I want. I feed the rope through my hands, speeding my descent. Tom Petty, Free Fallin’, would be more apt. A family inside the building gaze out at me, looking sick on my behalf. But I’m fine. It’s incredible how quickly one can adjust to this. It would actually be a good seat to watch the match, I think. As I get closer to Earth, the fans don’t look like ants any more. They’re gawking at me. “How’s it hanging?” one yells. There’s no point replying. No one has any dignity when their feet aren’t in contact with the ground. I feel like Boris Johnson on a zipwire. I remember gravity, and the harness, as my feet return to Earth. My testes hurt, I complain to Fran, in so many words, as I touch down. “I’ll just switch your GoPro off …” she says. Oh yeah. I’ve picked up a fair amount of embarrassment during my sky journey. But what a terrifying privilege. I feel enlarged and free. I’ve conquered fear, and even turned the air blue again. How’s that for aerial dominance? Is this a gateway thrill? I do find myself wondering if I’m allowed to use Stonehenge as a pommel horse, or high five the Angel of the North. Smugness points Not Neil Armstrong, but still Buzzing. 5/5 Want to suggest an activity for Rhik to try? Tell us about it here.Throughout the 2021 United Nations climate change conference, the Guardian will be publishing the stories of the people whose lives have been upended – sometimes devastated – by the climate breakdown. Sunil Kandar, Ghoramara Island, India I live in the Hatkhola locality of Ghoramara. I remember how on this island, during my childhood, I had a very happy and enjoyable life. We had a big mud-walled house. We also had large farmland of our own where rice and other vegetables grew. We sold a big part of our farm produce in the market. Like some other families in the island we were pretty rich. The farmland owned by our family was our biggest strength. Our island is located at the mouth of a river coming from the north. The northern edge of the island began sinking bit by bit under the river water when I was a child. Then, 20 or 25 years ago, the sea began eating away land around the southern edge of the island where we lived. Ghoramara began going underwater almost from all sides and the island began shrinking fast. Farmlands and houses of the people are constantly going underwater. Cyclones are pounding our island more frequently in recent years. The fragile island is too feeble to keep away the tidal waves. Often during natural disasters, tidal waves cause flooding of the island with salty seawater. Whatever farmlands are left on the island are turning unusable because of inundation by seawater and increasing salinity of the soil. Once I owned four acres of farmland. In the past 20 years, three-quarters of it has been lost under the sea. This year I have been forced to buy rice for us, for the first time in my life. I am over 50 now. I cannot go out of the island, learn a new skill and pick up another job. My son knew he cannot earn a living on this island. So, he left the island and has become a migrant day-wage labourer in south India and sends money to support our family. Within a few years, my son, daughters and their families will have to move out of this island to save their lives. But my wife and I are already very old. Somehow we will spend the remaining few years of our lives on this island. Oceanographers and other experts came to the island and conducted studies five years ago. They said the water level around the island is rising and it will perhaps completely vanish underwater by 2050. But in the past five years, the island has been shrinking. I think Ghoramara will disappear underwater within 10 or 15 years.The problem: rising carbon dioxide in the atmosphere The level of CO2 has been rising since the Industrial Revolution and is now at its highest for about 4m years. The rate of the rise is even more striking, the fastest for 66m years, with scientists saying we are in “uncharted territory”. The causes (I): fossil fuel burning Billions of tonnes of CO2 are sent into the atmosphere every year from coal, oil and gas burning. The slight reduction in 2020 due to coronavirus lockdowns was no more than a “tiny blip” in the continuing buildup of greenhouse gases, according to the World Meteorological Organization. The causes (II): forest destruction The felling of forests for timber, cattle, soy and palm oil is a big contributor to carbon emissions. It is also a major cause of the annihilation of wildlife on Earth. The causes (III): farming Methane is a powerful greenhouse gas and emissions are increasing faster now than at any time in 40 years of observations. Farming, especially cattle, as well as fossil fuel extraction and landfill sites are responsible. The consequences: global temperature rise The planet’s average temperature started to climb steadily two centuries ago, but has rocketed since the second world war as consumption and population has risen. Global heating means there is more energy in the atmosphere, making extreme weather events more frequent and more intense. The consequences: rising sea levels Sea levels are inexorably rising as ice on land melts and hotter oceans expand. Sea levels are slow to respond to global heating, so even if the temperature rise is restricted to 2C, one in five people in the world will eventually see their cities submerged, from New York to London to Shanghai. The consequences: shrinking Arctic sea ice As heating melts the sea ice, the darker water revealed absorbs more of the sun’s heat, causing more heating – one example of the vicious circles in the climate system. Scientists think the changes in the Arctic may be responsible for worsened heatwaves and floods in Eurasia and North America. The upside (I): wind and solar energy is soaring Huge cost drops have helped renewable energy become the cheapest energy in many places and the rollout is projected to continue. Analysts also expect coal use to fall. But much government action is still required to reach the scale needed, and tackle difficult sectors such as aviation and farming. The upside (II): electric vehicles The global fleet of electric cars and vans is still small compared with those running on fossil fuels. But sales are growing very fast. Electric cars are cheaper to run, suggesting they will become mainstream. The upside (III): battery costs Renewable energy is intermittent, depending on when the sun shines or wind blows. So storage is vital and the cost of batteries is plummeting. But other technologies, such as generating green hydrogen, will also be needed. Support urgent, independent climate journalism Make a contribution from just £1 Become a digital subscriber and get something in return for your moneyI am in a battle to get TSB to refund more than £1,000 taken from my account by thieves, and I need some help. Two weeks ago I realised that several unknown debits had appeared on my current account over a two-day period. I immediately rang the TSB fraud helpline. While I was waiting on hold for three hours, I unilaterally cancelled my card, to be on the safe side. The bank has refunded a £3 payment to Travelodge and a £35 Just Eat order, but it has refused to refund 22 transactions at various betting sites including Bet365, Unibet, Betfair, Trannel International and Sky Bet – all for sums of between £30 and £40. I have never used any of these sites except Sky Bet, where I do hold an account. The bank’s staff immediately refunded the £3 and meal charges as “they could be seen to be fraudulent”, but refused the others because they were deemed to be “gambling”. I was told to investigate myself and that TSB could not assist me in doing so. Many of these companies are offshore in Malta and elsewhere and I’m at a loss where to start. I don’t understand why the bank is making this distinction given that it accepts that my card has been compromised. The Financial Conduct Authority regulations clearly state that “if you didn’t authorise a payment, you can claim a refund”. The disputed entries have since been changed so I can no longer see which vendors were even involved. SG, Southampton Last month an expert on fraud told me that TSB has the best record of the banks for refunding victims of fraud. Your case was all the more surprising given that it clearly accepted that you had been the victim of fraud, but declined to refund the sums spent on gambling sites. Clearly the thief was spending small sums to prevent any security flags being raised. You did the right thing in cancelling the card, and this probably saved you from further losses. I raised your case with TSB, and it now accepts that you did not authorise these payments. It has refunded you in full. It did so having looked into the “additional information provided by you and the betting companies”. The bank has also offered £100 compensation. We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at consumer.champions@theguardian.com or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Please include a daytime phone number. Submission and publication of all letters is subject to our terms and conditions.The song that is my karaoke go-to I don’t like karaoke, it makes me really uncomfortable. I did Gangsta’s Paradise at a birthday party once. I felt so self-conscious, but you have to commit to that song, which I definitely did, as I was absolutely hammered. I don’t think I could do it sober. *** The song I inexplicably know every lyric to My mother used to always put Barry Manilow on in the car, so I know all the words to Copacabana. The last stanza, all about how she used to be beautiful and now she’s lonely and old and her lover has been shot dead, is really bleak and misogynistic! *** The last song I streamed Scratchcard Lanyard by a band called Dry Cleaning that my good pal Lolly Adefope got me into. They’ve got an art school feel, almost spoken word. The lyrics are these little celebrations of banal, everyday things, and they’re all delivered in a monotone. It’s trying to do the opposite of entertaining you, which I really respect. *** The song I want played at my funeral Mahler’s Symphony No 5: it’s so emotive. I’ve loved it ever since I first heard it, aged 16, on the soundtrack to Death in Venice, and became obsessed with it. Weirdly, I heard it at a funeral recently and, if anything, it confirmed: “Yeah, this is very powerful music!” *** The song I pretend to like, but I secretly hate When I’m writing, I can’t listen to anything with lyrics, because it’s too distracting. A friend recommended the soundtrack of The Master, but it was very invasive. Just really difficult to write to. So I told a white lie about liking it and went back to my cheesy three-hour-long YouTube compilations of instrumental Disney piano. It’s naff, but it does the job. *** The song I can’t help singing When I was about 15 and doing National Youth Theatre, we had to learn this incredible Georgian folk song called Tsintskaro. I don’t even know what the words mean, but when I’m in the shower, it’s the tune that wants to come out. I’d love to speak to a Georgian person to find out what it means! It’s been haunting me all these years. *** The best song to have sex to I once accidentally had a threesome at university to the [hidden camera comedy show] Trigger Happy TV soundtrack. It has amazing tracks on it by bands like the Waterboys – it doesn’t have the Nokia tune on it! I remember suddenly becoming conscious of what we were listening to, and going: “Have you seen Trigger Happy TV?”, as if I was about to say: “Well, guess what? You’re on it!” Katy Wix appears on Stath Lets Flats on Channel 4. Her book Delicacy: A Memoir about Cake and Death is out now.In October last year, thousands of mainly young Nigerians took to the streets to protest against police abuses, particularly among the now-disbanded brutal special anti-robbery squad (Sars) police unit. – Yet the several protests across the country were brutally repressed. At least 12 people were killed in the #EndSars protests, according to Amnesty International, and dozens were injured, including at Lekki tollgate in Lagos on 20 October, where witnesses livestreamed soldiers shooting at protesters draped in or waving Nigerian flags. The army and Nigerian government continue to deny anybody was killed at Lekki tollgate, and atrocities at other demonstrations have scarcely been acknowledged. A year on, four young Nigerians present at the protests across Nigeria reflect on the brutality they suffered and witnessed. They describe how it changed them and how they now feel about their home country. Amaka Obi*, 30, living in the US I didn’t see any of the shootings [at Lekki tollgate]. But I saw blood everywhere. It was unreal. And I heard screams, I heard people crying. And the gunshots. The only people that had guns were the military. After it happened, it was something that I tried not to think about, but the images, I just couldn’t get them out of my head for months. That night, it started off OK. The military was kind of surrounding us. They had these machine guns. And they were shouting at us. But I didn’t feel scared at that point. I thought there’s no way they’re ever going to do anything, there are hundreds of people around. It wasn’t bright daylight, but it was light enough for people to see. But then it got dark and the tollgate lights went out. I wasn’t at the main entrance of the tollgate, I was a little further away, but I just heard screaming and running. People were shouting, “they’re killing, they’re killing”. People were being pushed over and trampled. I was trying to find my friend because I didn’t know what was happening and I was afraid. For at least a few days afterwards, I was in shock. I left Lagos immediately and went to Abuja, even though Abuja wasn’t safe. During the protests, my mum was calling me every day begging me to leave, crying, and I didn’t because I didn’t feel unsafe. But that was the first time I did. I left Nigeria within a week. And then I felt this guilt. I was privileged enough that I didn’t have to be there. I have a blue passport [one of Nigeria’s five types of passport, given to government officials], I could leave at any point, but my friends and everyone are still there. For a while, I thought maybe it didn’t happen. But then how can all of us remember the same thing? It did happen, it’s just they [the government] denied it. That’s the scary thing about the government. They can just gaslight you and tell you what happened isn’t what happened. Then you feel crazy. I know I’ll never go to another protest in Nigeria, because we can’t protect ourselves. When I went back to Nigeria, it felt different to previous times. I love to travel a lot, I used to take a bus from Abuja to Lagos, but no way now. Ogechi Igbani, 32, from Abuja When the agitation started and conversations happened online, it gave me energy. I wanted to do something. That day [11 October], I got to Unity fountain. There were about 200 or 300 of us. The idea was to march to the police headquarters. We were singing our songs, and people were greeting us on the road. When we got to an intersection with two police armoured trucks, 30 or so people went towards them and knelt down. The police began firing teargas. Initially, we were standing our ground, but then gunshots started. We were running and they [the police] were chasing us. I thought, “wow, I’m going to die”. But at the same time, in a weird way, I wasn’t afraid. Some people ran into a bush to hide. I could have joined them but I thought, “why am I running? I didn’t do anything wrong. I didn’t commit any offence”. So I just stopped. There was a police van with seven to 10 policemen. Immediately they saw me, stopped and said: “Shebi, you’re one of them?” [Shebi is Yoruba term used for confirmation of a statement: “is it not that?” or “you agree?”]. The officers that attacked me had guns and sticks, which were thick branches cut from trees. The first person slapped me across the face. I fell to the ground. About four or five of them started hitting me with the sticks. I tried to cover my head. All I was thinking was, “If I can’t do anything else, let me prevent them from hitting my head”. And they asked, “Who sent you? How much were you paid? Do you think you can protest? Who are you?”. I can’t even tell how long it lasted. Before then, I had not had encountered police brutality. But now I was seeing it for myself. And it wasn’t pretty. It wasn’t nice. It’s not something that I would wish for anybody. It made me start thinking about how, one day, I’m not going to be here any more. It made me think of things I would do or should do to make my society better. For me, it was like a reawakening. Now, I’m part of a group of young people wanting to change the country for the better. I still believe in Nigeria and think while I’m here I want to try to make things better. Isaiah Ekabo, 32, from Lagos I wanted to join the protests immediately as they began in Ajangbadi [a suburb of Lagos]. I was excited, the youths were protesting all over Nigeria, even around the world, outside embassies and everywhere. It was our time. I was thinking, “yes, finally. Let’s come together. Let’s tell them that we’ve had enough”. The government, the police, they know what they put people through every day, so they can’t tell us they were surprised. Harassment all the time, because your hair is one colour, or because of piercings, or dreads. Even without any of those things, they can stop you for any reason. But, instead of seeing us as citizens demanding our rights, look what they did? The first day I joined, straight away, they [the police] were shooting. They didn’t care at all. I know of two people who were killed. I was running and heard them shooting from behind me. One person running some distance in front of me suddenly collapsed. They shot him. I couldn’t stop to check him, I just ran. Fearing for my life, I ran into a sidestreet. In Nigeria, in a so-called democracy, I was running from police who were trying to end my life, because of protests. I don’t really think about the protests now. I don’t give myself that opportunity. It’s a painful period because our government showed itself. But this is not new, it’s what we’ve known it to be. Just to survive in Nigeria, it’s too much. Everything is working against you. Be it no light, no roads, few jobs, bad water. Then, on top of that, we have to beg that the police don’t harass or kill us. I studied architecture at university. I finished six years ago. Since then, I’ve been working, doing different jobs that are OK, it’s just not what I was hoping for. I have an uncle working in Norway. It’s my prayer that I will join him after some time, either to find work or to continue university, because the situation here is too hard. Agbeze Ifeanyi Matthew, 35, from Ondo state On 20 October, my friend, Olamide Gudo, and I left the protest at about noon. But when we got to Obalende [a neighbourhood in Lagos state], we were not able to get a bus home to Ikorodu. We were stranded. Some youths had taken over the area. So we thought, let’s go back to Lekki tollgate, because that place is safer. We had been at the protest there and the atmosphere was very safe, like nothing I had ever seen before. People were giving speeches, singing, dancing, protesting. There was food around and drinks. At about 6.45pm, we heard that Nigerian soldiers were coming to the Lekki tollgate. The tollgate lights had never gone off before, but when they turned them all off and we saw people [in uniform] removing the cameras, we became scared. What happened was the worst memory that I can never forget. When they [the army] got to the tollgate, they immediately started shooting. I was so shocked. Did this government send soldiers to come and kill innocent youths? It’s our right to protest peacefully. Some of us sat down. I saw a military man … He shot me [in the chest]. I ran away … but I was gradually getting weaker. There were so many people running, everywhere was dark. I thought if I carried on in that direction I was going to lose blood until I died, so I started to run back. And I heard two men say, “this guy has been shot”. I fell to the ground. These young men took my picture, then they took me to the general hospital in Marina. The bullet had gone through my back. In the ambulance they were saying I had lost so much blood. The nurse was praying, trying to encourage me to be courageous, saying that I should not lose hope. This was around 1am. I was the first person from the tollgate admitted to the ward. By later that morning, there was no more space. To this day, Lai Mohammed [Nigeria’s information minister], the army, the government, are telling us that nobody was killed at the Lekki tollgate. You can see how disgraceful they are. So what we saw with our eyes is a lie? Are these bullet wounds fake? I’ve posted videos on my YouTube channel for future reference. *Name changedWhen it comes to the world of mathematical puzzles, Hungary is a superpower. Not just because of the Rubik’s cube, the iconic toy invented by Ernő Rubik in 1974, but also because of its long history of maths outreach. In 1894, Hungary staged the world’s first maths competition for teenagers, four decades before one was held anywhere else. 1894 also saw the launch of KöMaL, a Hungarian maths journal for secondary school pupils full of problems and tips on how to solve them. Both the competition and the journal have been running continuously since then, with only brief hiatuses during the two world wars. This emphasis on developing young talent means that Hungarians are always coming up with puzzles designed to stimulate a love of mathematics. (It also explains why Hungary arguably produces, per capita, more top mathematicians than any other country.) I asked Béla Bajnok, a Hungarian who is now director of American Mathematics Competitions, a series of competitions involving 300,000 students in the US, whether he knew of any puzzles that originated in Hungary. The first thing he said that came to mind was the ‘3-D logic puzzle’, a type of logic puzzle in which you work out the solution in a three dimensional box, rather than (as is the case with the standard version) in a two-dimensional grid. He said he had never seen this type of puzzle outside Hungary. Below are two examples he created. You could solve these using an extended two dimensional grid. It’s more in the spirit of the question, however, to draw a three-dimensional one, like you are looking at three sides of a Rubik’s Cube. 1. Date night Andy, Bill, Chris, and Daniel are out tonight with their dates, Emily, Fran, Gina, and Huong. We have the following information. 1. Andy will go to the opera 2. Bill will spend the evening with Emily, 3. Chris would not want to go out with Gina, 4. Fran will see a movie 5. Gina will attend a workshop. We also know that one couple will see an art exhibit. Who will go out with whom, and what will they do? 2. Condo conundrum When Mr and Mrs Verona opened the door to their condominium at 11am this morning, they saw a terrible sight: their beautiful home had been burgled. They called the police, who came over immediately. The upcoming investigation revealed the following. 1. There are six condominiums in the building, numbered 1 to 6, the Veronas owned #4. 2. The Veronas left their home at 6pm last night. 3. The night guard of the building, Mr. Safe, works from 6pm till 10am. 4. There were six visitors in the building during last night: Mr A. Bream, Miss F. Green, Mr R. Hill, Dr T. Smith, Miss T. Taylor, and Mr Z. White. They all visited one of the six condominiums, each a different one, some time between 6pm and midnight. Mr. Safe could not recall, however, who visited which place; but he was sure that none of them stayed longer than an hour. Furthermore, they all stayed during different hours; the first one between 6pm and 7pm, the second between 7pm and 8pm, and so on. 5. Mr Bream was at a huge party at the country club. He arrived there at 8pm and stayed till midnight. 6. Miss Green was also at the country club; she arrived at 9pm and left with Mr Bream. 7. Mr Hill could not provide any credible alibi for the night before. 8. Miss Taylor was at her home watering her front yard between 7.45pm and 9pm. Several of her neighbors saw her. 9. Mr White was at the party at the country club. He arrived at 7pm and left at 10pm but, surprisingly, he came back again at 11pm and stayed till after midnight. 10. No one could enter the condominium without going through the lobby where Mr. Safe was stationed. 11. None of Dr. Smith’s, Miss Taylor’s, or Mr White’s fingerprints were found in condo #5. 12. Dr Smith could not have visited condos #1, #3, or #6. 13. Miss Green couldn’t have visited condos #3 and #6. 14. Mr Safe recalled that shortly before 8pm a visitor left either condo #1 or #4. 15. Nobody entered condos #5 and #6 before 7pm. 16. A visitor arrived at 8pm, and entered condo #1, #3, or #6. 17. Nobody visited condos #2, #3, and #6 between 10pm and 11pm. Well, these were all the clues that the police investigation revealed during the first day of the investigation. Can they solve this terrible crime without further information? I’ll be back at 5pm UK time with the solutions. PLEASE NO SPOILERS Instead discuss your favourite Hungarians. UPDATE: To read the solutions click here. Thanks to Béla Bajnok for today’s puzzles. He is is Professor of Mathematics at Gettysburg College in Pennsylvania and director of American Mathematics Competitions. I set a puzzle here every two weeks on a Monday. I’m also the author of several books of popular science, most recently The Language Lover’s Puzzle Book, just out in paperback. Finally, it’s Maths Week England next week (from November 8). Parents and teachers, you can register your school here.Australia’s acting prime minister, Barnaby Joyce, has dismissed the diplomatic row over the scrapping of the French submarine contract by declaring: “We didn’t deface the Eiffel Tower.” Other members of the Coalition also played down the fallout, saying Australia’s actions were not as bad as “cheating on a lover”. They made the comments hours after the French president, Emmanuel Macron, criticised Australia’s handling of plans to end the French contract and instead partner with the US and the UK to acquire at least eight nuclear-powered submarines. Asked whether he thought the prime minister, Scott Morrison, had lied in the lead-up to announcement, Macron told reporters in Rome: “I don’t think, I know.” Morrison later denied Macron’s claim, telling reporters: “It’s not true.” Joyce, the leader of the Nationals and acting prime minister while Morrison is overseas, implicitly accused France of overreacting to the cancellation of the $90bn deal, saying contracts had terms and conditions that allowed for an exit. “We didn’t steal an island; we didn’t deface the Eiffel Tower,” Joyce said. Joyce said he understood the French sentiment, but he was “certain that with time, like all things, we can get over this and move on”. Matt Canavan, a backbench senator from the same party told ABC TV: “We have not cheated on a lover here or somehow requested a divorce, we have changed a business arrangement and done so in the best interest of our country.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning While Joyce and Canavan attempted to minimise the significance of Australia’s decision, the Australian foreign minister, Marise Payne, took a step towards repairing the relationship with France. On Monday Payne met for more than an hour with the French ambassador, Jean-Pierre Thébault, who returned to Canberra after being recalled to Paris for consultations at the height of the diplomatic crisis. When he left Canberra in September, Thébault told Guardian Australia: “We thought we were mates and we were stabbed in the back.” Payne said Monday’s in-person meeting was “constructive” and added that Australia was “focused on moving forward in our relationship with France”. “This is another important step in that process, building on discussions between our countries’ leaders,” Payne said. “Australia looks forward to regular engagement continuing.” Thébault has yet to comment on the outcome of the meeting, but he is scheduled to address the National Press Club in Canberra on Wednesday. Labor’s foreign affairs spokesperson, Penny Wong, welcomed the meeting, but said Payne’s efforts would be “undermined and damaged by what the prime minister has done and how he is now dealing with it”. “It is unprecedented to see a world leader so bluntly assert that we are led by a man whose word he doesn’t trust,” Wong told ABC TV. Wong said France was an important power in the Indo-Pacific and Macron would take a leadership role in the EU after the retirement of German chancellor Angela Merkel. She said the Australian government should have ensured it managed the issue in a way “that minimises disruption to our relationship with France”, adding: “On what possible planet is a good idea for us to have a stoush with them?” The Labor senator Kristina Keneally told Sky News that Joyce was “not exactly helping here” and asked: “Are there any adults in this government? I mean, come on!” The dispute with France dominated Morrison’s trip to Rome for the G20 summit. Shortly after Morrison arrived in Italy, US president Joe Biden moved to repair his own damaged personal and political relationship with Macron by acknowledging that the Aukus announcement had been a “clumsy” episode handled with a lack of grace. Biden told Macron with television cameras present that he was “under the impression that France had been informed” about Australia’s intention to ditch the contract “long before” the Aukus partnership was revealed publicly. Morrison denied he had lied to the French president. He said he had told Macron that he had formed the view that conventional submarines would not meet Australia’s strategic interests when the two leaders met in Paris after a G7 summit in June. He said when the two had dined together at the Élysée Palace in June, “at that stage we had not concluded any other arrangements with any other parties”. Morrison said he understood Macron’s disappointment, but that he did not resile from the decision to abandon the French contract and proceed with the acquisition of nuclear-powered submarines in partnership with the US and UK. He said doing otherwise would have elevated French disappointment above Australia’s national interests. Macron expressed scepticism to Australian journalists that the Aukus nuclear submarines would arrive on schedule. He noted there was an 18-month review of the feasibility of the arrangement, and quipped: “Good luck.” Macron has told Morrison that Australia’s decision was about more than the submarine contract. In a phone call last week, Macron said it was also a “unilateral decision” to scale back the French-Australian strategic partnership and “broke the relationship of trust”. France has urged Australia to propose “tangible actions” to heal the diplomatic rift. At Senate estimates last week, the secretary of the defence department, Greg Moriarty, said there had been “a number of engagements with French officials about our thinking about capability requirements” but added: “I did not discuss cancellation of the Attack programme with any French official prior to the night before [the announcement].” Asked whether representatives of France’s Naval Group were blindsided, Moriarty said: “They were surprised and disappointed – understandably.”With that, we will wrap up the blog for this fine evening. It has been quite a day in Copenhagen and at home. Here are the major developments: The French president Emmanuel Macron has accused Scott Morrison of lying about Australia’s intentions to withdraw from the two countries’ submarine contract. Morrison said he’d spoken with Macron “several times” over the past few days and his decisions were made in the national interest. Barnaby Joyce dismissed the severity of the situation, telling reporters “we didn’t steal an island. We didn’t deface the Eiffel Tower. It was a contract.” Marise Payne met the French ambassador this afternoon, and had a “constructive discussion”. Back at home, international travellers began landing in Sydney and Melbourne without having to quarantine for the first time in nearly 20 months. There were many teary reunions, but WA premier Mark McGowan is still standing firm on his own hard border stance. Former NSW premier Gladys Berejiklian faced her final day of Icac hearings, telling reporters she was ready to “move on” with her life. It was today revealed Daryl Maguire told Berejilkian to get a private phone and download WeChat before fronting his own hearings. NSW recorded 135 local Covid cases and four deaths while Victoria recorded 1,471 local cases and four deaths. South Australia could suffer between four and 51 deaths amid a 27% chance of a significant Covid-19 outbreak once the state’s borders open later this month, new modelling shows. And Canberra disability support workers and community aged care staff will be mandated to get a Covid-19 vaccine. The new safety measures have been introduced to prevent needless deaths in racing. Oh no it’s too early for this. The Royal Australasian College of Physicians (RACP) has released a statement calling for the commonwealth to urgently assess the physical and mental health status of all 47 refugees and asylum seekers held in the Park hotel building in Melbourne. The RACP is “seriously concerned” about reports almost half the refugees and people seeking asylum have contracted Covid and are reporting a lack of timely medical care. RACP president professor John Wilson: Reports that as many as 20 asylum seekers in the Park hotel building have contracted Covid are disturbing. They suggest that some are not getting the necessary and timely medical attention or medical supplies they need. We are obliged to give asylum seekers the same medical attention and support that is provided to other people in hotel quarantine under their human rights. That means access to medical support and provision of medical supplies, as well being offered transfer to hospital if recommended by a qualified healthcare professional. We have very serious concerns for these asylum seekers in this hotel. Covid can be deadly and medical advice must be urgently sought and implemented in keeping with national standards. Physicians are calling on the Australian government to ensure that all Covid-care standards are upheld by urgently addressing this extraordinary outbreak. South Australia could suffer between four and 51 deaths amid a 27% chance of a significant Covid outbreak once the state’s borders open later this month, new modelling shows and AAP reports. Data prepared by University of Adelaide scientists, part of the broader Doherty Institute network, looked at three potential scenarios. In the worst scenario, which involved dropping local restrictions and introducing vaccine certificates for high-risk activities, the state could suffer more than 400 deaths. So far, SA has had four deaths since the start of the pandemic. The Liberal government says it plans to follow scenario one, which allows for the borders to open to fully vaccinated people from 23 November, when the 80% vaccine target is reached, and keeps all existing health measures, including mask-wearing, in place. This predicts a 27% chance of an outbreak, which is defined as “averaging more than 100 cases per day over any three-day period”. Premier Steven Marshall said it was the “safest way forward”: South Australia would be able to safely manage hospital and ICU demand from Covid infections generated in the community as long as there are high testing rates, contact tracing is maintained, and cases and their close contacts are quarantined. Under scenario two, which drops some local restrictions, SA would have a 64% chance of an outbreak and under scenario three, the most relaxed, the chance would rise to 84%. Under scenario one, hospital demand is considered manageable with ward occupancy to peak at around 36 beds. Peak ICU occupancy is estimated at a median of nine beds with an extremely small chance of demand exceeding 30. The median prediction for total deaths under this scenario is 13 over 300 days, with a total range between four and 51. Marshall: No death is palatable but what we’ve got to do is be realistic that the Delta variant cannot be kept out of South Australia forever. We’ve relied on the evidence to suggest what is the best way for prudently opening the borders. More on the Victorian feral horses deal announced today from Lisa Cox. The Victorian government will recommence aerial shooting of feral horses in the Alpine National Park under a new plan to deal with growing population numbers. Feral horses are a major threat to ecosystems in the alpine region because they graze and trample on habitat and damage waterways. Parks Victoria said on Monday that additional control measures were now necessary because there had been limited interest from the public in rehoming captured horses, despite repeated callouts. The plan says aerial shooting will occur in “exceptional circumstances” where other control methods - including capture and rehoming - have failed. Ground shooting will also be used. “It is critically important to increase efforts to protect this rare and sensitive landscape which has been in decline for decades,” a Parks Victoria spokesperson said. The most recent feral horse surveys, conducted in 2019, found the feral horse population in the Australian Alps had doubled from about 2300 horses to 5000 in the five years from 2014 to 2019. James Trezise, of the Invasive Species Council, welcomed the plan, which he said, if implemented, would protect Australian wildlife and ecosystems in the park for future generations. He said this would include the complete removal of horses from the Bogong High Plains and a significant reduction in the eastern Alps population: Australia has the largest population of feral horses in the world. Our native ecosystems did not evolve with hard-hoofed animals such as feral horses, which degrade and destroy sensitive habitats. It is vital feral horses are removed from sensitive alpine wetlands, including areas along the Bogong High Plains, and this plan aims to do just that. NSW and Victoria are currently eligible for the travel bubble but this may expand. It’s official – Dr Jeannette Young has been sworn in, and she’s in good company, joining a female chief justice and female premier. Kristy McBain has commented on a story that has just dropped from Paul Karp on Liberal MP Christian Porter. The story says Porter will be formally asked by a powerful parliamentary committee to explain his declaration that legal fees for his defamation case were part-paid by a trust with funds from unknown sources. McBain told Afternoon Briefing: It was a real shame last week and the week before in the house that we had the government not advocating in favour of sending that matter to the privileges committee. It wasn’t an admission of guilt, it was simply to seek the privileges committee to have a look at it. Their own speaker said it was a prima facie case for that. I think it is a step in the right direction and I hope the privileges committee does get cooperation because at the end of the day, all people across this country want to know that their politicians are acting in the utmost faith to the electorate. That includes letting people know who has contributed, whether it is to legal cases, the election, political donations, whatever it is, be upfront about it. So people know exactly was going on. Karvelas: You said you wanted them to release the modelling and we still haven’t got them, what do you think of that? Canavan: I don’t think it is the right way to go about things. As I have said, modelling has been released around every other climate change debate that has occurred, including the Coalition and from Labor governments over the past decade. I would like to see this analysis supported in the Senate and it still isn’t out there. This has been the government’s best few days to release the stuff that has been paid for by your viewers and we should have the right to see them. Nationals senator Matt Canavan is on Afternoon Briefing talking all things submarines. He says the prime minister “has not cheated on a lover” or “requested a divorce” with the nation of France: I back our prime minister in Australia making decisions on its own national interest, that is what the PM and the Australian government has done here, they have acted in the national interest ... we had to act in this way. I don’t agree with the French president’s description of this, what happened here was we terminated a business contract, that was always within the rights of the Australian government to do, we are not walking away from our contract, under that but it was always the right to end the business relationship. We have not cheated on a lover here or some how requested a divorce, we have changed a business arrangement and done so in the best interest of our country. The foreign minister, Marise Payne, says her talks with the French ambassador were “constructive”. She said: “I met with France’s ambassador Jean-Pierre Thébault today. We had a constructive discussion for over an hour. Australia is focused on moving forward in our relationship with France, and this is another important step in that process, building on discussions between our countries’ leaders. Australia looks forward to regular engagement continuing.” Wong says Morrison should have taken a stronger 2030 target to Glasgow: What we have seen is the G20 making clear that the majority of the world is moving in a direction which Scott Morrison hasn’t wanted to move in. Barnaby Joyce certainly doesn’t want to move, whether it is net zero by 2050 or a stronger 2030 target which the PM should have taken to Glasgow. The reality is climate change is real but equally the economic reality of nations response to climate change is real, and we want to make sure not only we get cheap energy but we continue to protect and build Australian jobs into the future ... the problem with this government is they are not sincere on this ... does anyone believe anything Barnaby Joyce signs up to on climate is real? He has campaigned for over a decade on no action, they are not sincere. Patricia Karvelas: The prime minister will have potentially another opportunity at this Glasgow meeting to have another exchange with Mr Macron, how should he handle it? Wong: A little more respectfully than he how he has handled things right now. Karvelas: Should he apologise? Wong: He should remember when he sits at the table he represents the country, his own ego and his own stubbornness to deny he made mistakes and give them a lecture, that is his personal character on display, he is leading the nation and representing Australia, he should try and manage that discussion, with Australian interests at heart not Scott Morrison’s interest. Penny Wong is up on Afternoon Briefing, condemning Scott Morrison’s handling of the botched submarine deal: People can make their own judgement about the prime minister from his past behaviour, but ... the reality is, we have a demonstration of how to deal with it better and that is the Americans. Look at president Joe Biden. France, America’s eldest ally withdrew their ambassador over this for the first time, America managed to find a way through that involved Joe Biden acknowledging what had occurred and acknowledging the French experience of that. We don’t have that kind of leadership from Mr Morrison and the problem with that is it damages the nation’s interest not only its reputation ... it is unprecedented to see a world leader so bluntly assert that we are led by a man whose work he doesn’t trust. An impressive feat for Victoria’s regions, particularly after lagging vaccination rates in some LGAs like Greater Shepparton. Some 81.8% of South Australians aged over 16 have received their first vaccination dose. Tonga will enter a snap lockdown at midnight. It managed to avoid Covid for the entire pandemic until late last week. TGA has recognised that Covaxin, manufactured in India and BBIBP-CorV, manufactured in China aren’t registered in Australia but are widely used internationally for the purpose of establishing a traveller’s vaccination status. This recognition is for travellers aged 12 and over who have been vaccinated with Covaxin, and those 18 to 60 who have been vaccinated with BBIBP-CorV: Recognition of Covaxin, and BBIBP-CorV, along with the previously announced recognition of Coronavac (manufactured by Sinovac, China) and Covishield (manufactured by AstraZeneca, India), means many citizens of China and India as well as other countries in our region where these vaccines have been widely deployed will now be considered fully vaccinated on entry to Australia. This will have significant impacts for the return of international students, and travel of skilled and unskilled workers to Australia. In addition, with input from the TGA, Atagi have determined that those who have received two doses of a TGA-approved or recognised vaccine at least 14 days apart are regarded as fully vaccinated from seven days after the second dose (with the exception of Janssen vaccine, where they are regarded as fully vaccinated seven days after the single dose). This includes homologous (two doses of the same vaccine) and heterologous (two doses of two different TGA-approved or recognised vaccines) schedules. Some 355 emergency calls for assistance are still active as of midday today following wild storms that battered parts of Victoria last week. Help is now on the way with crews from SES NSW to work from tomorrow to Thursday. Many active calls are on the Mornington Peninsula which saw the brunt of the storm and include large and complex roof issues that require specialists. More calls for emergency assistance are expected as people return to their homes and discover damage. Dr Jeannette Young has just been sworn in as the 27th governor of Queensland. The Victorian Electoral Commission has clarified unvaccinated people won’t be banned from voting in next year’s state election. The Australian foreign minister has met with France’s ambassador – just hours after the French president accused the Australian prime minister of lying about the now scrapped submarine contract. Marise Payne met today with Jean-Pierre Thebault, the French ambassador who was recalled to Paris shortly after the Aukus nuclear submarine plans were announced in September. Thebault returned to Canberra a couple of weeks ago and finished his stint of quarantine at the weekend. The meeting is understood to have finished. We’ll bring you more details as soon as we have them. The Pacific Islands Forum secretary general has welcomed climate commitments by Australia and New Zealand heading into Cop26. Henry Puna: We welcome the recent commitments to tackle climate change from New Zealand and Australia. New Zealand and Australia are the two developed country nations in the 18-member Pacific Islands Forum, but as one Blue Pacific and in accordance with Forum Leaders’ Kainaki II Declaration for Urgent Climate Change Action Now, we are all taking concrete action to address climate change. New Zealand has pledged to reduce net greenhouse emissions by 50% (below 2005 levels) by 2030 from its previous target of 30%. This was in addition to an earlier announcement to increase its climate finance commitment to $1.3bn from its current levels of $300m. Last week Scott Morrison announced Australia’s commitment to net zero by 2050. These enhanced contributions are the sort of action we need from all developed countries at Cop26. We have been very clear that the future of our Blue Pacific and the future of our Blue Planet depends on international efforts to meet the Paris Agreement goal of limiting global warming to 1.5 degrees above pre-industrial levels. Superannuation will now follow Australians when they change jobs after new laws came into effect today, AAP reports. Superannuation accounts will now be stapled to workers, ensuring new employers pay super contributions into existing accounts in a bid to avoid expensive double ups and lost money. Treasury estimates $2.8bn will be saved from duplicate fees and lost interest returns over the next decade, with around 850,000 duplicate accounts created every year. Employees are still able to nominate a different super account. The new laws address a key recommendation of the banking royal commission and build on measures implemented under the Your Future, Your Super reforms. The government estimates these reforms will save Australian workers almost $18bn over the next decade. It comes as 75% of New Zealanders are now fully vaccinated. The number of people with disability parking permits in NSW is increasing but there aren’t enough places for them to park, AAP reports. Mobility parking permits have increased by 60% since 2007 but despite almost 400,000 drivers with a disability holding a licence in NSW, “there have been no attempts to keep pace with the growth in accessible spaces”, the NRMA says. Shopping centres require 2% of parking spaces to be accessible, while residential areas require 1%, but 8% of NSW drivers have a mobility parking permit. Permitted parkers are also in competition with other drivers, with almost 13,000 fined in the last financial year for parking in spaces for which they had no permit displayed. A review of accessible parking suitability and enforcement of violations will deliver “long overdue improvements” and “reduce barriers for people with a disability to access mobility parking spaces”, the NRMA said alongside Spinal Cord Injuries Australia. Some of those improvements include using real-time technology to monitor parking spaces, signposted warnings about the consequences for parking in accessible parks without a permit, and harsher penalties for repeat offenders. SCIA CEO Dianne Lucas said cities need to take into account a growing population of disabled drivers. Almost a quarter of her organisation’s workforce have physical disabilities but need to drive to be independent, Lucas said. The premier of South Australia Steven Marshall says the state has to take a “realistic” view to reopening: Information provided to the Australian Electoral Commission by people considering standing as a candidate for parliament will be reviewed via a new inquiry into the qualification checklist relating to section 44 of the Australian constitution. The proposed checklist responds to recommendation one of the joint standing committee on electoral matters’ report on the conduct of the 2019 federal election. Committee chair senator James McGrath: Although the candidate checklist worked well in the 2019 election, there were some critical elements, such as requiring information on a candidate’s date and country of birth, that were not required as mandatory data. This information is highly relevant to ascertaining a candidate’s citizenship status. It is important to examine the proposed amendments to the Candidate Qualification Checklist and ensure there is adequate time to incorporate any revisions before the next election. Catch up on another big day here: The federal government has provided further detail on two dedicated visa streams that will allow people from Hong Kong to claim permanent residency in Australia. Mark McGowan is refusing to budge on his hardline border stance as a returned overseas traveller pleads with the West Australian premier to be reunited with his sick mother, AAP reports. There were emotional scenes on Monday as Australians returned home to Sydney and Melbourne, which have scrapped quarantine for vaccinated travellers. The pathway to return to WA is considerably more narrow given the state has placed NSW and Victoria under “extreme risk” border restrictions. A man who arrived in Sydney from Los Angeles was in tears as he spoke of his desperate wish to travel to WA to see his sick mother after two years overseas. He told Seven network: I’m really scared and emotional because I really want to see my mum. The doctor said that she hasn’t got long ... she’s been in permanent care for a few years and it’s been so long since I’ve seen her. I love her heaps and I just want to get back there. Under the extreme risk border rules, most NSW and Victoria travellers are banned from entering WA and those who are permitted must enter hotel quarantine for 14 days. McGowan said the man’s case would be assessed for a possible exemption on compassionate grounds: Obviously these situations are very sad and very difficult. The police and the chief health officer will analyse his case if he makes an application so that a decision can be made. Any decision on reopening WA’s borders will be delayed until after the state has reached 80% full vaccination, a benchmark expected to be reached by early December. McGowan has insisted WA is well-placed to make a “soft landing” out of the pandemic, reaching high levels of vaccination whilst avoiding the need to reimpose restrictions such as capacity limits and mask-wearing within the state: We have a virtually unique opportunity to get to very high levels of vaccination before such time as we have Covid come in. Really, it’s a matter of a few months. We’re heading towards the end of this, we’re just going to remain safe whilst we get there. The premier has outlined mandatory vaccination requirements for most of the state’s workforce, including a 31 January deadline which would coincide with the end of the school holidays and potential reopening of borders. WA’s cap on returned overseas travellers will double to 530 once it reaches 70% full vaccination. Opposition health spokeswoman Libby Mettam said another “horror month” of ambulance ramping figures showed WA’s health system was not prepared for a possible Covid outbreak. The hard hats are out, baby! It may not seem like it but house price rises are easing ever so slightly. Figures from CoreLogic out today saw values rose 1.49% for the month, down from 1.51% in September, and remain at close to half the 2.8% monthly pace in the consultancy reported in March. Sydney’s rise was pretty much bang in line with the national rate, while Melbourne’s trailed at just under 1%, and Perth notched its first negative monthly result since June, dropping 0.1%. You can also see the drop if you squint. Brisbane topped the monthly growth rate among the capitals with a 2.5% rise in October. As CoreLogic’s research director Tim Lawless (aptly named, perhaps, given the market) said national house prices are now 21.6% higher than a year ago, an incredible advance when you consider how the increase compares with wages: Housing prices continue to outpace wages by a ratio of about 12:1. This is one of the reasons why first home buyers are becoming a progressively smaller component of housing demand. Those still desperate to get into the market may take some solace that gains in new listings and tighter regulations on credit assessment that come into force today may take some of the fizz out of the market. Rents, meanwhile, were up 0.7% for the month, up from a pace of 0.6% in September. Other stats out today also point to an easing of demand for housing. The ABS reports new loan commitments in September reached $20.7bn, down 1.4% seasonally adjusted from August. While down for a fourth consecutive month, the amount remains 21% higher than for September 2020, and 49% higher than pre-Covid levels in 2020, Katherine Keenan, head of the ABS’s finance and wealth unit, says. Victoria’s new loans went backwards by 12.7% in the month, while states like NSW saw another rise. The average loan in the state has now climbed to a record of $750,000, the ABS said. Perhaps not surprisingly, it is investor demand that is driving the prices up. The number of new loan commitments (not their size) dropped for an eighth month in a row, dropping 5.6% in September, the ABS said, adding they are now 11.4% down from the same month a year ago. More hints of how much momentum the wider housing market could lose may be clearer tomorrow after the RBA holds its monthly board meeting on interest rates, with a verdict known at 2.30pm AEDT. A change to the record low official case rate of 0.1% is not expected but market watchers and anybody on a variable loan rate will be watching for any prospect that official rates are heading higher. The RBA’s stated aim has been to keep the rate at its record low into 2024 to ensure the wider economy withstands the Covid storms but the commercial banks are tipping increases to start towards the end of 2022. Not surprisingly, the AFR are among those reporting a big jump in people switching to fixed-rated mortgages before the inevitable increase kicks in. Crown Resorts says all visitors to its Sydney and Melbourne venues will have to be vaccinated against Covid-19, effective immediately, AAP reports. The policy includes customers, workers, and contractors. A similar policy at Crown’s Perth casino is still being finalised and is expected to be implemented from 31 January. Crown Resorts chief executive Steve McCann said the new rules were critical to stop the spread of the virus. We must do whatever is in our power to help limit the potential for further impact at our resorts – whether that be to our people, our guests or to business continuity. McCann said the move had overwhelming support from stakeholders. The company announced a vaccine incentive scheme in September, offering workers three hours’ paid leave to get the jab as well as extra sick leave for those who needed it. A recent royal commission into Crown Resorts castigated the company for “illegal, dishonest, unethical and exploitative” behaviour, but stopped short of recommending it should lose its Melbourne casino licence. Earlier this year, the NSW Bergin report found Crown had “enabled or facilitated” money laundering at its Perth casino. More on the Extinction Rebellion protests in Perth, where a lone protestor has been arrested after glueing herself to the ground. Over in Victoria, the feral horse action plan has been released today for the Alpine national park. Parks Victoria will continue to work closely with our partners in the humane control of feral horses to reduce their impacts; including removing small, isolated populations and preventing spread into new areas using the most humane, safe and effective techniques, including lethal and non-lethal methods. The preferred methods of managing feral horses include trapping and rehoming, tightly managed shooting and construction of small-scale exclusion fences. Good reminder. The ambassador of France to Australia Jean-Pierre Thebault is set to address the Press Club this Wednesday. It will be very interesting watching following Macron’s rather explosive language this morning. Queensland health authorities are providing an update as its vaccine mandate comes into effect. Health minister Yvette D’Ath says home quarantine rules for fully vaccinated travellers will be released “very shortly”, but apartment dwellers won’t be able to home quarantine, even at 70% vaccination rates. Over in Sydney, Elias Visontay has been at the airport where families and loved ones are reuniting after 583 days of ongoing border restrictions. As expected, it is a tear jerker. Just one case detected in hotel quarantine in Queensland today. Meanwhile in Australia, acting prime minister Barnaby Joyce has secured $150 million for “neglected unsealed roads”. The Liberal and Nationals launched the “Remote Roads Upgrade Pilot Program” today, which Joyce said would target unsealed roads throughout remote Australia, offering councils between 80% and 100% of funding. It comes after closed negotiations on net zero targets. Joyce: This is not about sealing roads; it is about making them safer. It is about putting down gravel to stop parents getting bogged in the rain when they drive their kids to school; it is about removing dangerous corners. Many of these remote roads haven’t been touched since the Great Depression. The Liberals and Nationals government will partner with local government in delivering this new funding to address many neglected roads that are out of sight to most people. Our regional towns are the lifeblood of our nation, and every Australian deserves safe and efficient roads regardless of where they live. More from Matthew Guy’s presser this morning: Many thanks as ever to the talented Matilda Boseley. I’ll be with you for the rest of the day. With that, I shall hand you over to the amazing Caitlin Cassidy who will guide you through the afternoon’s news. See you all tomorrow morning! Two people have died overnight from Covid-19 in the ACT, as the territory recorded five new infections in the past 24 hours, reports AAP. A man in his 60s and a woman in her 70s were the latest deaths from the virus in the ACT, taking the death toll from the current outbreak to 10. ACT health authorities said both were in the intensive care unit before their death. There are now eight people in hospital with Covid in the ACT, with just three of those in intensive care, all of them on a ventilator. The territory’s vaccine rate has increased slightly to 92.6 per cent of over 12s being fully vaccinated. Testing, however, was down to just 978 negative tests in the past day. There are now 170 active cases in the community. Extinction Rebellion are also demonstrating in Perth this morning. New Zealand has reported 162 new cases of Covid-19 today, all of which were in the North Island. The country’s daily case numbers are expected to grow over the next month, prime minister Jacinda Ardern has said, before vaccination rates begin to eat into transmission. According to the ministry of health, 88% of eligible (those aged 12+) people have now had at least one shot, and 75% are fully vaccinated. Among Maori, 72% have had at least one shot and 53% are fully vaccinated. Among Pacific New Zealanders, 85% have had at least one shot and 69% are fully vaccinated. In Auckland, the centre of the outbreak, 91% have had at least one shot and 81% are fully vaccinated. The government has committed to shifting to a “traffic light” system that will lift most restrictions for vaccinated people once district health boards across the country have reached 90% fully vaccinated. 53 people are in hospital with the virus, with 3 in intensive care. “Time can bring you down,” Adnan Choopani sings, his words echoing off the walls of the detention centre compound, “time can bend your knees”. Time is something Adnan, and his cousin Mehdi, know only too well. For eight years they have been held by Australia’s immigration detention regime, offshore and on. They have watched friends burn themselves to death and known the despair that has led them to attempt suicide themselves. They have been beaten and abused, jailed without reason. They have grown from boys into men in that time. Fifteen and 16 when they arrived in Australia seeking sanctuary, they are now 23. Despite their claims for protection being formally recognised more than half a decade ago, they remain in detention. You can read the full story below: This has not been independently confirmed by Guardian Australia but the ABC is reporting that a number of Victorian Liberals believe the former shadow AG Tim Smith’s position in parliament is untenable after he resigned from cabinet after admitting to driving above the legal blood alcohol level. Oh, Extinction Rebellion is out and about the Australian capitals this morning, to mark the first day of Cop26. Here is their demonstration in Melbourne. The Australian Capital Territory has recorded five new cases overnight, and a whopping 92.6% of its over 12 population fully vaccinated. Hmmm, a lot of big talk about emissions from Albanese, but the Labor leader still won’t commit outright to phasing out coal entirely. Reporter: There’s a fair few calls for some sort of global plan to phase out coal-fired power. Do you reckon that’s worth considering? Albanese: Well, nation states are making their decisions, and they have implications for what happens in terms of the energy sources. And we know that that will occur going forward. We know that we need to move to a clean-energy economy and that is something that’s needed to happen globally. So, that is having an impact. It will continue to have an impact. All of our major trading partners have adopted targets of net zero by 2050. In China’s case, net zero by 2060, but that has real implications for the energy mix. And here in Australia, we know that the cheapest form of new energy is clean energy. It’s the energy that we see behind us here at this wind farm, that can power over 200,000 homes. That is what we see occurring right around Australia. And we see similar initiatives, of course, happening in other parts of the world. And of course, Albanese has mentioned the French incident this morning. You’ve seen president Macron make some very serious statements about his view of what Scott Morrison said to him prior to Scott Morrison cancelling the contract between Australia and France by text message. Australians need a leader who can be trusted. Albanese seems sure that Morrison’s showing at Glasgow will be viewed negatively across the world. Scott Morrison is overseas, saying that he supports net zero by 2050, but also saying that there are no new policies being announced from last Tuesday. Yesterday, we saw Angus Taylor unable to answer basic questions about the cost and government expenditure relating to the 2050 target, relying upon technology that hasn’t been invented yet, being vague and basically saying, “We’ll get there just through the vibe.” Well, the Clean Energy Finance Corporation wasn’t just a “vibe”, it was actually a vehicle to drive investment, as was the Australian Renewable Energy Agency, as were Renewable Energy Targets. The former Labor government put those in place and the current government has relied upon them for any reduction in emissions which has been achieved up to now. The fact that they had no policy going forward will be exposed when the Prime Minister is at Glasgow. You can’t have an Australian prime minister just saying, it’s the vibe,” when the rest of the world wants to see concrete steps towards net zero by 2050. OK, why don’t we have a listen into the opposition leader, Anthony Albanese, who is speaking about renewable energy from Tamworth today. And yes, there are windfarms in the background of his press conference. Albanese says the world has “no confidence” in Australia’s ability to meet the challenge of climate change: Australia is behind where we should be because of the almost a decade of denial by Scott Morrison and the Coalition government. I don’t think there are opportunities for New England in new energy, I know there are. And we can see it right here. Barnaby’s second time as a leader is just one more sequel that hasn’t led up to the original. It’s not as good as the first time, indeed. This time round, he’s tying himself in knots because he gained the leadership saying that he’d oppose net zero by 2050 and it wouldn’t be possible for the National party room to adopt it. And now, of course, the National party room has, but he still says he’s opposed to it. Today, people will have no confidence in Australia being able to meet the challenge of climate change and take up the opportunities which are there, because it’s a day when Barnaby Joyce is the acting prime minister of Australia. NSW Health has released the details of the four people infected with Covid-19 who died in the last reporting period. Sadly, NSW Health is today reporting the deaths of four people with Covid-19, two men and two women. Two people, a man in his 70s and a woman aged 101, acquired their infections at the Mercy Place aged care facility in Albury. They were both fully vaccinated and had underlying health conditions. There have now been five deaths linked to an outbreak at this aged care facility. A man in his 60s who died at Concord Hospital acquired his infection at Parklea Correctional Centre. He was not vaccinated and had underlying health conditions. A woman in her 60s from south east Sydney died at Prince of Wales Hospital. She was not vaccinated and had underlying health conditions. NSW Health expresses its sincere condolences to their loved ones. There have been 518 Covid-19 related deaths in NSW since 16 June 2021 and 574 in total since the start of the pandemic. The first quarantine free international flight to Melbourne has touched down. Although, it was far from packed. A sign of the times: Just in case you were wondering if the NSW premier Dominic Perrott has hand-fed a giraffe this morning, the answer is “Yes”. OK! We will be hearing from the WA premier Mark McGowan in about 10 minutes time, 11.15am (ADET), 8.15am (AWST). He will be discussing the rollout of booster vaccination shots. (And hopefully, someone asks him about those “lost his marbles” comments from Joyce this morning.) Stay tuned! Joyce says the last time he spoke to WA premier Mark McGowan opening the border, the western leader “lost his marbles”. Reporter: And every state and territory, except for WA, has announced plans to reopen their borders. Do you have anything to say to the WA premier? Joyce: I did last time. But he lost his marbles with me. So I’ll just let him talk ... All I’ll say is that we’re all going to be jumping on planes and flying to other parts of the world. If you want to live and stay in Western Australia forever more, I don’t think that your people will. Your people will want to go overseas with us. The Nationals leader has been asked “what did [he] get” when going into the room to discuss Austalia’s plans to combat the climate crisis. A whole range of things. Farms. Scope 3 emissions so the new exports sitting on that train so that we don’t account for where it lands in the world. You don’t have to pick up those emissions. We talked about reviews. There are so many issues coming through where things weren’t implicit, we made them explicit. The sort of things that were floating around. You all heard about it. Methane emissions. They said it and said it probably the day after we came to the deal. They said that over in the United States and Europe, they’re talking about a 30% reduction by 2030. How am I going to sell that one to the beef industry? How would that have worked? Well, we would be putting them out of a job. But the Nationals went in to bat so we wouldn’t destroy. But we would get a better deal. We were going to be negotiators, not demonstrators, getting a better deal for regional Australians. Joyce was asked if the nuclear submarine deal was “important enough” to justify this animosity with France. Yes, it is. Defence of our nation comes absolutely 1st, 2nd and 3rd [priority]. ... our best platform is to protect our people, your people, your sons and daughters, your granddaughters and grandsons, to make sure that this part of the world is safe. We are not an aggressive people. We are a very peace-loving people. But we will have a platform that deters people from taking our nation for granted. And if that is to go with nuclear submarines designed by the British or the United States of America, then that’s precisely where we go. What other choice would the Australian people want? Say – oh, we’re going to go for another platform which probably can’t do the job of that one. Now, the Australian people want to see one thing. They’ll say get the very best so that you can keep our nation as safe as possible. The acting prime minister, Barnaby Joyce, has just been asked about the whole “French president saying Morrison lied to him” situation. The Nationals leader says he is going to “back the prime minister” on this one. There were stories that have been floating around the paper long before the cancellation of the submarine contract. And that’s a really important word – it was a contract. We didn’t steal an island. We didn’t deface the Eiffel Tower. It was a contract. And contracts have terms and conditions and one of those terms and conditions and propositions is that you might get out of the contract. We got out of that contract. We got out of it because the best outcome for our nation and the protection of our nation was to go to the platform that we now have, that we’re now going towards building. Now I hope, I hope, that President Macron understands that, ultimately, Australia and France have got so much more in common and so much into the future than a contract which is now in the past. And you know, [I] understand the sentiment. I understand the views of the French people. And I’m certain that with time, like all things, we can get over this and move on. The world’s gone mad! A mammal taking out the New Zealand bird of the year! Heresy. A heads up to ACT readers, a number of the territory’s Covid-19 hotlines are out of service this morning. US Open champion Daniil Medvedev said he is eager to play in the Australian Open in January but could not confirm his participation if only players who have been vaccinated against Covid-19 are allowed in Melbourne. Victoria’s premier Daniel Andrews said this week that no unvaccinated players would be permitted to play in the tournament despite prime minister Scott Morrison earlier saying they could compete but only after undergoing a two-week quarantine. Medvedev refused to disclose his vaccine status and said he preferred to keep his medical records private, a stance similar to that of world No 1 Novak Djokovic. Ahead of the Paris Masters the world No 2 said: I always said it, that I really like Novak’s answer about this. I want to keep my medical, no matter if it’s about vaccine, leg injury, head injury... I want to keep my medical private for a reason. You can read the report below: Canberra disability support workers and community aged care staff will be mandated to get a Covid-19 vaccine, reports Andrew Brown from AAP. The new public health order in the capital will require workers to have received their first dose by November 15 and be fully vaccinated by December 13. ACT health minister Rachel Stephen-Smith said the decision followed a large number of talks with the sector. It was originally proposed workers would need to be fully vaccinated by November 29 but the mandate was pushed back by two weeks after consultation. “Stakeholders considered that the ACT’s public health direction should be more consistent with the approach taken with NSW,” Ms Stephen-Smith said. “This is why we have a consultation process and I am confident that the direction to be signed today will meet the needs of the affected sectors while protecting the community.” Healthcare workers and teachers in the ACT have already been mandated to be fully vaccinated. More than 92 % of the eligible population aged 12 and over are fully vaccinated in the national capital. It comes as Canberrans will be able to receive a booster shot from Monday. People who have had their full course of a vaccine more than six months ago can now get the Pfizer top-up shot at a government clinic, regardless of which brand of vaccine they already had. Immunocompromised Canberrans have already been able to get a booster shot. South Australia could suffer between four and 51 deaths amid a 27% chance of a significant Covid-19 outbreak once the state’s borders open later this month, new modelling shows, reports Tim Dornin from AAP. The state government has released the data prepared by scientists at the University of Adelaide, who are part of the broader Doherty Institute network, which looked at three potential scenarios. In the worst of those, which involved dropping local restrictions and also introducing vaccine certificates for high-risk activities, the state could suffer more than 400 deaths. So far, SA has had four deaths since the start of the pandemic in early 2020. The Liberal government says it plans to follow scenario one, which allows for the borders to open to fully vaccinated people from 23 November, when the 80 % vaccine target is reached, and keeps all existing health measures, including mask-wearing, in place. This predicts a 27 % chance of an outbreak, which is defined as “averaging more than 100 cases per day over any three-day period”. Premier Steven Marshall said: The modelling shows scenario one is the safest way forward ... South Australia would be able to safely manage hospital and ICU demand from Covid-19 infections generated in the community as long as there are high testing rates, contact tracing is maintained, and cases and their close contacts are quarantined. Under scenario two, which drops some local restrictions, SA would have a 64 % chance of an outbreak and under scenario three, the most relaxed, the chance would rise to 84 %. Under scenario one, hospital demand is considered manageable, with hospital ward occupancy to peak at around 36 beds. The modelling found there was an extremely small chance of demand exceeding 200 beds. Peak ICU occupancy is estimated at a median of nine beds with an extremely small chance of demand exceeding 30. The median prediction for total deaths under this scenario is 13 over 300 days, with a total range between four and 51. Australia will reopen quarantine-free entry to fully vaccinated Singaporeans from 21 November. The new travel agreement follows a meeting between Scott Morrison and the prime minister of Singapore, Lee Hsien Loong, on the sidelines of the G20 meeting in Rome on Sunday. The two governments have agreed that Singaporeans departing from Singapore can travel to Australia without having to quarantine after arrival. There will be no requirement to have spent 14 days in Singapore prior to departure. Last week, Singapore announced Australia would be included in its vaccinated travel lanes arrangements. Fully vaccinated Australians will be able to enter the country without quarantining from 8 November. You can read the full report below: Does Dubbo just... not have an airport? Why did they land in a field? The Victorian numbers are in, with the state recording 1,471 cases overnight. Speaking of uncomfortably close photos of politicians... Emmanuel Macron has accused the Australian prime minister, Scott Morrison, of lying to him over an abandoned $90bn submarine contract, in a significant escalation of tensions between Paris and Canberra. The French president levelled the accusation in impromptu comments to Australian journalists on the sidelines of the G20 summit in Rome. He said he had a lot of “respect and friendship” for Australia and Australians, but that respect between nations needed to be reciprocated. “I just say when we have respect, you have to be true and you have to behave in line and consistent with this value,” he said. When asked whether he thought Morrison had lied to him by not revealing Australia’s secret dialogue with the UK and US over the acquisition of nuclear submarines, a dialogue that ultimately became the Aukus pact, Macron was direct in his response. “I don’t think, I know,” he said. You can read the full report below: The former NSW premier Gladys Berejiklian is speaking in front of Icac again today. If you want to follow along with all the updates, check out Guardian Australia’s dedicated blog below, captained by the amazing Christopher Knaus and Michael McGowan. The NSW Covid numbers are out. The state recorded 135 new local cases overnight. If you haven’t listened to the “Australia vs the climate” series of Guardian Australia’s Full Story podcast, honestly what are you doing! 10 News Journalist Stela Todorovic has disputed Scott Morrison’s claims that Australian journalists were taking “selfies” with French president Emmanuel Macron. The Australian defence force has tightened its vetting procedures in a bid to prevent nationalist and racist violent extremists from joining. The measures, which include better information sharing with the intelligence agency Asio, are driven by concerns that extremists have sought to join the ADF “to obtain training and capability”. A defence spokesperson told Guardian Australia the organisation: “Works closely with law enforcement and intelligence agencies to understand and mitigate the threat of ideologically motivated extremism to Defence and within Defence.” The spokesperson said the new framework “improves upon existing information exchange arrangements between Defence and Asio to assess whether someone is a ‘fit and proper person’ to serve.” You can read the full report below: Shadow foreign affairs minister Penny Wong has slammed both Morrison’s net-zero by 2050 commitment and his dealings over the French submarine deal in one fell swoop while speaking to ABC Melbourne. I just think the problem for Mr Morrison is his position at Glasgow is about as sincere as his conversations with the French president. New figures will give some idea how Australia’s booming housing market was performing prior to the banking watchdog stepping in last month to tighten loan application rules, reports Colin Brinsden from AAP. The Australian Prudential Regulation Authority increased the minimum interest buffer it expects banks to use when assessing the serviceability of home loan applications. It wants banks to assess applications at a rate three percentage points above the interest rate product being offered rather than 2.5 percentage points previously. The CoreLogic home value index is released on Monday for October. Prices were 1.5 per cent higher in September, a marked slowdown from earlier in the year. However the annual rate of more than 20 per cent was the fastest since mid-1989. The Australian Bureau of Statistics will also release lending figures for September. In August, mortgages to owner occupiers fell 6.6 per cent, while for investors they rose 1.5 per cent. However, addressing senators last week, APRA chair Wayne Byres said one in five new loans that were approved in the June quarter were at more than six times the borrowers’ income. “With lockdowns being lifted, and expectations that the economy will bounce back, APRA considered the balance of risks has shifted such that a timely adjustment to serviceability standards was warranted,” Mr Byres said. The Morrison government has been warned its plan for carbon neutrality by 2050 will fail if it is solely reliant on investing in new technology. The Grattan Institute’s Towards Net Zero report, released on Monday, has suggested the Australian government would need to pull many other policy levers to reach net zero, including vehicle emissions standards, energy efficiency obligations and rules on use of carbon credits. The report’s lead author, Tony Wood, suggested that the Morrison government’s net zero plan, announced on Tuesday, failed to show how emissions reduction would be achieved outside the electricity sector. Scott Morrison will attend the Cop26 climate talks in Glasgow from Monday without an increased 2030 emissions reduction target, despite international pressure from the UK, EU, US and Pacific island nations to significantly increase ambition. You can read the full report below: Georgia Steele, the ex-lawyer who is running as an independent in Hughes against the United Australia Party’s Craig Kelly, has spoken to Radio National about the government’s net zero target. Steele said: I think the voters are very aware of the government’s significant lack of action on climate change over the last eight years they’ve been in government. I don’t think the Morrison government will get a pat on the back for coming kicking and screaming to the table last. Liberal MP Katie Allen – who is also likely to face a significant challenge from Labor and possibly an independent over the climate issue – has described the net zero commitment as a game-changer akin to John Howard’s gun reforms. Steele isn’t having a bar of it: I have to say I think that’s a little bit optimistic. Katie Allen is obviously a member of the government who made the announcement this week, so it’s not surprising she would say that ... I think the Liberal government is out of step with what the actual constituents and their community want ... I’m listening to what people are telling me about their extreme disappointment and even exasperation on climate change. I’m confident they’re looking for an alternative to step up and force the government, whoever that might be, to take positive, active steps on climate action. Steele said Australia is in an “unbelievable position” to benefit from the transition to renewable energy but is letting the opportunity “pass us by”. Rowland: OK, I’ll put it this way. Pre-selections for Liberal seats open on Friday, including his seat of Kew. Do you support Tim Smith standing again, being again pre-selected as a Liberal MP by the party, given what’s happened? Frydenberg: Well, he will make his own decisions about ... Rowland: But you carry a lot of weight. As you and I both know, you carry a lot of sway in that particular part of Melbourne. Do you, Josh Frydenberg, support Tim Smith staying on as a Victorian MP? Frydenberg: Well, Tim has still got a lot of work to do to represent his own community, even though he’s not in shadow cabinet. But those deliberations and those decisions are matters for him ... Events like this, actions like this, do have consequences. And in his own political career, it’s seen him resign his position straightaway from the shadow cabinet. And that was the right thing to do. And no one is condoning that conduct. It’s completely unacceptable and it’s dangerous, and he’s made a strong statement to that effect. But as for his future, no doubt he will take some time to reflect on that. Michael Rowland: Before you go, Victorian Liberal MP Tim Smith – a good friend of yours, as it turns out – drove drunk over the weekend. He was nearly three times the legal limit. He crashed into a car and into a house in Melbourne. He’s already quit the Victorian shadow cabinet. Does he deserve to stay in the Victorian parliament as an MP, given what he did? Frydenberg: Well, he made the right decision to resign from the shadow cabinet. And no doubt he will consider his own future. But my comments about drink driving would be the same whether it’s friend or foe, alike. It’s clearly unacceptable. It’s clearly dangerous. Thank goodness, in this instance, nobody was injured. But there is a very powerful lesson to everyone watching your program today: Do not get behind the wheel if you have been drinking. It endangers not just your life, it endangers others. And these events have consequences. And as we’ve seen, they’ve already had consequences for Tim Smith. Rowland: Should Tim Smith be considering his future in politics? Frydenberg: Well, again, he no doubt will take some time to consider his future. But what I can say is that he’s made a very strong statement accepting the errors of his own judgement, and thank goodness in this case nobody was injured. But drink driving by anyone in our community is clearly unacceptable and is dangerous. Here is the treasurer on international borders in NSW and Victoria opening: It’s a day for celebration. The fact that Australians can move more freely in and out of our country without home quarantine, if they’re double-vaccinated. The fact that you can move more freely between Melbourne and the regions, or Sydney and their regions. Whether you can also now move more freely between New South Wales and Victoria. All of this is good news for our economy. We’ve seen an additional $150 million a day being spent across New South Wales and Victoria since the restrictions have eased, and we’ve also seen ticket sales for airline travel going gangbusters. Qantas says that they’ve sold half a million tickets in the last two weeks alone. That compares to selling just 20,000 tickets over a 2-week period in August. Jetstar has sold 75,000 international seats in the last 72 hours. And we also know Virgin has had very strong sales. So, that’s all gonna be good news for our economy, and it’s certainly gonna see families and friends reunited ahead of Christmas. Frydenberg: [France’s] disappointment is obvious, and it’s understandable too. I mean, this was a large defence contract that they were hoping to see through to completion, but it’s not going to happen that way – because of the Aukus arrangement. With respect to the next steps, well, the prime minister and the president will, you know, no doubt talk about those in subsequent conversations. But we’re thinking about how to build that partnership back, the areas of activity where we can continue to cooperate. France is an important player in the Indo-Pacific and our trading relationship is very important, worth nearly $8 billion a year. So there are opportunities for us going forward, but clearly there is real disappointment on the French side and there’s no hiding that. Here is the treasurer Josh Frydenberg on ABC. His job this week seems to be mopping up Morrison’s mess from across the pond. Just to recap, French president Emmanuel Macron says Morrison lied about backing out of the submarine deal. Morrison says he never lied. Host Michael Rowland: Do you believe Emmanuel Macron is lying? Somebody is not telling the truth here. Frydenberg: Well, the prime minister has made it very clear that he refutes those claims that have been made. He’s also said, in other statements, that the French knew that we were considering various options and that that contract wouldn’t necessarily meet our strategic and national interests. The partnership with Aukus ... hopefully will be a very fruitful and long-standing one in a broad range of areas. And so France and Australia again have been, historically, good friends and allies. And as you know, we have participated side by side with them in many activities, and we hope to continue to do so in the future. It’s a positive step forward that the prime minister and the French president have spoken, but there’s clearly a lot of work still to be done. Here are some more photos from Sydney airport this morning. Stay tuned while I google quote from Love Actually to add to these. Sydney airport has been a scene of tearful family reunions this morning, with Australians able to fly home and walk straight out of the airport for the first time in 583 days. As fully vaccinated passengers on the first flights from Singapore and Los Angeles walked into the arrivals terminal shortly after 6am, they were greeted by family members. In many cases, they had been separated for years – since before the pandemic began. Returning Australians were handed Tim Tams and hakea pincushion flowers as they made their way through a crowd of media. “I’ve got to get to my daughter, I’ve got to hold her,” one mother said as she pushed past reporters to embrace her daughter. They hugged for about a minute. Other passengers told Guardian Australia their Qantas flight from Los Angeles had only about 70 passengers. Here is Scott Morrison on his tense relationship with Emmanuel Macron, this morning: It will be some time, I think, to go down this process. But we’ve begun it. We’ve spoken several times over the last couple of days. I’m sure we’ll speak a bit more before I head back to Australia. But let me be very clear. The decision I have taken as prime minister, that my government has taken, was in Australia’s national interest. I don’t resile from it for one second. These decisions are difficult. Of course, it has caused disappointment and it has caused an impact on the relationship with France. But I’m not going to put that interest higher than Australia’s national interest, and I don’t think any Australian would expect me to do the same. There’s a lot of hugging happening at Sydney airport this morning … Speaking of the G20 conference, it has failed to produce much in the way of ambitious climate commitments, leaving Cop26 to do the heavy lifting. Connie Hedegaard, the host of the 2009 Copenhagen climate summit has told ABC radio she is disappointed with the results. Wait, did you say you would like to watch that full exchange via uncomfortably close iPhone footage? I got you! Here is Emmanuel Macron accusing Scott Morrison of lying: Now we cut to the reporter you can see filming in the background. Good morning, everyone! After two gruelling weeks of parliament with Amy Remeikis, it’s Matilda Boseley here back on deck, bringing you all the updates from Australia this morning. We start the blog at the airport, where after nearly 20 months, international travellers have been allowed to touch down in Sydney without quarantining for the first time. That’s right, the international border has opened (in Victoria and NSW at least) on a landmark day in Australia’s Covid-19 response. From Monday fully vaccinated Australian citizens and permanent residents will no longer have to undergo 14 days in hotel or home quarantine, so long as they provide a negative Covid-19 test within the 72 hours of departure and another 24 hours after arrival. Flights from Singapore, LA and Tokyo have already touched down in NSW and Victoria’s first plane from Singapore is due to land later this morning. Speaking of international travel, Scott Morrison has just finished up at the G20 in Rome and is on his way to Glasgow for the Cop26 climate conference. But his trip to Europe doesn’t seem to have mended Australia’s fractured relationship with France, with President Emmanuel Macron accusing Morrison of lying about Australia’s intentions to withdraw from the two country’s submarine contract. Here’s what he said to Australian reporters just hours ago: I think it’s very bad news for the credibility of Australia and very bad news. Great partnership we could have had with Australia. I had a direct discussion with prime minister Scott Morrison about this issue ... I mean, we have to unearth this common path and common values. But I think you can have disagreement. I do respect sovereign choices. But you have to respect allies and partners. And it was not the case with this dealing. Reporter: Do you think he lied to you? Macron: I don’t think. I know. OK, with that, why don’t we jump into the news of the day?There is certainly plenty going on!When the New York Jets needed one yard with two minutes left to secure a stunning 34-31 upset over the Cincinnati Bengals on Sunday, the football stayed in Mike White’s hands. It had to. White’s successful quarterback sneak was the perfect ending to a game that showcased how nothing in the NFL is certain. Two weeks ago, very few people outside of the Jets universe had even heard of White – quite frankly, I kept envisioning the former Raiders head coach. White erased any confusion over his identity with a brilliant performance, especially as far as Jets quarterbacks go. His 405 passing yards were the most by a Jets quarterback in 327 games. That dates back to the year 2000. His 37 completions (out of 45 attempts) are an NFL record for a player in his first start. White also tied Cam Newton as the only player to top 400 passing yards in his first start. White also magically brought the Jets back from a 10-point deficit on two separate occasions, including during the fourth quarter. And executed a Philly Special two-point conversion to give the Jets the late, decisive three-point lead. The fairytale of a player like White coming out of nowhere is why, despite its many troubles, the NFL continues to draw us in. White was drafted by the Dallas Cowboys in the fifth round of the 2018 draft. He lost a battle for the backup job behind Dak Prescott and was waived in 2019 when the team decided to carry just two quarterbacks. Then the Jets swooped in and signed White, though it’s been a rocky relationship. Since 2019, White has been cut four times, and signed and waived and re-signed and moved to the active roster 11 times. White’s performance led to the home fans at MetLife chanting his name. For now, the 26-year-old should enjoy the adulation – because the NFL has only a few examples of quarterbacks emerging from obscurity to sustained success. Kurt Warner famously quit football and stocked shelves at a grocery store when he was waived by the Packers before what would be a Hall of Fame career. But what makes Warner’s story so compelling is that it is the exception rather than the rule. Whatever White’s long-term merits turn out to be, the fact that he beat a team that were competing for the AFC No 1 seed heading into the weekend raises a serious question. How can the Jets go back to Zach Wilson, currently sidelined by injury? The Jets, of course, drafted Wilson as the No 2 overall pick this spring with the idea that he would be their quarterback of the future (and the present). While it’s still very early in Wilson’s career, it’s safe to say no one in Canton is thinking about fitting him for a gold jacket any time soon: he currently sits 32 out of 33 eligible quarterbacks in ESPN’s QBR rankings. Jets head coach Robert Saleh told reporters after the game that White will start for the Jets against the Colts on Thursday night. More telling, when asked if White could be the long-term solution at quarterback, Saleh replied: “Anything is possible.” Perhaps Saleh was merely caught up in the revelry after a resounding win and will need to backtrack for the sake of Wilson’s psyche. Or maybe White really did make the first step to winning the starter’s job on Sunday. Because, as he showed us, anything is possible in this league. MVP of the week Matthew Stafford, quarterback, Los Angeles Rams. Stafford continues to thrive under center on a Rams team overflowing with weapons and strong coaching. In Sunday’s 38-22 win over the Texans (which was much more of a blowout than the final score suggests), Stafford was nearly flawless with 305 yards and three passing touchdowns (without playing in the fourth quarter). It’s not just the great system Stafford entered, it’s his command of a complicated offense and his elite ability to read defenses. Exhibit A: By the end of the first quarter, Stafford had already surpassed Jared Goff’s touchdown total for the Rams last season. Video of the week Best Broncos pass of the season? Peyton Manning, who was inducted in the Broncos Ring of Honor on Sunday, showed he still has some life left in that arm after all. Stat of the week This week it was revealed that Dallas Cowboys receiver CeeDee Lamb has been fined by the NFL a whopping FIVE times in six games this season. That might lead you to conclude that Lamb has serious behavioral issues. But Lamb’s egregious crimes include: Having his jersey untucked ($5,510 v the Eagles; $15,450 v the Panthers). Failing to have his socks cover his lower leg ($5,510 v the Bucs in the season opener). Waving after his game-winning touchdown ($10,300 v the Patriots). Lamb was also fined for an illegal crackback block which, OK, is a fair penalty. But everything else? The NFL is loaded with examples of greed, but none may be more so than its list of fines. The pettiness of the league’s attempts to strip players of their individuality has been known for a while but seeing it manifest in fines like Lamb’s is a reminder of the ickiness. Quote of the week “I need to step away from football at this time and focus on my mental wellbeing” – Atlanta Falcons wide receiver Calvin Ridley. Ridley’s heartfelt explanation of his absence is the latest in a string of athletes being open about their mental health struggles. Just before Ridley released this statement, the NFL on Fox aired a riveting segment with Eagles tackle Lane Johnson about what it’s like to live with anxiety and depression. The more we see athletes as humans, the better. Elsewhere around the league • Trevor Siemian’s Saints beat Tom Brady’s Buccaneers 36-27. Let that simmer for a moment. Siemian hadn’t played since 2019. He beat Brady – Tom Freaking Brady – who has played almost nonstop for around 472 years. In fairness Siemian, who entered the game in the second quarter when Jameis Winston was injured, wasn’t as critical to the Saints’ win as White was for the Jets. But he played well enough in a tough situation, with 159 passing yards and a touchdown. It was the Bucs and Brady who shot themselves in the foot throughout. They committed 11 penalties (to the Saints’ two) including a taunting call on Devin White on third-down deep in the final quarter that kept the Saints alive and led to a go-ahead field goal. For his part, Brady lost a fumble and threw two interceptions, including a pick six that sealed the game for New Orleans. • Back to that Winston injury. It sounds like he could be out for a while. “I cried when I saw him coming in,” said Saints head coach Sean Payton. “It’s hard.” The injury came after a horse-collar tackle from former teammate Devin White. “I hate that this happened to you, man,” White told Winston after the injury. “Because you’re playing good ball and just praying for you.” • More backup quarterback heroics in Minnesota. Where Cooper Rush stepped in for the injured Dak Prescott and led the Dallas Cowboys to victory over the Vikings. Rush threw for 325 yards and led an impressive touchdown drive late in the game to secure a 20-16 victory. The Cowboys are now 6-1 this season and firmly in control of the NFC East. • Both San Francisco and Chicago entered Sunday with major questions at quarterback. The 49ers won 33-22, which doesn’t greatly matter since neither of these teams are shaping up as playoff contenders. But both Jimmy Garoppolo and Justin Fields gave performances that should please each fanbase. Garoppolo was efficient, decisive, and accurate. He ended the day with a very clean 322 passing yards (171 of which were to Deebo Samuel) and no turnovers. Even in a loss, this game may have been more monumental for Fields, who finally showed us his dynamic playmaking skills. Entering Sunday, the Bears had only designed eight run plays for Fields. Against San Francisco, Fields was let loose. He rushed for 103 yards and a score (on top of 175 passing yards). And in what felt like his true welcome to the NFL moment, Fields showcased his athleticism and instincts on an incredible touchdown run. • It was another tough day for anyone trying to understand the roughing the passer rule. Every week, without exception, there are flags thrown on questionable calls. A defender rolling over a quarterback to avoid his head. Or giving him a light shove to avoid deeper contact. Sunday saw some of the inverse, the non-calls. There was a very late hit on Mac Jones that was allowed to fly. More egregiously, Steelers kicker Chris Boswell, who had become a passer on a fake field-goal, was demolished by Browns DE Jordan Elliott on a clear roughing the passer that went unpenalized. Boswell had to go to the locker room to be evaluated for a concussion. Let’s please get some consistency. • Jaguars head coach (for now) Urban Meyer really said: “I didn’t see that coming,” after one of the biggest coaching shitshows you’ll ever see in the NFL. Among the highlights of the Jags’ 31-7 loss to the Seahawks were consecutive penalties for 12 men of the field. And when his team finally scored with less than two minutes remaining, Meyer kicked an extra point that was followed by an onside kick. Does he want to win or not?The world’s nations meeting at the Cop26 summit in Glasgow are tasked with dramatically ramping up action to tackle the climate emergency. But do their citizens back them? And does the UK, as host, have a strong public mandate to act? The evidence from dozens of recent opinion polls is overwhelming: yes. So who is worried? Most people, everywhere: the biggest ever opinion poll on climate change, for the UN Development Programme, found two-thirds saying it is a “global emergency”. Across 50 countries, a majority in every one agreed. Both the young and the old agreed: 69% of those aged 14-18 and 58% of those over 60, indicating there is not a huge generational divide. Another large poll, for the BBC, showed most people (56%) across 31 nations want their governments to set stronger targets to address climate change as quickly as possible, with 36% backing more gradual action, and just 8% opposing action. In the UK, Ipsos Mori found that 80% of people think the climate crisis is a global emergency, with the same proportion blaming human activity. Concern is rising fast: between 2016 and 2020, the proportion of people very or extremely worried about climate change jumped from about 20% to almost 60% among UK citizens over 35 years old, with those younger going from 30% to 70%. “The UK government can take heart from the very strong levels of public support for the goals of the Cop26 summit,” said Bridget Williams at Ipsos Mori. Across major European nations, anxiety about global heating is as high, or even higher than in the UK, YouGov polling shows. Is climate concern a worry that only the well-off can afford, as some opponents of climate action in the UK suggest? Absolutely not. A poll for Global Future found working class people are just as likely to be “highly worried” (43%) as the middle class (46%). The same poll did indicate a gender difference. For example, 40% of women said they had altered the food they ate to help combat climate change, compared with 27% of men. The UNDP poll also found significantly more women and girls were concerned about global heating in the UK, US, Australia and Canada, though not elsewhere. Those on the political left often report more climate concern than those on the right but, even in countries where climate change has become a very polarised issue, heavy majorities support action. In the US, for example, 75% of people support regulating CO2 as a pollutant, according to a survey by the Yale Program on Climate Change Communication. In the UK, work by WWF and Demos found levels of support for various climate actions changed little depending on party loyalty, as did polling for the New Economics Foundation. How worried are people? Climate change is the biggest concern for the public in the UK and Europe, ahead of Covid and the economy, according to recent research by SecNewgate, although it ranked significantly lower in the US, Australia and China. Another survey backed the high levels of concern in Europe, with 81% of EU citizens saying climate change was the biggest challenge humanity faces this century. A Yale poll found 66% of people in the US are worried about climate change. In the UK, most people (56%) believe that climate change will have a bigger impact on humanity than coronavirus, with the majority holding across all classes and genders, according to the polling by the Global Future. Britons do not think stark warnings about the climate crisis are alarmist: 69% say the threat is not exaggerated, found YouGov, compared to 17% who think it is. Other UK polls show climate change consistently ranking highly as an issue of concern, vying with the economy and health for the top spot. More than half of UK citizens said “drastic action” is needed, researchers at the Centre for Climate Change and Social Transformations (Cast) at Cardiff University found, with similar levels of concern in China and even higher levels in Brazil. “As world leaders discuss how they want to fulfil the international commitment to avoid the worst of the climate crisis, it is important to understand what citizens expect from their governments,” said Katharine Steentjes at Cast. “Policymakers should note that citizens expect their governments to take responsibility and [implement] effective climate action.” What action do people want? The UNDP poll, which surveyed over 1 million people around the world, found the most popular actions to tackle the climate crisis were protecting and restoring forests, renewable energy and climate-friendly farming. In nations where fossil fuels are a major part of the economy, people strongly supported renewable energy, including the US (65% in favour), Australia (76%) and Russia (51%). However, while 65% of Saudi Arabians believe there is a climate emergency, only 30% support stopping burning fossil fuels. Where the destruction of forests is a big cause of emissions, people supported conservation of trees, with 60% support in Brazil and 57% in Indonesia. In the UK, the biggest analysis of climate policy preferences ever published in UK, found backing for a carbon tax on polluting industries, higher levies on flying and grants for heat pumps. WWF and Demos asked 22,000 people to choose their favoured mix of policies to hit emissions cuts targets and they also supported a speed limit of 60mph on motorways and a campaign to reduce meat eating by 10%. All the policies had between 77% and 94% public support. Recent YouGov polls also recently asked Britons about climate action: when taking into account the costs and possible disruption, 84% supported subsidies to make houses more energy-efficient. An earlier YouGov/Sky Survey found 50% backed higher air taxes and banning the sale of petrol and diesel cars in 2030. The UK’s Office for National Statistics found that one in four people purchasing a new car in the next year said they would choose an electric or plug-in hybrid. Governments often shy away from action that targets people’s behaviour, but a large survey across the UK and Europe for the European Investment Bank found more than 70% support for imposing changes on people’s behaviour to fight climate change. “These demands from the public are a clear mandate to strengthen our efforts and accelerate the green transition,” said EIB’s Ambroise Fayolle. Even in the US, 60% say they are willing to drive and fly less, or already do, and 51% to eat less meat. But don’t most people object when action, such as a wind farm, is planned in their backyard? The polling indicates not. Renewable energy is popular – 79% support in a UK government poll. Another poll, in the UK and nine European countries, found 67% of people supportive of the construction of an onshore wind farm near to where they live, even in rural areas. In contrast 65% of Europeans would oppose the construction of a new nuclear power station near their home. A separate poll found those already living within five miles of a windfarm were just as supportive (70%) as those who did not. Cutting meat consumption in rich nations is vital to beating the climate emergency but is seen as one of the most controversial policies. However, in the UK, 70% of people agree they should definitely or probably do eat less meat, according to data from the Centre For Climate Change And Social Transformations, and Britons have already cut down by 17% in the last decade. Nonetheless, the promotion of plant-based diets was the least popular of the 18 policies in the global UNDP survey, with only 30% support, and the idea of a higher taxes on meat was last in a UK Ipsos Mori poll of eight policies, albeit with 47% support. Other research has shown that 80% of people in the UK and US would be open to eating meat grown from cells in a factory. Another idea seen as controversial is taxing motorists per mile that they drive. This has been proposed in the UK as one way of replacing the £37bn-a-year tax revenue from petrol and diesel sales as more people take up electric cars. But a survey for the Social Market Foundation found 40% in favour, with 26% opposed. But what about the cost of action? The UK public is much more worried about the costs of inaction on climate change, according to Opinium polling, rather than the costs of action. More than half (55%) said we can’t afford not to implement climate change policies, compared with 21% saying that is unaffordable. “You still need funding to reduce up-front costs, but the view that normal voters won’t wear action on climate belongs to 2001 not 2021,” said the pollster Steve Akehurst. Almost three-quarters (72%) of Britons say green products are too expensive for those on lower incomes, according to an Ipsos Mori poll. But they also think those people should be protected. The consensus of the 22,000 people participating in the WWF-Demos work was a suite of policies leaving people earning under £22,000 a year better off, thanks to redistribution of a carbon tax and savings on heating and car bills. Tax rises to fight climate change found support in a Savanta ComRes poll, with 67% of UK citizens saying that would be acceptable, and only 22% saying the reverse. Just over half of UK people (51%) believe the household cost of tackling global heating will be larger than any savings from things like lower heating and petrol bills over one year, but they expect the trade-off to be more favourable in 10 years’ time. “Britons seem to be prepared for hair shirts. They just don’t want to wear them forever,” the Economist concluded. Who has the most responsibility for fixing climate change? In the UK, 34% put the most responsibility on the government, compared with the general public (26%) and businesses (19%), according to the government’s own data. But YouGov polling shows only 13% of people think politicians are genuinely interested in tackling the climate emergency. Instead, most thought politicians were only trying to maintain a positive public image for themselves (68%). Surveys in the UK and nine other European countries found only 18% of people thought their government was doing “all they realistically can to tackle climate change”. Another large European survey found 58% believing their country would fail to drastically reduce its CO2 emissions by 2050. There is strong support for the Cop26 goals among UK citizens, according to Ipsos Mori research, but low confidence that the government will deliver on climate. Over half (55%) are not confident that the government will take the actions needed in the next few years, compared with 40% that are confident. What can we conclude? In summary, there is strong and widespread support for climate action and equally strong scepticism that governments will fail to deliver. The opportunity for leaders at Cop26 is, therefore, to confound people’s expectations and give them what they want. “The voice of the people is clear – they want action on climate change,” said Cassie Flynn at the UNDP.Eddie Jones has always felt like an outsider, and still does. “An Australian coaching in England rugby,” the England rugby head coach tells me in the latest episode of Life Lessons: From Sport and Beyond. “In Japan, half-Japanese – you’re an outsider.” Born in Tasmania to a Japanese-American mother and Australian father, as a boy he lived in La Perouse, a south-eastern Sydney suburb. There were around 30 children in his school class. “Twenty-six Anglo-Saxons, three aboriginal kids and myself.” Jones’s mother would make him take presents whenever he visited someone else’s house, a Japanese custom he found uncomfortable. “Other people could never understand why that was done. So, you were different.” Growing up feeling like an odd-man-out helped to shape Jones’s eventual career choices. “I wanted to be good at sport, because I wanted to be part of something.” Rugby was his ticket in. While he was not physically imposing – estimates of Jones’s height vary from 5ft 3in to a somewhat unlikely 5ft 8in – he had other skills, including a talent for sledging. “I would be quite fast with my lip, so there was a role for me to play in the team.” While Jones played against the British &amp; Irish Lions for New South Wales B in 1989, he never made it into Australia’s first team. Some have suggested that was a chastening experience that left a mark and a point to prove. As a coach, he has led teams to two Rugby World Cup finals, the first with Australia in 2003, when his side were pipped by Sir Clive Woodward’s England. “That defeat was easier to take than 2019 [when England lost against South Africa],” Jones admits, adding that, while he doesn’t like to lose, “if we played close to our best and got beaten that would have been easier to accept.” As a leader, Jones prides himself on his observational skills, which he admits were borne of that feeling of not quite fitting in while growing up. That prompts the question, what has he observed about English culture that surprises him? “How complicated and complex it is, and I’m still trying to work it out,” he says. “England has a history as a colonial power, and now people are trying to dissociate themselves from that. “There’s a bit of a small-island mentality. And I see that in Japan as well, where people don’t want to offend each other. They really want to get on and sometimes, that can make relationships quite difficult because it’s harder for people to be honest. And the thing that strikes me is how often English people say, ‘to be honest’ or ‘to be fair’. Why? What else would you be? “There’s a desire to be polite and fit in with what’s going on in the moment. Until alcohol comes into it. Alcohol has a remarkable change on behaviour here, more so than even [with] Australians.” Having spent time coaching and living in Australia, Japan, and England, Jones believes there is one Japanese habit that could enrich English culture. “One of the customs I really like in Japan – and my [Japanese] wife’s really big on it – is that wherever you go, you have got to leave that area better than it was. It’s such a harmonious and simple thing to do that’s better for society. If you go to a park, don’t leave it in worse condition. Leave it in a better condition.” When Jones was first given the England job, there were some who said he would be a short‑term appointment; the sort of person to get quick results before burning out. Jones has been there nearly six years now, through ups and downs including the dismal fifth‑place finish in the Six Nations last season. His hardline methods have been controversial and at times divisive, and there has been high turnover rate among the coaching staff. But Jones insists he wants his players to know he cares about them, and that he’s trying to move them – and subsequently the team – to a better place, via an “arm around the shoulder” or “a couple of tough words”. Jones has also been quick to dispense with the services of several stalwarts who have served him well throughout his English tenure. Several big names have been cast aside for the autumn internationals including the Vunipola brothers Billy and Mako, George Ford and Jamie George. A new generation featuring players such as Marcus Smith, Louis Lynagh and Sam Simmonds have been given the opportunity to spearhead Jones’s next crack at the World Cup. When asked recently to nominate his top five career moments, Jones left one place clear for the 2023 World Cup final in France. He has confirmed he will stand down after that tournament, by which time he will have been the country’s longest‑serving head coach. Jones insists his priority is to ensure England are better off than when he was brought in. “The main thing for me is how I leave England. I want to make sure I leave England always thinking they should be top three in the world. That will be a job well done.” When I point out how that chimes in with the Japanese trait of seeking to leave a place better off that when you arrived, Jones pauses. “I’ve never actually thought about it like that. But that’s true.” • Simon Mundie hosts the Life Lessons: From Sport and Beyond podcast, available to download on all major podcast platforms.On 4 August 2020, Fouad Elkoury was sitting in his home in Beirut when an enormous explosion at the port shattered his windows and blasted through his living room. Miraculously, the Lebanese photographer survived but his home was destroyed, along with those of an estimated 300,000 others. “When you go through such an explosion,” he says, “first, your memory disappears. Second, your hearing is ruined. And third, you stop planning. Things are so big, you realise you are nothing. This is where I am at the moment.” One of Lebanon’s foremost photographers, Elkoury came to international recognition with his intimate photographs documenting life during the Lebanese civil war in Beirut in the 1970s and early 80s. Travelling in the years following the conflict, he found himself aboard the ship carrying Yasser Arafat during the 1982 Israeli invasion of Lebanon. He created Atlantis, a nautical series of images featuring the Palestinian leader. Typical Elkoury shots juxtapose the personal and the political, producing images that imbue scenes of everyday life with the heavy resonance of their often traumatic histories. They include Portemilio, Lebanon, 1984 – a black and white image of sunbathers reclining by a fountain at a holiday resort north of Beirut, while the year the image was taken reminds the viewer that, a few miles out of the frame, conflict was raging. In Changing the Wheel, two well-dressed men stare imposingly into the lens while their driver replaces a tyre. It’s not just a microcosm of social hierarchies – in the background, you can see the blasted-out shells of Beirut high rises. Life and its rituals go on, Elkoury shows, even amid the chaos. We are speaking by phone, since Elkoury has spent the past year relocated at his family’s “mountain house” in the countryside, where the electricity and the internet are unreliable. Despite having spent much of his life on the move, initially coming to London as a young man to study as an architect, the past two years have seen him grounded, with his work reaching a new audience online, largely via the popular Instagram account Middle East Archive. Founded by Romaisa Baddar, MEA reposts historical images of the region, and has just released its debut photography book, comprising Elkoury’s shots of Oman, Palestine, Egypt and Lebanon from 1980 to 1997. “When Romaisa approached me, I told her I didn’t have much energy,” says Elkoury. “For two months after the explosion, I couldn’t do anything because I was so traumatised. I would rather stay alone and think for myself than be on Instagram looking at pictures of what people are eating.” Yet Baddar persisted and Elkoury finally relented. The result is an intriguing collection of Elkoury’s lesser-known, optimistic work, from a horse rider in the middle of a busy road talking with someone through a car window (Jerusalem, 1993), to a man in a coat leaping wildly in a bid to stop a kid from scoring a goal during an impromptu football match (Gaza, 1994). The book, also called Middle East Archive, is full of this quiet poetry of everyday life: no matter the geopolitical context, Elkoury is saying, kids still play football. Is that the winning ball of the match? We will never know. The book, explains Baddar, is intended as a corrective for the usual depictions of the Middle East. “The Arab world has been framed mainly through suffering, when that is not all these places stand for,” she says. “I want to show the region in its true essence and Instagram is a place where me and a lot of people of my age get informed. So it felt important to display something far more joyous than what you would see if you just Google the Middle East.” Elkoury does not, however, see his work as a mere journalistic documentation. “If my images just show the event happening in front of me,” he says, “the meaning of it will die when the event dies. For my pictures to be preserved in time, they had to be more symbolic.” Shooting his first images with a camera pilfered from his father’s desk drawer at the age of six, Elkoury took a circuitous route into professional photography, initially becoming an architect. But a return to Beirut in 1979 coincided with the chaos of the civil war and he began photographing his surroundings again. “The war was raging and there was nothing else to do but take pictures,” he says. “I was scared of the conflict so, rather than head to the frontlines, I concentrated on what constituted life during the war.” This focus on the personal in a time of massive upheaval is a recurring theme in his work, most notably in his 2006 series On War and Love. Here, text is written directly on to his images of unmade beds, bathroom mirrors and sunlit walls, creating a startling combination of a diaristic account of a breakup with the ongoing conflict in Beirut. Just as his lover is absent from the images, so are the usual bombastic depictions of war. That series formed part of Lebanon’s first pavilion at the 2007 Venice Biennale, where Elkoury again exhibited earlier this year with a new series accompanying works by Lebanese-American poet and artist Etel Adnan. “I’m continually surprised by the fact that respectable museums want to display and purchase my work,” Elkoury says. “I photograph where I live and what I see and feel and there’s not more to it.” His search for sincerity has seen Elkoury immersing himself in the places he has chosen to photograph. “Usually when I travel to a country, I stay for some time – like in Palestine I stayed two and a half years. I don’t travel for five days. I stay, I rent a house or flat and slowly get to know the atmosphere and the mentality of the city. It is interesting to immerse oneself in a country. But at the same time, it is quite a dangerous move because you often fall into things you didn’t recognise.” He pauses. “It’s incredible that I’m still alive. I could have died six or seven times, just being in places I shouldn’t have been in.” Elkoury shoots on film. Right now, there is a pile of rolls waiting to be taken to town and developed. The images they contain document a therapy of sorts, one he embarked upon after that fateful explosion last year. Those rolls record the walks he has been taking through the mountains around him. The act of taking these photographs – of returning to his craft – have aided his recovery. “Nature seems to be the only soothing element,” he says. “It provides eternity.” Middle East Archive is out now.As world leaders descend on Glasgow for vital United Nations Cop26 climate talks, seen as one of the last chances to prevent environmental breakdown, they will try their utmost to be seen to be taking action. But when it comes to the data, where do the biggest polluters really stand? To help get a clearer picture, the Guardian has created data profiles for individual countries, using the most recent available data from the UN, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), IEA Statistics and Climate Action Tracker (CAT). The information is broken down into five key categories: total greenhouse gas emissions, greenhouse gas emissions per capita, modern renewables share in final energy consumption, any current net zero target and CAT rating. At the top of the leaderboard for total emissions is China, which is rated “highly insufficient” by CAT, and has a net zero target of “before 2060”. And in second place is the US, which in 2019 emitted 19.77 tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent per capita of greenhouse gases. The UK, co-host of Cop26, is rated “almost sufficient” by CAT, but despite being home to the world’s largest offshore wind energy market, in 2019 its renewable energy share was only 12.2% – considerably lower than the overall EU figure of 18.2% and far behind other European countries including the other co-host Italy (17.3%), Portugal (28.2%) and Norway (62.4%). Meanwhile, big polluters Russia, Iran and Saudi Arabia, none of which have set net zero targets, were among those classed as “critically insufficient”.It’s time to acknowledge a difficult truth: our democracies are failing us on the climate crisis. As world leaders meet for the crucial Glasgow summit, rhetorical commitments abound. But no government has a plan compatible with the goal that they have all agreed is critical to our collective future: limiting global average temperature rises to 1.5C. In some democracies, such as the UK, there is at least a consensus that something must be done; in others, such as Australia, Canada and the US, political debate rages over the most fundamental questions. Faced with a problem of these proportions, some are running out of patience. The veteran Earth scientist James Lovelock puts his faith in eco-authoritarianism. Climate change is so severe, he has said, that “it may be necessary to put democracy on hold for a while”. Lovelock may state this explicitly, but in my many years of work on climate policy and politics, I have been struck by how often people make the same argument implicitly. Bill Gates, in his breathlessly upbeat book How to Avoid a Climate Disaster, describes how enlightened investment strategies from well-meaning entrepreneurs could save the day. No need to bother, he implies, with winning hearts, minds or votes. Then there are those who look approvingly towards China, a country where the very lack of democratic accountability, they argue, allows leaders to take tough and unpopular decisions. The common theme in all these accounts is that the public are not to be trusted – they do not understand, or care; they are too selfish, or too shortsighted. Better to let the experts decide. Yet proposals for some sort of eco-authoritarianism raise more questions than they answer. How, exactly, do we move beyond democracy? Who appoints the experts? Scientists may have evidence at their disposal, but how would they make deeply social decisions about who wins and who loses? Under whose authority would they regulate, and how exactly would that regulation happen – how would laws be made? The best that can be said about these proposals is that they gloss over the complex realities of political, social and legal change. There’s also the fact that authoritarian states have not performed better, historically. A recent study by the University of Gothenburg’s V-Dem Institute showed that autocratic regimes lag significantly on climate action. Given the economic and political might of China, we have to hope that they find a way to buck this trend – but it would be reckless, not to mention ethically dubious, to suggest China as a political role model on climate. Despite the considerable flaws in our democratic systems, the alternatives crumble under any sort of close inspection. It is hard to disagree with Churchill’s pithy summary that “democracy is the worst form of government, except for all the others”. My experience leads me to a very different conclusion to that of the eco-authoritarians. The data just doesn’t support the picture of an uncaring or uninformed public. Research consistently shows high levels of concern about climate change, across different ages, demographic groups and parts of the world. Yet this concern is coupled with a deep mistrust in government and political elites, and a breakdown in the means by which people’s priorities are translated into political action. To generalise, we have a population that is cynical yet concerned about the climate, frustrated with the inability of politicians to act decisively in the face of growing climate impacts. Could it be that the problem here is not too much democracy, but too little? What if we were to begin with the assumption that people can and do make sensible decisions if they have the evidence and the influence that they need? That if we designed a meaningful dialogue between citizens, experts and governments, we would get better outcomes? Just before Covid-19 struck last year, I was part of an incredible experiment that did just this. Climate Assembly UK was a citizens’ assembly commissioned by parliament, bringing together a representative group of 108 citizens. Over a series of weekends, they learned about climate science, impacts and action; discussed and debated with experts and each other; and then voted on recommendations. The assembly’s findings are a coherent, far-reaching set of proposals for tackling the climate emergency – created by a different sort of democratic body. Processes such as this aren’t intended to replace our system of representative democracy, but to make it work better. They allow citizens and politicians alike to talk about what they need from each other. Citizens’ assemblies on the climate crisis have now taken place in Scotland, France, Denmark and some US states, as well as at a local level in many areas. They show the potential of a move to a more deliberative democracy – one which goes beyond the blunt instrument of a vote, toward an informed conversation. But making democracy work better for the climate doesn’t just mean hearing more from people. It means hearing less from those economic interests, such as oil majors and airlines, that have a stake in the high-carbon status quo. We’ve recently seen corporations suing governments under trade law, claiming that climate policy, passed by democratically elected parliaments, has damaged their profits and is therefore illegal. US scientist Michael Mann has documented this “new climate war”. He shows that denial of the scientific facts of climate change has been replaced with more complex, but equally insidious, attempts to delay or derail legislation. A key tactic, Mann shows, is to deflect attention away from the workings of big companies, and towards individuals, by saying that it is up to each of us to make the right choices, and reduce our carbon footprint. When this doesn’t happen, it is a short step to blaming people for the state we are in, and undermining faith in the ability of democracies to handle the climate crisis. What is necessary, then, is not to dispense with democracy, but to double down on it. Seeing climate change not as something that can be solved by experts, nor through individual sacrifices – but by the negotiation of a new sort of social contract between people and the state. The novelist Amitav Ghosh refers to our current climate predicament as a “great derangement”, a collective reluctance to face up to the reality of how the crisis will affect our lives. Pretending that we can bypass people and democracy is, to my mind, the ultimate derangement. • Rebecca Willis is a professor of energy and climate governance at the University of Lancaster, and the author of Too Hot to Handle? The Democratic Challenge of Climate Change. Further reading The New Climate War: The Fight to Take Back Our Planet, by Michael Mann, 2021 (Scribe, £16.99) The Great Derangement: Climate Change and the Unthinkable, by Amitav Ghosh (University of Chicago, £11.50), 2016 How to Avoid A Climate Disaster: The Solutions We Have and the Breakthroughs We Need by Bill Gates (Allen Lane, £20).The groundswell of disgust over water firms dumping raw human sewage into England’s rivers and seas has grown into a roiling tsunami threatening to overwhelm the government. By their own confession, water companies say they dumped untreated sewage into English water bodies more than 400,000 times last year, for a total of about 3.1m hours. As shocking as that seems, you can safely assume this figure grossly underplays the true picture because not all sewage discharges are recorded, and because the sector is allowed to self-report its spills, a practice that begs to be abused. Take a look at Southern Water, which was fined £90m for repeatedly and deliberately dumping raw sewage into seas along the south coast, while misreporting its performance to the regulator, the Environment Agency. Or you could ask the data scientist who has calculated that Thames Water may not be reporting 95% of its illegal dirty discharges. For its part, Thames Water says it will look carefully at the findings and stresses that it regards all untreated sewage discharges as unacceptable. So how did we get into this mess? When water companies’ sewerage infrastructure is overwhelmed by sewage and rainwater, it is dumped into rivers and on to beaches via combined sewer overflow pipes, rather than allowing it to back up and cause flooding. In many cases it’s not illegal because the Environment Agency issues the firms with permits allowing the discharges on condition that it only happens under “exceptional circumstances” when there is heavy rainfall – and only then if the water company is already treating a specified volume of sewage. But companies are dumping with such appalling regularity, and during dry weather, that the term “exceptional” has lost all meaning. But when called out over the horrific pollution, the sector and the Environment Agency simply point at the creaking infrastructure they inherited from the Victorians, perhaps not realising that in doing so they’re demonstrating just how overdue an upgrade to the system is. It hardly needs saying, but there are around 27 million more people in the UK now than at the end of the Victorian era, so you’d think someone somewhere might have thought about the extra sewerage capacity needed to cope with that. Apparently not. Since privatisation, the water sector has paid out billions of pounds in dividends and director salaries and bonuses, and although it has invested in water treatment it has not found the cash to stop the rampant pollution. Given that the financial regulator, Ofwat, has not seen fit to force them to end it, can we really blame them? They have fiduciary duty to their shareholders, after all. I’m kidding: of course we can blame them, but the regulators and successive governments are also at fault. The half-starved Environment Agency, with its budget repeatedly slashed, is reduced to accepting whatever figures the industry supplies to it rather than play the role of fearsome watchdog. By its own admission, aside from the occasional prosecution, it can’t take on polluters with paltry resources, despite the best efforts of its remaining frontline staff. Meanwhile, the population keeps growing, rainfall intensifies, and all across the country ugly pipes continue to spew their nauseating contents into our waters, choking wildlife and infuriating water users. Fish die, beaches are closed, rivers run rich with effluent. But things could be about to change – because the water sector’s dirty little secret is now exposed, thanks to the hard graft of campaigners who have refused to stop banging on about it and lockdown-enforced staycations focusing more people’s minds on the state of the UK’s coastlines and rivers. So what is the government planning to do about it? Initially, not much. But public pressure is a powerful thing and the furore of recent days has embarrassed the government into making a number of changes to the environment bill that is currently making its way through parliament. It is keen to show it is serious about tackling sewage pollution now everyone knows it’s happening. Over the past few months, the government has been dragged from its position that giving the water firms a stern ticking off was all that was needed, to reluctantly adding amendments to the bill requiring it to make plans to reduce discharges; though these changes are lacking targets or timelines to make the reforms concrete. More recently, as part of a parliamentary ping-pong, the House of Lords demanded stronger action, adding their own amendment to the bill which would place a duty on “sewerage undertakers to take all reasonable steps to ensure untreated sewage is not discharged from storm overflows into inland and coastal waters”. In response, the government has said it intends to table its own amendment that would place a direct legal duty on water companies to “progressively reduce the impacts of sewage pollution from storm overflows”. You’ll notice that “reducing the impacts of sewage pollution” is not the same as saying it will require the sector to stop it entirely. The devil, as always, will be in the detail. The difference this time around is that everyone is watching. Rachel Salvidge is an environmental journalist and deputy editor of the ENDS ReportHave the spare cash Inflation is running at 3.1%, and finding a savings account paying above that is impossible. But many experts claim you can reasonably expect investments to grow by about 4% a year after fees are taken into account, or more if the stock market has a strong run. If you invested £50 a month for 10 years and enjoyed a 3.9% return, you would end up with £7,348, according to investment firm Fidelity. That’s growth of £1,348 on your contributions. Carry on for 20 years and your profit rises to £6,193. If you are in it for the very long term, and are lucky, your returns may be supercharged thanks to the power of compounding. Like a snowball rolling down a hill, your investment earns returns, and those gains are reinvested and start earning returns, too. However, remember investing means taking some risk – it’s possible investments could fall in value, so this isn’t for everyone. First, you need some cash set aside for emergencies, so allocate some of your savings to that. It’s also vital to tackle any expensive debt, such as credit or store cards, before diving into the stock market. Assess your risk Before choosing where to put your money, decide on your risk profile. In other words: how comfortable are you with seeing the value of your investments fall? As a rule, the sooner you need your money, the less risk you should take. Online investment providers designed for self-starters, such as Nutmeg, Evestor, Wealthify, and sustainable investment provider Clim8, simplify this. Pick from a few investment options, rather than thousands of funds, after the providers have asked basic questions about your preferences and goals to match you to suitable options. Start small Investing a small amount every month is a great way to get started. You could, say, kick off with £25 a month into a single fund, although some providers will accept contributions from as little as £1. Regular investing will help to iron out the highs and lows of the market. You buy more shares when the stock market is performing poorly and the price is lower, and fewer when their value rises. You can invest a lump sum, too, if you have some cash savings you want to put to work in the stock market, for example, but this is a higher risk strategy as you might be buying at the top of the market. Pick funds Rather than buying shares in individual companies, funds are a good option for beginners. They hold a range of different companies, so you don’t have all your eggs in one basket. “When it comes to choosing funds, I think of personal investors in three broad camps: ‘choose for me’, ‘help me choose’ and ‘I’ll choose myself’,” says Tom Stevenson, investment director at Fidelity International. Many investment websites offer best-buy fund lists put together by experts, including Hargreaves Lansdown’s Wealth Shortlist, and Interactive Investor’s Super 60. There are two main fund types: index trackers and active funds. Trackers, also known as passive funds, follow a particular market index such as the FTSE 100. They typically return the average of the market they invest in, and, as there is no one choosing the investments, they are the cheaper option. Active funds are usually more expensive as they have a manager who chooses the shares they hold, aiming to beat the market. You can pick from thousands of funds, such as those focusing on, for example, sustainable investments, smaller companies or emerging markets. Holding a range of funds spreads your money and protects you from market falls. If one company falls in value, hopefully another will rise. Go ready-made If you don’t know where to start, you could go for a single, ready-made fund that holds investments from around the world. Interactive Investor has a list of six quick-start funds. “These are well-diversified, multi-asset portfolios that are very competitively priced,” says Moira O’Neill, its head of personal finance. They include Vanguard’s LifeStrategy funds, each investing in thousands of global companies. Alternatively, there are model portfolios on investment websites. These include a mix of some of the most popular funds and can be used as a template to build your own portfolio. AJ Bell Youinvest offers four ready-made options, tailored to whether you are cautious, balanced, adventurous or seeking income. Check charges Watch out for fees, as these can really eat into your returns. Investment providers either charge a percentage fee, based on how much you invest, or a fixed fee. Comparetheplatform.com offers a simple calculator to help you find the most appropriate and cheapest provider. “A percentage charge is better for portfolios up to £50,000, and Vanguard is the cheapest but has a limited selection of investments,” says Bella Caridade-Ferreira, the chief executive of Comparetheplatform. If you are investing a larger lump sum, you will be better off with Interactive Investor, which charges £9.99 a month, including one free trade a month, she adds. As your investment grows, charges stay the same with a flat fee. You’ll pay for your investments on top of this fee, and to buy and sell funds. Average charges on active funds are about 0.75%, which, on top of a 0.25% service fee, brings the total to 1% a year. Use your Isa allowance Wrapping your investments in a stocks and shares Isa means you won’t pay tax on profits, or need to include them on your tax return. This tax year you can invest up to £20,000 in an Isa wrapper. You can invest all, or some, of your allowance in a stocks and shares Isa, and hold any investments you wish. Stay invested Investing can be a bumpy ride, but it generally pays to hold your nerve. You need a time frame of at least five years, ideally far longer. If you can sit tight through market falls your investments may bounce back and go on to be worth more. “Great years can often follow terrible ones,” says Richard Hunter, head of markets at Interactive Investor. “In 1974 the UK was beset by recession, a miners’ strike, three-day weeks and an oil crisis – the FTSE All Share tanked 55%. The following year it rose by 140%.” If you want further help before investing, seek assistance from a financial adviser, but you will need to pay. You can find one local to you online on Unbiased or VouchedFor.The first lockdown, my family did medium-to-spicy well. It was me, my husband Mark, [my daughter] Tash and her boyfriend, Oliver. When the kids were fleeing university in London, and Tash said, “Is it OK if Oliver and I come down?” Mark and I said, “Of course!” – thinking that they would be down for three weeks at the most, like a long school holiday. Five months later, they were still there. We were very fortunate to be in Cornwall, in the country – we had more space than some people. We’re a hop, skip and a jump from the water. There’s a ferocious beauty to the Cornish coast. There’s the gorgeous beaches, but then there are the crags and the rocks. There’s something gently brutal about it. I surrendered to the land at a certain point: OK, I’m in exile here. I can’t get back to the States, because I don’t know if I can get back [into the UK] if I go. If I can’t get back to Mark and Tash, then I’m going to evaporate. Because they are the reason I wake up in the morning. By the third lockdown, however, in January of this year, I was not at my best. I was grieving not playing live for the longest time in my life, not doing what musicians do. There isn’t the spiritual ceremony of the collaboration with a live audience. We’re talking about a voltage that I can’t achieve by myself. That was gone, and there was no way to recreate that. The closest thing was to go to the ocean and feel when the tides are coming in and hitting those rocks. Yes, the sea can be calm and gentle, but when the gales are blowing, my goodness – now that’s voltage. I became despondent and sad, and filled with loss. You’re trying to find different coping mechanisms at 50-some years old, and sometimes not even realising that that’s what you’re needing to do. And that’s where the songwriting began. The muses said to me: “Write from where you are. And where you are is on your knees in a grief and a sadness. You have to start from there.” It was my own private little hell that I had to write myself out of. At first, I wrote from the chair I was sitting in, because I couldn’t get out of it – [I didn’t have] the energy that it took. I was able to make dinner with Tash. It was something we would share. But Mark gave up on trying to coax me into the studio. I don’t need to be by an instrument to write; it’s just not necessary – it is at a certain point, once I’m exploring the structures that I’ve thought in my head, but I needed to get out of this lethargy. The song Metal Water Wood came first. I was trying to combat this force of despondency, loss – a quagmire of “What is this that’s zapping us, almost stealing our life force?” I started reading about Bruce Lee. I don’t know why I was drawn to him. The muses take me to places sometimes, and it doesn’t necessarily make linear sense. But he said: “Be like water.” As a fire being, as a fire creature, that was almost as if I was betraying the element that has always gotten me through stuff before. Once it was wintertime and I started going out into the land, I began to realise I needed to do it more and more. In that act of engaging with it, it began showing me, it began collaborating with me, with the songs. And the muses, of course, were there. I had to say: “OK, I know I’m a guest here, but will you share your secrets with me?” And the land said to me: “Are you worthy? What are you going to do with these secrets, Tori? Will you honour them? Or are you going to bend them to suit your own needs? Or are you going to be really honest, that this has broken you?” And I said: “I’m not the mom I want to be. I’m not the wife I want to be. I’m not the artist I want to be.” And they immediately rolled their eyes and said: “Oh, please stop with the dramatic postmenopausal crap.” I want to step out of it, but you have to sometimes admit you’re not there. You’re in the middle of a complex conundrum. My mom passed away a couple of years ago. People talk about stages of grief. And sometimes you have to say: “You know, I miss my mom. And she’s not here, and I can’t call her. And she would know what to say.” And then Tash finally walks in the room: “OK, I need my mom back. I’m sorry you don’t have your mom. I’m really sorry. And I miss grandma. But I need my mom.” Jesus. Then you go: “OK, I have to stop being the child missing her mother.” When I was a child, I would travel by listening to the Beatles’ work and then playing it at the piano. The music was able to take me to anywhere in the universe. If the music was right, I could jump on that sonic spaceship and go. And I had to relearn that skill, but the trick this time was I needed to write a song in order to try and find my mom, Mary. She’s in Speaking with Trees and Flowers Burn to Gold. People have said to me: “I’m not trying to shame you, T, but you had a mother who had unconditional love. You’ve experienced that. What a gift. Can you hold on to that gift? She runs through your veins too, so if you can channel the songs, can’t you channel her?” And, God, that left me speechless. The playwright Samuel Adamson, who I worked with on The Light Princess, sent me a message. He’s such an amazing writer. He said: “I just had a vision. And I have to tell you, Cornwall’s protecting you.” I thought, What? And he said: “I’m just giving you a message. I know this to be true. She’s protecting you. She’s keeping you safe.” And I felt, OK, then I need to keep her safe. Not that she needs protecting in that way, but her stories. I need to give something back to this majestic, compassionate energy. The way to reflect that energy was a collaboration with the land, the water and the muses. Trying to give people a glimpse of this essence that I’ve spent 18 months with. The mythology of Cornwall feels alive. It doesn’t feel in the past. If you squint your eyes and don’t look at the cafe on your right, but look around you, there’s something so ancient about it. You can kid yourself that Sir Gawain and the Green Knight are going to show up any moment or Ragnelle is going to show herself. There is a sense of being protected by something so ancient. I had to allow it into my bones. • As told to Annie Zaleski. Tori Amos’s new album, Ocean to Ocean, is out now on Decca.It’s expected that the Bank of England will begin to increase interest rates this month or next to tackle rising inflation. Interest rates are currently at a historic low of 0.1%. We would like to understand more about the impact any increase may have on household finances.. Do you have concerns about your mortgage or debt repayments? Or perhaps a rise will help with savings? Or is there another reason why you will be keenly watching for the Bank’s decision? Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.World leaders must commit to actions rather than promises, renewable energy rather than fossil fuels, and future security rather than present consumption, according to hundreds of messages from Guardian readers and supporters submitted to the Cop26 climate summit. As policymakers gather in Glasgow for the two-week summit, readers and supporters called for rapid divestment from fossil fuels, deeper investment in renewable energy and regenerative agriculture, and an end to the fixation on GDP as a measure of progress in society. The summit, which culminates on 12 November, will consider concrete cuts to carbon emissions, following the 2015 Paris agreement in which nations pledged to keep global temperature rises to “well below” 2C above pre-industrial levels. A callout asking readers and supporters what messages they would like to impress on world leaders as they head to Glasgow elicited more than 800 submissions from around the world. Hundreds of respondents implored leaders to think about future generations and the burden they will bear as a cost of inaction. Readers emphasised the need for people in richer countries to adapt their ways of living, while a number of messages urged world leaders to understand that the summit is humanity’s “last chance” to implement meaningful climate solutions. A sample of responses follows. ‘We need world leaders to commit to taking drastic action and to actually do it’ “I live on the Caribbean island of Trinidad and Tobago. We, like the rest of the Caribbean, are paying the price for climate change even though we have contributed very little to it. Storms, droughts, rising seas – my children are going to suffer, not only for things you did but for the things you have avoided doing: reducing emissions and taking drastic action to prevent global warming. Where I live now is likely to be flooded out by rising seas in less than 100 years. It means my grandchildren are unlikely to continue to live in our generational home – I’m the third generation to live here. The area we live in used to flood once every 10 years, now it’s every year. In the Caribbean, it’s become a waiting game every hurricane season. There is a sense of helplessness. We need you to commit to taking drastic action and to actually do it. There is no more time left to delay.” Sachin Ganpat, 44, IT professional, Trinidad and Tobago ‘Treat the climate crisis as an emergency’ “Around the world, governments acted to treat the Covid-19 pandemic as an emergency. We saw the money they’re prepared to invest in order to deal with the pandemic. We’ve not seen anything like a similar response for climate change, which, without a doubt is a much bigger threat to our future survival. Why are governments failing so spectacularly to treat the climate and ecological crises as the emergencies they are? These are the defining problems of our time. The planet is fast approaching cascading tipping points which threaten the stable climate our planet has known for thousands of years, and with it, life as we know it.” Julie Parker, early 60s, retired research scientist, Bristol, UK ‘End the blind pursuit of GDP’ “We have to acknowledge that blind pursuit of GDP is the root cause of the climate crisis. In the case of countries like Indonesia, where most people live outside of the GDP, in the informal sector, to talk about GDP constantly is actually destructive. Much of Indonesia’s GDP comes from extractive industries like palm oil and building infrastructure, which often relies on land-grabbing. This colonial-style economy is why we are in trouble – land use and deforestation is Indonesia’s number one contributor to greenhouse gases. By design, the pursuit of GDP is destructive. We know that it’s not possible to grow infinitely in a finite world, but the very nature of GDP is that you always want more. We must shift this distorted view of the economy.” Melissa Kowara, 32, wooden toy maker and climate activist, Jakarta, Indonesia ‘Stand up to multinationals and fossil fuel companies’ “Time is running out. The vast majority of politicians will not be alive to see the worst consequences of the climate crisis, but those of my generation are keenly aware that we will be the ones to deal with a crisis we did not create. If ever there has been a time for selflessness, for leadership in the face of adversity, it is now. Stand up to multinationals and fossil fuel companies, to corporate interests weaving their money into political campaigns. Tax and emissions loopholes allow the largest polluters, including fossil fuel companies, to move their emissions around and use smart accounting to hide their emissions and avoid accepting responsibility. Stand up to those that say capitalism is the only solution, and dare to think differently. Listen to young people, and give us a seat at the table like the rightful stakeholders we are.” Nick Gutkin, 26, intern at a carbon crediting company, Rotterdam, the Netherlands ‘Talk about fair distribution of our planet’s resources’ “We need to talk about what it means for us in the global north to lower our standard of living in order to save the world’s resources. How can we bridge the gap between people’s expectations and the reality of what one planet can offer, for a fair distribution? What are the dreams we can dream and what are the dreams that are someone else’s nightmare? Does lowering our standard of living necessarily mean lower quality of life? I think we have to reconsider a lot of the things that we take for granted: fashion, travel, lifestyle choices like that. Things that perhaps Covid restrictions showed us that we could actually do without.” Marianne Morild, 49, artist, Bergen, Norway ‘Reduce animal agriculture’ “Animal agriculture is one key area which is not sufficiently talked about. Globally, livestock use more than 80% of the world’s farmland and 56% of the greenhouse gas emissions from food. Reducing animal agriculture would have positive implications for food security, climate change, pollution and biodiversity. It would free up huge amounts of land which could then be rewilded. It is important to work closely with farmers to support them with any such changes. But we cannot keep ignoring this elephant in the room.” Hannah Howarth, 31, postgraduate student, France ‘Think about future generations’ “I don’t expect you who are reading this to care about me, beyond in the most abstract sense. I want you to think about your children instead. Your grandchildren. Your nephews. Your nieces. Anyone you personally know and love under the age of 30. I want you to think about how your actions will shape the world they inherit. I want you to think about how [people in power are] pushing us further to the end of human civilisation, the death of progress, and the extinction of almost every living thing on this globe. Young people see no future.” Fergus McAteer, 30, quality assurance engineer, Edinburgh, UK ‘Solving the climate crisis is a question of political will’ “We live on a finite planet, and economic growth is no longer a viable measurement of success, especially when surplus wealth is concentrated into a few hands. We need to act more urgently than we have ever done anything as a species. End all fossil fuel extraction now, stop cutting down the world’s tropical forests, invest in renewable energy and regenerative agriculture. We need to invest the carbon budget into expanding renewable resources as quickly as possible, but also with drastic cuts in energy needs in the western world. It’s a matter of political will. We don’t have time for more of the same schemes, clever accounting, and broken promises – the future of all species is at stake and you are failing us.” Andrew Payton, 35, works in online education, Virginia, US ‘Time is running out – I want to see actions, not promises’ “I want to see actions instead of beautiful and unrealistic promises, I want to see trees being planted, I want to see renewable energy sources and cutting emissions. While you are postponing real and concrete actions, my country is drying up, our forests are being consumed by hell-like flames, my body is being exposed to harmful temperatures, our animals are being extinguished at an unprecedented level. I want to see progress – it’s just a matter of time until the irreversible. We’ve had a lot of summits but not a lot of action. The current president has weakened environmental protections – Brazil needs laws to regulate agriculture, mining and logging in the Amazon.” Wellington Vitor da Silva, 21, software quality analyst, Londrina, BrazilThe most important UN climate change talks since the 2015 Paris Agreement are upon us, with more than 120 world leaders are arriving in Glasgow for Cop26. The question now is, amid all the big talk, will it make a difference? Given that Cop1 was held in 1995 and carbon dioxide emissions are now 14 billion tonnes a year higher than back then, we can be forgiven for thinking Cop26 is all a charade. But this time it is different, because it is a battle not only over reducing carbon emissions, but also over the rules of a new phase of capitalism that will affect us all. Governments are facing extreme pressure to act now. Climate impacts are hitting home. The climate crisis is no longer abstract and no longer about the future. The heatwaves, floods and droughts we experience or see in the news, and endless reports of more to come, make catastrophe easier to imagine. Public pressure gets ever higher, from Insulate Britain blocking roads to surveys showing most people are seriously concerned about the climate emergency. Scientific reports by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change have unflinchingly shown that we can only stabilise Earth’s climate by reducing greenhouse gas emissions to an average of zero, known as net-zero emissions. This means that the transition away from fossil fuel energy is not a matter of if, but when. The transition to powering society using renewables is also now technologically and economically feasible. The costs of wind and solar have plummeted to below the cost of building plants to produce electricity generated by oils and gas, with further falls expected. The economic argument for inaction is now gone. Given that countries and companies have left it to the last possible second to take action, and the stakes are sky high, an avalanche of announcements are arriving. What should we make of them? The bewildering complexity of the Glasgow talks can be seen, at its simplest, as a battle among three major blocs of countries, companies and protest movements. They aren’t formal groupings and don’t negotiate together, but can be grouped as they want similar outcomes. The first is composed of the income poor and vulnerable countries, marginalised communities and the protestors who will be outside the SEC as negotiations take place. They want urgent action to limit warming to 1.5°C, the finance to achieve this, and a plan to adapt to climate change. Equity is at the heart of their demands. The second bloc want to delay climate action by almost any means necessary. These are extractive states, such as Saudi Arabia, Russia, and Australia, and their allies in the fossil fuel and airline industries. The third bloc want a transition to net zero that consolidates their position of power in the world. This is composed of the EU, US, and China, big companies such as Unilever and Amazon, along with much of the financial industry. Aside from China they all argue for markets to deliver net zero efficiently. The three-way battle has already led to some surprising and rapid changes. Countries accounting for some 77% of global carbon dioxide emissions are now covered by mid-century net zero announcements, including countries traditionally hostile to climate action, including Saudi Arabia, Russia, and Australia, as well as the US, EU, UK and China. But why are climate delayers voluntarily announcing net zero targets? This may be a mix of global opprobrium from the first bloc and plain cynicism because they think they won’t face the consequences of missing these targets. However, it is also likely to be because within the third bloc the EU have agreed, and the Democrats in the US have proposed, “carbon border adjustments” to impose tariffs on high carbon imports. This means exporter countries will need to reduce their emissions to access these huge markets. This battle to shape the future will continue in Glasgow as countries negotiate rules on transparency, which would allow the UN to check what various nations are doing to achieve their targets. Negotiations on the rules governing carbon markets will also be tense. The prospect of interlinked markets for a new fungible global commodity – carbon – is a bonanza that banks and the financial industry are pushing for. But many are wary that carbon accounting tricks will trump real emissions reductions. Overall, there are serious problems with the seemingly sensible thinking of bloc three: that if governments in the core zones of the global economy invest to kick-start a green industrial revolution, then the market will drive down prices for new technological solutions that outcompete fossil fuels and drive down emissions, and carbon border adjustments will bring the world with them. Critically, this will not be anywhere near enough to shut down most of the fossil fuel industry and actually resolve the climate problem. Stopping new exploration for fossil fuels needs to go hand-in-hand with investing in alternatives. Yet, many governments who set themselves up as rational followers of the science are self-delusional. They cut emissions at home while also licensing yet more oil, coal and gas for export. Norway, the UK, the US and Canada are all doing this. A perhaps more fundamental problem of the EU, US and UK market-driven approach is that markets are not fair. The Covid vaccines scandal has shown how new technology and market approaches have left billions vulnerable. Unprecedented international cooperation is needed to tackle the climate crisis. And within countries, if the transition to net zero is not experienced as a fair and just transition, plans will be derailed and catastrophe beckons. Glasgow is a pivotal moment. The world cannot afford any more delays in climate action, so the climate-wreckers must not get their way. But for the most powerful countries and companies, they must realise that a transition to net zero can’t be achieved by relying on markets. They need to listen to the vulnerable countries and people. Solving the climate crisis needs action that is both fast and fair. Simon Lewis is professor of global change science at University College London and University of LeedsThe news was horrifying, a parable of inhumanity so grim that it was destined to go viral. Two weeks ago, police said that passengers on Philadelphia’s elevated train watched a man rape a woman and did not intervene – and that some riders might have even recorded the 13 October attack with their cellphones. These onlookers did not call for help during the attack. The only person who dialed 911 was an off-duty transit worker, police alleged. “I’m appalled by those who did nothing to help this woman,” Timothy Bernhardt, superintendent of the Upper Darby Township police department, said on 16 October. “Anybody that was on that train has to look in the mirror and ask why they didn’t intervene or why they didn’t do something.” Bernhardt said the passengers who stood idly by might even face criminal charges, according to the Philadelphia Inquirer. Transit authorities made similar statements and the story rapidly spread around America and then the world as a grim symbol of an uncaring society, obsessed with social media over helping a victim being attacked. But, it now seems, the story was not entirely accurate. In fact, the story is far more complex, revealing not only a brutal crime, but how a mistaken narrative ran wild in the press. At the same time, the appalling rape does reveal social problems in America, but they center around crime, the pandemic and policing, not the baleful influence of social media. The Delaware county district attorney, whose office is prosecuting the case against alleged rapist Fiston Ngoy, said this portrayal of bystanders callously videoing the crime was “simply not true”. The prosecutor, Jack Stollsteimer, said it was wrong for authorities and media to advance the narrative that people were “callously sitting there filming and didn’t act”, calling this “misinformation”. While Ngoy’s alleged interactions with the victim took place over a 40-minute period, starting with unwanted talking and then groping, the rape lasted about six minutes. Other riders were not on the train for the entire duration of their interaction, and might not have known what was happening, Stollsteimer said. Surveillance video from the train revealed two passengers raised their phones toward the assault, and that one of those provided their video to authorities, AP said. The dramatic turn of events has raised questions about how the original narrative took off, and why it might have staying power. There is no single answer – explanations are multifaceted and nuanced, ranging from police accountability to broad societal fears to longstanding concerns over public safety. But one definitive starting point is the Kitty Genovese case. The 1964 murder of Genovese in New York City rose to international notoriety after a New York Times report claimed that nearly 40 people witnessed her being attacked and didn’t try to help her. The incident prompted extensive study, and the so-called “bystander effect” – a notion that when everyone thinks that someone else will act, nobody does – became de rigueur in psychology coursework. Many years later, it emerged that the Times’ description of bystanders was incorrect. Far fewer people had actually witnessed Genovese’s murder than was reported and some did contact authorities. One of Genovese’s neighbors went out to help her, cradling the dying 28-year-old while waiting for paramedics. Most glaringly, an ambulance came to the scene “precisely because neighbors had called for help”, the New Yorker said in explaining how the original narrative was debunked. Indeed, present-day research on bystanders stands in opposition to initial police accounts about the Septa passengers. A study based on closed-circuit television footage of 200 violent crimes across three countries found that “in 90% of those cases, bystanders did intervene”, explained Elizabeth Jeglic, a professor of psychology at John Jay College of Criminal Justice in New York City. “So the bystander effect, as we had known it or had taught it for decades, may not be applicable today,” Jeglic said. “There are various factors that go into people acting and reacting, but for the most part, if the crime is clear, and it’s a serious crime, in almost all cases people will intervene.” When bystanders are worried about their own safety, or physically incapable of intervening, they might step in by going for help or calling the police. Some have hypothesized that bystanders’ filming might even be an attempt at intervention. “They may be trying to help in videotaping it because it may be helpful in the prosecution of the crime later on,” Jeglic said. Roy Peter Clark, senior scholar at the Poynter journalism institute in St Petersburg, Florida, said the concept of “master narrative” – effectively, cultural motifs that really stick – helps explain why the initial story resonated, even if facts ultimately don’t add up. “That’s what makes it a master narrative – other stories are rejected as false or misleading or misinformation if they don’t fit the particular narrative,” said Clark, who has written about and discussed the Genovese case. Genovese’s story appeared to prove a story about “the loss of community, urban isolation and alienation”, not to mention the decline of good samaritanism. The same thing may have been at play with the Septa attack. “It may be magnified by the current moment – pandemic, catastrophic weather, economic disruption, people being unable to exercise the normal constructive communal rituals of a community and a society,” Clark said. “Whatever darkness there is in these master narratives, they may have been magnified by our collective current experience.” Jeglic voiced similar sentiments, saying: “We are in a period of time where everything is very polarized and we often jump to conclusions without considering all aspects of situations. “A lot of people want to be drawn to the narrative that there’s a lot of doom and gloom in humanity, that people are acting in very negative ways.” But to dismiss the story would also be a mistake, say the people who actually live in the communities served by Septa and who ride its trains. Septa passengers in Philadelphia and the suburb of Upper Darby didn’t find the notion of uncaring bystanders all that implausible, based on their own concerns about safety predating the rape. When presented with the fact that initial descriptions of uncaring bystanders appeared to be untrue, the consensus was that it made little difference. “There’s no way you cannot see a sexual act,” said Victoria Evans, 38. “I would have rather taken my chances intervening than not saying anything.” Evans, a certified nurse’s assistant, said that body language should have made people think twice about what they saw. “It would look uncomfortable. You can tell the difference. There’s no way nobody knew something was wrong.” “I was really sad because I take the [train] everyday,” said Nasherah Tucker, 18. “I don’t really feel safe anywhere in Philadelphia, especially as a woman.” Tucker said the fact that the rape took place in public, on a train, was incredibly disheartening. Even if the original police account regarding bystanders weren’t true, she said, “I think someone should have definitely said something.” Many passengers, many of them people of color and especially women, do find riding public transport in the city a scary experience, where crime seems possible and a police presence seems thin on the ground. “It was a mix of both being surprised and not being surprised,” said Noor Rana, a 19-year-old biology student, of her reaction to the incident. “I was kind of scared – scared for myself, for other women my age. “Go tell the police. Get to another car. There’s so many things that you could do,” she said. “I don’t think there’s any excuse not to do anything.” Would she feel differently about the bystanders if they didn’t know what was happening, as authorities have now said? “This is Philadelphia. Crazy stuff happens, so I feel a lot of people tend to ignore stuff,” she said. Even if people mistakenly thought the encounter were consensual, they should have notified authorities, because “it’s still indecent”. Some of those interviewed said that there needed to be a greater police presence on the the transport network. “They get paid to protect the public. You don’t see them do anything. Police don’t patrol inside trains,” said Esdras Taylor, 46. “The public is not going to do it. They should be doing their jobs.” But in the aftermath of the attack, even before Stollsteimer provided more information, some residents remained optimistic. Jenice Armstrong, a metro columnist with the Inquirer, did not believe the description of bystanders originally put forth by police. “It took me a while to write something,” Armstrong said in an interview. “I thought about it every day after I heard the initial report, but I just kept trying to picture it and I couldn’t.” She told herself that there had to be more to the story. Before Stollsteimer provided the additional information, Armstrong was working on a column about how something didn’t seem to add up. Then came word of Stollmeister’s press conference. She rushed over there. “I was glad I did, because it bolstered my initial hunch I had – that it didn’t happen the way people were saying that it happened,” she said. In the column Armstrong wrote after this information came out, she interviewed Septa police officer Tom Schiliro, who with his partner apprehended Ngoy when the train arrived at the 69th Street station. Schiliro told her that other riders quickly pointed out Ngoy. “As soon as the train cars opened, everyone was pointing, ‘It’s over there! It’s over there,’” Schiliro told her. The week before, Schiliro arrested another man at this station for sexual assault. A good samaritan hurried to help the victim; Schiliro heard shouting and rushed to the incident. “People are so quick to believe the worst about humanity. And ignore the good among us,” Armstrong wrote. “Philly is a tough, tough city,” she said, “but I would like to think that it’s not so tough that you have passengers on a train standing around videotaping a woman being actively raped.”Petrit Halilaj was 13 years old when Serbian troops moved into his Kosovar village, forcing his family to flee and then burning their house to the ground. Piling as much as they could on to a tractor, they took off for his grandfather’s home. When that was also invaded they moved again, flitting from refuge to refuge until they arrived at a camp in Albania, where they sat out the rest of the 15-month war between Serbia and Kosovo. It was there, in the spring of 1999, that Halilaj met up with the Italian psychologist who was to change his life. News reached the tent (in which he was living with his mother, grandfather and four siblings) that Giacomo “Angelo” Poli was giving out paper and felt-tip pens to any child who wanted to draw. Before long he was pouring out images so powerful that the then UN secretary general Kofi Annan asked to meet him during a visit to the camp. “I’d grown up with Kofi Annan. He was bigger than Star Wars to me, so I said to my mum: ‘I can’t show him a little A4 picture,’” recalls Halilaj. Together they managed to liberate some of the cardboard used to floor the tents, so he could redraw one image of a massacre in a village. The original plan was to give the picture to Annan, but Halilaj’s mind was changed by his grandfather’s insistence that the visit was no more than a piece of political theatre. So, while the image was broadcast around the world, the picture itself stayed in Albania, where Halilaj only rediscovered it decades later. A year after the war ended, the family returned to Kosovo. Halilaj was given a scholarship to art school in Italy, setting him on a course that now brings him to Tate St Ives for his first solo show in the UK. Though Angelo’s visit to the camp only lasted two weeks, it was the start of a lifelong friendship. The two worked together to find an adult sense in the 35 drawings produced during that fortnight, which are the basis of Halilaj’s Tate installation. One room documents his childhood: it not only includes a video of Annan patting Halilaj’s head as he is shown the picture, but an Andrew Testa photograph he discovered years later on the New York Times website, of his little figure, squashed between two plumply upholstered women, in a food queue at the camp. Their plumpness, he points out, is the result of many layers of coloured felt that protected them from the vicious cold, and now plays a signature role in his art. The installation itself is an enchanted forest of images, where parrots and peacocks hover over the churned earth of mass graves and burn you into the mind of a 13-year-old boy who somehow managed to craft his own salvation from the trauma of war. As installers stitch the felt cut-outs to the threads attaching them to the ceiling, the artist runs around poking feathers in here and there – peacock, chicken, flamingo – “for those who care to look closely”. “When we talk about the war in Kosovo, we are not talking about a historical situation that has been resolved,” says Halilaj. But it is the artist’s role to find an alternative to “boring diplomacy”. In the end, Halilaj says, “landscape is what remains and gives us dreams of the future. So to me this exhibition is not just fragments of 1999 but fragments of the future, too.” Petrit Halilaj on his Tate installation The blanket “This red and yellow cover was over the body of a three-month-old baby who was killed in the village of Obri, very close to where we lived. I didn’t put the child in the picture, because for me it’s an image of a massacre. I didn’t want to show the victims, because we’re so bombarded by war images. At first we were told that the soldiers would never hurt children. The murder of this child and his entire family was the moment when I started to live with fear on a daily basis.” The burning house “In another part of the installation you can see our yellow and red house before it all happened, but here it’s burning to the ground. There’s nothing left of it now. In the background you can see a soldier and a bulldozer, but in the foreground are birds in those first colours Angelo gave us. It’s a way of giving back to him what he gave to us as kids: paper and colour and space for our imaginations. That was such an amazing gift.” The peacock “Birds represented to me the colour and joy of my imagination, even in the worst of places. Behind it you can see the shadow of a soldier with a knife. It’s up to you which way you turn: you have either the unfolding of war or the unfolding of dreams.” The little boy “This little boy is the one figure I have taken directly from the drawing I made for Kofi Annan. In that, he stands to one side, with a tank rolling in, watching a massacre. I didn’t want to put him in the middle because it’s not a self-portrait, but a picture of all of us.” Petrit Halilaj: Very volcanic over this green feather is at Tate St Ives to 16 January.Alan Garner’s novels are usually separated into his wildly successful books aimed at children – The Weirdstone of Brisingamen, Elidor, The Owl Service and The Moon of Gomrath – and his adult writing – The Stone Book Quartet, Thursbitch and Strandloper, which are more difficult and quixotic, at least thematically (Garner is always an author of supremely clear and readable prose). I was speaking at an event with Ruth Ozeki and Karen Joy Fowler recently and, having mentioned Garner in my talk, was surprised that neither of them had read – or even heard of – him. They asked me where to begin and I suggested the wonderful, time-collapsing Red Shift, largely because I feel like it contains the best of each of Garner’s worlds: the magic of his children’s fiction and the emotional and philosophical complexity of his adult work. Garner’s latest novel, Treacle Walker, also belongs in this hybrid space. It, too, is concerned with time. Indeed, it seems as though the subject of time is the theme that underpins much of his later work – how we experience it, how we might refigure or alter our relation to it. “Time is ignorance,” reads the book’s epigraph, from Carlo Rovelli, and the novel is essentially a response to this idea, seeking to ask how we would experience the world if we were able to step out of the straitjacket of time. Garner lives in a medieval medicine house on a site that has been inhabited for 10,000 years and is a stone’s throw from the Jodrell Bank Observatory in Cheshire. It should perhaps not surprise us that, again, he takes time as his subject. Joe, our hero, is a child living a strange and circumscribed existence. He has been poorly, he says, and wears a patch to correct a lazy eye. His parents are not in evidence, and he measures out the days by watching the passing of Noony, the train, through the valley below. One day a rag-and-bone man appears, named Treacle Walker, and offers Joe a cup and a stone in exchange for an old pair of pyjamas and a lamb’s shoulder bone. The cup has Joe’s name written upon it, the stone is inscribed with the picture of a horse. This is classic Garner territory: obscure but resonant objects, a present that feels wedded to a mythical past, a questioning child seeking to unravel the mysteries of an off-kilter world, a landscape freighted with meaning. Joe wanders out into the marshy wood behind his house where he meets Thin Amren, a naked man with copper-brown skin and a hood made of leather. This bog-man informs Joe that his lazy eye is the result of “the glamourie” – a gift that enables him to see time collapsed, to perceive the eternal in the now. Joe’s adventures see him drawn into the mirror-world of a comic book, fighting alongside “Kit the Ancient Brit” against “Whizzy Wizard and the Brit Bashers”. He’s aided in these battles by the visits of the genial Treacle Walker, with his “green violet” eyes and face at once old and young, like “them knacky postcards that change when you look”. The riotous energy of seemingly throwaway comics is shown to be in communion with the power of myth and both express truths found in the most cutting-edge science. This is a book about quantum physics as well as ancient lore. Garner has always suggested that there is essentially just one story, and this novel, published in his 87th year, contains all the exuberance and eccentricity, all the deep thought and resounding mythology of his best work. At the end of his life, Philip Roth wrote the extraordinary Nemesis, a book that felt like a conversation between the author and his younger self, an attempt to express in a single novel the concerns of a lifetime. Treacle Walker does something similar, cramming into its 150-odd pages more ideas and imagination than most authors manage in their whole careers. Treacle Walker by Alan Garner is published by Fourth Estate (£10). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyHymnal melodies reverberate around the hillside in Kuwadzana, a Harare suburb. On a blisteringly hot Saturday, members of the Apostolic church, dressed in white, hum and sing together. Songs, long prayers and a little Bible reading punctuate the outdoor service. It’s a spectacle for passersby. Since the Zimbabwean government partly reopened church gatherings in August, Apostolic members, known for their open-air worship, can be seen every weekend around the capital. The government has asked religious groups to endorse the Covid-19 vaccine. The Catholic church, evangelical and adventist groups have done so. But with a tradition of not seeking or trusting medical help, some of the “white garment” churches are refusing to encourage congregations to get vaccinated. With millions of followers across southern Africa, the church’s stance could undermine Zimbabwe’s attempts to vaccinate 60% of the population by December. “We believe in God, and science is entirely subject to God’s will,” says Gramaridge Musendekwa, of the Vadzidzi Apostolic church. “I grew up on my parents’ prayers and I am passing it down to my children. My family will not take the vaccine because we are protected by prayers,” says Musendekwa, 38. “I believe we should not be forced to get vaccinated. For us who grew up without medicine, vaccinations are an insult to our faith and religion. Surely the authorities can achieve whatever they want to do without involving us.” The Apostolic position threatens the success of vaccination programmes in southern Africa, according to research published in the Journal of Religion and Health in 2017, which linked it directly to the rise of measles outbreaks in 2009 to 2010. More than 85% of Zimbabweans identify as Christian, and 37% belong to the Apostolic church. It is 2pm on a Saturday and no one at St Peters Apostolic church in Harare is wearing a government-mandated face mask. After spending hours at a shrine, decorated with red and white flags, Miriam Mushayabasa, 34, a mother-of-three, believes she does not need a vaccine. “Our preacher gave us a clear instruction that if we use these little stones and holy water he prayed for, nothing will happen to our families. Since Covid-19 began last March, my family and I have never suffered from this disease, we are as strong as ever,” says Mushayabasa. “My children are strong, so I have no cause to fear. I have always believed in prayers and this is how I choose to go through this pandemic.” While the government mandates only the vaccinated can attend religious services, it is tough to enforce in the Apostolic churches, who meet outdoors on hilltops and in fields. Zimbabwe’s vaccination programme has inoculated 15% of the population since it began in February. It is one of 15 African countries to have achieved the World Health Organization target of 10% of citizens by September. Regular vaccine consignments are arriving from China, but the government says misinformation and general mistrust have slowed the vaccination programme. Prosper Chonzi, Harare’s health services director, says the authorities are running campaigns on the benefits of vaccination to increase take-up. “Our efforts to continue engaging them [the church] are there, and now there is more literature. It was more people getting sceptical about the vaccine. There is more knowledge about the vaccine.” Aaron Chakaipa, 40, reflecting the fears of his fellow Apostolic members, says, “I heard that if you get vaccinated, you will not be fertile any more. I am really scared to take it. “I believe an individual should make a personal decision and not be cajoled into taking the vaccination. Telling people to stay away from church if they are not vaccinated is the same as forcing the vaccination, which is not right.” However, Andby Makururu, bishop and founder of the Johane Fifth of Africa Apostolic church in the eastern Manicaland province, is encouraging his members to get vaccinated. “We are transforming the indigenous church to suit global standards. Johane the Fifth of Africa has been on a vaccination drive. In all our preachings, we encourage members to get vaccinations because the Holy Spirit does not cure all these diseases. So I am encouraging the Apostolic sect to go to hospitals and get treatment, I also get treatment and regular checkups,” he says. He says sects who deny the benefits of vaccines are out of touch. “Our children are getting vaccinated. Those that are still behind are lagging but we are moving with the times,” Makururu says.A train driver suffered “life-changing” injuries and 13 passengers, including a child, needed hospital treatment after two trains collided as they entered a tunnel in Salisbury. British Transport Police (BTP) said on Monday that they could not rule out foul play but officers do not believe one of the trains was derailed as it hit an object on the line, as had originally been thought. It is understood that police and the rail investigation branch are focusing on issues including the signalling and points, human error and weather conditions at the time. Speaking outside Salisbury railway station, Supt Lisa Garrett, of BTP, said the crash happened at about 6.45pm on Sunday when the Great Western Railway (GWR) service from Southampton to Cardiff collided with a South Western Railway train from London Waterloo to Honiton in Devon as both entered the Fisherton tunnel, close to the city centre. Garrett said: “Both trains were travelling in the same direction and one train struck the other, causing it to derail while in the tunnel. The front few carriages remained upright while the back tipped on their side.” There were a total of 92 passengers on both trains. About 30 people attended a casualty centre set up in a nearby church. Most were “walking wounded” but 13 passengers were taken to Salisbury district hospital by ambulance, where they received treatment for minor injuries. One remained in hospital in Salisbury on Monday afternoon. Garrett added: “The driver of the train was more seriously injured and his injuries are believed to be life-changing. He remains in hospital in a stable condition and his family have been informed.” The driver, who was at the controls of the South Western train, had to be cut from the cab and is believed to be in hospital in Southampton. Garrett said a senior detective had been appointed to find out how the trains came together in the tunnel. BTP said it was working with the rail investigation branch and the office of rail and road. She said: “We are keeping an open mind but there has been nothing to suggest the train stuck an object or there was any significant delay between the trains colliding and one derailing.” Garrett said there was no evidence the driver of the train that had been hit had activated his GPRS button, which warns signallers and other drivers of an emergency. Asked if they had ruled out that anything criminal was involved, she said: “We haven’t ruled out foul play; until the investigation has concluded, we cannot confirm why this has happened.” Passengers told of their horror at the crash. Alan Crocker, a former Royal Navy sailor, who was travelling home to Exmouth, Devon, with his wife, Wendy, said they were travelling at about 20mph when the collision happened. He said: “The impact was quite weird. There was a jolt and a juddering which I imagine was the train leaving the rails. There was a fireball and a little bit of smoke coming through the train. “There was a smell of diesel; that was a real concern. That was my initial concern: was there a fire and was there going to be smoke? Our carriage had gone off at a 35-degree tilt.” Dimitri Popa, 17, was in the first carriage of the London Waterloo train. “It all happened very fast. There was a big crash, then I saw flames,” he said. “We didn’t know where we were or anything, we were very shocked.” Morgan Harris, 20, who was travelling on the same train, was thrown from his seat. “It was all going along normally then all of a sudden there was a massive bang and all of the lights went out,” he said. “There [were] sparks and flames. Our train was on its side. I was thrown out of my seat and I banged around the table.” Asked about railway safety, a spokesperson for the prime minister, Boris Johnson, said: “It’s obviously a top priority for this government, which is why we’ve allocated £40bn-worth of spending to ensure that the railways continue to be one of the safest in the world.”The husband of a Victorian MP was paid taxpayer funded salaries by three other MPs to do factional work, according to evidence given to the state’s anti-corruption commission. The Independent Broad-based Anti-corruption Commission (Ibac) resumed public hearings on Monday as part of its investigation into the alleged misuse of public funds for factional activity, including branch stacking, within the Labor party. Branch stacking is not illegal but it is a breach of party rules. Chris Carr SC, counsel assisting the commission, told the hearing MP Kaushaliya Vaghela agreed in an interview with investigators that her husband, Dinesh Chauhan, had “predominantly” done factional work when employed in taxpayer-funded electorate officer roles. Chauhan worked in the offices of Marlene Kairouz, Robin Scott and Adem Somyurek. All three were implicated in widespread branch stacking last year, with Kairouz and Scott standing down as ministers, and Somyurek dumped from the ministry and resigning from the party. The trio have denied branch stacking. Vaghela, an upper house MP for western metropolitan region, said she believed her husband was rotated by Somyurek from his office through the offices of Scott and Kairouz as a reward for his ability to recruit members of the Indian community. A transcript of part of Vaghela’s Ibac interview was tendered as evidence to the commission on Monday. “Your husband also, as we’ve already canvassed, has been quite active in the community, quite an active recruiter ... do you think that was the predominant activity he was engaged in during these times?” an investigator asked Vaghela. “Yes,” Vaghela replied. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning She also agreed with the suggestion that Somyurek, Scott and Kairouz shared full-time staffer roles between their offices for their own factional purposes, including to “ensure that people who are good recruiters could be kept in the fold”. Vaghela was told during the same interview that records of her husband’s work activity during 2020 showed he had sent one email using the address, which she agreed was “highly suggestive” he was mostly doing factional work. Last month, federal Labor MP Anthony Byrne told the commission that Vaghela, the first Indian-born MP elected to Victorian parliament, was given her spot by Somyurek in exchange for a large number of Indian members recruited by Aloke and Manoj Kumar joining Somyurek’s moderate faction. It was not suggested Vaghela was aware of the scheme. Vaghela’s evidence came to light during Carr’s questioning of Christine Kelly, an electorate officer who has worked for Kairouz since she was elected in 2008. Carr said Ibac had uncovered evidence of forged documents being produced from the electorate office giving permission for Kelly to pick up ballot papers from ALP headquarters on behalf of members. But Kelly said she had no knowledge of the letters, and could not recall any specific occasion when she collected ballot papers on behalf of members. Kelly denied ever doing factional work for Kairouz, and said she was aware electorate officers were not supposed to do such work on their taxpayer-funded wages. She also disputed that Chauhan was involved in factional work and said he would always be working on official business while she was there. She mostly dealt with constituents, she said, even though Carr showed her phone records for 2019 that showed for six months, the office averaged less than one incoming call per day. Constituents emailed and stopped into the office, Kelly said, but she said that while the former electorate office at Mill Park was in a busy shopping centre, the current Caroline Springs office rarely had visitors. Carr asked Kelly why she had attended a Derrimut branch meeting in 2019 that had to be cancelled after 70-80 members showed up unannounced and were “hostile”. Kelly, along with three other staff employed by Kairouz in her ministerial or electorate office, had attended, and Carr asked if it was an attempt to take over the branch. Kelly denied this, and a suggestion she had been one of the “leaders” who was responsible for directing the crowd to sign an attendance book. She said Kairouz had simply asked her to attend the meeting to give an update on local issues such as “a new footpath … or roundabout being put in”. Kelly also denied seeing Kairouz in the carpark outside the meeting. The hearings continue on Wednesday, when Kirsten Psaila, who has also worked for Kairouz in her electorate office since 2008, will give evidence. Carr started the hearing on Monday by revealing that lawyers for the commission had asked the ALP Victorian branch to provide further information as part of its investigation. But the branch had so far declined to do so, Carr said, meaning the commission may have to compel them to comply.On a night when an expected challenge by the main opposition party quickly fizzled out, candidates from a tiny local party seized one seat after another in Japan’s general election, turning an economically vital region into a citadel of rightwing populism. Nippon Ishin no Kai (Japan Innovation party) almost quadrupled its seats from 11 to 41 on Sunday to become the third largest party in the lower house of Japan’s parliament, after winning almost every seat in the western prefecture of Osaka. While the biggest opposition group, the Constitutional Democratic party of Japan, and its allies were counting their losses, Ishin was becoming the most intriguing backstory in an otherwise lacklustre election. By the early hours of Monday, the ruling Liberal Democratic party (LDP), despite winning the national vote, had been summarily dismissed from Osaka by the upstarts from Ishin. Liberals and leftwingers will shudder at Ishin’s rise. But the party succeeded where their candidates had failed, exploiting disillusionment with the LDP and its junior coalition partner, Komeito, and hoovering up votes from people who could not bring themselves to vote for a five-party opposition bloc that included the socialist and communist parties. “Nippon Ishin gathered votes from conservative voters who are frustrated with the LDP-Komeito government,” the Yomiuri Shimbun newspaper said on Monday. A new governing coalition in which Ishin replaces Komeito as the LDP’s official parliamentary ally is unlikely, however. While Ishin shares the LDP’s enthusiasm for higher defence spending and a tougher line on China and North Korea, its opposition to income redistribution would be anathema to the prime minister, Fumio Kishida, who campaigned on promises of closing Japan’s wealth gap. Ishin’s emergence as a force in national elections could be an uncomfortable reminder to Kishida that his party is no longer the natural home of conservative voters. Yoichiro Sato, a professor of international relations at Ritsumeikan Asia Pacific University, said Ishin was “really sweeping the Osaka region. They’ve emerged as an important conservative bloc,” adding that its MPs would oppose Kishida’s “new capitalism” mission to boost incomes. Yu Uchiyama, a politics professor at Tokyo University, did not rule out a political marriage of convenience between the ruling party and Ishin MPs who support changes to Japan’s “pacifist” constitution – an ideological obsession of Kishida’s mentor, the former prime minister Shinzo Abe. “There is a lot of interest, especially in Asia, over whether Japan will try to revise its constitution, but by the look of it that won’t be possible with the (existing) ruling coalition,” Uchiyama said. “But the Japan Innovation party looks like it has captured a lot of seats, so we may be seeing some sort of constitution-related coalition, even if the possibility of constitutional revision remains low.” Formed in 2015 by Toru Hashimoto, the controversial former mayor of Osaka, Ishin benefited from the popularity of its acting leader, Hirofumi Yoshimura, who also serves as Osaka governor. “The thing I’m most surprised by is how well Ishin has done,” said Kenneth McElwain, a political science professor at Tokyo University. “Yoshimura developed a major national profile, which I think has also served as a tailwind for the party overall.” Despite triggering panic-buying of iodine gargle solution last year after wrongly claiming it was effective against coronavirus, the 44-year-old Yoshimura – whom one party colleague described as a “pop idol” – won praise for his leadership and communication skills during the height of the pandemic. Yoshimura, who has 1.1 million followers on Twitter – more than the Tokyo governor, Yuriko Koike – subscribes to traditional rightwing causes such as constitutional reform and prime ministerial visits to Yasukuni, a controversial war shrine in Tokyo. But he is not always an exact fit for the Japanese right’s ideological template, having campaigned for a ban on hate speech towards ethnic Koreans and other minorities in Osaka. Agencies contributed reportingFor the Indigenous Maya Ch’orti’ people of La Unión in eastern Guatemala, the daily struggle for water involves catching every drop of rain that drips from sloping metal roofs and walking long distances to fill plastic containers from overused streams. In this parched region, communities rely on rainfall to feed their families, and in 2019 worked together to build water reservoirs high in the mountains in order to better cope with increasingly frequent droughts and unpredictable rains which caused their maize and bean crops to fail. But the following year brought the opposite problem. After years without enough rain, two powerful hurricanes, Eta and Iota, struck within a fortnight of each other, causing flash floods and landslides that left dozens of people trapped in partially collapsed houses. “We always worried about not enough water, and then this abundance came. What a disaster,” said Yesenia Martínez, the village mayor. It was around 9pm on a November evening when the concrete walls in Martinez’s own home started to collapse. It was pitch black. Children screamed as cracks opened in the floor and rain poured infrom all sides. “We tried to fill the cracks with stones and plastic sheets, but the earth just gave way. We didn’t lose any lives, thank god – but we lost everything else,” said Martinez, 38, wiping away tears. It took almost a week for neighbours to rescue Martinez and her family using ropes, sticks and planks of wood to cross the flooded river. The season’s bean crops were ruined, the soil too sodden for replanting. No government help ever arrived. Almost a year later, Martinez and some of her extended family are living in temporary rickety houses built from corrugated metal sheets and wood, far from the river. But there isn’t room for everyone, and so her four youngest siblings are back living in the derelict house. “I cried when I came back here. The house could crumble at any moment or a rock could fall on us while we’re asleep. Of course we want to leave, but we’re poor and don’t have anywhere else to go,” said Mirna Martínez, 19. Barefoot children, skinny dogs and noisy chickens mill about the partially collapsed structure, which is held together by wooden beams and crumbling concrete blocks. Two days before the Guardian’s visit, a landslide had gobbled up another chunk of the neighbor’s coffee crops just 50 meters or so away. It wasn’t even raining when the ground gave way. *** Guatemala is one of five Latin American nations – along with Honduras, Nicaragua, Colombia and Haiti – identified among the 11 countries most at risk from climate chaos due to a combination of geography and poor governance, in a recent US government report on climate and global insecurity. Eta and Iota marked the first time two major Atlantic hurricanes had been recorded in November, and came after six years of drought in Central America’s dry corridor, an impoverished region that is highly vulnerable to catastrophic extreme weather events such as storms, torrential rain, droughts and heatwaves – all of which are getting longer and more intense due to global heating. Guatemala has contributed very little to greenhouse gas emissions but its people are suffering acutely from their impact. Acute malnutrition in children under five has more than doubled since 2019 due to the hurricane related crop losses, volatile commodity prices and the pandemic. Many campesinos were unable to reach coffee plantations, where they can earn $5 to $7 a day, because damaged roads and bridges were left unrepaired for months. Figures show that the largest increase in acute malnutrition cases and child deaths occurred in the regions hardest hit by floods and landslides caused by Eta and Iota. As women cut back on food to provide more for their children, the rate of low birthweight babies also skyrocketed. With few personal resources, little or no government assistance and NGOs struggling to cope with the unprecedented rise in food insecurity across Latin America, many Guatemalans have left in search of work and safety. Martínez’s sons, Brian, 21 and Esban, 18, borrowed thousands of dollars to pay coyotes or guides to travel overland to the US. They were repeatedly detained by Mexican immigration officials, but eventually made it to Florida where they work in construction, and have started sending some money home every month. “My sons had to go because we were left with nothing, so many young people have gone. There’s no work here, especially if you’re Indigenous,” said Martinez. One of her sisters also migrated, with her six-year-old daughter. Almost 300,000 Guatemalans have been detained at the US southern border since Eta and Iota struck. It’s unclear how many succeeded in entering the country, but 2021 is on track to break the remittance record, with more than $11bn sent home by Guatemalans in the first nine months of the year. “It’s evident from the numbers at the US border and remittances that the climate crisis and Covid economic downturn has led to a rise in migration as people try to get away from hunger – you can’t deny this. It’s already happening and the projections are not positive,” said Ricardo Rapallo, the Guatemala representative for the UN Food and Agricultural Organization (FAO). At the UN climate talks in Glasgow this week, world leaders will hammer out what help and how much richer countries – those most responsible for greenhouse gas emissions – should contribute to cover the costs of climate impacts in lower- income countries. But the lack of scientific data on climate migration is hurting vulnerable countries like Guatemala, said Edwin Castellanos, member of the IPCC’s scientific group on vulnerability and adaptation and dean of the research institute at Guatemala’s Universidad del Valle. “The future is going to continue like this – very dry periods followed by very wet periods – so we have to adapt to both extremes. But the same socioeconomic conditions that make Central America particularly vulnerable also make us invisible scientifically and therefore least able to access funding needed to adapt.” Next year’s IPCC report on vulnerability and adaptation, which Castellanos helped write, will conclude that there is “low confidence” on the link between the climate crisis and migration, due to the dearth of scientific research. “We know from journalistic reporting that climate change is causing migration, but we lack the hard data because we can’t get the funds to get the hard data, which makes accessing international green funds almost impossible. It’s a vicious cycle,” added Castellanos. *** Maya Ch’orti’ territory extends south from La Unión in Zacapa to Camotán in the department of Chiquimula, where rural villages are scattered along dirt roads in the rain shadow of the picturesque Sierra de las Minas. Each house is flanked by clay pots and rows of colorful plastic jars and buckets used by women to collect water for drinking, washing and cooking. In one tiny canton, campesino Esteban Gutiérrez was sorting through the maize harvest in front of the single-room adobe house where he sleeps with his wife and six children. In 2019, the family was already struggling when the Guardian visited after consecutive years of drought had left them without enough food. So far this year, they’ve had enough maize for Gutiérrez and the children to eat three tortillas three times a day – but not his wife, Miriam Ávalos, 25, who has two for each meal. She’s skinny, tired and breastfeeding four-month-old David, but must fetch water from the stream every other day when the communal tap runs dry. The three oldest children, aged 11 to 6, are chronically malnourished, and have barely grown since 2019. The two youngest girls, aged 3 and 4, are acutely malnourished after repeated bouts of diarrhea; their hair is falling out in small clumps. Guatemala has one of the highest malnutrition rates in the world with almost half of all children suffering chronic malnourishment, but rates are significantly higher among the country’s 24 Indigenous communities. “It’s worse now than when you visited us before, the earth is so dry nothing grows,” said Ávalos. Two years ago, Gutierrez was desperately trying to mortgage the family’s small plot of land to pay a coyote. He’s still trying to find away to migrate so he can provide his family with enough food. “We keep trying, we work hard, and hope the water comes in time.” This story is part of a Covering Climate Now reporting series on climate migration called Flight for Their Lives. CCNow is a global journalism collaboration strengthening coverage of the climate storyFormer Vancouver Whitecaps women’s team players fear a proposed investigation by Major League Soccer into the club’s response to allegations of sexual misconduct will be a whitewash and fail to adequately address multiple instances of wrongdoing. The players, who represented Vancouver Whitecaps in the 2008 and 2011 seasons, are supported by Canada’s Professional Footballers Association (PFACan) in a call for key club executives to be fired. It is understood the players this week will also demand Concacaf suspends its president, Victor Montagliani, until an independent investigation is completed into events surrounding Canada Soccer’s failure to deal with separate allegations against former Whitecaps coach Bob Birarda in 2008. Birarda was head coach of Canada’s under-20 women’s national team and the Whitecaps women’s team while Montagliani was director of national teams. Montagliani also serves as a Fifa vice-president. At the time, an internal investigation into Birarda’s behavior resulted in Canada Soccer and Whitecaps stating the coach had left his roles by “mutual agreement”, yet he continued to coach girls’ youth soccer. In a statement this week, Concacaf said it welcomed a report on the 2008 investigation into Birarda. “The [Canada Soccer] board was in late summer 2008 informed by the CSA general secretariat of the allegations regarding the inappropriate text messages. The board, including Mr Montagliani, took these allegations seriously and unanimously approved the appointment of an independent ombudswoman to investigate the matter,” read the statement. “Following that independent investigation, the board was provided with a summary of the ombudswoman’s findings, which included confirmation that inappropriate language was included in text messages. All board members subsequently approved a recommendation to terminate the coach’s employment. Mr Montagliani believes that he and his fellow board members at the time followed the appropriate steps to support the CSA with this very serious matter.” Birarda was arrested in December 2020 and faces six counts of sexual exploitation, two counts of sexual assault and one count of child luring, involving allegations spanning 20 years from 1988 to 2008. He is out on bail and has yet to enter a plea. “I welcome the interest of Major League Soccer in these issues but we don’t need MLS to be in charge of this investigation,” said Malloree Enoch. In a Guardian investigation published last week, Enoch alleged her former coach Hubert Busby Jr attempted to pressure her for sex during a recruitment process spanning 2010 and 2011. Busby denies the allegations. After the Guardian reported the allegations last week, MLS said it intended to launch an investigation. “MLS will only look after its own interests,” Enoch said. “We need to see a thorough investigation.” The former Whitecaps players are expected to release a statement in the next 48 hours supported by PFACan that will include a demand that any Whitecaps or Canada Soccer executive involved in the departures of Birarda and Busby, but who chose to misrepresent the reasons behind their exits, be fired. “These executives have lost their ability to continue in a leadership position,” Paul Champ, legal counsel to PFACan, told the Guardian. The players will also call for Concacaf and Fifa to suspend Montagliani from his roles until an independent investigation into the 2008 events is completed. That issue centers on Birarda being allowed to coach in the local community after allegations of sexual misconduct were known by Canada Soccer. “We are happy we can carry this burden for the players,” Champ said of the union’s support. “There is already some reflection going on at Canada Soccer and we would like to continue to push them to consider these issues. All of these issues are connected and we need to know what the governing bodies are doing about it.” The Whitecaps organization has been in crisis since the Guardian last week revealed the allegations by Enoch. Chief executive officer Axel Schuster called Enoch on Friday night to apologize for the club’s failure to act at the time of the alleged incidents. After local journalists camped outside the club’s headquarters on Friday hoping to speak with officials about the allegations, Schuster released a statement claiming unnamed executives had been placed on leave. Still, the club has yet to respond to questions from the Guardian sent to chief operating officer Rachel Lewis on 19 October. Lewis, along with current management executives Dan Lenarduzzi, Greg Anderson, and Bob Lenarduzzi are longtime executives at the club and were aware of the allegations against Birarda and Busby at the time they were made. Dan Lenarduzzi, a Whitecaps club vice-president, emailed members of the women’s team in 2011 after Busby’s departure from the club instructing them to not comment publicly on his exit. The club did not mention the allegations when Busby left the Whitecaps, instead saying it was in “the club’s best interest to make a change in coaching staff for our women’s team program”. Busby told the Guardian that allegations of misconduct were never discussed when his contract was being negotiated at the end of the 2011 season. Busby, the head coach of the Jamaica women’s national team, is scheduled to meet with the Jamaican Football Federation on Tuesday to discuss the allegations around his time with the Whitecaps. Issues with how Whitecaps executives have dealt with abuse claims have not been limited to the women’s teams. In 2017, the mother of a Vancouver Whitecaps male youth team player who was allegedly sexually assaulted by his teammates claimed the club discouraged the boy and his family from immediately reporting the incident to police. The mother of the player – a minor at the time of the incident – told local media the MLS club provided her with two options to address the issue: hire either a private investigator or a moonlighting police officer who had previously provided the club with matchday security to look into the allegations. “Our gut instinct was that they were trying to downplay it and protect themselves,” she said at the time. “We felt that they wanted to deal with it internally and not let it get out.” The assault involved the player being pinned to the ground inside the team’s training-ground locker room before what was described as “a graphic sex assault”. “These were his teammates,” the player’s mother said. “It’s mind-blowing to think that this even happened.” Police eventually charged two players with sexual assault after the mother called the police. It is unclear whether the Whitecaps reported the incident to the police. “The safety and wellbeing of our players is our top priority and we have been cooperating fully with the [police] investigation,” the Whitecaps said at the time. Major League Soccer did not respond to multiple requests for comment for this story.On the eastern edge of the Sonoran desert, in the grasslands not 10 miles north of the US-Mexico border, James and Rachael Stewart have arranged a dozen weightlifting machines and dumbbell sets. At sundown, as they and their four children herd lambs and alpacas into their stalls, the occasional chick or duck passes between these markers of the Stewarts’ previous life. Two years ago, James and Rachael were fitness trainers living in a Phoenix suburb. James traveled frequently to bodybuilding competitions across the south-west, in cities such as Tucson and Albuquerque, and Rachael had just completed a master’s degree in business management. But then the Covid-19 pandemic struck, shutting down meatpacking plants across the country, and they found themselves without the protein sources they needed as athletes – and parents of four growing children. That’s when an idea came to them that sounded a little impossible at first, but felt more important the more they thought about what doing it would mean for their kids. James sold his 1972 Chevy Caprice and the couple purchased 10 acres of land just outside Douglas, Arizona. They were going to start one of Arizona’s very few Black-owned commercial ranches. In October of 2020, James and Rachael Stewart broke ground on the ranch they are calling the Southwest Black Ranchers. As a biracial couple (James is Black and Rachael is Filipina and Mexican), they immediately began looking for other Black ranchers for guidance – and so far have struggled to connect with any in Arizona. According to the USDA, Black farmers make up less than 1.5% of the country’s producers and are primarily located in southern and mid-Atlantic states, despite the long, but often forgotten, history of Black ranchers in the American west. Connecting with other Black farmers, ranchers and gardeners across the country through social media, the Stewarts hope to build a ranch that inspires their children and other new generations of Black farmers to return to the south-west. In 1920, Black farmers made up 14% of the industry, but after thousands lost their land due to discriminatory lending practices at the US Department of Agriculture, less than 2% remained. In order to connect with other Black farmers, the Stewarts joined a Facebook group where they met Texans who taught them about hydroponics and a South African farmer whose work on regenerative agriculture is inspiring their goals for the ranch. At home in Arizona, they also connected with Drinking Gourd Farms, a network of Black gardeners and homesteaders in Phoenix, who are helping the Stewarts mulch their farm’s soil. As the Stewarts prepare their ranch they’re hoping to create a world where their children don’t think twice about being part of a Black-led agricultural revolution. When James and Rachael first bought their land outside of Douglas, they were motivated by the inequities they had seen come to light during the early months of the Covid-19 pandemic. Tyson Foods had just shut down several of its meatpacking plants and published a full-page New York Times ad warning that “the food supply chain is breaking”. That same week, the USDA reported that beef production was down 25% and grocery stores started rationing the amount of meat each customer could purchase. That’s when James and Rachael realized the perils of a factory farming system, where the fate of one company could harm their ability to feed their four children. They wondered if they’d have more control if they owned their own livestock – and if the food supply chain overall might be more sustainable if there were many local farms, meatpackers and processors, as opposed to just a few. Although those questions have continued to motivate them, James and Rachael say it’s their children – who go by their nicknames J5, Nay, Zey and JG – that are the real driving force behind their work. “We live in a very white state,” said Rachael, and many people “don’t realize the societal impact of [Black] kids not seeing positive role models who look like them”. Arizona’s population is only about 5% Black, and nearly 83% white. When the Stewarts discovered that they’d be nearly the only Black ranchers in Arizona, they decided they wanted to fill that gap for their kids. “Sometimes you need to actually see something before it can become tangible,” said Rachael. “You need to see a Black farmer before you realize you could be a Black farmer.” James and Rachael see their work as parents not just as role models, but also as the creators of new systems that they can pass down to their children. “We want to create a situation where our kids have an option, and they have a trade,” so that if they “don’t want to take on the debt” of college “that doesn’t hinder them from being successful”, says James. Although he and his wife both have college degrees, they’d like their children to have choices so they don’t “have to go $80,000 into debt to get a $35,000 job”. We’re trying to “create an alternative system for minority and socially disadvantaged ranchers”, says Rachael, so that we can hand over a business to our children “that is always going to be needed”. Part of that work has involved creating alternative networks with other Black ranchers, farmers, gardeners and entrepreneurs. The Stewarts realize they have a long way to go to make their ranch financially viable for the long term. Although they were able to purchase their initial animals and supplies with the support of a Go Fund Me account, they are now Beta testing approaches to sales, meeting with meat processors, and also applying for grants, including ones from the USDA. One of those first collaborations was with the Drinking Gourd Farms community in Phoenix, which is primarily led by Black Muslim refugee women. During the early months of the pandemic, Drinking Gourd Farms also began to re-evaluate the sustainability of the food supply chain. To make sure Black families had access to healthy food while that system was in turmoil, they distributed food boxes to 4,600 families across the state. When a few of Drinking Gourd Farms’ members heard about the Stewarts’ plans, they drove down to visit the family in Douglas. That’s how James and Rachael met their ranch manager, Grand Rahba. Rahba had spent most of the past decade working at independent farms and gardens across the country, learning sustainable techniques such as composting and permaculture, before landing at Drinking Gourd Farms. On those farms, Rahba says he learned the techniques to “set up an ecosystem that will sustain itself” and the “importance of having access to stuff, being able to grow your own food, raise animals, have space”. When he met the Stewarts, he was immediately drawn to their mission and bought his own five acres of land adjacent to theirs. For Rahba, Southwest Black Ranchers was an opportunity to prioritize alternatives to capitalism, that would allow him, the Stewarts and other Black farmers to reconnect with the land and their livestock, while reimagining their relationship to work and rest. A history of pioneering Black cowboys It’s late morning on the Stewart’s ranch and Romeo, their sole male alpaca, has gotten loose. He’s supposed to be in his pen while the females graze, but he’s wily and desperate to mate, so instead he’s chasing Soleil – who seems decidedly uninterested in his affections. The pair are not two feet away from crashing into their pen’s fencing when 12-year-old J5 lassos Romeo in one fell swoop – accomplishing a skill he and his siblings have been practicing for months. Zey, Nay and JG cheer for their brother as he shepherds Romeo into his stall, and then each takes their own turn trying to lasso the alpaca under J5’s now expert guidance. What none of them realize in the moment is that J5 has mastered a skill that Black ranchers invented and perfected generations before him. “It was enslaved cowboys of African descent in Mexico who invented this new technique of capturing cattle” with a lasso, says Andrew Sluyter, professor at Louisiana State University and author of Black Ranching Frontiers: African Cattle Herders of the Atlantic World, 1500–1900. “The previous way of capturing cattle was simply to ride behind them with a lance that had a sharp blade on the end of it” and cut the tendons in the cow’s rear legs. But then, in the 17th century, there was “a change in the laws that makes it illegal in New Spain and what’s now Mexico for cowboys who are slaves … to own one of those lances with that halfmoon-shaped blade on the end of it because there were more and more slave rebellions.” That’s when enslaved cowboys developed the idea of lassoing cattle. “There was this imperative for Black cowboys to advance some kind of alternative means to capture cattle that didn’t involve a weapon,” said Sluyter, who cites an engraving from 1643 of Black cowboys demonstrating the technique by using a long pole to drop a lasso over a cow. “By the 1700s it had been perfected so they no longer needed that pole.” Although lassos and cowboy hats are typically associated with white cowboys in the American west, Sluyter says it shouldn’t come as a surprise that many early ranching techniques were developed by people of African descent. “If you look at the world in 1492 when Columbus lands in the Caribbean, the largest single area of open range cattle ranching was the Sahel” in Africa, he says. “That’s where cattle and humans evolved together over millions of years” and “that’s where the expertise was.” The word “cowboy” itself originated during slavery when ranchers called Black cow hands by the pejorative “cow boy”. During reconstruction, many formerly enslaved men took jobs as ranch hands and by the late 1800s, historians estimated that one in four cowboys working on the frontier were Black. One of those men was Nat Love, who earned the nickname “Deadwood Dick” in a roping competition in 1876. Another was Bass Reeves, the first Black deputy US marshal west of the Mississippi River – and allegedly the inspiration for the Lone Ranger. Today, the legacy of Black cowboys is continued by groups such as the Louisiana Trail Riders and the Compton Cowboys. For more than a decade, the Arizona Black Rodeo Association has held a rodeo in Phoenix each year. And Black cowboy Lu Vason has, since 1984, hosted the traveling Bill Pickett Invitational Rodeo, named after the Black cowboy who invented rodeo steer wrestling (or bulldogging). But to this day, few Black cowboys or ranchers actually own their own land or livestock. Finding a home on the land If you ask James and Rachael for their address, they’ll send you GPS coordinates instead. Although their ranch isn’t far outside of Douglas, their neighbors are few and far between – depending on the route you take, you might see the “No Trespassing” signs along a neighbor’s fence, but then again you might only spot the distant mountains and mesquite trees. Despite the many neighboring farms, the Stewarts are actually located in a food desert: the only grocery store for miles north of the border is a WalMart. “There’s a fear of being out on the land, and being rural, and being the only minority there. It’s a valid fear,” said Rachael. Moving out of the city, she and James say, has been precarious. “If you’re coming out here with money obviously everything’s different, but if you’re not coming out here with money then there’s a lot of change you’ve got to get ready to deal with. It’s not the easiest experience in the world,” says James. But if you do come out on the land, “you’re getting a lot more freedom”. Since moving, James and Rachael have helped three other Black families buy land on their same street. They’re still wary of harassment, but they’ve started building their own networks – largely made up of people they’ve met on social media, like a South African farmer whose work on regenerative agriculture is inspiring their goals for the ranch and Black ranchers in Texas who have taught them about hydroponics. Black farmers “are already doing these things independently because they’ve been forced to”, says Rachael. For generations, official structures, such as the USDA, did not support Black farmers equally, so those farmers created their own systems. But the result, Rachael says, is that those independent networks exist now for ranchers who hope to challenge the factory farming system. The Stewarts have built almost everything on their ranch from scratch. They’ve traded their labor for supplies, built pens out of pallets and wire fencing, and even adopted rehomed animals to grow their flock. “We’ve never bought anything new. Everything we’ve ever had was used,” says Rachael. That reality can be difficult, she says, “sometimes you get to this point where you think you don’t deserve anything”, it’s a mindset that “minorities just always get the leftovers”. But despite – or rather because of – that, Rachael says, she and James “are trying to create a blueprint for people to follow”. Including their kids. “Whatever we learn, we want to be able to pass on.”Chloe had encouraged her husband to accept the new job. “I told him: ‘Life is too short to be unhappy.’” The effect on him was transformative – but not in the way she had imagined. “One minute, he was a family guy, the next, he was always working late and going in early.” She found out why when she visited him one day at work. “My heart dropped when I saw them talking to each other – they had this closeness,” says Chloe, 49. “I realised then that it was her that had come between us. He went to her with problems, shared secrets and aspirations – all those things that we used to do together.” Chloe is confident the relationship was never physical – but 15 years later it is still enormously hurtful. At the time, they had been married for 12 years and had a three-year-old son. “Before, I thought that pain could only come from a physical betrayal – there wasn’t a rulebook to follow for this type.” *** An emotional affair is characterised by nonsexual intimacy with someone other than your partner, in such a way that violates their trust and expectations. With technology enabling round-the-clock and covert communication, it has never been easier to fall into that grey area between “just friends” and “more than friends” – often with plausible deniability. According to a 2015 YouGov study of 1,660 British adults, 20% of people have been unfaithful to their partner. Of those, 15% said their infidelity had no physical component. When the Guardian ran a reader callout asking for experiences of emotional affairs, the responses showed that the fallout of this kind of affair is no less devastating for the lack of sex. Chloe says she could feel her husband’s relationship with his colleague “eroding” her own, but “it was so easy to duck out of discussing it because nothing had physically happened”. Then she looked at her husband’s phone: “His messages to her had their own kind of language and intimacy – I knew then that we wouldn’t work.” Not every relationship would be threatened by such a bond: only 44% of respondents to the YouGov survey said they considered a non-physical connection to be cheating. Some people actively make room for others through consensual non-monogamy. Albert, a retiree who identifies as queer, says an “emotional affair” strikes him as a non-sequitur: “It equates the attachment with something that is duplicitous – this need not be the case.” Jealousy over friends or colleagues might also denote a relationship that is controlling or even abusive. But in instances where those suspicions are well founded, the truth may emerge only after many painful arguments, denial and even gaslighting. Confirmation of her ex-partner’s emotional affair made Anneka, 31, feel strangely relieved: “I felt vindicated that I had been right. I’d spent a long time questioning whether I was just being crazy and controlling.” Anneka’s paranoia had been piqued by her then boyfriend being “glued to his phone”, while keeping it out of her sight. “I’m pretty confident he wasn’t cheating on me physically – but, in my mind, emotional cheating is almost as bad.” What constitutes infidelity is specific to each relationship, says Sarah Calvert, a sex and relationships therapist based in London, but secrecy can be proof enough. “That is one of the factors – telling secrets and deep, intimate feelings that you wouldn’t want your partner to know you were sharing. It comes down to that basic question: would you be happy for your partner to be overhearing these conversations, or to know how much time you spend thinking about them?” Georgina, 40, says her three-year emotional affair with a colleague was “as intense as a physical affair – perhaps more so. We never even kissed on the mouth. I had never felt closer to anyone.” Dr Gayle Brewer, a senior psychology lecturer at the University of Liverpool, says that if our partner is confiding in someone else instead of us, perhaps with intimate details about our relationship, “we tend to view that as a betrayal”. Conversely, “if we feel as if our partner is not listening to us or supporting us, we’re more likely to engage in emotional infidelity,” she says (although a strong support network outside the relationship could mitigate this). The impact is felt more by women, says Brewer, with studies showing “time and time again” that they are more distressed by an emotional affair than by a sexual one, while the opposite is true for men. “Men tend to question their partners: ‘Have you had sex with that person?’ Women tend to ask: ‘Do you love that person?’ And the unfaithful partner will deny the aspect that’s more hurtful.” Daphne, 25, broke up with her boyfriend over his messages to a former colleague: “They were chatting like boyfriend and girlfriend. It hurt more than if he had drunkenly snogged someone on a night out.” When they got back together a year later, her boyfriend struggled with Daphne’s sexual encounters during the break. “He didn’t really have the right to say anything about it,” she says. The common conception is that an emotional affair is a precursor to a physical one. “A little bit of chemistry or sexual tension” is typical of emotional affairs, says Calvert, but their underlying cause – the behaviours driving the betrayal – may not be obvious. “In my experience, it comes from deeper issues within the relationship or the person – unresolved issues from past traumas, for example, or a need that’s not being met.” Walter, a middle-aged father of three, paraphrases When Harry Met Sally: “Affairs are a symptom, not a cause.” His wife’s emotional affair, with a female friend, had roots in her sexual confusion and childhood abuse, he says. “I can’t judge her from an intellectual perspective. But I can say that when your lover gives her heart to someone else, it’s simply painful.” Other readers linked their (or their partner’s) emotional affair to a wide range of factors including religious upbringing, difficulties in conceiving, new parenthood, mental and physical illness, the death of a parent, professional impostor syndrome, and the disruption to a social network caused by a change in job or location. One 29-year-old described feelings of panic at a looming engagement: “I couldn’t explain why – I had spent the past six years dreaming of our future. But a birthday message from an ex-lover popped up in my inbox and the rest unfolded at a rapid pace.” Much more pronounced than doubts about the relationship was the toll taken on them by day-to-day responsibilities, especially after many years of monogamy. “The emotional high we both got from a feeling of being recognised as people – not parents, colleagues, spouses, whatever – was addictive,” says Yvonne, 47, who had an emotional affair with her colleague. Clara, 24, echoed many respondents in describing a man she met via an app, with whom she talked nonstop for four months: “He was everything I wanted my partner to be.” When the third party is often idealised, it is not a fair comparison, says Calvert. “It’s like this big fantasy is created – they seem to understand you, but actually you’re not seeing the whole of them, because you don’t have a full relationship.” Confronting what is at the root of your emotional affair could reveal the path out of it – and strengthen your relationship, she adds. “Just like physical affairs, emotional affairs give an opportunity to look at the underlying issues, whether that’s within the individual or the relationship. It can be a catalyst for quite a seismic change – but re-establishing trust takes a long time.” Phyllis, 58, and her husband are opening up their 20-year marriage to polyamory after admitting to emotional affairs: “I’m not ready to give up the person I’m having an emotional affair with, but I am willing to repair what is broken in my marriage,” she says. Caitlin, 37, says her husband’s emotional entanglement with a colleague has “been a real kick up the arse for us”. At the time, they had been working long hours and raising young children, with little joy in their lives or time for each other. After the affair came out, they relocated, resolving to make a change. Now their marriage is “better than ever”, says Caitlin. “We remember we do actually like and love each other, and we feel good that we’ve gone through so much together … it just as easily could have been me who had had an emotional affair; things were that bad. We’re grateful that it happened now.” Even if a relationship does not recover, there is more to be gained from confronting the problems at play, says Calvert. Through therapy, Walter found the self-esteem he needed to end his marriage after his wife’s emotional affair. India, 28, says she is much happier after hers led to a divorce. Likewise, Tanya, 30, says it was a catalyst to end her 10-year relationship: “I’m thoroughly enjoying the independence and growth.” As for Chloe, her husband’s emotional affair led to their divorce. “I slowly rebuilt myself by going to [the counselling service] Relate to ‘get over it’ – and him.” And she did, later remarrying and having another child. She says her husband’s emotional affair was the making of “the more savvy me. I wouldn’t be who I am today without it.” Some names have been changedDespite quizzical think pieces on the motivations behind the Great Resignation, anyone who pays rent or a mortgage knows why this “labor shortage” is under way. After years of inflation and stagnant wages, the pandemic has revealed the value of labor, the worthlessness of commutes and office culture, and the importance of finding personal comfort in times of increasing precarity. In other words, we are living in what labor economist Lawrence Katz calls “a once-in-a-generation ‘take this job and shove it’ moment” – which gives workers a once-in-a-generation upper hand. The potential of this cultural moment is not limited to the 2.9% of the workforce who have quit their jobs in the past few months. As CEOs scramble to maintain retention rates, those who have kept their jobs can express solidarity with resigning workers and contribute to the cultural shift by slowing the pace of productivity. What I am proposing is not exactly a “slowdown”, but a “slow-up”. Traditionally, a slowdown is a strike tactic in which workers remain on the job but slow productivity with the aim of negotiating for a particular objective, such as higher wages. In this sense, a slowdown is a highly localized and temporary effort. By contrast, a slow-up must be unlocalized and permanent. It would entail a grassroots redefinition of workplace expectations – and frankly, it has been a long time coming. In 2020, 80% of US workers reported feeling that they have too many things to do and not enough time to do them – a phenomenon known as time poverty. This isn’t just in our heads: a 2014 Gallup poll revealed that US workers clocked in an average of 47 hours a week, with more than 18% working over 60 hours a week. It would be naive to attribute these statistics to the industrious spirit of the American worker, considering that full-time minimum wage workers cannot afford an apartment in any state in the US without taking on another job. It is no surprise that “speed up” and “slow down” evidence a cultural recognition that a fast pace moves you up the corporate ladder, while a slower pace leaves you behind. Instead, a slow up (intentionally rhymes with “glow up”) signals that slowing down can improve workers’ quality of life. The objective is not to drive down profits (though that may happen), but to uphold the ideal that everyone deserves a life of dignity, which includes rest and distance from work. Undoubtedly, some will say that calling for a slow-up ignores the lived realities of workers or the racialized and gendered dynamics of the workplace, where people of color still have to work twice as hard to be recognized and women are still expected to do unpaid work. While such criticism is valuable, it also reaffirms the expectation that living a worthwhile life or getting a human amount of rest is a luxury afforded only to the privileged. Moreover, such a critique intentionally ignores the work of Black activists and artists who explicitly call for a change in work rhythms. A 2019 art installation by Navild Acosta and Fannie Sosa, Black Power Naps/Siestas Negras, responds to the fact that 34% of Hispanics and 45% of Black US residents get less than seven hours of sleep a night. Similarly, Tricia Hersey, a performance artist known as the Nap Bishop, has convincingly argued since 2016 that rest is a necessary component of reparations. So, while it is true that groups who bear the brunt of workplace disparities would be taking the biggest risks in a slow-up, it is also true that we would have the most to gain. We would be, effectively, stealing back our lives. Although a slow-up is not a strike tactic, it does elicit many of the same concerns of a “prisoners’ dilemma” as workers’ strikes. Because our economic structure puts workers in continuous competition with each other, a worker who slows the pace could lose an opportunity, a promotion, or employment itself. The slow-up requires solidarity, flexibility and creativity. Depending on the job and the worker, slowing up might mean responding to emails only three days a week, blocking out time for yourself before and after draining meetings, taking unofficial breaks, following work expectations to the letter of a company’s mission statement, or strategically engaging in untrackable forms of “time theft”. Attending to a slower pace can also help us be vigilant against corporate attempts to rebrand fast-paced exploitation. CEOs are scrambling to create a “new normal” that mollifies workers’ desire for work-life balance while keeping existing power structures in play. While more than 70% of CEOs expect that the labor shortage will disrupt their business in the next 12 months, two of the main solutions they are implementing across the board – more flexible hours and increased diversity – fall short of the policy changes workers need, such as increased holidays and paid time off. It is not that flexible schedules or emphasis on diversity and inclusion are bad for workers, but rather that both of these retention strategies are easily subsumed into the traditional rat race. Studies already show that more flexible hours lead to more work hours – specifically, 2.5 more hours of work a day. This is not to say that flexible hours cannot be beneficial, but that workers should preemptively find ways of slowing up to make the most of their new work dynamic. Similarly, corporate-driven diversity efforts very quickly hit the limits of their potential, particularly given that most begin and end with “we should see more diversity in our employee base and … our leadership”. In the spirit of slow-up, we could ask: What would it mean, instead, if diversity, equity, and inclusion practices were worker-led and intended to explore labor practices that can grapple with rest as a necessary part of reparations and closing the sleep gap? What if inclusion examined the relationships that emerge from labor organizing? Or if “equity” (defined as fairness and justice in the way people are treated) responded to the many reports highlighting that the US remains an outlier in overwork? As with any labor movement, the Great Resignation is a waiting game. The longer workers remain between jobs, the more their expenses go up – an important advantage to employers. Keeping those who quit their job afloat through mutual aid and pushing for generous paid time off and parental leave during this crucial time of workplace redefinition is also in the interest of our collective wellbeing. Does this seem impossible? The truth is, you don’t have to be idealistic to participate in the slow-up. You only have to be imaginative. You only have to think about the meaningful things that could fill your day and imagine what it would feel like to work more slowly and feel more rested – and then strategically act as though that were already possible. In the words of Courtney Desiree Morris: “What if we attempted to live as free as the many-gendered daughters that are yet meant to arrive but we know are coming?” Erika Rodriguez is a postdoctoral fellow at the University of Maine at Farmington and the director of the New Commons ProjectLate in the evening on Friday 15 October an alert appeared on my phone that seemed at last to portend the end of the world. Two weeks before the UN climate summit in Glasgow – a make-or-break moment for American leadership and international ambition – Senator Joe Manchin had decided to gut our country’s best, and perhaps last, attempt to save itself. With three decades left to decarbonize the global economy, and a window of Democratic control unlikely to recur for years, Manchin’s benefactors in the coal and gas industry had managed to snatch defeat from the jaws of victory, killing the Clean Electricity Performance Program that would finally have brought their lucrative global arson spree under control. It was hard not to feel like this was game over, a sensation I’d grown accustomed to after a decade working in the American climate movement. It was the same feeling I’d had after the collapse of the Copenhagen climate talks, and the defeat of the Waxman-Markey bill, and the election of a president willing to drown the world to buoy his ego. But though each of those moments felt crushing, the news on the 15th felt worse. After all, we have many fewer years left now to act. And we are so close this time, so excruciatingly close. My rage might consume me if I couldn’t set it down here: not only is Joe Manchin devastating the constituents he claims to work for, consigning them to a future of constant, devastating floods. Not only is he shilling for an industry that has ravaged his home state, snaring West Virginians in a resource trap. Not only is he making a choice that could single-handedly warm the planet by several tenths of a degree, precipitating millions of avoidable deaths and dimming the prospects of my entire generation. The truly maddening thing is that he refuses to look his decision in the face, hiding instead behind the debunked and convenient lies furnished by his donors, who maintain that they can burn coal into mid-century without risking a catastrophe. Whether he genuinely believes these fantasies is anyone’s guess. But for the sake of our lives and those of his grandchildren, I pray he changes course. A few days after the news broke, I gathered with dozens of young people outside the yacht where Joe Manchin makes his DC home. Our signs echoed our disbelief: how was he so sanguine, risking the fate of human civilization? As a practicing Catholic, how could he spurn the pope, who just this month called for an urgent transition away from fossil fuels? It is hard to overstate how surreal it felt, knowing that the fate of our children, and our children’s children, and the many generations beyond them, rested on the whims of a single man enjoying his evening on the second boat from the end of the wharf, the one called “Almost Heaven”. As a friend put it, “Almost Hell” would feel more apt. Since then, many young people have taken to the streets and gone on indefinite hunger strike, pleading with him not to torch the world we were meant to inherit. When one of the strikers – seven days into her fast – confronted Manchin outside a donor luncheon, he offered the weakest of moral sidesteps: “All the emissions are coming from Asia.” (In fact, the US has contributed more to global emissions than any other country. And China, unlike Manchin, has thrown its weight behind a detailed plan for decarbonization.) As young people work feverishly to overcome this intransigence and prevent our future from slipping through our fingers, it’s worth asking a basic question: what exactly does hope look like now? It feels increasingly clear to me that I don’t have hope. It’s not that I’ve succumbed to fatalism. I just no longer think that hope is something you can “have”. The past two weeks have made unmistakably vivid to me that hope is a kind of discipline; it is something you do. I have felt the daily effort of it: gritting my teeth and wrenching some glimmer from the gloom. On most days, this has looked like calling my best friend and grasping together at the latest straw. Maybe Manchin could be convinced to support a carbon tax! He has since rejected the idea, threatening to bring down a crucial methane fee along with it. Maybe a call from Pope Francis could remind him that Catholic virtue demands not setting fire to the planet! If such a call has been placed, no one has reported on it. Maybe the Biden administration’s plan B will actually work. Maybe we can meet our Paris targets with all carrots and no sticks, plowing $550bn into clean energy without actively drawing down on fossil fuels. This last one remains to be seen, though our reasons for confidence are shaky. But hope is not something we do because we know we’re going to win. Hope is something we do for each other. It’s a gift we grow together then spread outward, a communal act of unconditional grace. It is looking past the headlines at the people we love and telling them we haven’t given up. In this way, hope is like any other co-constructed human story – marriage, or money, or God. The more people tell it, the more power it wields. So I’m going to tell it again, for its own sake, with our opponents at center stage: The fossil fuel industry is scared. They are hanging on by a political thread. There is a single old man standing between them and the regulation they despise, and his entire party is telling him to stand down. Meanwhile their grift keeps getting exposed. Their rationalizations are ringing false. Their cultural capital is running dangerously low. And you need only watch last week’s public excoriation of the CEO of Shell to understand how their historical legacy is taking shape. Like the fuels they drill from the dirt, their grounds for hope are finite, costly and getting harder and harder to reach. Ours, on the other hand, cannot be exhausted. Our hope is stubborn, and furious, and born in one another. We are its source and its horizon. And we know what we’re capable of. It was young people who led the charge to defeat Donald Trump; young people who compelled the Biden administration to feel our climate urgency, while electing the progressive caucus that’s given that urgency teeth. No matter how many brutal setbacks we’re forced to swallow, we will always have a reason to keep fighting. We are our reason to keep fighting. And unlike Manchin’s fading coal industry, we are never, ever going away. Daniel Sherrell is the author of Warmth: Coming of Age at the End of Our World (Penguin Books) and a climate activistPlans are under way to build the UK’s largest village for rough sleepers in one of Manchester’s most desirable neighbourhoods. Embassy Village will provide homes for 40 men in purpose-built pods underneath 10 railway arches in the Castlefield district, where one-bedroom flats regularly sell for £250,000. Sandwiched between the River Irwell and the Bridgewater canal, the land has been given for free on a 125-year lease by Peel Group, the developers behind MediaCity and the Manchester Ship Canal. The village is the brainchild of Sid Williams, founder of a Christian charity called Embassy. A skinny-jeaned, perma-cheerful enthusiast, he ran a homeless shelter on Mumford &amp; Sons’ old tour bus until Covid got in the way. James Whittaker, Peel’s executive director of development, calls him Jesus, “because you can’t help but feel the genuine good he’s doing. He’s probably the kindest, most genuine man I’ve ever met.” Though he would blush at the blasphemous comparison, 36-year-old Williams has a remarkable knack for getting rich people to dig into their pockets in his mission to house the homeless and destitute in Manchester. An estate agent would describe Embassy Village as “waterside living in a city centre location”. Showing the Guardian around the site last month, Williams admitted it currently looks more like “an apocalyptic wasteland”, with water dripping from two viaducts carrying noisy trams and trains and some rough sleepers having already set up mattresses among the detritus of illegal raves. Planning permission was granted this summer, with 61% of local people in favour of the project. Now Williams – helped by Tim Heatley, founder of property developer Capital &amp; Centric and chair of the Greater Manchester mayor’s homelessness charity – is on a mission to raise £3m to build the village, offering local corporates a chance to sponsor one or more homes. Computer-generated simulations of the project show alfresco dining, festoon lighting and imaginary residents tending to communal gardens – exactly the sort of aspirational images sold to wealthy young professionals moving into the skyscrapers popping up across Manchester. But while they may pay £800 a month for a one-bed studio, Embassy’s residents are likely to pay no more than the local housing allowance – currently £302 a month for a room in a shared house or £552 for a one-bed flat. Embassy is not providing “forever” homes. Residents can stay for a maximum of two years. The idea is to “give every resident a live trial run at managing a home, cooking, cleaning and paying rent in a sympathetic and supported environment”, said Williams. Running the Embassy bus led Williams to conclude that shelters are not really the answer to solving rough sleeping. If people are to get off the streets, they need stable tenancies and wrap-around support. They also need jobs, which is why Embassy partners with 18 local businesses who agree to give interviews and hopefully employment to its tenants. To qualify for residency in Embassy Village, residents must be men with no alcohol or drug addictions. (Embassy will soon open a separate, more low-key project for homeless women fleeing domestic violence.) As well as paying rent, they must commit to six hours a week of training in shopping, cooking and budgeting. “I wanted to get away from the shelter model where you sort of accidentally become a parent, going, ‘Oh, I’ll do the shopping. And I’ll do the cleaning. And I’ll do the cooking,’” said Williams. The preconception that most homeless people are addicts is not true, said Williams: “Sixty per cent of our chaps are homeless because of relationship breakdowns.” During the pandemic, Embassy rented properties to move men from the tour bus into homes, including one who had spent seven years in shelters waiting for a council house. With about 13,000 households on the waiting list in Manchester, he never got to the top as a “single bloke with no criminal record, no addictions and no real mental health struggles”, said Williams. Potential residents will be referred by Manchester city council or local homeless charities and then interviewed by Embassy. “The interview is really to ascertain whether you’re serious about change,” said Williams. “Believe it or not, about half the people we interview say, ‘I don’t want a job, I don’t ever want to work, I want to live in a council flat. That’s my ambition.’ And we go, ‘That’s great. But we are not that thing.’” Smaller homeless villages have been built in recent years in Bristol and Edinburgh, and the Hope Gardens development in Ealing, west London, has 60 apartments in containers used as emergency accommodation in 20ft containers for the newly homeless. What makes Embassy different is the ambition to build a community. Central to this is a village hall, complete with counselling room, laundry and communal computers, plus a training kitchen to help residents learn to cook, said Williams: “That way we can be a community, we watch England lose at the football, we can celebrate people’s birthdays, and Christmas dinner – all that good stuff.”When Daryl Maguire phoned Gladys Berejiklian in 2018 to tell her he’d been summonsed to the Independent Commission Against Corruption did she realise that what she did next might cost her her career? Did the former New South Wales premier consider that she might have information gleaned from their five-year secret relationship that she, as a public official, had a duty to report? Apparently not. On Monday Berejiklian faced serious questions about whether she met her obligations the Icac Act to report “a reasonable suspicion of corrupt conduct” to either Icac or the head of her department of Premier and cabinet. She did not contact either, a decision that, depending on what the commission finds she knew about Maguire’s alleged dealings, could lead to a finding of a serious breach. Icac guidelines explain reasonable suspicion means “there is a real possibility that corrupt conduct is, or may be, involved. No proof is required.” We’ve already heard tapped phone calls of Maguire telling Berejiklian he hoped to make $1.5m in commissions out of securing property rezonings at the new airport site at Badergy’s creek. This was while he was a serving MP in an electorate 400km from Sydney’s new airport site. Berejiklian has given evidence this sum did not ring alarm bells for her. She told Icac she didn’t really believe him. But she was told more than that, as we learned from phone taps played to the commission on Friday. On the evening of 5 July 2018 the former MP for Wagga rang with a bombshell: he had been summonsed as a witness to Icac over an introduction he had made for a Chinese developer, Country Garden, to then mayor of Canterbury, Michael Hawatt. An increasingly alarmed Berejiklian spent the 52-minute call trying to untangle exactly what Maguire was being called to Icac for. He told her Icac was interested in an introduction he had made for Country Garden to a council 400kms from his own electorate. She commented that the people he was associating with were “dodgy”. He assured her he was just a witness. He railed against Icac and said they could be listening now. They were. Monday morning brought further grilling by counsel assisting Scott Robertson SC about Berejiklian’s state of mind and her suspicions after that call. Berejiklian gave evidence she didn’t put two and two together with anything she had heard over the last three or four years. She did not “join the dots” about what had been revealed to her privately about lobbying for rezonings of land at Badgery’s creek and the Icac probe. She did not suspect corrupt conduct. “I assumed he had been caught up in something,” she said. Even after the 5 July call, she didn’t think she needed to inform Icac what Maguire had just told her because “Icac already knew”. As commissioner, Ruth McColl pointed out, she didn’t know what Icac knew or didn’t know. Still she didn’t suspect any corrupt conduct. “My radar wasn’t going off,” she said. “I trusted him.” The commission heard that in the days after 5 July, there were texts and calls in which Maguire urged Berejiklian to get another private phone and to communicate using the WeChat app, so that Icac couldn’t read or hear their communications. She suggested WhatsApp might be easier and said she would try. She did not take up his advice, and said that she believed his requests were because of “privacy concerns,” rather than trying to avoid detection. On 13 July Maguire appeared before Icac in Operation Dacha and the full extent of his involvement with Canterbury council became public. That inquiry was played phone taps of Maguire discussing his plans with business associates to seek payment for brokering property deals. The inquiry ultimately made no finding of corrupt conduct against him, but recommended he face criminal charges for giving false evidence. That evening Berejiklian phoned her chief of staff, Sarah Cruiksank whom she described as “a close friend” and highly professional public servant, to tell her about the secret relationship with Maguire. Cruikshank has given evidence that she was at dinner when the call came and did not take notes but she recalled Berejiklian telling her the relationship was “historical” and had ended when she became premier in January 2017. Under questioning Cruikshank’s counsel on Monday, Berejiklian denied she had lied about its status to Cruikshank. “Two people could have different perceptions of the same conversation,” she said. Of course, a current relationship would have had very different political ramifications. Cruikshank, had she known the relationship was ongoing, would have no doubt swung into full damage control, telling Icac that if she had known the relationship was ongoing she would have discussed with Berejiklian “whether or not there were implications for things she had done” and told Maguire that Berejiklian should not be involved in decisions relating to proposals he was lobbying for. The motivation behind Berejiklian’s obsessive secrecy about the relationship with Maguire is difficult to fathom. After his evidence at Icac, she removed him from the ministry and sent him to the crossbenches, as is protocol. But she made some poor choices. She did not seek any advice from Cruikshank or a lawyer on whether she had a duty to report what she knew to Icac, maintaining that she didn’t have any suspicions. In fact she kept in contact with him until September 2020. She told Icac that she was “mortified” after he gave evidence, saying the “shock of what happened made me question everything” including whether Maguire might have lied to her. Meanwhile, at least two staff members came forward in the days after Maguire’s evidence, to tell the head of the Premier’s department they needed to go to Icac to report what they knew about Maguire. One of them was an adviser to the minister for trade and industry. The other had worked as an adviser to the minister for planning. We do not know what they told Icac but the fact they had made disclosures was noted in two memos to the premier’s office which were tendered at the commission. Berejiklian saw at least one of these, noting on it: “the secretary’s role in this should be replicated for all future declarations.” Still Berejiklian did not see the need to report anything to Icac herself. Under intense questioning from Robertson, Berejiklian said she was “alive to her obligations” and that she had asked herself over and over whether she knew anything that should be reported to Icac. She was not motiviated by a fear that the relationship would become public, and “No. Gosh,” she was not affected by her personal feelings toward him. She just didn’t suspect anything.A single mother of six children has been waiting four years and four months to see a consultant for suspected multiple sclerosis in Northern Ireland as officials admit in leaked court papers that health waiting lists have spiralled “out of control”. Although referred to a neurologist in June 2017, Eileen Wilson, 47, has still not received a date to see the specialist despite suffering choking episodes that leave her “blue in the face”, loss of muscle control and a multitude of other symptoms. She is one of the hundreds of thousands of patients suffering in silence because of the chronic waiting lists that have been building since 2013, according to testimony submitted to the high court. Her case is at the centre of two landmark cases to be heard in December and January against the Northern Ireland health minister, Robin Swann, the UK chancellor, Rishi Sunak, and the health secretary, Savid Javid, who were named as defendants in the case last week after affidavits from Northern Ireland’s Department of Health blamed years of underfunding for the crisis. Sitting in her garden in her army veteran house in Belfast, Wilson said she would not give up the fight even though the human rights commission, her GP, and her MP, Gavin Robinson, have all failed to get her an appointment. “I just want to know what’s wrong with me,” she says. She explains how she staggers around her home “like a drunk” even though she does not drink and now suffers episodes of sleep paralysis, which has been likened to locked-in syndrome. “When I go to bed all the worry is there, it’s like a washing machine on full spin,” she said. “I worry that if I fall or choke, that’s going to be the end of it.” Die? “Yes,” she answers. “It can happen anytime. It’s like something is stuck in my throat. I’ve gone blue in the face. It lasts for a few minutes but it feels like hours,” she said. To her shock, she heard through her MP that her GP’s referral had been downgraded from “urgent” to “routine”, with the chief executive of South Eastern health and social care trust telling Robinson that “regrettably” the waiting time for an appointment was 163 weeks – three years and 13 weeks. “I am very sorry that we have not yet been able to offer Mrs Wilson an appointment,” he said. Four years and four months later, she is none the wiser. Her solicitor, Ciaran O’Hare of McIvor Farrell, has already applied successfully for leave for a judicial review, which is now listed for January with a second case expedited for hearing in December over a failed bid to get her an appointment overseas under EU legislation transposed into domestic law. He said her case was for the “benefit of the people of Northern Ireland” and is asking the court to conclude that the waiting lists, the worst in the UK for much of the past decade, are “unlawful and a breach of human rights”. “This saga has been going on in Northern Ireland for over 10 years and hospital waiting lists have been getting longer and longer. We do not have the NHS here, like in England; we have health and social care and it doesn’t work,” said O’Hare. “This is the first case of its kind and it is absolutely crucial because something must be done to end the suffering that is occurring every single day with people languishing and dying on hospital waiting lists,” he added. Recent figures show nearly a fifth of Northern Ireland’s population are waiting for a first appointment and more than half of those are waiting for more than a year. “It is the case that the majority of people on the waiting list are waiting for more than a year, which is pretty extraordinary,” said Mark Dayan, a policy analyst at the health services thinktank the Nuffield Trust. Waiting lists are the worst in the UK and possibly in Europe. Last week, the children’s commissioner revealed that 24 children with confirmed or suspected cancer were among the 17,000 minors waiting more than a year to see a specialist. Affidavits submitted to the courts and seen by the Guardian paint a grim picture. A senior official in the Department of Health in his testimony, said the delays were “extremely regrettable” but the health minister had repeatedly said a significant increase in funding was necessary to make a return to acceptable levels. “While doctors, nurses, other health professionals and managers have made every effort to ensure that any negative impact on patients has been kept to a minimum, waiting times have continued to grow to a level where many believe that they are now out of control,” he added. Dayan said Northern Ireland’s waiting lists began to “spiral to more and more unacceptably poor levels relative to the rest of the UK” 10 years ago. He said “one year-plus waits” were “almost unheard of” in England before Covid, but have been “common in Northern Ireland”. Out of an estimated 460,000 on a waiting list, 250,000 have been on it for more than a year, he said. The Department of Health declined to comment due to ongoing court proceedings.Good morning. Leaders representing more than 1 billion of the people most at risk from the climate crisis have accused the G20 of failing poor and vulnerable countries by not agreeing to a climate plan that would ensure their people’s survival. The leading figures at the Cop26 climate talks told the Guardian they were “extremely concerned” and had hoped for more from the G20 summit in Rome. They said the prospect of limiting global heating to 1.5C above pre-industrial levels, a vital threshold that scientists say is a “planetary boundary”, was slipping away as the UN conference opened in Glasgow. Gaston Browne, the prime minister of Antigua and Barbuda and chair of the Alliance of Small Island States, which represents 39 countries, said: “From what I’ve seen it appears we are going to overshoot 1.5C. We are very concerned about that. This is a matter of survival for us.” He blamed the influence of powerful private-sector interests for the G20’s failure to come up with better plans, saying: “We are here to save the planet, not to protect profits.” From the seemingly inexorable increase of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere to the rapid growth in green energy, here’s the climate crisis explained in 10 charts. How bad are emissions from key polluting countries? My colleague Miranda Bryant plays “Cop trumps” to find out who has been taking steps to improve and who really has not. As an environment writer, Fiona Harvey has seen many setbacks – but also triumphs, such as the tackling of acid rain. Here she shares her optimism for Cop26. Joe Biden dismisses bad polling and says domestic agenda set to pass Joe Biden sought to brush off concerns about bad polling on Sunday, telling reporters he expected Democrats to overcome internal differences and pass his domestic spending plan and a bipartisan infrastructure deal in the week to come. Earlier, an NBC News poll found that 54% of US adults disapproved of Biden’s performance, down six points since August, a period in which the president’s domestic agenda has stalled amid intra-party division. Biden spoke to reporters in Rome at the end of the G20, before traveling to Glasgow for the Cop26 climate summit. He said: “I didn’t run to determine how well I’m going to do in the polls. I ran to make sure that I follow through on what I said I would do as president of the United States. “I said that I would make sure that we were in a position where we dealt with climate change, where we moved in a direction that would significantly improve the prospects of American workers having good jobs and good pay. And further that I would make sure that we dealt with the crisis that was caused by Covid. “I believe we will pass my Build Back Better plan. I believe we will pass the infrastructure bill.” Top Democrats reportedly want a final version of Biden’s $1.75tn spending plan drafted by Sunday and passed by Tuesday. The price tag has come down dramatically from $3.5tn, with concessions to senators Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema. The infrastructure deal is valued at $1tn. In a 50-50 Senate, and with no Republican support on spending, Manchin and Sinema are key. Democrats must use reconciliation, a way to pass budgetary initiatives via a simple majority rather than 60 votes. Jen Psaki, White House press secretary to Joe Biden, tests positive for Covid Jen Psaki, Joe Biden’s White House press secretary, said on Sunday she had tested positive for Covid-19. Psaki, 42, did not travel with Biden to Rome for this week’s G20 summit. Biden has been accompanied in Europe by his principal deputy press secretary, Karine Jean-Pierre. The news of a positive test for a close aide to the president came a little over a year after an outbreak at the White House reached the then president, Donald Trump, who fell seriously ill and was forced to spend time in hospital. In a statement, Psaki said she last saw the 78-year-old Biden on Tuesday, “when we sat outside more than 6ft apart and wore masks”. Biden tested negative for Covid-19 on Saturday, Reuters quoted “a person familiar with the matter” as saying. Why didn’t she travel to Europe for the G20 and Cop25 talks? Psaki said she stayed in the US “due to a family emergency, which was members of my household testing positive for Covid-19”. Has Biden had a booster shot of the Covid vaccine? Yes, the president got his Covid-19 booster on 27 September, shortly after federal regulators approved the third dose for many Americans. In other news … A suspect has been arrested for attempted murder after 17 people were injured in a knife, fire and acid attack on a train in Tokyo that was carried out by a man wearing a Joker costume. As Trump and allies falsely claim the vote was stolen, nearly one in three election officials feel unsafe in their job. Those who uphold the election machinery say threats are the new normal. Southwest Airlines announced an internal investigation after a pilot was reported to have signed off a message to passengers by saying: “Let’s go Brandon.” The apparent non-sequitur is in fact a rightwing meme. The US supreme court is set to hear oral arguments over whether Texas can continue to allow private citizens to enforce a controversial six-week abortion ban on Monday. Stat of the day: The average American has 47 unread text messages and 1,602 unopened emails While social media and messaging apps claim to keep us more connected to each other, many younger users are finding themselves exhausted from receiving constant notifications and balancing numerous exchanges at once. The after-effect? Delayed responses, forgetting to get back to someone entirely, and a need for frequent phone breaks. In fact, a 2020 study exploring the effects of information overload found that “over-exposure to information can suppress the likelihood of response by overloading users, contrary to analogies to biologically inspired viral spread”. Don’t miss this: the devastating, destructive love affairs that involve no sex at all An emotional affair is characterised by nonsexual intimacy with someone other than your partner, in such a way that violates their trust and expectations. With technology enabling round-the-clock and covert communication, it has never been easier to fall into that grey area between “just friends” and “more than friends” – often with plausible deniability. According to a 2015 YouGov study of 1,660 British adults, 20% of people have been unfaithful to their partner. Of those, 15% said their infidelity had no physical component. Climate check: the show about our throwaway addiction and how to cure it How will this age be remembered? After the stone age, the bronze age, the steam age and the information age, what material or innovation will most define the current era? According to a new exhibition at the Design Museum, the most ubiquitous hallmark of the Anthropocene is not a gamechanging material, nor the mastery of technology. It’s trash. “We are arguably living in the waste age,” says Justin McGuirk, the London museum’s chief curator. “The production of waste is absolutely central to our way of life, a fundamental part of how the global economy operates.” Want more environmental stories delivered to your inbox? Sign up to our new newsletter, Down to Earth (formerly Green Light) to get original and essential reporting on the climate crisis every week Last thing: San Francisco’s bohemian boat-dwellers fight for their way of life For decades, a group known as the “anchor-outs” enjoyed a relatively peaceful existence in a corner of the San Francisco Bay. The mariners carved out an affordable, bohemian community on the water, in a county where the median home price recently hit $1.8m. But their haven could be coming to an end – and with it, a rapidly disappearing way of life. The agency that oversees the local waterway known as the Richardson Bay has in recent months begun a fervent crackdown on the boat-dwellers, who they say are here illegally and pose a threat to safety and the marine environment. The anchor-outs, meanwhile, are fighting back. Sign up First Thing is delivered to thousands of inboxes every weekday. If you’re not already signed up, subscribe now. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.comAmazon forest defenders are urging delegates at Cop26 not to trust the “greenwashing” promises of Jair Bolsonaro’s government, which has wreaked havoc on the environment over the past three years. Brazil will field one of the biggest delegations at the UN climate talks in Glasgow and fund a lavish promotional pavilion inside the conference centre. According to the agriculture minister, Tereza Cristina Corrêa da Costa Dias, and the environment minister, Joaquim Alvaro Pereira Leite, the message is that Brazil is “a longtime champion of the environmental agenda and an agrifood powerhouse”. But climate activists say the world should pay more attention to the destructive policies of the recent past than vague promises about the future, which they say are aimed at securing cash. Suely Vaz, a former head of the environment regulator Ibama who now works for the Climate Observatory, said the Brazilian government had gutted forest protection agencies and tried to change the law in favour of farmers and land grabbers. “Nowadays Brazil has an anti-environmental policy. They are paralysing everything. Deforestation and forest fires are out of control. This must change to ensure that climate money – which is important for our country – can be used in very detailed, specified way,” she said. Carlos Rittl, a senior policy adviser at the Rainforest Foundation Norway, said Brazil should not get away with a makeover that aimed to shake its pariah reputation under Bolsonaro. “It will be the biggest team ever. They are spending a lot on communications. Agriculture and industry will be there and a big comms team trying to sell the world a different image. But the world needs to hold Brazil accountable to the truth. The satellites don’t lie.” Satellite images show deforestation is at its highest level since 2012. More than 10,000 square kilometres were lost in the 12 months to July – an area nearly seven times bigger than greater London, and an increase of 57% on the previous year. Scientists say the rainforest is approaching an irreversible tipping point after which it would degrade into a dry savannah. Every nation is supposed to come to Glasgow with a more ambitious climate plan so the world can move closer to the Paris agreement’s goal of holding global heating as close to 1.5C as possible. The vast majority of governments have promised stronger action, but when Brazil updated its national climate plan last December it weakened its targets and allowed an extra 400 megatonnes of emissions. Climate Action Tracker rated this “highly insufficient”. Brazil has often proved a key player at climate talks and its negotiating team is highly respected. Since Bolsonaro took power, however, the country has become notorious for nationalist, anti-globalist policies. One of its first acts was to abandon plans to host the 2019 Cop. At the subsequent meeting in Madrid, the NGO Climate Action Network presented Brazil with the “colossal fossil” award for least progressive country. At Glasgow, Brazil will show a less fractious face. This is largely due to the shift in Washington. While Donald Trump was in the White House, Bolsonaro was emboldened to denigrate international cooperation on the world stage. Since Joe Biden came to power, he has been forced to drop his two most globally toxic representatives: the former foreign minister Ernesto Araújo, and the former environment minister Ricardo Salles. The new environment minister, Joaquim Leite, who will head the Brazilian delegation at Glasgow, is far more personable, but activists say he has done little to change the destructive policies of his predecessor. At Biden’s climate summit earlier this year, Bolsonaro promised to meet a goal set by one of his presidential predecessors, Dilma Rousseff, to halt illegal deforestation by 2030. But this threatens to become meaningless because his supporters in Congress are trying to change the law to allow more legal forest clearance and invasions of indigenous land, which is usually the best-protected territory. Inside Brazil, the heat is growing on Bolsonaro, who faces reelection next year. The economy is weak, his ratings are down and the senate wants to try him over the country’s 600,000-plus Covid deaths. Many in the agribusiness sector fear they will lose markets if the president continues to sully the country’s overseas image. Some farmers realise the rainfall for their crops depends on a stable Amazon rainforest. Concessions are possible at Glasgow. Some observers expect Brazil to announce a green growth policy, tweak its national climate plan and compromise on one of the most contentious areas of the climate talks, the “article 6” debate on a market mechanism for climate action. This could unlock billions of dollars in carbon credits and other incentives. A focus of Brazil’s delegation is the potential market for carbon, methane and conservation credits. These forms of financial support are intended to protect and restore the world’s great forests. This is a key goal of the UK hosts, who hope to announce a deal on Tuesday that would detail measures to halt and reverse forest loss by 2030, including greater support for indigenous peoples, moves towards deforestation-free supply chains, finance and regulations. The EU, Indonesia and the Democratic Republic of the Congo have agreed to this deal. Brazil is reportedly yet to sign. Brazil and other developing nations will also be pushing wealthy countries to finally live up to their promise of $100bn a year in climate funding between 2020 and 2025. If approved, the key question is how to ensure the money is spent on projects that reduce emissions and climate impacts. The situation is reminiscent of the US under Trump, when the rest of the world largely ignored the official US delegation at Cop summits while giving prominent space and attention to a rival gatherings of state governors, city mayors, NGOs and others supporting more ambitious emissions cuts. The two very different sides of Brazil will be similarly present in Glasgow. While the official Brazilian pavilion will promote agriculture, a rival Brazil Climate Action hub will highlight the emissions-cutting efforts of Amazonian states, indigenous communities and civil society groups.In February 2020, Amy had plans to go on holiday to the UK to visit friends. Originally from the US, she was living in Tbilisi, Georgia, teaching English to Chinese students. At the last minute, she pulled out of the trip. “I’d heard about the virus that had started spreading through Europe and decided it might not be great timing,” she remembers. The same week, she discovered black mould in her home. “Instead of going on holiday, I decided to move house.” After finding a new flat, she asked a friend if she knew anyone who could help her to move. “She said she knew someone from Iran but he didn’t speak any English.” Amir had moved to Georgia to buy a home, had bought a van and set up his own moving business. When he arrived to pack up her boxes, she was struck by how attractive he was. “He was the most handsome man I’d ever seen. I hardly knew where to look,” she says. Because Amir couldn’t speak English, they weren’t able to communicate on the journey. “Even though we couldn’t talk, I thought she seemed smart and pretty,” he says. The next day he texted her to ask her out, using Google Translate to send the message. They went for dinner and used their phones to communicate all evening. “We talked about our families and the reasons we’d come to live in Georgia,” says Amir. Amy admits she was “being cautious” because of the language barrier. “It kept me from opening up and getting to know him at first.” But when he offered to help her unpack and sort out her new flat the next day, she recognised how kind he was. “That’s when we were able to get a better feel for each other’s personalities,” she says. “I could tell he was a good person who would do anything for anyone.” A month after they started dating, the government announced that a strict lockdown would soon be coming into force. “Just before everything shut down, I invited him to move in,” she says. She continued to teach online, while Amir’s business was temporarily paused. “I started to teach him some English, but he’s a very stubborn student,” she laughs. It wasn’t long before they began discussing marriage. “I was thinking about it from the start,” says Amir. “She is so smart and independent. She knew what she wanted from life.” Amy also felt the relationship was right. “He’s dedicated to me. Even though he couldn’t express these things with words, I saw it through his actions.” At the end of the lockdown, Amir “asked me through Google Translate if we could get married”, Amy says. As they were unable to have guests, they held video calls with both families before and after the wedding, which took place at the end of May 2020 in Georgia. “My family always trusted my decisions and they were happy for me,” says Amy. Amir also had his family’s blessing. “I’ve always been able to tell my dad anything and he supports me.” The couple enjoy doing everything together, from hiking to yoga. They share a passion for travel and have plans to visit Japan in the future. In September, they moved into Amir’s apartment, just outside the city. They’re now planning to return to Amy’s hometown of Richmond, Virginia. “The government in Georgia invited people from Iran to live here if they could buy a home for $35,000, but this rule has now changed and the home must be worth over $100,000. It means Amir is no longer eligible for residency, so we’re going back to the States.” Amy loves her partner’s fidelity and commitment to her. “I told him I wanted a pet fish and he bought me this amazing aquarium. He has unquestioning loyalty and will do anything to make me happy. He’s my best friend.” Meanwhile, Amir appreciates his partner’s caring nature. “She’s always teaching me about the world. I have a better understanding of culture, and she’s opened my mind to new things and new experiences.” Want to share your story? Tell us a little about yourself, your partner and how you got together by filling in the form here.We found a pumpkin in the swimming pool car park one day last summer. My son spotted it and, thinking it was a toy half hidden in the leaning bamboo that marks the end of the plot, ran to get it. For a moment, I thought he’d found a mannequin limb, a short leg or a long arm, and yelled at him to put it back. But it was too late; the extremely long, putty-coloured pumpkin was running towards me, and the next thing I knew it was in the car and coming home with us. We washed it, measured it (1.2m) and found out it was a zucca lunga, but decided it looked like a lute crossed with a baseball bat. We then came up with fantastical reasons as to why it was in a swimming pool car park, before balancing it on the top of the cupboard. That was two months ago now, and every couple of days it catches my eye, a strange souvenir from the summer, and hints at what to cook. Although not the souvenir, but rather something bought from Marco on Testaccio market, who grows and sells different varieties of pumpkins and squashes (all of which he calls zucca) that sit like people on a bench on the shelf at the back of his stall. There seems no urgency about pumpkins and squashes. It’s as if they know their longevity, that they will be great the next day or in two months, so they can sit back while other more desperate vegetables vie for attention. All that changes when they are cut and flash their orange insides – then they do demand attention. Whether that’s sliced and baked, or made into soup or a puree, or stirred into a risotto or fried for caponata. Caponata, the agrodolce Sicilian dish, is most commonly made with aubergine as the main element, supported by celery, onion, tomato, capers, olives, sugar and vinegar (plus variations). Traditionally, it was a summer dish, a way of enjoying and dealing with the abundance of aubergines. My Sicilian mother-in-law, whose parents were farmers on the south coast and grew aubergines, talks of how caponata was a persistent presence in the summer. Also of how, as summer drew to an end, her mother would add enough sugar and vinegar that it became a dark, demanding relish and could last into autumn. The caponata principle does not end with summer, though, because aubergines, like most things, are available all the time these days, and also because there is a caponata for all seasons: aubergines are replaced by apples or pears in winter, artichokes in spring, and pumpkins or squashes in autumn. The singularity of aubergines lies in the way they become rich and velvety when fried. Squash and pumpkin are more silky, but much denser, which makes for a different but still brilliant dish, and the celery feels even more essential here. A summer souvenir adapted for autumn, butternut caponata fits in almost everywhere, but is especially good with sausages. Ours is still on top of the cupboard. Pumpkin or butternut caponata Serves 4-6 Oil, for frying or baking 1kg butternut squash or pumpkin, cut into 1-2cm cubes Salt 4 stalks celery 1 handful capers, ideally packed in salt 1 handful olives 1 large red onion, peeled and sliced into half-moons 200ml tomato sauce or passata 50g currants (optional) 30g pine nuts or almonds (optional) 50g sugar 50ml red-wine vinegar Heat 5cm oil in a small, deep, heavy-based frying pan, then fry the diced squash in batches until golden brown, drain and sprinkle with salt. Alternatively, put the cubes on an oven tray, rub with oil and sprinkle with salt, and bake at 180C (160C fan)/350F/gas 4 until golden. Trim the celery stalks of any tough ends or strings, then cut them in half. Drop the celery into a pan of boiling water and cook for about five minutes, until tender but still with bite. Drain the celery and, once cool enough to handle, chop into 1cm chunks and set aside. If the capers are salted, soak them for two minutes, then drain; if brined or in vinegar, drain and rinse. Pit the olives. In a large, deep frying pan, warm four tablespoons of oil over a medium-low heat, add the onion and cook, stirring, until floppy. Add the tomato sauce and cook for another three minutes, then stir in the capers, olives, currants and nuts. Make a well in the middle of the pan and add the sugar and vinegar, allowing the sugar to dissolve in the heat. Stir and cook for one to two minutes, tasting to see if it needs more sugar or vinegar. Turn off the heat, add the squash and celery, and stir gently, so the squash remains in distinct pieces. Leave to sit for at least two hours or, better still, several, stirring gently once or twice. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from OcadoJust around the corner from where the Krays used to hold sway in east London’s Brick Lane there is an establishment called Alcotraz. Described as “London’s first immersive theatrical cocktail bar”, Alcotraz allows you to dress up in a prison uniform, get locked up in a cell, have a cocktail or two, and get your photo taken. So Britain is channelling – in the cause of entertainment – a famous prison in the United States. But look closely and you’ll see that we are also mirroring that country’s relentlessly unforgiving and counterproductive penal policy. Earlier this year, the prime minister joked that Britain was now “probably the Saudi Arabia of penal policy, under our wonderful home secretary”. In October, the Prison Reform Trust published a report which showed that there had been a “dramatic” increase in the number of people serving long prison sentences, with far more people now serving very lengthy terms. Nearly 11,000 people in prison in England and Wales will spend at least 10 years in custody. More than two-thirds of them are serving indeterminate sentences and do not know when – or if – they will be released. Prison numbers will also inevitably increase if the police, crime, sentencing and courts bill becomes law. The bill creates new offences that will essentially criminalise the lifestyles of Gypsies and Travellers and bump up the overall prison population with increased sentences for protesters. The new nationality and borders bill means that those arriving in Britain illegally could now be jailed for up to four years. In addition, a growing number of people on parole are being recalled to prison on the basis of dubious information as the probation service stumbles to recover from the then justice secretary Chris Grayling’s disastrous decision to privatise parts of it in 2014. On 21 October, Kevin Lane, one of those wrongly recalled and only recently released from prison, held a rally in front of the House of Commons to draw attention to this scandal. “The landings are full of people who should be on parole but are back in prison,” he said. The whole criminal justice system is in a chaotic state, partly – but far from entirely – because of Covid-19. Of the 320 magistrates courts that existed in England and Wales in 2010, 164 have been sold off to developers for a total of £223m and turned into hotels and apartments. In Scotland, 17 sheriff and justice of the peace courts were sold off or closed in the past decade. All of which makes it harder for lawyers, members of the public – and reporters – to attend courts and see what sort of sentences are being handed down. September’s justice committee report suggested that as many as 70% of prisoners in England and Wales may have mental health issues. During Covid lockdowns many of us talked of being “stir-crazy”. For prisoners, often confined to their cells for 23 hours a day and heavily restricted from learning new skills or studying because of staff shortages, being driven crazy is now a daily reality. There is also a drugs epidemic inside, with “spice” – with all its wild and dangerous side-effects – widely available. In Scotland, which at least has a government more conscious of the problems of drug-related crime, the prison population is also surging. The number of those behind bars has risen sharply to an annual average of around 8,200 in 2019-2020. According to the Howard League Scotland, around a quarter of those inside are awaiting trial and have not yet been convicted. Maybe the owners of Alcotraz will not be able to resist opening something called Bar Linnie in Glasgow for anyone else anxious for that “epic yet intimate” cocktail experience. Britain currently leads its western European neighbours in terms of inmates per head of population. England and Wales jail 138 of their population per 100,000; Scotland 147. Compare that with 76 in Germany and 59 in the Netherlands and Norway. Even Spain (123), Italy (101) and France (105) lag behind us. Maybe not quite “world-beaters” yet but at least we can defeat those pesky Europeans at something. But where – as many have asked about the response to the recent report on the government’s early failings over Covid-19 – is the anger? In 1910, a young home secretary, Winston Churchill, the same one our current prime minister bases himself upon, said that “the mood and temper of the public in regard to the treatment of crime and criminals is one of the most unfailing tests of the civilisation of any country”. It’s a test this country is now shamefully failing. Duncan Campbell is a former Guardian crime correspondent and Los Angeles correspondentFrance’s seafood sector is divided over government sanctions on British trawlers due to start on Tuesday, with processing companies warning they will cost jobs but fishers insisting that after 10 months waiting for UK permits, tough action is needed. Paris has said it could ban British trawlers from unloading in French ports, carry out extra licence checks on boats, tighten checks on trucks and reinforce customs and hygiene controls unless London grants more licences to fish in UK waters. But the head of the fish wholesale association in Boulogne, France’s largest fishing port, said the planned measures were “excessive” and “disproportionate”, warning they risked doing more harm to the sector overall than good. “Our processing businesses absolutely need British products, which represent about 25-30% of our deliveries,” Aymeric Chrzan told French radio, adding that France imported more seafood from the UK than is sold in French fish markets. “The stake as are high for the whole fisheries sector – not just the wholesalers but the processing and salting companies,” Chrzan said, warning that up to 1,500 fish and seafood sector jobs out of a total of 5,000 in Boulogne could be at risk. The British foreign secretary, Liz Truss, said on Monday that France had 48 hours to back down or the UK would begin dispute talks. President Emmanuel Macron said the ball was in Britain’s court and that France had tabled concrete de-escalation proposals. Chrzan said the sanctions would lead to “delays at the very least. Since we work with fresh fish and just-in-time deliveries, any hold-ups can be catastrophic.” He said, however, that Britain should “respect its commitments” under the Brexit deal. “We need a measured response and rapid solutions in both countries’ interests,” he said. Arnaud Delegorge, the managing director of one processing company, Marine SAS, told local media his firm processed 7,000 tonnes of Scottish salmon each year. “Of course we will suffer if the planned sanctions are implemented,” he said. “If we stop British fish entering the French market we will really be shooting ourselves in the foot – we’re talking thousands of jobs here.” However, Olivier Lepretre, the head of the Hauts-de-France regional fishers association, said his members had requested 80 licences to fish in UK waters but had so far been granted 35. “Some have seen their incomes fall by up to 50%,” he said. Lepretre said those businesses concerned “will be in seriously difficulty very quickly. We need a solution, urgently. It’s a real problem. These boats are confined to French waters which as a result now risk being overfished.” Fishers “really don’t care about the politics”, he said. “They just want to work, to go to sea. But they’re reaching the end of their tether now, because we’ve been waiting for 10 months. Unless something gives, some are going to go under.” One Boulogne fisher who asked not to be named told French television: “After all this time, we need concrete steps. I’ve invested €3m in my boat and I need to be able to work properly. There’s been enough blah-blah – we want results.”UK diesel prices have reached a record high at the pumps a week after petrol prices hit their highest ever level, in a blow to hard-hit households and small businesses. About 12.5 million diesel-car drivers faced an average price across the UK of 147.94p a litre on 31 October, narrowly surpassing the previous high of 147.93p set on 12 April 2012. Diesel prices have risen by 30p a litre over the past year, driven higher by a sharp rebound in global oil markets, making a full 55-litre tank £16 more expensive. A 55-litre tank of diesel will now cost about £81, up from £65 a year ago, according to the motoring group RAC. The record pump price for diesel came one week after the average daily price for a litre of petrol reached a record 142.94p, in what was described as a “truly dark day for drivers”. Businesses in particular are expected to bear the brunt of the record diesel prices, according to the RAC. The UK has 4.5m vans, most of which run on diesel, and 525,000 heavy goods vehicles. Simon Williams, a spokesperson for RAC, said although the new record was expected after the historic petrol price highs, it was “still another body blow to drivers and businesses across the country who were already struggling to cope with rising prices”. “As well as hitting household budgets this will have a knock-on effect on the price we pay for goods and services, as diesel is very much the fuel of business and, as such, will contribute further to inflation,” he added. Fears over a cost of living crisis this winter have kept a lid on fuel duty. In last week’s autumn budget statement, Rishi Sunak scrapped plans to introduce a 2.84p hike in fuel duty that was expected to cost drivers up to an extra £66 a car each year. Pump prices have climbed steadily in line with global oil market prices, which have more than doubled from about $40 (£29) a barrel a year ago to about $85 in recent weeks because of a sudden rise in post-pandemic energy demand. “While the price of diesel on the forecourt has primarily shot up due the cost of a barrel of oil doubling in the last year from about $40 to more than $80, the price of biodiesel is now two-and-a-half times what it was 12 months ago,” Williams said. The global energy supply crisis has also caused gas markets to rocket to record highs, which could lead to historic winter heating bills. Squeezed suppliers have been hit by soaring wholesale prices, while the amount they can charge consumers is limited by the energy cap. On Monday, Bluegreen Energy, which has 5,900 domestic customers, became the 15th supplier to collapse since early August. The government hopes to break the UK’s reliance on gas boilers by offering £5,000 grants to help homes switch to electric heat pumps. But Chris O’Shea, the boss of the British Gas owner Centrica, warned that another 40,000 heating engineers would be needed to meet the government’s ambition to retrofit millions of homes over the next decade. “We do have a real shortage,” he told a side event at the Cop26 conference in Glasgow. Global oil prices are expected to continue to rise this year, and many banks have raised their market price forecasts to between $90 and $100 a barrel. Larry Fink, the chairman and chief executive of US investment giant BlackRock, said last week: “We’re looking at a high probability of $100 oil.”It is one of the most remarkable success stories of the pandemic: the unproven technology that delivered the Moderna and Pfizer/BioNTech vaccines in record time, helping to turn the tide on Covid-19. The vaccines are based on mRNA, the molecule that instructs our cells to make specific proteins. By injecting synthetic mRNA, our cells are turned into on-demand vaccine factories, pumping out any protein we want our immune system to learn to recognise and destroy. Pre-pandemic, the technology was viewed with scepticism – a clever concept, but not guaranteed to deliver. Now there is growing confidence that mRNA vaccines could have far-reaching applications in tackling diseases from flu to malaria. Flu Every February flu scientists take part in an annual ritual: bets are placed at a World Health Organization meeting on which flu strains will dominate the following winter. There are four influenza viruses in circulation, each rapidly evolving so that the previous year’s vaccines will have lost efficacy. Manufacturers need at least six months to produce vaccines, a laborious process that involves growing attenuated virus inside millions of chicken eggs. When the flu forecast is on target, vaccines can be 60% effective, but a mismatch between vaccines and circulating strains can result in efficacy as low as 10%. The holy grail of flu research is a universal vaccine that would work across all four strains and continue to work for their future incarnations as they shuffle their genomes over time. Such a vaccine would need to target the core influenza protein that doesn’t change much from strain to strain. But our immune systems do not respond strongly to this part of the virus and so the goal has remained elusive for decades. However, mRNA is so quick and easy to produce that vaccines can be designed to strike many sites simultaneously. “Such a vaccine will likely be able to induce broadly protective responses,” said Norbert Pardi, a microbiologist at the University of Pennsylvania. His team is working on a vaccine candidate that will use about a dozen pieces of mRNA and is designed to work across several flu strains. The team hopes to begin human trials in 2023. Cancer The HPV vaccine, which protects against the virus that causes most cervical cancers, already averts thousands of cases of cancer each year. In future, scientists hope that mRNA vaccines could be used to vaccinate against cancer itself by teaching the immune system to recognise mutations before they occur, in an entirely new approach to treatment. “We’re taking advantage of the known genetic progression of cancer,” said Prof Herbert Kim Lyerly, who is working on cancer vaccine technology at Duke University. His team plans to trial an mRNA vaccine next year in patients with late-stage breast cancer, where tumours typically evolve to be unresponsive to drugs by acquiring mutations in specific genes. Again, an advantage of mRNA is the ability to hit multiple targets at once – in this case, a handful of potential mutations. “There’s no better surgeon in the world than your immune system to pick off those [mutated cells] in the early stage,” said Lyerly. The first applications, if successful, could extend a patient’s life by months by keeping cancer at bay for longer. Eventually it may be possible to prevent cancer in certain high-risk populations such as heavy smokers, where a mutation in a gene called KRAS accounts for up to a quarter of cancers. Malaria In October the WHO approved the first rollout of a malaria vaccine. But there is scope for improvement, with the RTS,S vaccine reducing severe malaria by 30%. A fundamental challenge is that the malaria parasite has evolved a way of preventing immunologic memory. Even after catching malaria, let alone being vaccinated, people remain susceptible to reinfection, and the disease kills 500,000 people annually, mostly babies and children. In 2012, Prof Richard Bucala, of Yale School of Medicine, and colleagues discovered that malaria induced this “immune system amnesia” using a protein called PMIF, which kills memory T-cells. Bucala is working on a form of RNA vaccine that would immunise against PMIF. Studies in mice suggest that blocking the protein allows the immune system to clear malaria quicker, resulting in milder illness and, crucially, future immunity. Bucala has teamed up with scientists at Oxford’s Jenner Vaccine Institute to test the candidate, and if results are positive they hope to begin human trials next year. “Vaccines are desperately needed in the developing world for parasitic diseases that have long depressed economic and societal development of many countries,” said Bucala. “RNA has not only enabled the success of our PMIF vaccine but the platform is far less expensive than protein-based vaccines, opening opportunities for a malaria vaccine that have not previously existed.” HIV “We’re going into the fifth decade now of a global pandemic for HIV,” said Derek Cain, of Duke University’s Human Vaccine Institute. So far, a vaccine has remained out of reach. Cain’s team has focused on a subset of HIV patients (fewer than one-third) who eventually develop specialised antibodies that can neutralise HIV years after infection. By this time there is a huge reservoir of virus in the body, and it is too late to clear the infection. “It’s like you find a fire extinguisher but the whole house is on fire already,” said Cain. However, if a vaccine could induce these antibodies, the hope is that they could extinguish HIV before it takes hold. Cain and colleagues have meticulously mapped out the circuitous route taken by the immune system to create these highly specialised antibodies, and as part of a consortium they are concocting a sequence of four or five multi-target mRNA vaccines designed to “recreate the arms race between the immune system and the pathogen”. “We certainly think that an HIV vaccine will be far and away the most complicated vaccine that we’ve ever had to put into the population,” said Cain. “We don’t expect it to work 100% or 90% like the Covid vaccines, but even if we can get to 50-60% that would be a success; 70% would be amazing.”Barclays’ chief executive, Jes Staley, has stepped down after an investigation by the City watchdog over how he described his links to the sex offender and disgraced financier Jeffrey Epstein. The bank said its board reached an agreement over Staley’s resignation after being notified on Friday of the preliminary conclusions in an investigation by the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) and the Prudential Regulation Authority into how Staley had characterised his relationship with Epstein to Barclays. The investigation, which began in late 2019, also considered the way Barclays subsequently described that relationship to the FCA, which covers conduct related issues in the City. The inquiry was launched after emails between Staley and Epstein were handed to UK regulators by their counterparts in the US. The outgoing chief executive plans to challenge the investigation’s findings. Depending on the outcome of his challenge, it could delay or ultimately block regulators from issuing potential fines and penalties, as well as releasing the investigation’s findings to the public. “In view of those conclusions, and Mr Staley’s intention to contest them, the board and Mr Staley have agreed that he will step down from his role as group chief executive and as a director of Barclays,” Barclays said in a statement on Monday morning. “The board is disappointed at this outcome. Mr Staley has run the Barclays Group successfully since December 2015 with real commitment and skill.” Staley will be replaced by Barclays’ head of global markets, CS Venkatakrishnan, with immediate effect. In an internal memo to staff seen by the Guardian, Staley said: “The reasons for my decision are simple. The FCA and PRA let me know on Friday evening the draft conclusions of their investigation into the characterisation of a professional relationship I developed earlier in my career. I do not want my personal response to those matters to be a distraction from the fantastic work you do every day to support our customers and clients.” The bank said the investigation did not conclude that Staley “saw, or was aware of, any of Mr Epstein’s alleged crimes, which was the central question underpinning Barclays’ support for Mr Staley following the arrest of Mr Epstein in the summer of 2019”. The FCA and PRA said in a joint statement that they “do not comment on ongoing investigations or regulatory proceedings beyond confirming the regulatory actions as detailed in the firm’s announcement”. Staley – who joined Barclays in 2015 – has previously said that he developed a relationship with Epstein in 2000 while working at JP Morgan, where Epstein had already been a client. Staley stayed in contact with Epstein for seven years after the financier was convicted of soliciting prostitution from a minor in 2008, and visited Epstein in Florida while the financier was still serving his sentence and out on work release in 2009. Staley said their relationship tapered off after he left JP Morgan. His final visit involved sailing his yacht to Epstein’s private island in 2015. It is not clear why Staley decided to cut ties with the former banking client. Despite his resignation, Staley will still be paid his full £2.4m salary, £120,000 pension allowance and other benefits, including medical cover and life assurance over the next 12 months. The American banker will also be eligible for relocation costs if he chooses to move back to the US. However, the bank said no decision has yet been made in regard to further payments, which include bonuses or clawbacks. It is understood that those decisions are likely to hinge on the final findings of the FCA and PRA’s investigation. The outgoing boss was paid £4m for 2020, including an annual bonus worth £843,000. However, he donated about £392,000 of that total to the bank’s Covid fund. Barclays shares fell 2% to 198p, making it one of the worst-performing stocks on the FTSE 100 on Monday morning, although they later recovered to close just 0.7% down at 201p. New boss for Barclays Barclays has chosen CS Venkatakrishnan – also known as Venkat – to take over as chief executive with immediate effect. The bank’s board said it had been working on a succession plan “for some time” and had identified Venkatakrishnan as its preferred candidate more than a year ago, resulting in his move from chief risk officer to head of global markets in autumn 2020. The new boss – who, like Staley, also joined Barclays after a career at JP Morgan – will earn a higher annual salary than his predecessor, worth £2.7m, a sum that will be split equally into cash and shares subject to a five-year holding period. He will also be paid £135,000 in lieu of pension, receive medical and life assurance benefits and an annual bonus worth up to 93% – or £2.5m – of his fixed pay. A long-term incentive plan will also give the new boss a chance to earn up to 140% of his fixed pay in any one year, a sum that would currently be worth about £3.8m. Barclays said it had “long been confident in Venkat’s capabilities to run Barclays Group”. “The board is confident that Barclays under his leadership will continue its strategic direction and improve performance in line with the progress of recent years,” it added.Scott Morrison has hit back against an extraordinary accusation from the French president that Australia’s prime minister lied to him over an abandoned $90bn submarine contract, declaring he will not “cop sledging” about Australia’s integrity. Speaking to reporters in Glasgow where he is attending the UN climate conference Cop26, Morrison said Emmanuel Macron was well aware that Australia was contemplating pulling out of the troubled Naval Group diesel submarine contract. Morrison said he was as transparent as possible with the French president that diesel-powered submarines were not going to meet Australia’s capability needs. Morrison said he did not wish to “personalise” his rebuttal of Macron’s allegation, delivered on the sidelines of the G20 summit in Rome. Australia’s prime minister said he had “broad shoulders”, but he did not intend to take “slurs” about Australia’s national integrity. “I’ve got broad shoulders, I can deal with that. But those slurs, I’m not going to cop sledging of Australia, I’m not going to cop that on behalf of Australians. “I can deal with whatever people throw at me. But Australia has a proud record when it comes to our defence capability.” Macron’s target was clearly Morrison when he fired a broadside at his Australian counterpart in Rome, with the French president saying he had a lot of “respect and friendship” for Australia and Australians. A visibly furious Morrison had been blindsided by Macron’s impromptu remarks at the conclusion of the G20 meeting in Rome on Sunday night. In an exercise in damage control, text messages from the French president were leaked to some Australian media outlets. One leaked Macron text two days before Australia cancelled the Naval group contract and unveiled the Aukus pact with the United States and Britain had the president asking Australia’s prime minister: “Should I expect good or bad news for our joint submarines ambitions?” But the leaked message shared to reinforce Australia’s position confirmed that Macron did not know which way Australia would go on the eve of the Aukus pact being announced. Morrison was asked on Monday why Macron’s private messages had been leaked. The prime minister said he didn’t intend to “indulge your editorial on that”. He insisted that Macron’s claim to have been blindsided by the cancellation of the contract was contradicted by France’s own actions after the two leaders dined at the Elysee Palace after a G7 summit in the middle of the year. Morrison says he conveyed Australia’s significant hesitations about the Naval Group contract at that point. But he said he was not at that time in a position to be entirely candid with Macron about his plan to acquire nuclear submarines through the Aukus pact. “The suggestion that these things were not raised [with Macron] does not gel with the way the French defence system flew into action the very next day [after the dinner in Paris],” Morrison said. He noted a French admiral had been sent to Australia to “try and save the contract after our dinner in Elysee”. Morrison said France would not have launched a rearguard action to save the multibillion dollar deal on that scale “if there was no concern about the contract being under threat”. Morrison said he also tried to give Macron a heads-up about the Aukus pact before it was unveiled publicly, but the French president wasn’t available to take a call. Morrison said he then texted Macron to say it was important that the two leaders spoke. Asked whether Macron – an important ally – deserved better than a last minute heads up, Morrison said: “This was a highly secure decision, a highly secure environment over which we had held these things incredibly tightly … for more than a year.” “[Macron] was clearly aware over some months that there were concerns, and they were responding to those concerns, and we had correspondence and other messaging during the course of that period,” the prime minister said. “We decided in Australia’s interests not to go ahead with the [Naval Group] contract,” he said. “There was a contract, it had a gate, and that gate should have actually been passed through last December.” “Delays in the contract meant that didn’t occur and that it extended out well into July. We had not made a decision, which [France] would have been very well aware of, we had still not made a decision on the scope two works, and they were seeking to respond to that. “But at the end of the day, I am going to take the tough decisions to ensure Australia has the best defence capability.” Morrison eased around a question about whether France had offered to supply Australia with nuclear submarines as an alternative. He told reporters in Glasgow Australia wasn’t interested in that option. He also declined to answer a question about whether he had failed to tell Macron about the Aukus discussion because the Biden administration had sought total secrecy. Morrison has faced public opprobrium about his conduct during the submarine fracas not only from Macron, but also from the US president Joe Biden. Shortly after Morrison arrived in Italy for the G20, Biden moved to repair his own damaged personal and political relationship with Macron by acknowledging that the Aukus announcement had been a “clumsy” episode handled with a lack of grace. Biden told Macron with television cameras present that he was “under the impression that France had been informed” about Australia’s intention to ditch the contract “long before” the Aukus pact was revealed publicly. It was unclear whether the US president was rebuking Morrison, or his own senior staff for failing to keep him abreast of the nuances.On the one hand, they are deliciously creamy, versatile and gloriously Instagrammable. On the other, they have an enormous carbon footprint for a fruit, require up to 320 litres of water each to grow and “are in such global demand they are becoming unaffordable for people indigenous to the areas they are grown in”, according to Thomasina Miers, the co-founder of the Mexican restaurant chain Wahaca. For some time, the chef has struggled to balance the devastating environmental impact of avocado production with her customers’ appetite for guacamole. Now, she thinks she has found the answer: a vibrant, green guacamole-inspired dip, made from fava beans, green chilli, lime and coriander. The dip – called Wahacamole – debuted last month, but Wahaca is not the first restaurant to remove or reduce its reliance on avocado. In Toronto, the Mexican chef Aldo Camarena recently suggested a guacamole alternative made with courgette and pumpkin seed paste. Last year, the chef Santiago Lastra included a guacamole-style dip made from pistachios and fermented gooseberries on the menu at Kol, his Mexican restaurant in London. In 2018, the Irish restaurateur JP McMahon called avocados the “blood diamonds of Mexico”; he has developed a guacamole alternative made using jerusalem artichokes. This trend is not confined to the restaurant industry. Last month, the TikTok star Calum Harris (AKA @madebyblitz) garnered 371,000 likes on his recipe for “guacamole” made with frozen peas, while, on Instagram, the hashtag #noavocado has 3,220 posts and counting. “A few years ago, I was quite well known for my use of avocados in my cooking – so much so that I dedicated a whole Instagram account (@avodaily) to my love for them,” says the vegan cookery writer Bettina Campolucci Bordi. She decided to cut back when she moved to the UK, having previously lived in Spain, where she could source avocados locally. “My favourite recipe to date uses British peas instead. I blanche the peas before crushing them and mixing them with plant-based sour cream, salt and pepper, a little grated garlic and a spritz of lemon juice.” Wahaca’s decision to offer an alternative to guacamole is perhaps the clearest indication to date that “parts of the food industry are beginning to wake up to the enormity of the issues we face as a result of intensive farming”, says Tim Lang, a professor of food policy at City, University of London. Avocados have become a “global commodity crop”, he says, the perfect example of what happens when “an exotic food becomes normalised with no thinking through of the consequences”. Problems including deforestation, loss of biodiversity, and water shortages mean that “the communities growing them do not have enough water for washing and hygiene”, adds Lang. But avocados are challenging to replace – as are their derivatives, avocado oil and avocado butter, which are important in gluten-free and vegan baking. Plus, for many fans of the fruit, a dip made from beans, nuts, seeds or vegetables is no more a replacement for guacamole than smashed broad beans on toast (as suggested by Tom Hunt’s recipe for not-avocado on toast) is an alternative to smashed avocado. Perhaps anticipating this complaint, Wahaca has said that “a traditional, freshly made guacamole” will remain on its menu, for which all of its avocados are “sourced at the most sustainable levels possible”. Miers, who worked with the British pulse grower Hodmedod’s to create Wahacamole, says: “The fact that we can grow [fava beans in the UK] using regenerative farming methods that fix both nitrogen and carbon into our soil is an added boon.” While guacamole swaps may not exactly replicate the taste of avocado, the feedback has been good at Wahaca. “We’ve been giving people Wahacamole to try for free when they come in to dine with us – and on the whole they seem genuinely interested in giving it a go. Most are enjoying it and many are ordering more,” says Miers. Lastra says: “We were looking not to recreate, but to produce a similar sensorial experience. What does an avocado mean in terms of sight, texture, aroma and flavour? And how do we paint that with the tools we have?” His blend of pistachios, pine oil, cucumber juice and fermented gooseberries may not fool an avocado connoisseur, but Lastra tells me most people “can’t actually tell the difference … they really enjoy it”. It has all the creaminess, tang and colour of traditional guacamole, he says – and it doesn’t look bad on Instagram, either. • This article was amended on 8 November 2021 to clarify that avocados have a large carbon footprint relative to other fruits, not all foods; and that a reference in the text to one avocado needing 320 litres of water to grow is an extreme and specific example, but not typical.In the sample clues below, the links take you to explainers from our beginners series. The setter’s name often links to an interview with him or her, in case you feel like getting to know these people better. The news in clues A wintery clue from one of the Telegraph’s Tuesday setters … 1d At home and cross after virus’s arrival (6) [definition: arrival] [wordplay: synonym for “at home” + cross-shaped letter after a kind of virus] [IN + X after FLU] … for INFLUX. We’ll find out soon whether it describes just the winter months at the start of 2021 or the ones at the end as well. And, as Cop26 gets under way, Knut takes a little liberty … 28a Scruffy UK PM networking (7) [definition: scruffy] [wordplay: anagram (“working”) of UKPMNET] … asking us to separate “net” and “working” en route to UNKEMPT for a puzzle that is recommended to fans of comedy. Paper-free This is where we share cryptics we have found outside the papers. Here’s one from MyCrossword by Rachel Playforth, AKA the Independent’s Angel, which has certain characteristics that emerge pleasingly as you solve. Your recommendations welcome and we’ll note that Angel also makes solving videos on Twitch. Latter patter The name Steerpike brings to mind a conscience-free manipulator in Gormenghast, the Spectator’s gossip columnist … and now a setter of two-and-counting FT puzzles. He or she is as sneaky as the name suggests, such as this clue … 28a Dreaded individual almost returned as leader (4) [definition: leader] [wordplay: most of a word (“almost”) for a wearer of dreadlocks (“dreaded individual”), backwards (“returned”)] [RASTA – A, backwards] … for TSAR. As “locs” gains popularity as an alternative name, will it live alongside “dreadlocks” or replace it? I hope both survive. Some folk etymologies speculate that “dreadlocks” was coined as a way of describing the hairstyle as “dreadful”, but there does not seem to be any evidence of its having actually happened. I like the way “dreadlocks” reminds us that “dread” has, in its time, also meant “to regard with awe or reverence, venerate”, a sense that I only otherwise hear, outside the Old Testament, in the Jamaican use of “dread” as a friendly or respectful address. On the subject of dubious etymologies and the Caribbean, I stopped myself recently in the middle of trying to narrate where the word “barbecue” comes from. When completing the Richmond test – a [now defunct] multi-choice prototype device for turning primary children into data – I was given a reading comprehension, which I remember claiming that we have the word because a barbecue lets you cook an entire goat, from its beard to its tails – in French, “de barbe à queue”. I’m fairly sure I shaded the lozenges as expected in the exam but I’ve since become more wary of an etymology the more interesting it appears, even it appears in a test. And since there is a Haitian word “barbacòa” for, well, a barbecue, I suspect we can file the beard under “dreadful” too. For our next challenge, let’s have another word from that corner of the world: reader, how would you clue HAMMOCK? Cluing competition Thanks for your clues for ESWATINI. I enjoyed such just-anagram clues as Jdthndr’s “I sweat in uncomfortable state” and Chameleonxwords’s “African monarchy ordered Asti wine” – and also seeing attenders of Paul’s Zooms comparing notes. The audacity award has to go to Newlaplandes for, in doing something similar to Knut above with “It’s a wine-free country”, prompting perhaps the only reasonable conversation about the two broad schools of cryptic setting anywhere on the internet. The runners-up are Montano’s portentous “Iniesta injured touring West African country” and Harlobarlo’s sneaky “Country doctor wasn’t visited regularly”; the winner is Lizard’s triple-exclamation-mark “Disgusting waistline! – must lose pounds! – state for a few years now!” Kludos to Lizard. Please leave entries for this fortnight’s competition – and your picks from the broadsheet cryptics – below, and the latest in our collaborative playlist Healing Music Recorded in 2020-21 to Accompany a Solve or Even Listen To is a “home concert with dogs” from Inga Fiolia. Clue of the Fortnight Here’s a clue from novelist/setter Picaroon … 24a Poet, reading the Iliad, mostly stunned (5,9) [definition: poet] [wordplay: anagram (“stunned”) of READINGTHEILIAD without its last letter (‘mostly’)] … for DANTE ALIGHIERI which, if I understand the old Divina Commedia correctly, is so apt, it could have one those exclamation marks at the end to tell the solver “this is not just random wordplay”. Chin-chin, and stay safe. • Here’s a collection of all our explainers, interviews and other helpful bits and bobs. • The Shipping Forecast Puzzle Book by Alan Connor, which is partly but not predominantly cryptic, can be ordered from the Guardian Bookshop.There were always going to be boos from one end of the ground or the other and, as Ole Gunnar Solskjær’s side pulled off another of those increasingly familiar job-saving victories, they came from Spurs fans. At half-time, at full time and, probably most significantly, when Lucas Moura was taken off for Steven Bergwijn. By the end there were chants against the chairman, Daniel Levy. Saturday’s defeat proved to be the last of Nuno Espírito Santo’s short reign as Spurs manager as Levy took decisive action. Manchester United were more solid than they have been. There may be problems ahead if Marcus Rashford, Mason Greenwood, Jadon Sancho and Paul Pogba have to go without regular football for a protracted spell, but for now the 3-4-1-2 has brought short-term relief. Solskjær at least has the fallback of good players who can do brilliant things – Nuno was not so fortunate. With the exception of Son Heung-min – and, being generous, Pierre-Emile Højbjerg – nobody at Spurs is playing well at the moment. There is nobody in this side who one can really imagine being part of a successful Tottenham team in two or three years’ time. Everybody, from Harry Kane to Eric Dier, from Dele Alli to Cristian Romero, seems not quite what he used to be. This is what happens when a squad goes stale en masse. Even Nuno appeared diminished, the sage of Molineux turned into something altogether damper. The reserve that seems like intelligent restraint when things are going well can quickly come to seem ineffectual when results and performances go awry. And as everything declines, the poverty of the team and its football is only highlighted by the magnificence of the surroundings. Spurs have one of the greatest stadiums in the world; all it cost them was the team. In that sense, the fury at Levy is understandable. Future generations of Tottenham fans may have cause to be extremely grateful to him – without excess spending, he has provided the infrastructure for Tottenham to be a great club. But they may equally come to regard him as an eccentric who built a magnificent garage with every conceivable amenity and then chose to house within it only a rusted old jalopy. This generation, certainly, is entitled to feel frustrated. It is not even a case of wondering whether the cost was too great: could they maybe have scaled back on the luxury and bought a midfielder? There is also now the sense that, on top of the economic gamble the club took, as well as having to suffer some shortfall of investment on the playing side to achieve the new stadium, a series of bad decisions have been made. It was not just in those final couple of years under Mauricio Pochettino that there was a lack of expenditure on players: it was that too few players were sold. Entropy is the curse against which all managers must constantly fight: if the manager is to establish a dynasty, if he is to defy Bela Guttmann’s Three-Year Rule, there has to be constant rejuvenation. That is perhaps particularly true of managers who demand the intensity that Pochettino does (which is why he is such a curious fit for Paris Saint-Germain). The model there, perhaps, different as their football may be, is his fellow Argentinian Diego Simeone, now in his 11th season at Atlético Madrid, thanks at least in part to a capacity for offloading players at the right time (often bringing them back once they’ve been refreshed and come to appreciate the value of his demanding style). That process was never enacted. Perhaps the club was wary of offloading players who had made them seem worthy of the new stadium. Perhaps there were few buyers. Perhaps the focus on the stadium was a distraction. Perhaps Levy’s notoriously tough bargaining was to blame. But whatever the reason, the result was stagnation. Even then the situation was soluble. Even with the financial hit of the pandemic, and the gleaming new arena sitting empty, Pochettino had credit in the bank. He could have been given time to reconstruct his squad. But instead Levy made his gravest error: he not merely dismissed Pochettino, he also appointed José Mourinho, a decision that looks increasingly inexplicable with hindsight, as though he felt the need to act like a big club by appointing a big-club manager. There were only three problems: Mourinho is not a man to build on a limited budget, his best days were at least a decade in the past, and a big-club manager comes with a big-club cost. The consequence is the current malaise: a squad whose morale is broken, in a first-rate stadium that offers a constant reminder that only two years ago Tottenham were in the Champions League final. Nuno’s ill-fated appointment – everybody knows he was nowhere near Spurs’ first choice – has also undermined faith in the sporting director, Fabio Paratici. Underlying all of that is the status anxiety that seemed to underlie the reluctance seriously to contemplate selling Kane – a symbol of big-clubdom – the fee for whom could have begun the process of rejuvenation. That is assuming Paratici could have been trusted to spend it well – he may have been serenaded by the fans on his arrival but his early record does little to inspire confidence. Getting rid of Nuno leaves Spurs back in the position they were in six months ago when Mourinho was dismissed. This crisis is far deeper rooted than that. • This article was originally published on 31 October, and updated following the sacking of Nuno Espírito Santo on 1 November.Two thousand years ago, Ecclesiastes taught that even a king is subservient to the soil. That includes prime ministers and chancellors; we are all dependent on and an interdependent part of nature. Never before has there been a time when it is so urgent to budget for the benefit of the Earth. I am one of millions who imagined that Boris Johnson’s promise last year to “build back greener” was truly intended. I expected that the government of the country, entrusted with hosting Cop26 – the most important gathering ever for the future of our planet – would show that it means what it says and put its money where its slogans are. Wednesday’s budget dashed these hopes. One congregant told me: “I couldn’t bear to listen after hearing that fuel tax on inland flights would be cut.” It’s hard to understand why flying would be rewarded on precisely those journeys which could, and should, be made by train. It undermines the justification for building HS2, with the huge damage inflicted on ancient woodlands, if rail travel is not prioritised. Equally incomprehensible is the continued freeze on car fuel, when the infrastructure for electric cars and lorries so desperately needs proper funding. One of the key demands of Faith for the Climate is the ending of subsidies and support for fossil fuels, at home and across the globe. Why give the opposite message? No less dispiriting is what’s absent from the budget: serious incentives for the development of the green economy and the much-needed jobs it promises to offer. Innumerable business leaders have urged the government to offer such encouragement, including members of the government’s own Climate Change Committee and its chief scientific adviser, Sir Patrick Vallance. Money urgently needed to enable the world’s poorest, most affected countries to adapt to climate change is also not evidently forthcoming. As a founding rabbi of EcoSynagogue, working closely with Eco Church and senior faith and environmental leaders across the world, I am passionately engaged with climate justice, global warming and biodiversity. The Hebrew Bible sees human beings as guardians of the Earth, entrusted to work it for the benefit of all life. The Bible’s central values are justice and compassion. The Torah repeatedly reminds us of our responsibility to our children. We owe them the legacy of a viable and sustainable planet, rich in life. We are not entitled to commodify, monetise and exploit creation. We are not entitled to follow short-term self-interest only. It’s not a case of “Tomorrow we may die”, but “Tomorrow they, the world’s children, will die”. The future of all life is in our hands. These principles, by which I seek to live as a Jew, are shared by all religions and innumerable people of no faith alike. Deeper than the anger are the anguish and fear I experience and share with so many. I feel desperate that, while lip service is duly paid to what we know we need to do, in the UK and across the world, the government’s actions point in a different direction. Where the money goes is what sends the real message. Yet the time is right for change. Covid has led to a deeper awareness of our interdependence as a society; we’ve learned to value people whose work we took for granted: hospital teams, men and women who fill the shelves in the shops, keep the buses on the road and collect our rubbish. We’ve been vividly presented with the interconnectedness of the fate of humanity across the globe. We’ve experienced more closely than before our interconnectedness and interdependence with nature. These are learnings we cannot afford to squander. Faith leaders will be strongly represented at Cop26; Pope Francis himself will be attending. We will be working together across our religions, determined to live by our values and tell truth to power. We are not about to give up. Jonathan Wittenberg is rabbi of New North London synagogueIggy Pop said recently that whenever he hears anyone moan that music isn’t as good as it used to be, he points them to Nubya Garcia. His description of her “fantastically advanced music that tugs at the heartstrings” refers to how the 30-year-old Londoner of Guyanese and Trinidadian descent infuses jazz with influences from the African and Caribbean diaspora and uses her tenor saxophone to channel a multitude of feelings and emotions. Garcia does this so brilliantly that she doesn’t need to sing, but uses a vocal microphone to talk though. “Wow, we made it!” she begins, surveying the audience with the last 18 months in mind. This tour, like so many, was delayed by the pandemic, but the intervening period has seen a Mercury nomination for 2020’s Source and a sellout audience here, making her comeback feel triumphant. Each time she places her instrument to her lips, there is another wave of cheering. Garcia remembers how she first stepped onstage nine years ago at the Royal Albert pub in Deptford and reflects on how lockdown led her to re-evaluate her life. The extended, more mournful bass introduction to the bustling Pace – originally written, pre-pandemic, about London – seems to reflect Covid’s impact on our speed and quality of life. Upright bassist Daniel Casimir, brilliantly busy drummer Sam Jones and inventive Fender Rhodes keyboardist Joe Armon-Jones provide the perfect accompaniment for Garcia’s playing to run the spectrum from thoughtful melancholy to frenetically uplifting, her improvisational flights returning to a killer repeated phrase. Without words, titles such as The Message Continues or Stand With Each Other come loaded with meaning. When she isn’t blowing, Garcia makes an expressive dancer and an engaging raconteur, whether ruminating on the pandemic’s impact on the arts or, amusingly, mispronunciations of her name. “It’s Nub-ih-ya … Sometimes I wish I’d been called Jane. People always get that right!” She goes reggae for Source, brings a taste of South America to central Leeds and is momentarily rendered speechless by the rapturous reception. “I have no words,” she chuckles. “That’s why I play music.” • At Trinity Centre, Bristol, 6 November; then touring.The holiday park operator Haven is launching a training scheme for 200 chefs in the latest attempt to address a shortage of skilled kitchen staff. The company, which operates 40 sites across the UK, said successful applicants would receive 18 months of training from professional chefs and would have a talent coach and mentor. After an eight-week course at selected Haven centres, the trainees will learn on the job at one of the company’s parks. Haven said trainees would be paid £8.91 an hour, the legal minimum for those aged 23 and over, and would gain a professional apprenticeship qualification through its training partner, Lifetime. Ann Blyth, the talent director at Haven, said: “This carefully curated programme will be hugely beneficial to all those selected, giving applicants the tools they need to begin a fantastic career and get that essential on-the-job training, which is very hard to come by these days.” Hospitality businesses have faced a recruitment crisis as a shortage of workers created by Brexit combines with a rebound in consumer demand and a surge in Covid infections, forcing some firms to close temporarily or reduce hours because of workers needing to isolate. The industry is raising £5m to support the training of up to 10,000 recruits by next summer, via the SpringBoard initiative, as employers say former workers have sought alternative employment or returned to Europe after months of lockdowns kept businesses closed. Meanwhile D&amp;D London, the owner of about 40 upmarket restaurants across the UK including Coq D’Argent and Pont de la Tour, launched a permanent chef training programme this month after a pilot over the summer. It plans to run monthly courses in basic kitchen skills at its 100 Wardour Street site in Soho, central London. Trainees then take part in a MasterChef-style cook off and a work experience shift at a D&amp;D restaurant, with successful participants then offered a job. Those with six months of kitchen experience can opt for an eight-week training course to become a chef de partie.Boys and men are more likely than women to die as teenagers or young adults, according to new research that warns the gender gap in mortality rates for that age group is widening in many countries. In 2019, nearly two thirds (61%) of all deaths among 10- to 24-year-olds worldwide occurred in males, said the research published in the Lancet last week. Since 1950, mortality rates in males aged 10 to 24 have decreased by 15.3%, lagging behind improvements in female mortality rates, which decreased by 30% in this age group. Differences in mortality were greatest in Latin America and the Caribbean, where the mortality rate in men aged 20 to 24 was more than three times that for women. Interpersonal violence and conflict were the leading cause of death for men aged 15 to 24 in this region, where, over the past 20 years, there has been little to no improvement in mortality for this age group, said the research. Leading causes of death for men in 2019 varied according to age and region. In men aged 10 to 14, most deaths were due to accidents in all regions except high-income ones, where cancer was the leading cause, and south Asia and sub-Saharan Africa, where it was diseases from consuming contaminated food or water. In men aged 15 to 24, the most common cause of death was “transport injury” in almost all regions. The research said that widening gender inequities in many regions have been driven by poor progress in addressing the leading causes of death for boys and young men. Joseph Ward, of University College London’s child health institute, one of the authors of the research, said: “High numbers of deaths in males indicate increases in the proportion of deaths due to violence, trauma and substance misuse, which predominately affect young males. This reflects a failure to address some of the leading causes of mortality in this age group.” The report also suggested that young people in the 10–24 age group were being neglected by policymakers and that the Covid-19 pandemic would probably jeopardise efforts to improve mortality rates. The research said while programmes to address the social conditions in which young women live, and the impact of violence against them, were fundamental to improving adolescent health globally, boys had been left behind. “Inequitable gender norms are also damaging to adolescent males, and advancing the health of all adolescents requires action to reduce inequities in outcomes wherever they occur,” it said. Ward added that improvements in mortality rates in 10- to 24-year-olds generally were lagging behind other age groups. He said policymakers had failed to address the specific health risks of this age group and adolescent-specific programmes were insufficiently funded. This was highlighted by many countries having “relatively good mortality outcomes for young children, but some of the highest mortality globally in adolescent age groups”, he said. Sub-Saharan Africa has seen the slowest improvements in mortality rates, added Ward, resulting in the burden of global deaths in these age groups shifting towards that region. This article was amended on 2 November 2021. The report found that in 2019 males accounted for 61% of deaths of 10- to 24-year-olds, not that males aged 10 to 24 accounted for 61% of all global deaths as stated in an earlier version due to an editing error.Francis Ford Coppola, director After my 1982 film One from the Heart failed commercially, my production company American Zoetrope was bankrupt – it was a low period for me. But then I received a letter written by Jo Ellen Misakian, a junior school librarian from Fresno, California. It read: “We are all so impressed with the book, The Outsiders by SE Hinton, that a petition has been circulated asking that it be made into a movie. We have chosen you to send it to.” It contained about 15 pages of children’s signatures written in different-coloured pens. It was very moving. I read Susan Hinton’s book, written when she was in her late teens, and was touched by the level of regard these poor “Greaser” kids had for each other, even though they didn’t have the advantages of their “Social” rivals. I’ve always believed that kids have many more feelings than we give them credit for, and I wanted to make the story. When I was about 17, I had been a drama counsellor at a summer camp, and the idea of being with half a dozen kids in the country and making a movie seemed like being a camp counsellor again. I’d forget my troubles and have some laughs. If my company was famous for anything, it was casting new, unknown actors. I believed in the concept of open casting calls – but I tried to do them in a way that was appropriate for the film we were making. For The Outsiders, I had all the candidates – which included Nicolas Cage, Mickey Rourke, Robert Downey Jr, Patrick Swayze, Dennis Quaid, Matt Dillon, Rob Lowe and Emilio Estevez – sitting on benches in a circle watching each other trying for the different parts. No one knows more about acting than other actors. Tom Cruise, who ended up in a small role, was an intense kid who would do anything to make his part better. Often I err on the side of being too collaborative. I re-edited The Outsiders because Warner Brothers felt it was long, and that was a mistake. My father had also written a soaring, romantic score for it. I wondered if it was the right choice, but I couldn’t say that to him. By the time I recut the movie in 2005 he had passed away, and I balanced the schmaltzy music with more of what the Greasers would have listened to: early Elvis Presley and stuff like that. There are parallels between the rivalry of the Socs and the Greasers, and the inequality in American today. Most of the bads of contemporary civilisation are not caused by nature. Civilisation invents fictions that people will kill for, which is absurd. Why is there such inequality when we’re all one family? C Thomas Howell, who played Ponyboy Curtis I had established myself in my teens as a junior rodeo competitor. Pressure for me was riding a bull, not meeting someone called Francis Ford Coppola, or auditioning against the other guys. I only auditioned for one character, Ponyboy Curtis, and read with hundreds of actors in four or five cities. The only time I ever felt any pressure was when Norman Mailer’s son came in to read for it weeks after I felt I had already owned the role. But I think actually that was more about relieving me for half a day. There was an envy that was intentionally dialled in to the Soc and Greaser actors. We played football and basketball against each other – they had matching jumpsuits, while we’d show up in whatever we brought from home. The Socs stayed on floor 18 or 19 of the hotel, while the Greasers were on four or five. It was like a fraternity house in there; some pretty crazy stuff took place. Once I got home at three in the morning after an 18-hour shift; I couldn’t wait to get into my room and go to sleep. And I went in there, two of the Socs had turned everything in my room upside down. We rehearsed and shot the whole film on videotape first, which allowed us to get to know each other and created a trust. I was very green at 15. I had been in ET, but I had never played a lead. Francis was a master communicator, and taught me about film-making. He was patient enough to not just bully his way around and tell you what to do. And he’d cook you pasta for lunch. One lesson I learned was to never, as an actor, cut a scene. During the scene at the drive-in cinema, at one point Matt Dillon fell off his chair, and I turned to the camera and started laughing, thinking they’d cut. But he told me I shouldn’t stop, but that I should adapt to what was happening: it creates something very natural, more real and connected than anything that could be written. Later, in the church scene, a dolly grip’s foot fell through the floor – it was a real abandoned building – so I just said: “I think there’s a monster outside.” And Francis ended up cutting to a shot of a raccoon outside. The film is peppered with real moments like that. I still get letters about The Outsiders because it’s required reading in a lot of schools. People tell me it’s their comfort film, or they have a Stay Gold tattoo, or they used the Robert Frost poem for their wedding vows. I get asked all the time what the poem means. I had no idea when I was 15 that it represents the circle of life. Even the two boys don’t understand what it means – they’re just sharing a moment – until one of them dies. The fans are crying and upset that [Ralph Macchio’s character] Johnny is dead, and then they contact me and they realise Ponyboy is now 54 – and they cry even harder. • The Outsiders: The Complete Novel is available on Blu-ray, DVD and digital platforms from 8 NovemberGiovanni Simeone gets tired of every conversation coming back to his father. All through his development as a youth player, he had to put up with the suspicions of strangers. People who might have never seen him play, yet chose to believe he was having certain opportunities because his dad, Diego, had been a superstar player and was on the path to becoming one as a manager. Even now, 26 years old and enjoying his sixth season as a starter in Serie A, Giovanni knows every success will come with a predictable line of questioning. After scoring twice to bury Juventus on Saturday, he was asked whether he was carrying on a family tradition of antipathy towards the Bianconeri. “Dad wrote his story,” said the younger Simeone. “I am writing my own.” What a tale it has been lately. The weekend before, he had hammered four goals past Lazio. It becomes hard to avoid mentioning family ties when you have the most prolific afternoon of your career against the club where your father enjoyed some of the greatest years of his. Diego texted to tell him it was the best he had seen him play, but that was not the reaction that moved Giovanni the most. “The [Verona] storekeeper, Antonio, got emotional, started to cry and hugged me,” he said, two days later. “It was really touching. We are like a family here.” Verona have made a dramatic start to the season: losing their first three games and firing the manager, Eusebio Di Francesco, before transforming into one of the most entertaining teams in Serie A under his replacement, Igor Tudor. They have scored 21 goals in eight matches since – more than any other team in the division over that stretch – and had claimed wins over Roma and Lazio before they welcomed Juventus to the Bentegodi on Saturday. Most observers expected to see a reaction from the Bianconeri after their midweek defeat to Sassuolo. Instead, Simeone pounced before they could get a foothold in the game. In the 11th minute, he swept home a rebound after Antonin Barak’s shot was blocked. Three minutes later, he struck again: firing from outside the box into the top right corner after cutting in from the left. Juventus’s defence was at fault, backing off and affording him space, but this was a finish few ould have pulled off. Goalkeeper Wojciech Szczesny had plenty of time to see the shot coming but the precise trajectory gave him no chance. Simeone put the ball in the net a third time before the half-hour mark but was denied a hat-trick due to a foul by Gianluca Caprari. On another day, that missed opportunity may have come back to haunt Verona. Paulo Dybala hit the woodwork for Juventus and Weston McKennie saw a shot saved at point-blank range before finally pulling one goal back. But that was all the Old Lady could manage. Defeat was a catastrophe for Juventus, leaving them 16 points off the pace at the top of Serie A. Their manager, Massimiliano Allegri, described their league position as shameful. Talk of winning back the Scudetto they surrendered last season for the first time in a decade has been replaced with questions about whether they can get back into the top four. None of which is for Simeone to worry about. This was the most extraordinary week of his career, scoring six times in seven days despite starting two of three games. He played the last 24 minutes of the 1-1 draw with Udinese on Wednesday, replacing Nikola Kalinic, without getting his name on the scoresheet. Simeone owes a debt to Tudor, who outmanoeuvred Allegri just as he had done to Maurizio Sarri and José Mourinho before. Stationing the left wing-back, Darko Lazovic, high up the pitch, the manager forced Juan Cuadrado to play a more defensive game and obliged Juventus to attack down the left, where Alex Sandro has been less effective. Lazovic, Barak and Caprari have thrived under the new manager, who served as an assistant to Andrea Pirlo at Juventus last season. Some in Turin are starting to wonder whether he ought to have been given the top job, but Tudor has benefited also from a Verona dressing room pulling in the same direction. Even before embarking on his scoring spree, Simeone had spoken of his close relationship with Kalinic – who he is alternates games with up front. “Usually, players in the same role don’t talk much because of the rivalry [for places],” he said at the start of last month. “Between us two, it’s not like that.” It may become harder for Tudor to keep rotating if Simeone maintains this form. His eight Serie A goals are second only to the nine scored by Fiorentina’s Dusan Vlahovic. Cautious minds will point out e has had hot streaks before, but never sustained that form through a full campaign. He has yet to top the 14 goals he scored while playing for the Viola in 2017-18. Last season at Cagliari, he struck five times before the end of October and once more thereafter. He was playing for a struggling team and had his best stretch of form interrupted by coronavirus, but has said he could have done more. Simeone has credited his own improvement to a renewed work ethic, saying he was in the gym every day over the summer – even while on his honeymoon. He has spoken about using daily meditation to keep himself on track, as well as other techniques. Simeone claimed to have woken up before the Lazio game feeling not quite right, but corrected those sensations with mobility exercises and then concentration games using his computer. Finally, he watched a Rocky movie. “I always do that when I need an extra little charge,” he said. “There’s a phrase from Rocky I always think about: it says that life will often put you on your knees and the important thing isn’t how many times you hit, but how often you get hit and then get back up.” Perhaps Juve’s players are the ones who need to hear that message after being knocked to the canvas twice in one week. Verona are no title contenders, but they head into another high-profile bout with the joint-leaders Napoli next Sunday knowing that with Simeone in this sort of form they will always have a puncher’s chance.Companies need to offer higher pay, a shorter working week or enhanced benefits to prevent an exodus of unhappy staff over the next 12 months, research has found. A survey by Autonomy , a thinktank specialising in the future of work, concluded that improving working conditions was vital for sectors suffering from acute labour shortages. In the wake of a report suggesting almost one in four workers were considering quitting their jobs in the next few months, the Autonomy poll of more than 1,000 workers in the care, transport and logistics, and hospitality industries showed: 41% were considering leaving their job in the next 12 months. Low pay, long working hours and poor mental health were often cited as reasons for dissatisfaction. The majority of those considering quitting had been offered no incentives to stay by their employers. Workers in these sectors reported that a pay rise, shorter working hours for the same pay and better in-work benefits such as holiday pay and pensions would stop them from resigning. UK job vacancies are at a record high, reaching 1.1m in the latest data reported by the Office for National Statistics, and Autonomy said shortages of labour had had a severe impact on business, leading to a loss of clients and income through an inability to deliver services and products. Will Stronge, the thinktank’s director of research, said: “The good news is that the labour market crisis can be solved fairly easily by offering better working conditions. “However, the response by companies is falling far short of what is needed and unless they quickly come up with a better offer, our research suggests the crisis is going to get a lot worse in the next 12 months. “The Covid pandemic has shone a spotlight on unfair and precarious working practices in Britain and it seems that workers have simply had enough.” The Autonomy survey also contained new analysis from the shareholder advisory firm PIRC that showed three-quarters of the largest companies listed on the London Stock Exchange – with a collective global workforce of 4.5 million – cited labour shortages or staff retention as principal risks to their business. Tom Powdrill, the head of stewardship at PIRC, said: “The labour market is at a crucial juncture that requires urgent action. “Private sector companies have a duty to themselves, their investors and their workforces to take steps in order to avoid further problems and costs down the line. Listening to workers is a good start.”Perhaps it’s my love of the writings of Constance Spry and Margaret Costa, and the nostalgic world their writings conjure; perhaps it’s my unfettered obsession with mango chutney and any foods I can ladle it on or in (bhajis, devilled eggs, sandwiches … the list goes on); or perhaps it’s just my passion for spices and the way they transport me to far-off lands. No matter. The subtle spicing of “coronation” anything, and the exuberant, sprightly panicle of garlic, lemon, fresh herbs, coriander seeds and pomegranate, make this a blissful midweek dinner. Blistered “coronation” cauliflower salad with scented couscous and pomegranate You will need a hot grill for this, or oven roast the cauliflower at the highest setting until it is blackened and caramelised in places. Prep 30 min Cook 10 min Serves 4 100g couscous 3 tsp coriander seeds, crushed Salt and pepper 1 large head cauliflower 1 tbsp mild curry powder 3 tbsp extra-virgin olive oil 175ml Greek yoghurt 1 small garlic clove, peeled and crushed 1 heaped tbsp mango chutney Juice of 1 small lemon 1 handful mint leaves, chopped 1 big handful coriander leaves, chopped To serve 30g toasted flaked almonds Seeds from ½ pomegranate Put the couscous in a bowl, cover with 200ml boiling water and scatter in a teaspoon of the coriander seeds and lots of salt and pepper. Stir once, cover and leave for 10 minutes. Meanwhile, heat the grill. Break the cauliflower into florets, discarding the tough outer leaves, but keeping the young ones, then put it on a lined oven tray. Mix the curry powder, remaining coriander seeds, two tablespoons of oil and 75ml yoghurt, season generously, then rub all over the florets until well coated. Grill for five to eight minutes, until the cauliflower is charred at the edges and just tender in the middle. Whisk the remaining yoghurt, the garlic, mango chutney and half the lemon juice in a bowl or jam jar. Uncover the couscous, and check that it is tender (if not, add another 50ml boiling water and steep for five minutes more). Run a fork through it, then fold in the last of the olive oil, the lemon juice and all but a sprinkling of the herbs. Once the cauliflower is cooked, toss it in the yoghurt sauce and check the seasoning. Transfer the couscous to a platters, top with the cauliflower and sauce, sprinkle over the almonds, pomegranate seeds and a final scattering of herbs, and let the hordes tuck in. The simple flex … If you want to avoid dairy, try coconut yoghurt or make a cashew nut “cream” with soaked cashews. The marinade is also delicious on chicken legs slow-roasted at about 170C until golden and crisp-skinned. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from OcadoThe defining choice facing leaders in Glasgow this week at Cop26 is whether to sugar-coat reality or be honest about the climate emergency, and demand the action that will be necessary to confront it. If we are to have any chance of preventing catastrophe, we must choose truth and candour. The most important truth is the maths. For all the millions of words spilled about this summit, not enough has been done to spell out its central task. Many leaders say we need to limit global warming to 1.5 degrees, but few say out loud what that means. We know from the UN’s figures that after the Paris accord of 2015, the world was heading for something like 53 billion tonnes of emissions in 2030. To keep global heating in line with 1.5C degrees, we need to cut emissions to 25 billion tonnes by then. There is an emissions gap of 28bn tonnes to be cut in this decisive decade. These numbers should be in the minds of everyone who cares about our planet’s future. The world has taken important strides forward in recent years. But the unfortunate reality is that the pledges made in advance of Cop26 amount to a cut of just 4bn tonnes. This leaves an aching emissions gap within which climate catastrophe would occur – putting us on track to a devastating 2.7C. This maths matters more than anything, and should shape our response to what countries announce at Glasgow. According to the respected Climate Action Tracker, no G20 country is doing enough. It will be in the interests of leaders and ministers at Cop26 to pretend more progress has been made than is the reality. Since we cannot negotiate with the science, we must force them – particularly those who have arrived in Glasgow only to reheat old commitments – to confront the truth and negotiate with each other. This summit cannot be a fortnight’s fiesta of pre-packaged announcements; it must amount to a real reckoning to deliver the progress we need. As part of this, leaders must deliver justice for those in poorer countries who are least responsible for, and most vulnerable to, climate breakdown. It’s time to make good on the promises stacked up, but not delivered – in particular the long overdue $100bn of finance that was promised for developing countries back in 2009, and the prime minister’s pledge at the G7 in June to “vaccinate the world” against Covid. It’s essential that we also recognise the loss and damage many poorer and developing countries face from climate breakdown. This is the way to help reassemble the coalition we saw in Paris between the most vulnerable developing countries and ambitious developed countries, to maximise pressure on the world’s biggest emitters, including China. We must also head off the attempt to shift the scientific goalposts at Glasgow, which has crept into the UK government’s benchmark of success for these talks. It is positive that countries representing 80% of global GDP are now covered by a net zero target for the middle of the century, but targets three decades in the future do not make up for a failure to act now. No country can be allowed to think that setting long-term targets gives them an alibi to not act in the short term. Take Australia, for example, whose 2050 net zero target, announced last week, is accompanied by a 2030 target which puts us on track for a 4C world. Or Saudi Arabia, which is mulling a 2060 target, while planning to increase its oil production over this decade. We cannot stand for such global greenwashing at this summit from our country or anyone else’s. Telling these truths is not without its risks. Some people will worry that any admission of falling short in Glasgow will give the world and private investors reason to give up on their climate ambitions. Many of us remember the long shadow that was cast after the 2009 Cop in Copenhagen, when the summit crash landed without comprehensive agreement. We cannot afford the same hangover, whatever the result in Glasgow. The world has come too far for that to happen. But that cannot be reason to pretend progress is fast enough if the reality is otherwise. That’s because the inescapable truth is that, with the climate crisis, unlike so many other issues, winning slowly is not really winning. In this existential race against time, winning slowly means billions of people facing extreme heatwaves, countless millions more people displaced, and the destruction of natural wonders like our coral reefs. It also means forfeiting the opportunities that climate action offers, such as lifting people out of poverty by creating millions of good, green jobs. The truth matters both for the outcomes of Cop26 but also for what happens afterwards. The world is not due to return to the issue of country-by-country pledges until the next Cop26 happens in 2025. If we follow this course, we will forfeit 1.5C. We will need to come back much sooner to close the gap we face if we are to create a path out of Glasgow compatible with 1.5 degrees. We are all desperate for success over the next fortnight. But as we approach this crucial summit, those of us who are not in government have one power those in office will find it hard to fully embrace: the power to tell the truth about our progress in this decisive decade, however uncomfortable that may be. Playing our part in getting the right outcome means using this power without hesitation in the next two vital weeks. • Ed Miliband is the shadow secretary for business, energy and industryOptimistic assessments of progress on tackling the climate crisis were “an illusion”, the UN secretary general has said in a scathing critique of world leaders’ efforts so far to cut greenhouse gas emissions and stave off climate breakdown. António Guterres, greeting leaders gathering for the Cop26 summit, roundly dismissed the suggestion that the climate situation was improving, and he exhorted the more than 120 heads of government to “choose to safeguard our future and save humanity” instead of continuing with the addiction to fossil fuels. “Recent climate action announcements might give the impression that we are on track to turn things around. This is an illusion,” he told the conference in Glasgow. G20 leaders met at the weekend without making fresh commitments to further cuts in greenhouse gas emissions, though they did agree on the importance of taking action this decade. Scientists say emissions must be cut by about 45% by 2030 compared with 2010 levels, to limit global temperature rises to 1.5C above pre-industrial levels, the threshold of safety. The UK, as host of Cop26, has set as its aim to “keep 1.5C alive”. Two days of talks among world leaders will be followed by nearly a fortnight of tense negotiations by officials with the aim of producing a global deal to get on track for the emissions cuts necessary. But Guterres said nations were still far off track on their plans to cut greenhouse gas emissions as the conference opened. Without further commitments, he said, countries could be forced to return to the negotiating table not every five years, as set out in the Paris agreement, but every year. That threat will unsettle some countries at the talks that have been slow to come forward with strong commitments on cutting emissions and want to stick to the letter of the Paris agreement and only update commitments on a five-year schedule. Small developing countries, those with the most at stake in the climate crisis, want a more frequent schedule. Guterres said humanity stood on the brink of disaster and had been driven there by an addiction to fossil fuels and its “brutal” treatment of the natural world. Further global heating – with temperature rises already at 1.1C – would risk pushing the world past the point of no return. “We face a moment of truth. We are fast approaching tipping points that will trigger escalating feedback loops of global heating,” he said. Scientists have said surpassing 1.5C would risk some of the consequences of climate change, including ice sheet melting, rapidly becoming irreversible. Guterres gave a stark depiction of human ruin, with the planet changing before our eyes in the form of melting glaciers, disappearing forests and polluted oceans, the result of “treating nature like a toilet”. He said: “We face a stark choice: either we stop [the addiction] or it stops us. It’s time to say: enough. Enough of brutalising biodiversity. Enough of killing ourselves with carbon.” In an echo of the film Trainspotting, which was set in nearby Edinburgh, he called on leaders to shake off the addiction and choose a better path. “Choose ambition. Choose solidarity. Choose to safeguard our future and save humanity,” he said. Finance to help poor countries was also a crucial issue, Guterres said. A promise to developing countries of $100bn (£73bn) a year in climate finance by 2020 has not been met. Guterres said recent findings that it would be met from 2023 would “delay the largest support for years, with no clear guarantees”. The UK prime minister, Boris Johnson, also spoke at the opening ceremony, and began his speech with a James Bond analogy. Bond often ends up in peril, said Johnson, “strapped to a doomsday device, desperately trying to work out which coloured wire to pull to turn it off while a red digital clock ticks down remorselessly to a detonation that will end human life as we know it. “And we are in roughly the same position, my fellow global leaders, as James Bond today, except that the tragedy is that this is not a movie, and the doomsday device is real.” He also spoke of rich countries’ responsibility to pull their weight: “We in the developed world must recognise the special responsibility to help everybody else to do it, because it was here in Glasgow 250 years ago that James Watt came up with a machine that was powered by steam that was produced by burning coal.” “Yes my friends, we have brought you to the very place where the doomsday device began to tick.” The prime minister also urged representatives to consider their responsibility to future generations: “The people who will judge us are children not yet born, and their children, and we are now coming centre stage before a vast and uncountable audience of posterity and we must not fluff our lines or miss our cue. “Because if we fail they will not forgive us. They will know that Glasgow was the historic turning point when history failed to turn. They will judge us with bitterness and with a resentment that eclipses any of the climate activists of today, and they will be right. Cop26 will not, cannot, be the end of the story on climate change.”Almost a third of Republicans believe violence may be necessary to “save” the US, according to a new poll. Researchers at the Public Religion Research Institute, a nonprofit, found that 30% of Republicans agreed with the statement “Because things have gotten so far off track, true American patriots may have to resort to violence in order to save our country”. Among Americans who believe the 2020 election was “stolen” from Donald Trump, which it was not, 39% believe violence may be required. The troubling statistics show the post-election rancour that led to the violent insurrection at the US Capitol on 6 January is still very much in place. Republicans are most likely to believe “true American patriots may have to resort to violence”, PRRI found, with just 11% of Democrats and 17% of independents agreeing with the statement. Among all Americans, 18% agreed. PRRI said 2,508 adults, living in all 50 states, were interviewed for the survey between 16 and 29 September. “It is an alarming finding,” Robert Jones, chief executive and founder of PRRI, told Yahoo News. “I’ve been doing this a while, for decades, and it’s not the kind of finding that as a sociologist, a public opinion pollster, that you’re used to seeing.” Jones said the responses illustrate the “significant and rapidly increasing polarisation in the United States”. “As we’ve gotten some distance [from the 6 January], one might hope cooler heads would prevail, but we really haven’t seen that,” Jones said. “If anything, it looks like people are doubling down and views are getting kind of locked in.” The PRRI poll is not the first to discover an apparent readiness for violence among Republican voters. In February a survey by the American Enterprise Institute found that 39% of Republicans thought that “if elected leaders will not protect America, the people must do it themselves, even if it requires violent actions”. Among all Americans, 29% agreed with that statement. Some 31% of independent voters and 17% of Democrats thought violent action might be required. More than 650 people have been criminally charged for their role in the Capitol attack, in which five people died. Trump is resisting attempts to investigate from a House select committee, most recently suing the national archives to stop the release of White House documents.“That’s the closest to death I’ll ever be without actually dying,” the Australian cyclist Jack Bobridge said in January 2015 after he had failed to break the hour record. He had ridden 51.3km around a track in 60 minutes but he was still half a kilometre short of the world record. “I can’t even describe how much pain my gluts and quads are in, it’s unbelievable.” Years before, in October 1972, Eddy Merckx, one of the greatest cyclists to have lived, set a record for the hour in Mexico when he rode 49.43km. He could not speak when, his face etched in suffering, he was helped off his bike. Merckx said later: “Never before had I had such pain. It was the hardest ride I’ve ever done and I never felt such pain again.” On Wednesday, at the velodrome in Aguascalientes, Mexico, Alex Dowsett will attempt to reclaim the hour record he held briefly in 2015 before Bradley Wiggins broke it 36 days later. Dowsett will try to ride more than the 55.089km Victor Campenaerts covered at the same track when setting a world mark in April 2019. The hour is regarded as one of the most brutal challenges in sport but Dowsett is refreshingly laconic. He is still sorting out the logistics of his latest crack at the record and points out wryly that organising the ride might be harder than the physical pain: “My coach, Michael Hutchinson, said it’s like organising a world championships and then going out and competing in it.” Dowsett has a remarkable personal story and is proud to spend as much time in our 80 minutes together talking about the fact that haemophilia has not prevented him from carving out a successful career in the unforgiving world of professional cycling. He is determined his new tilt at the hour record will give fresh momentum to the Little Bleeders charity he started in 2016. The aim is to encourage the 3,000 young people who were born with the rare condition in Britain to understand that haemophilia should not limit their ambitions. Before we chart his own past as a little bleeder, and his hopes of raising awareness of a condition that hits men far more than women, with one in 10,000 males in the UK affected by haemophilia, I ask Dowsett if he expects to endure as gruelling an ordeal as Merckx did. “Not at all. I hate saying this because it’s the great Eddy Merckx but he didn’t do the hour record that efficiently. “He broke the 10km and 20km marks because he went out of the blocks like a greyhound and hung on. That’s the worst way to do an hour record and not something I’d ever want to experience. “The only other person to do that was Jack Bobridge and he became a verb in the Movistar camp [the cycling team for whom Dowsett rode] back in 2015 when I did the record. We all said: ‘We don’t want to do a Bobridge.’ So for me the first 30 minutes will be very controlled and disciplined and then the second 30 is where you start working out what you can do. “For lots of people it’s the biggest thing they’ll ever do so there are tales of Eddie Merckx and all those horror stories. But it is only an hour. It’s not a six-hour slog in the mountains of a Grand Tour when you’re 18 days deep into one. It can be broken down and, all things being equal, you should get the first 20 minutes for free. After that it will be looking at 10-lap blocks or five-minute chunks. “Mike Hutchinson will be on the side of the track giving me pacing feedback every lap. So I know if I stick to certain lap times I will break the record. The challenge will be at the back end of the hour to start adjusting or maintaining the pace.” Did he maintain such concentration throughout his successful ride in Manchester in 2015? “I wasn’t on my absolute limit so I could listen to the commentator. I saw where my mates were round the track whereas this one will be much tougher. I’m not sure where I’ll be mentally.” Dowsett regards his 2015 world record with some regret. “It was actually a very enjoyable experience because I knew after 40 minutes I was going to break the record. We had about 3,000 people [in the velodrome] and it was unforgettable. But afterwards, looking at the numbers, we knew we’d been too safe. “It’s haunted me because I could have given Wiggins quite a task. I got the record and everyone was happy – but there was a slight hollow feeling. I could have done much more and, after months of work, I probably used only 80% of what I’m capable of. It should have been around the 54km mark. Wiggins rode 54.457km. “It was going to be his great swansong and we were expecting 55 or 56km. But had he done 56km then Victor and I might not have attempted it.” He was meant to race in the hour this time last year, again in Manchester, but he contracted Covid. Dowsett was disappointed because, having won a stage of the Giro d’Italia last October, “I had been feeling really fantastic and, in Manchester, the only variable is air pressure. On the day we were meant to make the attempt it was perfect – but these things happen.” The marked difference between this attempt and his two previous campaigns is that Dowsett and his partner, Chanel, have done the overwhelming bulk of organising the event in Mexico – even though they are new parents to their daughter, Juliette. “It’s been far more arduous for Chanel,” he says. “She is really organising it but you can’t help but be involved in the trials and tribulations. The list of requirements needed to ride a bike round a velodrome for an hour is vast. But through sheer hard work it has come together.” Dowsett has been galvanised by his desire to use the hour record to publicise how haemophilia should not be a barrier to anyone. “My parents did a wonderful job shielding me from the negatives around haemophilia when I was young. Every so often we look back, whether it’s the finish line of the Tour de France or the hour record or any of the unimaginable things I’ve achieved. “If we’d had a crystal ball back then and known everything was going to be better than all right I’m not sure my parents would have believed it.” They initially struggled to get a diagnosis. “Being a dad now I appreciate what they went through and my mum says I owe her a facelift. I was a happy, healthy baby but mum and dad would notice how easily I bruised. They’d pick me up and when they put me down I’d have two black bruised thumb prints across my rib cage. Mum knew something wasn’t right and took me to the doctors numerous times – but they kept sending her away and saying: ‘He’s just a baby that bruises easily.’ “When I was 18 months old Mum demanded I had a blood test. She remembers the doctor threw the documents across the table because the idea of putting an 18-month-old through a blood test was, to him, worse than anything. On the way out of the blood test I fell over and split the skin between my lip and gum. “There are 13 steps to the blood clotting and, as a haemophiliac, I don’t have the eighth one. A cut will look like it’s healing until that eighth stage and then everything breaks down. “Mum and Dad put me to bed that night thinking all was well and the little cut was healing up. They checked on me at two in the morning and I was asleep in a pool of my own blood. So they rang the doctor because they thought I had leukaemia. A different doctor said: ‘I think your son’s got haemophilia.’ Then the blood test results came back and I had severe haemophilia A. The original doctor apologised and said: ‘I need to research haemophilia more and trust a mother’s intuition.’” There were many difficult days and, because there was a blood transfusion link then between haemophilia and HIV, Alex did not often get invited to birthday parties as a schoolboy. He also sometimes turned up at school on crutches or with his arm in a sling. It was only when the right medication became available, and he was advised to be as fit as possible, that life became easier. He swam a lot and then everything changed when, with his dad, he discovered cycling. Dowsett believes people are more informed about the condition but is he surprised that haemophiliac elite athletes are so rare? “When I was young the treatment had just been introduced. The treatment I’m on now stops me having a bleeding episode whereas when I was younger the treatment was to fix the bleeding, so it was reactive. Now medication is proactive. So I’m the first in a generation that can achieve elite-sport level because if I’d been born a decade earlier it wouldn’t have been possible to sustain any kind of training. We are very lucky it’s life-changing medication.” He has lived the life of an ordinary professional cyclist for 11 years – which has brought him two Giro stage wins, a European under-23 title and multiple national time-trial championships as well as the uncertainty of racing for teams that go out of business. Dowsett moved from the disbanded Katusha to the new Israel Start-Up Nation in 2020 and there was great anxiety last year. He was unsure whether his contract would be extended before he won a hard Giro stage after a solo breakaway. Dowsett cried with relief and, as he says now: “It was tough because Juliette was on the way and I thought my cycling career was ending. “It was also frightening as cycling was the only income Chanel and I had. Winning that stage bought me another two years and sharpened my focus on the hour record. Each year since 2015 I’d asked whichever team I was on: ‘Can we do the hour?’ Each time there was noncommittal pushback and so Chanel and I said: ‘We’re doing it ourselves.’” Now they’re so close how is Dowsett feeling? “Hutch said: ‘There are two ways of dealing with it, Alex. You can try and escape the stress or just embrace it.’ So Chanel and I keep thinking: ‘No matter how hard it is, we are glad we’re doing this.’ It’s a hell of an experience. “Victor Campenaerts has given me a 50-50 chance of breaking it and I’m not scared to fail. It would have been easy to not do this attempt, especially with the organisation, but failing is a far better alternative to not trying. There’s something quite poignant there for the haemophilia community.”Forests and nature are centre stage at Cop26. On the second day of the Glasgow summit, world leaders are announcing a commitment to halting and reversing deforestation. As the second largest source of greenhouse gases after energy, the land sector accounts for 25% of global emissions, with deforestation and forest degradation contributing to half of this. But why do forests matter to the climate, and how can we halt deforestation? What is a forest? There are an estimated three trillion trees on Earth. Some form part of enormous forest ecosystems like the Congo rainforest, while others stand in sparsely populated landscapes such as on the edges of the Sahara desert. Of the 60,000 known tree species, nearly a third are threatened with extinction, according to a recent assessment. Scientists cannot decide on a single definition of a forest due to disagreements over tree density, height and canopy cover. But the Food and Agriculture Organization’s version is commonly used: “Land with a tree canopy cover of more than 10% and area of more than 0.5 hectares.” Forest covered almost a third of the world’s landmass in 2020, with more than half found in just five countries: Russia, Brazil, Canada, the US and China. The taiga – also known as northern boreal forest – is the world’s largest, stretching around the northern hemisphere through Siberia, Canada and Scandinavia. Temperate, tropical and boreal are the three main types of forest that include a great diversity of ecosystems: cloud forest, rainforest, mangrove swamps, and tropical dry forest, among many others. Why do forests matter for the climate? Forests are among the most biodiverse places on the planet and form an enormous carbon store, regulating the world’s weather and climate. They hold about 861 gigatons of carbon – equivalent to nearly a century’s worth of annual fossil fuel emissions at the current rate – and absorbed twice as much carbon as they emitted in the last two decades. More carbon is stored in soil (44%) than living biomass (42%), with the rest found in dead wood (8%) and forest litter (5%). Forests like the Congo basin rainforest – the world’s second largest – affect rainfall thousands of miles away around the Nile. Billions of humans rely on forests for food, building materials and shelter. But they are being cleared at a relentless pace. About 10% of tree cover has been lost since 2000, according to Global Forest Watch. Although estimates vary, the land sector is the second largest source of greenhouse gas emissions and accounts for around a quarter of emissions, according to the IPCC, of which deforestation is a major component. Many scientists say it will not be possible to limit global heating to 1.5C above pre-industrial levels without halting deforestation. “There are two main points on forests and carbon,” says Yadvinder Malhi, a professor of ecosystem science at the University of Oxford. “Forests are a carbon store, meaning that when you deforest, you’re releasing CO2 into the atmosphere. The other thing is that intact forests have been shown to be a carbon sink, absorbing carbon over time. And if our sink is disappearing, you’re losing the service that the biosphere provides – an assumption that such a sink will continue is built into almost all of our climate model scenarios for this century.” Do all forests store the same amount of carbon? No. Old-growth forests that are free from human industrial interference and pollution are especially important for the climate and biodiversity. They are called primary forests and are ancient, carbon-dense ecosystems bursting with life such as parts of the Amazon, the Białowieża Forest in Poland and Papua New Guinea. With some of the largest trees and the biggest variety of life, conservationists place extra emphasis on their protection from logging, wildfires and human industry as they only account for one-third of the planet’s forest cover. Young or recovering forests store much less carbon and can sometimes take several years before they become effective sinks. Tropical rainforests, mangrove and peat swamp forests – such as those found in south-east Asia – play a disproportionally important role in regulating the climate due to the amount of carbon they store, their cooling effect and the protection they provide from flooding. Boreal forests, which are covered in snow for large parts of the year, reflect more heat back into the atmosphere and have a net warming effect on the climate. Agricultural tree plantations with very few species are much less carbon-dense and support much less life. What is deforestation? Deforestation is the human-driven conversion to another land use of a forest, such as cattle ranching or soya bean production, that is often clearcut with machinery then burnt. It is not the same as logging: trees can be selectively taken out of a standing forest. Deforestation has gone hand in hand with human development for centuries. Nearly all the temperate rainforest that once covered large parts of the British Isles was cleared for agriculture, roads and human settlements, for example. As well as being a major source of carbon emissions, land use change is the primary driver of biodiversity loss, which scientists warn is driving the sixth mass extinction of life on Earth. From space, deforestation often follows a “fishbone pattern” where land is cleared along the edges of roads and rivers. Over time, the fishbone fills in as more of the forest is cleared. On a large scale, the process can become self-perpetuating, such as the Amazon switching from rainforest to savannah, as so much of it has been destroyed. Last year, Brazil, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Bolivia, Indonesia and Peru were the top five countries for tropical primary forest loss. About 12m hectares (30m acres) of tree cover was lost in the tropics. This includes 4.2m hectares of primary forests, an area the size of the Netherlands, releasing the equivalent to the annual emissions of 570m cars. Why do people clear forests? While there are many local factors, experts say the main reason is financial: forests are worth more dead than alive in monetary terms. In Brazil, large parts of the Amazon have been cleared for beef production. In Indonesia, forests and peatlands have been cleared and drained for oil palm plantations. In other areas, coffee, cocoa, bananas, pineapples, coca leaves and subsistence farming have driven land-clearing. Most deforestation hotspots are in tropical regions, which are also profitable areas for farming. “The largest factor is the expansion of agricultural industries: cattle ranching, soya bean farming and oil palm,” says Malhi. “A second factor is poverty. In many parts of Africa, such as Madagascar, where there is demographic pressure, a lot of poor, rural settlers are just looking to make a living on the frontier as populations increase. The same is true in parts of South America and south-east Asia.” Can we really stop deforestation? It will not be easy, but there are reasons to be hopeful. Alongside the commitment from world leaders in Glasgow at Cop26, it is hoped big producers and consumers of commodities linked to deforestation will sign up to eradicating them from the global supply chain. China – one of the world’s largest consumers – is taking deforestation more seriously and is looking at “greening” its supply chain. “We really need to start thinking about forest loss – especially tropical forest loss – in the same way people are now talking about coal,” says Frances Seymour, a forest and governance expert at the World Resources Institute (WRI). “There was a big celebration that China had committed to no longer financing new coal abroad. But we need to be looking for similar commitments from all countries to stop financing projects that lead to deforestation abroad.” Are there any examples we can learn from? Costa Rica is the only tropical country to successfully halt and reverse deforestation. It did so, in part, with payments from an ecosystem services programme that put an economic value on standing forests and biodiversity. The country won the first Earthshot prize this year for the scheme, reversing one of the highest deforestation rates in Latin America in the 70s and regrowing large areas of forest. On a larger scale, Brazil had considerable success at reducing deforestation in the Amazon in the late 2000s and early 2010s. Environmental laws, improved surveillance of slash-and-burn illegal logging and a soya moratorium in the Amazon were credited with the fall. However, there have since been large spikes in deforestation in the world’s largest rainforest under the presidency of Jair Bolsonaro. Indonesia has had success in recent years slowing deforestation with a palm oil expansion moratorium, although experts warn it is fragile for the same reasons: the economic incentives to clear forest have not changed. A UN scheme that provides financial incentives to protect forests – known as Redd+ – has been agreed by countries. It allows developing countries to sell carbon credits to preserve carbon sinks. Although there is still division over the rules for carbon markets, it is hoped these will be sorted at Cop26. Countries like Gabon, with low deforestation rates and large forest cover, say that they also need funding to protect forests. Gabon is the chair of the African group of negotiators for Cop26. Why are indigenous communities so important for stopping deforestation? Studies show indigenous communities are the best protectors of forests. Many landscapes thought to be wilderness have actually been managed by indigenous communities for centuries. This year, a UN review of more than 250 studies found that in Latin America, deforestation rates were lower in their territories than elsewhere. Despite this, many indigenous and tribal peoples face persecution, racism and violence. In July, a two-year trial using remote sensors to alert indigenous communities in Peru to early deforestation found a decrease in tree loss of 37% overall for both years, compared to the control group. Researchers say that if this was scaled up, it could have a big effect on reducing deforestation. Jessica Webb, senior manager for global engagement at Global Forest Watch, says: “A third of the Amazon rainforest falls within approximately 3,300 formally acknowledged territories of indigenous peoples. Based on modelling we did with our partner Rainforest Foundation US, as a result of this study, we predict that an additional 123,000 hectares a year of deforestation could be prevented by scaling this approach to other communities within the Amazon. It would be the equivalent of taking 21m cars off the road for a year.” Can satellites protect forests? Ecosystem monitoring is experiencing a technological revolution. Deforestation is easier to track through a dataset developed by researchers at the University of Maryland, Nasa and Google. As image resolutions improve, we are close to being able to monitor deforestation in real time. But “there are still gaps on being able to monitor restoration and degradation”, says Crystal Davis, director at the Land &amp; Carbon Lab, a WRI initiative that aims to provide information on how the world can meet climate and biodiversity commitments and the needs of 10 billion humans. “We also need a better understanding of the accuracy of global datasets. They are not consistent across geography,” she says. What about reforestation? The world needs to restore forests to meet climate and biodiversity goals. But scientists say halting deforestation is an urgent task as it emits carbon immediately whereas it takes decades for nature to recover and sequester carbon. Primary forests that have stood for thousands of years cannot be replaced by tree-planting schemes. What if we don’t stop deforestation? Cutting emissions from fossil fuels is the most urgent task to avoid more global heating. But if the world continues to lose forests, we risk triggering tipping points with unintended consequences. The Amazon could turn into savannah, boreal forests could die back and carbon stores that took thousands of years to sequester could be released. What this would mean for food security, weather systems and millions of other species is unlikely to be good news, experts warn. Robert Nasi, head of the Center for International Forestry Research, says: “We would have climatic change that is cascading: the drying of the Amazon, the Congo Basin … there is a lot of risk of a domino effect. If we don’t protect the forests, people will migrate, there will be climate refugees.” With thanks to: Crystal Davis, director at the Land &amp; Carbon Lab Frances Seymour, distinguished senior fellow, World Resources Institute Luiz Amaral, director, global solutions for commodities and finance, World Resources Institute Robert Nasi, director general at the Center for International Forestry Research Yadvinder Malhi, professor of ecosystem science at the University of Oxford Jessica Webb, senior manager for global engagement at Global Forest Watch This story is part of Covering Climate Now, a global journalism collaboration strengthening coverage of the climate story.An MP has been readmitted to the Conservative party, despite having been found to have sexually harassed a member of staff. Rob Roberts had his party membership suspended for 12 weeks and was also banned from the House of Commons for six weeks, after an independent panel found he made repeated and unwanted sexual advances towards someone who worked in his office and used “his position as his employer to place him under pressure to accede”. On Monday, Roberts regained his party membership, but still has the whip withdrawn, meaning he sits as an independent in parliament. However, the MP for Delyn in north Wales still sits on the government’s side of the Commons green benches, and votes in line with the Conservative whip. A Conservative party spokesperson confirmed Roberts’ readmission and that the whip remained withdrawn. Although Roberts served his suspension from parliament, he avoided being subject to a recall petition. This is usually automatically triggered when an MP is suspended for more than 10 days. However, because Roberts appealed against the initial verdict by the standards commissioner, it emerged that his punishment was not covered by the existing recall legislation because the case was then judged by a separate body known as an “independent expert panel”. The failure of Conservative headquarters “to stop Roberts’ readmission means that the withdrawal of his whip is in name only”, a senior Tory staffer told the Guardian. They added: “This sends a worrying signal to parliamentary staff members who are still dealing with predatory and abusive behaviour on a daily basis.” The Labour party chair, Anneliese Dodds, said his readmission to the Tories was scandalous, and criticised the government for voting down a motion to change the law so the punishment of a recall petition could be applied retrospectively. “Rob Roberts should have resigned as an MP the moment he was suspended from parliament for sexual misconduct,” Dodds said. That he had now returned to the Conservative party showed it had let him off the hook, she added. “Just last week, the government voted against allowing Roberts’ constituents to choose whether he is the right person to represent them, and now they are choosing to readmit him as a member of their party. Yet again, the Conservative party is acting like there’s one rule for their MPs and another rule for everyone else.” The leader of the Commons, Jacob Rees-Mogg, has called on Roberts to do the “honourable” thing and step down as an MP, but argued that retrospective punishment would go against the principle that there should be no imposition of a sanction “which was not available at the time when a given case was determined”. The investigators’ report into Roberts said that he had accepted that “aspects of his behaviour” towards a staff member were “inappropriate” and had offered to apologise but that he “rejected the categorisation of his conduct as ‘sexual’, preferring the term ‘romantic’”.There was a nasty surprise for some supporters leaving Europa-Park Stadion after an uplifting afternoon. Those who parked on Hermann-Mitsch-Strasse found that theirs was one of dozens of cars towed by the local authorities as visitors get used to traffic restrictions at SC Freiburg’s new home. A few teething problems in the new place, perhaps, are to be expected. On the pitch, everything is much smoother. A home victory over struggling Greuther Fürth would be seen as standard in most contexts. Here, as a first win in only the second game at the new pad where they’re still peeling the sticky-back plastic off some of the seats, it meant so much more. “We are already a little bit in love,” said midfielder Nicolas Höfler, who headed the second in Saturday’s victory in front of a sell-out crowd of 31,500. Leaving Dreisamstadion had been hard – their iconic coach Christian Streich wept on the pitch as the squad greeted fans at the end of the last game there, the 3-0 win over Augsburg in late September. Maybe it will be even harder as winter bites, with the trip into -8c in the old chocolate box of a ground in the Black Forest a rite of passage for the hardiest Bundesliga away teams in past years. It will be missed. Now, the move delayed by the pandemic feels as if it has come to pass at just the right time, with supporters back in the stadiums (even with the new 2G regulations meaning spectators can only enter after full vaccination or with a certificate of recovery from Covid, the Fürth tickets were snapped up in double-quick time) combining with Freiburg’s excellent start to the season to create a sense of happening. They begin Monday morning in third place in the Bundesliga, as its only unbeaten team (or indeed as Germany’s only domestically unbeaten professional side) with comfortably the best defensive record in the division. The seven Freiburg have let in makes them the only team with a single figure in the concession column. Having equalled the club’s longest ever top-flight unbeaten run of 10 they could set a new record next week – if they avoid defeat at Bayern Munich. If any coach could keep the near-euphoria in check it’s Streich, the Bundesliga’s longest-serving coach, one of its most popular and without doubt its most down-to-earth. He’ll celebrate a decade in charge of the first team a few days before the turn of the year but his association with the club goes back much further – he’s been on the coaching staff in various guises since 1995 having previously played a season for the club in the late ‘80s. His click with Freiburg is as real as it gets. Yet what makes him so loved in the Bundesliga is that he is more than just a great coach. He often holds court on wider societal themes in his press conferences, and emphasises perspective and respect in a game that can often lose sight of both. “People who care for disabled people are genuinely worthy of praise,” he told Deutsche Welle in his first major TV interview, a few months after his appointment. He also told DW in that interview that he was “trying to remain seated more”. It’s fair to say that it’s one of the few things that hasn’t worked for him in the past 10 years. A huge element of the Streich legend is his touchline demeanour, wired, passionate and feeling every kick, whilst understanding that football is just football, the most important of the least important things in life. Now, Streich takes that attitude and the essence of what Freiburg are into their new arena. It will take some getting used to. “I need months and years,” he admitted after the game. “I was there for 25 years. It somehow turned into half of my life.” He might need a map as well, having famously cycled from his home to Dreisamstadion every day. This season, all the familiar pieces of Freiburg are there – the long-serving Christian Günter at the back, Nils Pedersen’s goals off the bench and Vincenzo Grifo’s craft – but there are a few supplementary strands. Jeong Woo-Yeong, who didn’t make it at Bayern but scored the club’s first goal at Europa-Park a few weeks back, adds some imagination and Maxi Eggestein brings thrust in midfield having joined late in summer from Werder Bremen. So the fans in those packed stands on Saturday chanted “Zieht den Bayern die Lederhosen aus” – Take Bayern’s lederhosen off – with feeling. Freiburg have travelled to Munich in an encounter with meaning in recent memory, hoping a win on the season’s final day in May 2017 could seal a return to European competition. They were made to wait to pursue their aim – the singer Anastasia’s half-time concert went on long enough to delay the second half by nearly 10 minutes, as Arjen Robben helped carry bits of stage off the pitch so the match could resume. Freiburg eventually went down 4-1, reduced in every way to peripherals in Bayern’s title party. This time, they return to Allianz-Arena through the front door – and they deserve to share the stage on equal footing, rather than just as the support act. Talking points • Bayern recovered from a rare and shocking hammering – 5-0 at Borussia Mönchengladbach to exit the DfB Pokal in midweek – by rattling in five of their own at high-flying Union, ending the Berliners’ unbeaten home record. There were still signs of vulnerability as Union came back strongly after half-time – Kingsley Coman’s lightening strike to make it 4-1 suddenly killed off that comeback – but Bayern will have coach Julian Nagelsmann back from quarantine for Benfica’s Champions League visit this week. • Borussia Dortmund had their moments of fortune too, despite beating Köln 2-0, with prolific B team striker Steffen Tigges scoring a debut first-team goal and helping make light of Erling Haaland’s continued absence. The much-improved visitors were excellent, with Gregor Kobel saving BVB more than once. “Except for the result, I’m happy with a lot of things,” said their coach Steffen Baumgart, who opposite number Marco Rose added: “You have to say that Effzeh were the better team.” • Wolfsburg began the post-Mark van Bommel era in fine style, deservedly winning Florian Kohfeldt’s first game in charge 2-0 at Leverkusen, with Lukas Nmecha and Maximilian Arnold getting the goals. There was always the question at Werder Bremen as to how the imaginative Kohfeldt might have got on with a better set of players – we might be about to find out. Meanwhile, Die Wölfe have perhaps passed the crisis baton to Leverkusen, whose confidence has clearly been shaken by their thrashing from Bayern, and have now lost three in a row at home following this and the midweek Pokal exit to Karlsruhe. • Augsburg netted their 50th Bundesliga win under Markus Weinzierl, coming back from a shaky start to beat Stuttgart 4-1 in some style. There was also a first goal since February 2020 for Alfred Finnbogason, who has struggled with Achilles tendon issues. “I have to lie down in the bathtub for the next few days,” he remarked afterwards.At her independent bookshop in the small, rural town of Puy-en-Velay in southern France, Anne Helman had seen an influx of customers since the coronavirus pandemic who said they would rather buy books in person than online. “I’ve never sold as many copies of Albert Camus’s The Plague,” she said. “Children wanted fantasy books. Adults wanted novels and the classics, particularly stories about viruses and the apocalypse. There has been a newfound enthusiasm for buying locally and supporting independent bookshops; it’s seen as the virtuous thing to do.” The French government is seizing on this increased support for independent bookshops to pursue its war against the domination of big tech firms. In a blow to Amazon, new legislation in France is to set a minimum price for book deliveries, in order to stop what the government calls “distorted competition” against independent bookshops from digital giants who deliver books for a charge of as little as €0.01. The French culture minister, Roselyne Bachelot, begged the nation during one lockdown: “Do not buy books from online platforms!” Now the French parliament is limiting the market advantages of net giants, which it hopes could set a precedent for other European countries seeking to protect small bookstores. The minimum delivery fee, which still has to be decided in negotiations with the state regulator, should come into force next year. Passing laws to protect books and the book trade is a rare point of political consensus in France, where debate has otherwise become increasingly tense in the run-up to next year’s presidential race. Emmanuel Macron has declared reading “a national priority”, extending opening hours for libraries. The move to force net giants to charge the same for delivery as small bookshops is part of the French notion of “cultural exceptionalism”, which has long sought to shield books and independent booksellers from the ravages of free-market forces. In contrast to the UK’s famous three-for-two deals on novels, French law requires that publishers set the price of new books so readers pay the same whether they buy online, from a high-street giant or a small bookseller. The law allows a maximum discount of only 5%. It has helped preserve France’s 3,500 independent bookshops – more than three times the number in the UK – which account for 12,000 jobs. But while French law bans free book deliveries, Amazon and other big companies selling online have circumvented this by charging just a single centime for shipping a book. Independent bookshops, to keep their narrow margins, have to charge much higher post-office prices. “Local bookstores typically have to charge about €6 [£5] or €7 for sending a book, so there was a considerable gap,” said Géraldine Bannier, a centrist MP who presented the law in the lower house of parliament. “This is about defending the diversity of where people can buy their books. It is very important to us.” More than 20% of the 435m books sold in France in 2019 were bought online. The fate of French independent bookstores during the pandemic has greatly influenced the new law. France had three nationwide lockdowns. During the first two, bookshops remained closed, despite protests from writers and publishers. But during the second lockdown, in November 2020, the government reimbursed delivery fees for small independent booksellers. It resulted in small shops maintaining 70% of their business. “It showed what a brake on business the postage costs are for local bookstores,” said the rightwing senator Laure Darcos who drafted the law. In the final lockdown this spring, books were deemed essential items and bookshops stayed open, with historically high numbers of customers flocking to buy from them. Across France, independent bookshops saw a year-on-year fall in sales of only 3.3% in 2020 despite three months of closures. Amazon warned that new legislation fixing delivery prices would “weigh on the purchasing power of consumers” and affect readers in small towns and rural areas. French politicians argued that people who bought books online tended to live in big cities and urban areas, while independent bookshops were present in rural areas in France. Wilfrid Séjeau, the owner of the independent bookshop Le Cyprès in Nevers, Burgundy, said he had posted about 70 books a day to customers during France’s second lockdown last year, wrapping many as gifts. When his shop reopened, there was a marked rise in customers from the surrounding rural area. “People realised certain things are precious,” he said of the human link between a bookseller and customer. “A person might buy a lot of books on Amazon but also enjoy browsing in small bookshops. People often save a book into their basket on Amazon as soon as they hear about it so they don’t forget. Now they tell us: ‘I’m stopping that, I’ll send you a list or reserve on your site instead.’” His trade is up and he has created two jobs since the pandemic in the two independent bookstores he runs on the same street, along with a stationery shop. Guillaume Husson of the French booksellers’ union, the Syndicat de la Librairie Française, said the law was about preserving bookstores as a meeting place in town centres, but also protecting publishers. “Independent bookstores don’t sell the same things as other sales points – they have more first-time novelists, more challenging publications – that has allowed hundreds of publishers and writers to exist.” Vincent Chabault, a sociologist at the University of Paris, saw good sales during the pandemic for his book Éloge du Magasin: Contre l’Amazonisation (In Praise of Shops: Against Amazonisation). He said small independent bookshops, which remained fragile, had become “the symbol of resistance against online platforms and Amazon” adding: “One thing we’ve learned from the Covid crisis is that digital capitalism has progressed and there’s a need to preserve places and moments where we can be together unconnected and offline.” Back in the Puy-en-Velay bookshop Le Chat Perché, Helman praised the legislation. She had feared for her shop’s survival when Covid first hit, but June 2020 to June 2021 proved to be her most profitable period in 23 years. She worried that customers had become so used to quick delivery by online giants that it would be a challenge for them to adapt to a slower pace of ordering books from independents. “People are used to ordering something online that pops through the letter box two days later. That’s the one thing which will still be hard to compete with.” • This article was amended on 16 November 2021. French law requires that publishers fix a price for books, the state does not set this price as a previous version implied.Jake Hunter (played by Paul Sloan, and yes, that really is the character’s name) has at one point been a soldier who did some kind of black ops work so secret he could never even tell his own daughter Melissa (Claire Kniaz) what it was exactly. While he’s away black-opping and she’s meant to be kicking a drug habit under the supervision of a friend of his (Michael Madsen), she goes missing near the desert California town Salton Sea, and Hunter puts his skills to use in an effort to find out what happened. Turns out, wouldn’t you know it, she got mixed up with some shady people through her skeevy boyfriend Bobby (Hudson Garland) who is the son of local big shot Nichols (Jake Weber), a man who is trying to go more legit by getting involved with the water industry instead of just running, say, strip bars – which is where Hunter first meets Bobby and his dad. Sigh. How many times do we have to do this? Does the world really need another film about some swaggering patriarch searching for, and avenging the death of, “his little girl”? The grandpappy progenitor of the form is arguably Paul Schrader’s now dated but still deeply discomforting Hardcore from 1979 which starred George C Scott. But the many and sundry knockoffs and remakes (see Joel Schumacher’s 8mm) too often rely on a reductive sort of morality wherein we’re meant to be horrified at the idea of one young lady’s innocence being despoiled but are still meant to leer at the images of other women in the sex trade who are encountered, usually barely dressed, along the way. Sure enough, that’s exactly what’s going on here when Hunter first meets the baddies at a pole dancing establishment. It’s all a bit icky really. Strictly as an action film, this is tedious stuff. The combat scenes are ponderous, the dialogue is risible, and the editing is clunky as a tank trying to do doughnuts. At least there are some fetching drone shots of date palms that create pleasing, nearly abstract compositions when seen from above, which break up the monotony. • Every Last One of Them is released on 8 November on digital platforms.An unusual event marking what organizers called “the start of the produce season” was recently held on the US side of an international port of entry connecting Mexico with Pharr, Texas. It was a different kind of ribbon-cutting ceremony, in front of a crowd of hundreds gathered beneath a large tent leading to the bridge connecting the United States and Mexico. Local dignitaries from both sides of the border were given a fruit or vegetable imported from Mexico and asked to cut it, which they dutifully did to the delight of the crowd. Then came the free-for-all. The crowd was given bags and told to take what they wanted from a carefully staged backdrop of every type of fruit and vegetable that comes through this region. While this quaint tradition has been a mainstay of the region for years, this year may make the event more significant, asthe United States struggles with supply chain problems in the wake of the pandemic. That’s because the produce-importing capacity of this landlocked port of entry could provide a solution that would help alleviate the problems that have been created by the backlog of ships waiting to offload cargo at the ports of Los Angeles and Long Beach, which account for 40% of all shipping containers entering the US. When President Biden recently announced that the Los Angeles port would stay open 24 hours a day, seven days a week to alleviate the backlog, a total of 64 ships were berthed at the two ports and an additional 80 were parked in the Pacific waiting their turn to unload. Experts are already predicting a Christmas shortage of certain goods, particularly those coming from Asia. What does Mexican produce coming through a landlocked south Texas port have to do with this backlog? It may be the key to developing a new trade route that avoids California and uses Mexican ports to get into the US via south Texas. It may even show the potential for a new mode of transportation that could alleviate growing traffic problems on our nation’s highways. The key is the newly remodeled Mexican Federal Highway 40, or the Carretera Interoceánica (Interoceanic Highway). This is a road that runs from near the Port of Mazatlán on the Pacific coast to Reynosa, Mexico, just across the border from several cities in south Texas and is connected by several ports of entry, including the Pharr International Bridge. The 1,145 km route bisects the northern portion of the Sierra Madre Oriental mountains by way of 63 tunnels and 115 bridges, including the Baluarte Bridge, the highest suspension bridge in the world. And the highway provides direct access from the Pacific Ocean to the Gulf of Mexico. Recent improvements to this roadway have dropped the drive time across Mexico to three hours from eight. Produce grown near the Pacific coast of Mexico had once been transported north for import into the United States through California. But the opening of the remodeled Mexican highway, particularly in the mountain region, gave growers a new option – a route through Texas. Pharr, in south Texas, now boasts that it is the busiest importer of Mexican produce in the United States and is a conduit for more than $33bn in trade with Mexico in 2020. This includes $21bn worth of imports and $11bn in exports. The Pharr bridge ranks number one for avocados, shipping nearly 50% and more than $1bn of that fruit. It’s number one in pineapple imports; number two for berries; and number three for tomatoes. As the produce boon began a few years ago, local realtors began joking that homes in neighborhoods that had been popular with drug dealers were being sold to produce importers. This region already has a large presence of factories called maquiladoras, twin plants that allow manufacturers to set up a factory on the US side of the border, transport partially built products to twin plants on the Mexican side of the border where labor costs are lower, and send back finished products to the US side at lower tariff rates because of the manufacturing process here. Reynosa, Mexico, across the border from Pharr, McAllen and Mission, has more than 200 manufacturing plants representing 155 companies and employing 100,000 workers. So even the success of produce imports is dwarfed by product imports from these twin plants such as televisions and computer monitors, which represent the top import over the Pharr bridge at double the revenue wrought from avocados. Some local community leaders are beginning to wonder aloud if the success of the produce imports can be a model for other products. Can the flow of goods from Asia to California take a slightly southern route to the Port of Mazatlán? From there, the products can be off-loaded and shipped across Mexico on Highway 40 for import into the United States in south Texas. Once across the international boundary, shippers have two options: they can move their products via highway on trucks that are beginning their US journey through the middle of the country by way of Texas rather than the far west coast of California. Larger shipments can be transported 30 minutes east from the international border to the Port of Brownsville or driven five hours to the Port of Houston. As supply chain issues continue to fester in the United States, new concerns are being raised about disruptions to food products. This brings a sense of urgency to discussions of new trade routes and raises the profile of import areas such as Pharr, which has a growing inventory of cold storage units to temporarily keep produce and other food. There are even mid-term and long-term possibilities that would make a new Asia-Mexico-Texas trade route more viable, especially as an alternative to the west coast port congestion – rail shipments supplementing truck shipments and an innovative technology that could make rail and truck traffic seamlessly integrate into a multi-modal planner’s dream. The Freight Shuttle Xpress is being designed in conjunction with Texas A&amp;M University’s Transportation Institute. It integrates what it calls “electric-powered transporters” capable of holding truck and shipping containers from one location to another. And in the best tradition of Walt Disney, these transporters would travel via a monorail system that could be built into the medians of existing highways. The approach would save on acquisition costs, including potential years-long eminent domain court fights for new right-of-way. It would also alleviate growing traffic problems, particularly along Texas’s main street, the Interstate 35 corridor that cuts through the state. A 2016 study said that 2.2bn tons of freight moved through Texas, a figure projected to go up to 3.8bn tons by the year 2040. The Freight Shuttle Xpress tried to raise investment funding several years ago to begin a project emanating from the Port of Houston, but did not raise enough money. But a route emanating from south Texas has the allure of attracting Mexican investment at a time when a backlog of goods due to the pandemic favors new ideas. Carlos Sanchez is director of public affairs for Hidalgo county, Texas. He was a journalist for 37 years and has worked at the Washington Post and Texas Monthly magazine, as well as eight other newsrooms. He can be reached at borderscribe@gmail.comThe global death toll from Covid-19 has passed 5 million, 19 months after the pandemic was first declared, according to figures released by Johns Hopkins University. Some experts, including those from the World Health Organization, believe the true toll may be two to three times higher than official figures suggest. The number of deaths from Covid-19 far outstrip that of other viral epidemics in the 21st century and most from the 20th century, with the notable exception of the Spanish flu. The US, Brazil, India, Mexico and the UK together account for more than half of all deaths worldwide. In the last 28 days, Johns Hopkins University has logged 197,116 deaths and 11.7 million new cases around the world. After it was first recorded in China in late 2019, the coronavirus spread quickly to almost every corner of the world and the outbreak was declared a pandemic in March 2020. In the last month, the US, UK, Russia, Turkey and Ukraine have recorded the most new cases, while 581m doses of vaccine have been administered worldwide. The US has the largest death toll, at 745,836, followed by India (458,437). Russia’s official death toll stands at 235,318, although independent analysis of excess deaths in Russia by the Moscow Times suggests the true figure could be up to three times higher. UK government figures show that in the last seven days there were 284,058 new cases, numbers last seen in the January and July peaks of the virus in the UK. In the last week 1,099 people have died in the UK within 28 days of a positive test, taking the total official death toll to 163,515. Nearly 80% of the population aged 12 and above in the UK have received two doses of a vaccine, and 86.9% have had at least one. Ariel Karlinsky, a member of the World Health Organization’s technical advisory group on Covid mortality, said the 5 million milestone was actually passed “a long time ago”. He estimated the the true global death toll from the pandemic so far was “at least 10 million people”. “There are 5 million covid deaths just in India,” he estimated in an interview with the Guardian. Karlinsky said the most reliable indicator was excess death toll, which was typically 40% higher, according to data. But he said certain countries were statistical “black holes”. These included India, Pakistan and many countries in Africa. Belarus and Nicaragua had dramatically undercounted Covid-related deaths, while in Egypt excess mortality was 13 times higher than official figures, he said. There was a correlation between good governance and good data, he added. He said in Russia more than 872,000 people had died of Covid, according to his estimate on Monday, over three times the Kremlin’s figure. “Autocrats tend to manipulate data. In Moscow, it is much worse than reported. The numbers from Belarus are complete nonsense,” Karlinsky said. Dr Albert Ko, a specialist in infectious diseases at the Yale School of Public Health, said: “This is a defining moment in our lifetime. What do we have to do to protect ourselves so we don’t get to another 5 million?” The death toll as tallied by Johns Hopkins rivals the number of people killed in battles among nations since 1950, according to estimates from the Peace Research Institute Oslo. Globally, Covid-19 is the third leading cause of death, after heart disease and stroke. Hotspots for the virus have shifted over the course of the pandemic, with eastern European countries experiencing a surge amid low vaccination rates, while some places such as Thailand reopen to tourism. Dr Wafaa El-Sadr, the director of ICAP, a global health centre at Columbia University in the US, told the Associated Press: “What’s uniquely different about this pandemic is it hit hardest the high-resource countries. That’s the irony of Covid-19.” Wealthier nations with longer life expectancies have larger proportions of older people, cancer survivors and nursing home residents, all of whom are especially vulnerable to Covid-19, El-Sadr noted. Poorer countries tend to have larger shares of children, teens and young adults, who are less likely to fall seriously ill from Covid. The Johns Hopkins University coronavirus tracking dashboard has become regarded as one of the most reliable measures of the spread of the disease globally, as it is independent and run by a small team of disease modelling experts at the University in Baltimore. The dashboard project began in January 2020, initially with manual data entry, and it is now automated and scrapes Covid data from official government sources around the world, with a team of about a dozen people managing it. Associated Press contributed to this reportThe health secretary is facing legal action over the Immensa testing fiasco, in which about 43,000 people have been given false negative Covid results since September. The Good Law Project has sent a pre-action letter to Sajid Javid seeking answers over the scandal, which some experts believe has contributed to a rise in coronavirus cases in south-west England. The project, led by Jo Maugham QC, said it was asking the health secretary and UK Health Security Agency to terminate Immensa’s contracts immediately, compensate the individuals affected and take action to properly regulate private testing firms. It says it will sue if its requests are not met, arguing there have been breaches of public law duties and the Human Rights Act. The letter says: “The false negatives and the defendants’ unlawful failure to adequately monitor and regulate Immensa’s performance have exposed the affected individuals, their families and communities to grave risks and in many cases harm.” Downing Street has denied claims that the false Covid test results from the Wolverhampton lab were to blame for a sharp rise in cases in south-west England, saying the region may have been catching up with the rest of the country. Immensa was founded in May 2020 by Andrea Riposati, a former management consultant and owner of a DNA testing company. Three months later, the Department of Health awarded it a £119m PCR testing contract. Riposati is the firm’s sole listed owner and board director. The award of the contract in autumn 2020 bypassed the normal competitive procedures, which the government said was necessary because of the urgency of the need for testing during the pandemic. Immensa was subsequently given a further £50m testing contract in August 2021. The Guardian has learned that Immensa won a separate £12m contract in relation to genomic sequencing as recently as September this year, raising questions over whether this would have happened if the problems regarding the Wolverhampton lab had been spotted sooner. Since the scandal broke it has emerged that Immensa was not fully accredited with the UK Accreditation Service. It was already the subject of an investigation into its sister company, Dante Labs, by the Competition and Markets Authority into its travel tests. Riposati is also the founder of Dante Labs. The Department of Health promised to look into behaviour at the Wolverhampton lab after a Sun on Sunday report about workers there allegedly fighting, sleeping, playing football and drinking on duty. The government said at the time it would speak to Immensa as it took “evidence of misconduct extremely seriously”. The Guardian also found that Dante Labs in the US had sent out used DNA test kits filled with other customers’ saliva. After the incident in 2018, Dante Labs issued a statement saying five people received “used kits” as a result of an error by its shipping provider, with Riposati saying he took “full responsibility”. Maugham said: “We don’t know why government chose to sidestep established testing facilities in universities and hospitals to send £119m to a newly formed private company. But the consequences have been catastrophic. Many people are likely to have lost their lives. We want answers for their families and the tens of thousands of others whose lives have been blighted by the government’s inexplicable disregard for public health.” A Department of Health spokesperson said: “The Immensa laboratory in Wolverhampton passed an independent quality audit overseen by NHS Test and Trace and is in the process of UKAS accreditation.” Separately, the Good Law Project has previously forced disclosures from the government about VIP access for favoured companies during the pandemic. Its legal proceedings also revealed that Lord Bethell, then a health minister, replaced his phone before it could be examined for information relevant to £85m of deals that are subject to a legal challenge. Government lawyers said Bethell had not been issued with a “preservation notice” requiring him to save documents because ministers’ official correspondence was routinely saved as a matter of course. However, this did not cover government business conducted by private means. Bethell, who oversaw the award of Covid contracts and is no longer a minister, is one of those under scrutiny over the way deals for personal protective equipment (PPE) and tests were awarded at the height of the pandemic.Throughout October, the viola player Antoine Tamestit was the London Symphony Orchestra’s artist-in-focus. After performances of concertos by Walton and Martinů, he closed his residency with the London premiere of the concerto written for him by Jörg Widmann. Tamestit gave the first performance in 2015, and he has since played it some 20 times, very often with Daniel Harding, who was conducting here too. Widmann’s viola concerto is a substantial piece – a single movement lasting half an hour. It proceeds in picaresque fashion through a series of musical encounters between the soloist and members of the orchestra, during which he moves around the platform, confronting different instruments in turn. It’s an idea that Thea Musgrave used more than half a century ago in her clarinet concerto, but Widmann was inspired by Tamestit himself, who has performed Berlioz’s Harold in Italy with similar peregrinations. But it begins with the soloist alone at the side of the stage, gently tapping on the body of his instrument, gradually drawing members of the orchestra into the argument. It’s a while before Widmann allows Tamestit to reveal the gorgeous smoky sound that he can draw from his Stradivarius. The viola’s subsequent adventures are undeniably vivid – there are brief flirtations with the harp and bass flute, a fierce encounter with the tuba, a violent outburst from the whole orchestra provoking frantic solo activity, before the wispy, quietly evaporating coda. But though they do make a fine showcase for Tamestit’s outstanding virtuosity, they seem to be a series of self-contained, brilliantly conceived moments, rather than adding up to something more than the sum of their parts. After the concerto came two programmatic works by Dvořák – the concert overture In Nature’s Realm, and what is perhaps the best known of the five symphonic poems he composed in the mid 1890s, The Golden Spinning Wheel. Both were superbly played by the LSO, the brass particularly outstanding, and Harding’s unfussy approach to the pictorial elements of the poem brought its gruesome narrative very convincingly to life. • Broadcast on Radio 3 on 4 November, and then available on BBC Sounds until 3 December.Shares in the cybersecurity firm Darktrace have plummeted again after an analyst note raising doubts about its valuation and as the expiry looms of a lock-up on insiders selling their stakes. The Cambridge-based firm, which had been a star performer since floating in April and joining the FTSE 100 last week, closed down 121p at 698p on Monday, a fall of more than 15% that valued the company at £4.7bn. Its shares first began to dive last week after an analyst note from Peel Hunt questioned its sky-high valuation. The note raised a range of issues, including that some customers of Darktrace, which uses artificial intelligence to create digital security products to keep businesses one step ahead of hackers and viruses, had described its technology as “snake oil”. The company, which is run by its 39-year old co-founder Poppy Gustafsson, has lost about £2bn from its market capitalisation within a week. Last month, Gustafsson, a high profile female executive in the male-dominated tech scene, took part in a government event promoting investment in Britain held at Windsor Castle where she was pictured meeting the Queen. The company’s shares had come close to hitting 1,000p in recent weeks, valuing the business at nearly £7bn, quadruple the 250p it began trading at when it made its debut on the London Stock Exchange. Darktrace’s latest share price fall – the largest in the FTSE 100 – comes as a 180-day lock on investors who were onboard at the flotation selling their shares ends on Wednesday. Investors who could offload stakes include the British tech billionaire Mike Lynch, Darktrace’s first and largest shareholder pre-float, who sold the software group Autonomy to Hewlett-Packard for £8.4bn in 2011. Lynch and his wife, Angela Bacares, own a 16.2% stake in Darktrace, worth about £780m, and are its second-largest shareholders. Lynch is appealing against his extradition to the US, where he is accused of fraudulently inflating the value of Autonomy before its sale to HP, and also awaits judgment in a $5bn civil fraud trial brought by HP. He denies any wrongdoing in either case. Last Monday, two days before Darktrace replaced Morrisons in the FTSE 100 after the acquisition of the supermarket chain by the US private equity group CD&amp;R, an analyst note titled Reality Check by the city brokers Peel Hunt wiped more than a fifth of the company’s market cap. The note warned that there was a “disconnect” between the company’s valuation and its growth prospects. “While we believe strong growth rates will continue, we also see a disconnect between valuation and the ultimate revenue opportunity,” the note said. “Having considered the potential market size, the intensifying competition, and Darktrace’s limited [research and development] spend, we take a more grounded approach to our valuation, giving a target price of 473p.” Darktrace joins a string of companies that initially enjoyed a pandemic boom – including fashion businesses Asos, Boohoo and The Hut Group, as well as grocery delivery business Ocado and spread-betting firm CMC Markets – to lose their shine among investors in recent months. Darktrace, which has almost 6,000 customers, said revenues grew 50.8% year-on-year in the quarter to the end of September, significantly slower than the almost quadrupling in share price the company had enjoyed until last week. “Darktrace uses cutting-edge AI technology to protect almost 6,000 customers worldwide, of which 1,500 signed up in the last year,” said a spokesperson for the firm. “This self-learning AI, which learns the digital fingerprint of an organisation, defends across every industry sector – from critical national infrastructure through to global banks and corporations. Our AI technology interrupts a cyber-threat every second, stopping attacks before they escalate into a crisis.” The company was founded in 2013 by mathematicians from the University of Cambridge, artificial intelligence experts and cybersecurity specialists from GCHQ.One in four people in their mid-30s to mid-50s are no longer following the full rules around self-isolation after a positive Covid test, according to a survey that suggests compliance with the requirements has slipped since the summer. The latest figures from the Office for National Statistics, based on a survey of 881 people in England in late September and early October, show that only 75% of respondents aged 35 to 54 complied with the full rules around self-isolation for the 10 days after testing positive for coronavirus. The number is down substantially from the 86% compliance reported by the ONS in July, and suggests that those in their mid-30s to mid-50s are now the least able, or least likely, of any age group to abide by the full requirements of self-isolation after a positive result. Hints of lower compliance were also seen in older people, with adherence to self-isolation falling marginally in those aged 55 and over from 81% in the summer to 78% in recent weeks, according to the ONS survey. Evidence for an opposing trend was seen in younger people, with 82% of 18- to 34-year-olds reporting full compliance with self-isolation rules in the latest survey, up from 75% in the summer. The findings came as further ONS data gathered between January and September 2021 showed that unvaccinated people were 32 times more likely to die from Covid than fully vaccinated individuals. The latest round of the ONS self-isolation survey collected responses from adults in England between 27 September and 2 October. The ONS said the statistics were “experimental” and based on a small number of respondents who reported their own behaviour, so should be treated with caution. Overall, the ONS estimates that 78% of individuals who have a positive Covid test follow the full requirements for self-isolation, a similar rate to the 79% seen in the previous round of the survey in July. However, the ONS said the compliance rate was “significantly lower” than levels seen earlier in the year, such as 84% in April and 86% in May. About one-third (34%) of those who tested positive for Covid reported that isolating had a negative effect on their mental health, down from 42% in July. “Today’s results highlight the majority of those testing positive for Covid-19 adhere to self-isolation requirements, though there has been a decrease since April and May earlier this year,” said Tim Gibbs, head of the ONS public services analysis team. “As we continue into the winter months, it is important we monitor general adherence to self-isolation requirements, which wouldn’t be possible without our respondents,” he added.Sir David Attenborough has called on leaders at the Cop26 summit in Glasgow to be “motivated by hope rather than fear” to avoid climate catastrophe. Speaking in front of an audience that included the US president, Joe Biden, at the conference’s opening ceremony on Monday afternoon, the broadcaster and naturalist said humanity was “already in trouble”. He also appealed to the political leaders and heads of state gathered for the two-week summit to commit to holding global temperature rises to 1.5C above pre-industrial levels, the lower of two limits set out in the 2015 Paris climate agreement. Attenborough said: “Everything we have achieved in the last 10,000 years has been enabled because of the [climate] stability during this time. “The global temperature has not wavered over this period by more than either plus or minus one degree celsius – until now.” He continued: “We are already in trouble. The stability we all depend on is breaking. “This story is one of inequality as well as instability. Today those who have done the least to cause this problem are among those to be hardest hit. Ultimately, all of us will feel the impact, some of which is unavoidable. “Is this how our story is due to end? A tale of the smartest species doomed by that all too human characteristic of failing to see the bigger picture in pursuit of short-term goals?” He added his voice to increasingly growing calls for world leaders to thrash out a commitment to the 1.5C temperature limit and called on young people to “rewrite our story”. “Perhaps the fact that the people most affected by climate change are no longer some imagined future generation but young people alive today, perhaps that will give us the impetus we need to rewrite our story,” he said. “To turn this tragedy into a triumph – we are after all the greatest problem solvers to have ever existed on Earth. “We now understand this problem, we know how to stop the number rising and put it in reverse. “We must recapture billions of tonnes of carbon from the air, we must fix our sights on keeping 1.5 degrees within reach.” Attenborough also highlighted the fact that “no nation has completed its development because no advanced nation is yet sustainable”, and demanded “all nations have a good standard of living and a modest footprint”. He concluded: “It comes down to this. The people alive now and the generation to come will look at this conference and consider one thing – did the number stop rising and start to drop as a result of commitments made here? “There’s every reason to believe that the answer can be yes. If working apart we are forces powerful enough to destabilise our planet, surely working together we are powerful enough to save it.” He added: “That desperate hope … is why the world is looking to you and why you are here.”Mention Attica and an iconic moment from Dog Day Afternoon is often top of mind. In Sidney Lumet’s powder-keg film from 1975, Al Pacino’s bank robber turned hostage taker yells “Attica! Attica! Attica!” in a standoff with police. He riles up the gathered crowds and wins sympathy for his predicament by invoking the tragedy that occurred just a few years ago, when inmates took control of Attica correctional facility in a fight for their humanity, keeping trigger happy police at bay outside the prison walls for four days. There is so much to say about that Dog Day Afternoon scene, where a white man invokes a prison rebellion led largely by Black and brown men to win the support of fellow white onlookers, subsequently supplanting the harrowing real life event in cultural memory. Consider Stanley Nelson and Traci Curry’s Attica an act of reclamation, then. Their powerfully empathetic, insightful and riveting documentary – airing on Showtime just over 50 years after the Attica rebellion – chronicles the events that began as a fight among inmates and guards, and immediately exploded into an incredibly organized coup with prisoners taking control of the prison and demanding national media attention. Prison staff were taken hostage but kept safe under the protection of Muslim prisoners. The inmates also set up security details for the news cameras that were invited inside to listen to testimonies of brutality and inhumane conditions and the back-and-forth negotiations for a peaceful resolution that never came. The doc, made up of archival footage and interviews with inmates, lawyers and journalists on scene, also skillfully weaves in the cultural fabric that led to what is still the bloodiest prison rebellion in US history. “What happened inside Attica resonated with what was happening outside Attica in 1971,” Curry told the Guardian on a Zoom call alongside Nelson. She explains that many of the inmates at Attica included members of radical groups like Black Panthers, the Weather Underground and the Young Lords, who would educate fellow prisoners and spread the spirit of activism that was prevalent across the nation during the Vietnam war. Curry, who began her collaborations with Nelson as a producer on a handful of recent projects before stepping into a co-director role on this film, adds that Attica was resonating with the reality outside her own Brooklyn apartment while they were making the film in 2020. “It really crystallized what this film was all about, watching George Floyd protests happening outside my window,” says Curry. She talks about witnessing police descending on protesters from her apartment. She compares Donald Trump’s attack on peaceful protesters near the White House to York governor Nelson Rockefeller’s political opportunism while handling Attica. She compares the disregard for life and humanity in Attica to the early days of the pandemic in US prisons, where Covid-19 outbreaks ravage the incarcerated population. “Attica is an invitation for us to reconsider a lot of what we’re willing to allow the state to do in our name today.” Attica, the film, also feels like a continuation and cumulation of the documentaries Nelson has been making for more than three decades. Whether directing on his own or collaborating with others, Nelson has been building a tapestry that captures so many vital stories in African American history and daily life. “I would feel very strongly that people should make films about the communities that they’re from and something that they know about and get into in a deeper way,” says Nelson, who was 20 when Attica happened. “I remember the utter shock and devastation when it ended up the way it ended up.” Nelson is speaking from his office in Harlem, with the multiple Emmy and Peabody awards he accumulated over the years strategically framed around him. I can also spy the National Medal in the Humanities he received from Barack Obama way in the back. Nelson’s first film, 1989’s Two Dollars and A Dream, was a biography on cosmetics entrepreneur Madame CJ Walker, the first female self-made millionaire. That story bears a family connection to the film-maker. Nelson’s grandfather FB Ransom was Walker’s attorney and the general manager of her enterprise. His mother, A’Lelia Nelson, became the company’s president for a time. Nelson’s film-making career essentially began with a story in his DNA before expanding out. He made biographies on Marcus Garvey and Miles Davis along with docs that celebrated Black press, activists and colleges. His most recent film, the Netflix documentary Crack: Cocaine, Corruption &amp; Conspiracy, covered the institutional failures behind the crack epidemic that led to the mass incarceration of so many Black people. Nelson’s films also have a tendency to speak to each other. His 2014 documentary Freedom Summer, about a 1964 drive to encourage African American voter registration, ends with civil rights activist Stokely Carmichael yelling “Black Power!” And his follow-up film, The Black Panthers: Vanguard of the Revolution, coincidentally begins with the same chant. But that’s an unintentional consequence of chronicling the African-American experience throughout a century and stumbling on echoes and overlaps. These stories simply don’t exist in a vacuum. “What we have gone through, what we’re going through in this culture, is all tied up together,” says Nelson. And so it goes that the stories of institutional failures, passionate activism and Black self-determination featured in Nelson’s past work are also elements in Attica, which in many ways feels like a compelling, all-encompassing microcosm of America. There’s another element to the Attica story that resonates today. The protests and racial reckoning of the past year happened because a young woman named Darnella Frazier stood by and recorded George Floyd’s murder. Her act of witnessing mobilized the country. The cameras served a similar function at Attica. The inmates, Nelson reminds, called the media and their TV cameras into the prison. They did that so the nation could hear them speak their truth and the cameras can serve as witness. “They thought that if the news media came in and filmed it, they would be protected,” says Nelson, “and thank God they did.” His documentary is built from all that visceral, on-the-ground footage from fifty-years ago, continuing the act of witnessing the inmates pushed for back then. “It makes us able to tell the story of Attica in a way that we can’t in any other prison uprising in this country. We could tell the story of Attica when we could see it.” Attica is now out in US cinemas and will air on Showtime on 6 November with a UK date to be announcedQueues, icy weather, and more queues; as the meetings finally got under way at Glasgow’s climate conference, organisation and admissions continued to be a problem. About 2,000 delegates and journalists were kept in large crowds queueing outside the conference centre, with Guardian reporters noting there seemed to have been a lack of planning, as no attempt was made to encourage people to queue rather than simply press forward. Also, covers to provide shelter from the elements had not been put up – despite rain being a fairly safe bet in Scotland at this time of year. Dominic Kavakeb, a senior communications adviser at Global Witness, said it had taken more than an hour to move through security at Cop26 on Monday morning. “Too many important voices are going unheard at this climate summit,” he said. “Either because they were blocked from attending by vaccine or economic inequality or, today, because of poor organisation by the UK government. “There is a special entrance for global leaders and, we presume, for major sponsors, so yet again it is activists, many of whom are from communities hit hard by the climate emergency, who are left out in the cold.” Laura Young, attending the conference with the Christian charity Tearfund, said she and her colleagues were left queuing outside for almost an hour and a half. She said: “I had colleagues arriving at staggered times throughout the morning and we all got held up in this mass of people queuing outside. I’m inside now and all the chairs are socially distanced but that obviously wasn’t the case outside. Hopefully it will get better over the coming days but yesterday there were people queuing in the morning saying they weren’t going to be able to make their meetings.” Scenes like this have not been seen at a Cop summit since the poorly prepared Copenhagen conference in 2009 according to the Guardian’s environment correspondent, Fiona Harvey. She said: “It is inexplicable that the hosts were not better prepared because I stood in a similar queue on Friday. They knew 30,000 people would come. This time thankfully it is not raining but they could have had a better plan for queue management. Like many people here I’ve already had a long journey, having left before 8am to get here, so there’s a lot of weariness in the crowd here before we even get started but everyone is still in good spirits and just eager to get in.” Protesters were gathering too. Despite the freezing cold there were a couple of small protests already taking place, including a delegation from Uganda demanding Boris Johnson take action against the president, Yoweri Museveni, who is accused of a wide range of human rights violations including environmental destruction. A large Bangladeshi crowd gathered on the edge of the River Clyde demanding that the prime minister, Sheikh Hasina, stand down. The summit always attracts political protests from across the world as activists take advantage of the international attention. American grassroots activists from the Build Back Fossil Free coalition were expected outside the Cop26 blue zone entrance to demand the US president take executive action to stop the approval of fossil fuel projects and declare a climate emergency, building on the historic People v Fossil Fuels week of action last month in Washington DC Activists are furious at Joe Biden’s likely narrative of “climate leadership”, which they say contradicts the daily suffering by communities on the frontline of gas and oil production in the US. In the first six months of the Biden administration, about 2,500 new oil and gas permits were authorised – a figure Donald Trump’s administration took a year to reach. Meanwhile, inside the convention centre, it felt as if the whole world had arrived in Glasgow. The Israeli prime minister, Naftali Bennett, and his team headed down one corridor, while in the opposite direction officials from Rwanda, Costa Rica and the EU gathered in the area where world leaders were due to arrive and speak. International reporters were diving in with questions in several different languages. Mostly, people were trying to find their way around, meandering through the network of country pavilions, offices and coffee shops with long queues. So far, Scotland’s favourite drink has not proved a hit: there were lots of unloved cans of Irn-Bru piled up.The Queen, who is following medical advice to take it easy for two weeks, donned a headscarf and sunglasses as she got behind the wheel to drive herself around her estate at Windsor on Monday. Forced to cancel her appearance at Cop26 in Glasgow after a recent overnight stay in hospital for tests, she was seen alone in the green Jaguar estate that she usually uses to take her dogs to go for a walk. Though she is complying with her doctors’ advice to cancel all official visits, she is still undertaking light duties from Windsor Castle. It was announced on Friday that she would not be attending the Royal British Legion festival of remembrance on the evening of 13 November, but her “firm intention” was still to attend a Remembrance Day service at the Cenotaph the following day. Buckingham Palace has previously said the 95-year-old monarch is in “good spirits”. It has given no details of any specific medical issues. She cancelled a two-day visit to Northern Ireland on the day she attended King Edward VII hospital in central London. On Friday the palace said she would rest for “at least” another two weeks. Boris Johnson said at the weekend that the Queen was “on very good form”. Her hospital admission for “preliminary investigations” followed a busy schedule including visits to Scotland and Wales. She has been undertaking virtual engagements by video link from Windsor Castle since. Though unable to attend Cop26, she has recorded a video message for delegates, while Prince Charles, the Duchess of Cornwall and the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge will attend a reception for world leaders.Armed and masked men hijacked and set fire to a double-decker bus at dawn on Monday, fuelling fears of a fresh wave of Brexit-related violence in Northern Ireland. The charred and smouldering remains of the vehicle remained in the Newtownards area on Monday afternoon. BBC Northern Ireland reported claims from loyalists that they had carried out the attack to mark the passing of the 1 November deadline set by the DUP for walking out of the Stormont executive unless major changes to the Northern Ireland protocol had been secured. Stormont’s infrastructure minister, Nichola Mallon, said two masked men “muttered something about the protocol” as they held the driver at gunpoint. “Two masked men entered the bus. They held the driver, a male, at gunpoint, they said something about the protocol, and they then proceeded to spray the inside of the bus with flammable liquid. They forced the bus driver off the bus and then they set it alight,” Mallon told BBC Radio Ulster’s The Nolan Show. The driver managed to get off the vehicle unharmed but was badly shaken by the incident, the police said. No passengers were on the bus at the time. The attack, which has echoes of the violence that spilled on to the streets in Belfast and Derry at Easter, was roundly condemned by all parties including the DUP, which said “thuggery and terrorism will do nothing to remove the NI protocol”. The party’s leader, Jeffrey Donaldson, said political engagement had already secured progress in relation to changes to the protocol and the talks between the EU and the UK must be allowed take their course. He said when he had set out his timeline for progress, “the EU was saying that fresh negotiations were impossible”. But in an indication that Donaldson has parked his threat to walk out of Stormont, he said that since then fresh proposals had been put forward by the EU and “serious negotiations have reopened with the UK government”. “No reasonable person could deny that this represents significant and positive progress. That progress was secured through political action and not violence.” “Those engaging in thuggery only undermine these efforts and cement the protocol more firmly in place,” he said. The Ulster Unionist leader, Doug Beattie, described the attack as “utterly disgraceful, depressing and stupid” while the shadow Northern Ireland secretary, Louise Haigh, said it was “utterly reprehensible”.As Boris Johnson stumbles from cliche to cliche in Glasgow, a boatload of French fishers are making a fool of him. Posing as a world leader, he pleads that the Earth is “at one minute to midnight”, and should raise its game in the last chance saloon. Yet he cannot stop France’s Emmanuel Macron taunting him over a few boat licences, any more than he can handle the consequences of the Northern Irish protocol, or exert influence over the truce between the European Union and the United States on steel tariffs. Being outside the EU was meant to display Britain beating its chest across the Channel and round the world, raking in lucrative new trade. Instead at Cop26, China, Russia and India have all found better things to do than listen to Johnson’s tired metaphors amid piles of rain-soaked rubbish. The fishing dispute with France is complex and unimportant, and 55% of England’s fishing quota is already owned by EU vessels. The row is pure electioneering by Emmanuel Macron. But Britain has no friends in Europe and zero leverage, following the sloppy withdrawal deal reached by Johnson’s belligerent chief negotiator and crony, David Frost. He has now handed Macron an election weapon, a threat to impede all trade through Channel ports. This should be an outrage. The same sloppiness was evident in last year’s Northern Irish protocol, which was certain to infuriate Unionists when they realised Johnson had lied to them over its implications. Now, when the EU offers Britain a genuine compromise package, as it did last month, he must pretend to hang tough over the near-trivial issue of the European court of justice, reneging on an agreement he personally signed. This too is outrageous. But it is what happens when politics strays into trade, which was precisely Johnson’s doing. To rub home the point, Joe Biden has now signed a deal on steel export tariffs with the EU that naturally excludes Britain. This is allegedly to make up for the exclusion of France from the bizarre Anglo-American arms deal with Australia against China. Johnson may now plead for his own steel agreement, but he is weakened outside the EU, and American lobbyists may oppose this. The UK’s decision to leave the EU was political. So be it. Quite different was the decision also to leave the European single market and free trade area, which was the personal choice of Johnson to aid his campaign against Theresa May. It was ill-considered and foolish. The price is now being paid by pig farmers and fruit growers, healthcare managers, transport sector recruiters, builders, hoteliers, musicians and Ulster unionists. Hardly a single gain has accrued to leaving the European market. Meanwhile, a widening 10-point gap exists between those who think Brexit a bad deal for the country against those who still think it good. Every woe currently descending on Johnson’s head is attributable not to Brexit but to the loss of the single market and customs union. It is blatantly in Britain’s interest to rejoin them. Continental agreements and supply chains forged more than 20 years of close relations with neighbours are not matters of great principle. They are a common interest and common sense. Abandoning them was a massive error in the name of a spurious freedom. The only question is, who has the guts to reverse it. Simon Jenkins is a Guardian columnistJersey has issued another 49 licences to French boats in an apparent attempt to de-escalate a post-Brexit row over fishing rights in which the UK and France have issued tit-for-tat threats. The Jersey government said it was allowing another round of temporary licences until the end of January to allow time for new arrangements to be put in place, as the two sides prepared to meet to try to resolve the row. The European Commission has said officials from France, Britain, Jersey, Guernsey and the commission will meet on Monday afternoon in Brussels. A spokesperson said the meeting, which was called by the commission, aimed for “a swift solution on the outstanding issues”. Earlier the UK foreign secretary, Liz Truss, warned France it had 48 hours to back down on threats made in the row over fishing licences or Britain would begin dispute talks set out in the Brexit deal. Emmanuel Macron, the French president, has previously issued the UK with a deadline of Tuesday to make a move to allow more French boats access to fishing waters. In a post-G20 press conference, Macron said Britain must give ground or France would trigger threatened trade reprisals this week. “The ball is in Britain’s court. If the British make no movement, the measures of 2 November will have to be put in place,” he said. French officials have said they will bar UK fishing boats from some ports and tighten customs checks on lorries entering the country unless more licences are granted for their small boats to fish in Britain’s waters. The diplomatic row over fishing, a very small sector of the economy, threatened to overshadow the G20 talks in Rome at the weekend and Cop26 in Glasgow this week. Jersey said the move would take the number of licences issued to French vessels to 162. Its government said it remained open to receiving further data for vessels that had no licence, and new applications could be submitted at any time. It is still unclear whether the extra licences will have any effect on the row. Speaking to AFP on Monday, Macron reiterated that reprisals “will take effect at midnight tonight” if the two sides failed to achieve a breakthrough. Almost 1,700 EU vessels have been licensed to fish in UK waters, equating to 98% of EU applications for fishing licences, the UK government says, but this figure is disputed in Paris. Truss suggested on Monday that Macron may be making “unreasonable threats” because he has a difficult election looming. Asked about whether France and the UK had come to an agreement, Truss told Sky News: “The deal hasn’t been done. The French have made completely unreasonable threats, including to the Channel Islands and to our fishing industry and they need to withdraw those threats.” She said that if the French did not withdraw the threats, the UK government would use “the mechanisms of our trade agreement with the EU to take action”, which “could lead to taking direct action in trade”. Truss said: “The French have behaved unfairly. It’s not within the terms of the trade deal. And if someone behaves unfairly in a trade deal you’re entitled to take action against them and seek some compensatory measures and that is what we will do if the French don’t back down. “[The French must] stop threatening UK fishing vessels, stop threatening the Channel ports, and accept that we are entirely within our rights to allocate the fishing licences in line with the trade agreement, as we have done.” She said she would “absolutely” take legal action in the coming days if France did not back down, adding: “This issue needs to be resolved in the next 48 hours.” Asked why the row had emerged, Truss said: “You might say there’s a French election coming up.” Truss seemed angered by the dispute and said: “I’m not remotely happy about what has happened.” Pierre-Henri Dumont, a French politician for Les Républicains party, said France simply wanted the UK to “fulfil its commitments that were made during the post-Brexit treaty”. He said he thought “harder negotiations” may need to be opened up with the British side. He told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: “What we are asking is just for the British government to fulfil and keep its promises that were made by signing this post-Brexit agreement. We’re not asking any more. We’re not asking for something that was not into this treaty. We’re just asking for the British government to fulfil and to keep its signature. That’s it.”When it comes to contemporary, chart-bothering rock, Biffy Clyro – back in the Top 5 this week – are perhaps Britain’s most unique example. The Scottish alt-rock trio bring together scabrous guitar riffs, quirky rhythms and frontman Simon Neil’s feral vocals to thrilling effect, packing all this and more into a sprawling, 23-song set here. Originally booked for April, a six-month postponement for this tour allowed the band to put together new album The Myth of the Happily Ever After, that they say is a reaction to their previous release, 2020’s A Celebration of Endings. New songs DumDum and A Hunger In Your Haunt are received as voraciously as staples Mountains and That Golden Rule. In keeping with the spirit of the evening – part of a tour of relatively intimate venues – the band do away with the latter’s prominent string section, but their audience is more than happy to follow Neil’s lead and sing the parts themselves. Biffy Clyro are no longer the dissonant, post-hardcore outfit that started in Kilmarnock in the mid-90s, but their heavy credentials remain. Errors In the History of God builds nicely towards an extended version of its crushing, sludgy outro, and Unknown Male 01 is quintessential Biffy: flapping, down-tuned riffs flanked by jazz hand verses and soaring choruses. Such is the hulking volume that erupts through the room during Wolves of Winter you could quite easily be watching the band at the city’s arena three miles up the road. Underrated sibling rhythm section James and Ben Johnston are to thank for that. They’re crucial once again during Slurpy Slurpy Sleep Sleep, where dreamy synth passages make way for a hypnotising, thrashing crescendo. The only thing louder than the deafening roars that greet Bubbles is the near-constant chanting of “Yorkshire” and “Mon the Biff” throughout. 2022 will no doubt see the band return to arenas and a slew of festival headline slots, given they still offer something few other bands do: brains and brawn in equal measure. At Kentish Town Forum, 2 November; Guildhall, Southampton, 3 November; Academy, Bristol, 4 November.On Sunday’s Last Week Tonight, John Oliver delved into the issue of homelessness in the US, which has been on the rise, particularly since the upheavals of the pandemic; experts project that the pandemic recession will increase chronic homelessness by 49% over the next four years, and cause twice the homelessness as the Great Recession. Yet “far too often, stories focusing on homelessness are presented solely through the lens of how it affects those with homes, when in reality it is obviously the people without them who need the real help,” said Oliver. “The story of homelessness in this country is grounded in a failure of perception compounded by failures of policy,” he continued. That policy, at least in its modern context, dates back to Ronald Reagan, who “came to power at a time when homelessness was increasing, and made the problem far worse by cutting programs for the poor and slashing housing subsidies by 75%”, and once lamented in a 1984 interview “the homeless who are homeless, you might say, by choice”. “That notion that homelessness isn’t related to economic policy, but simply reflects the problems of the individuals experiencing it, still informs the way it’s discussed today,” Oliver said. There are, he continued, numerous reasons why someone might be without housing: medical debt, job loss, fleeing domestic violence, kicked out of their homes for their sexuality, being recently released from prison, or just because housing costs are rising much faster than wages. Given that 70% of low-income families are spending half their income on rent, and only 37 affordable and available homes exist for every 100 extremely low-income renter households, “it doesn’t take much for people to suddenly find themselves without stable housing,” said Oliver. Yet focus tends to be on homelessness’s impact on housed residents; Oliver pointed to numerous stories about human feces next to homeless encampments in Los Angeles, a city which before the pandemic had only 16 mobile toilet stations, hauled away at night, for its 36,000 homeless residents. “So the next time you complain about human shit in the street, maybe think about what it would be like if someone padlocked your bathroom every night,” Oliver said. “You too would suddenly be getting really creative really fast.” The lack of public restrooms in many cities is one symptom of what Oliver explained as “the impulse behind many local policies surrounding unhoused people” – not to help them, but “to punish them for their existence and keep them out of sight”, such as hostile architecture designed to keep people from sitting or lying down, or in the case of one Florida city, blasting the children’s song “Raining Tacos” to prevent homeless people from sleeping at a pavilion at night. In addition, local ordinances that criminalize the behavior of homeless people – panhandling, sitting down on public or private property – have landed many unhoused people in a cycle of incarceration. “You cannot arrest someone out of homelessness in the same way you can’t sing someone out of bankruptcy,” Oliver argued. “One thing doesn’t remotely lead to the other, and you’re just going to end up making things worse.” As for solutions, Oliver had a straightforward answer: give unhoused people homes. “Some will say sure, giving the homeless homes is an obvious solution, but before that they need to be sober and have a job, but it’s just not that simple,” he explained. “Set aside that dealing with sobriety or your mental health issues is hard enough when you are not living on the streets, getting a job is often if not contingent on, at least aided by having an address.” Which is why advocates support an approach called housing first, which prioritizes getting people a place to live along with services such as mental health care, counseling and job training. Such a program led the number of homeless veterans to drop from 74,000 in 2010 to 38,000 in 2018. Supportive housing programs are expensive, he argued, but not as expensive as current approaches to homelessness, such as incarceration. “If your primary argument against housing for the homeless was purely monetary, congratulations, your concerns have been answered. Also, a pre-congratulations for being visited by three ghosts this upcoming Christmas Eve.” But funding is not the only problem – another obstacle to supportive housing programs is the nimby problem – Not In My Backyard, when residents support a program in theory, just not in practice when it’s near their home. Oliver derided nimbyism as unhelpful self-absorption – “it is not the housed’s comfort that needs to be prioritized right now. So if you’re wondering why homelessness continues to get worse in this country, one reason is that there are a lot of people, even liberals, who believe that homelessness is a personal failing, poverty can be avoided and their own good fortune makes them not only better than the unhoused, but more worthy of comfort. It is basically Reagan’s attitude from a Whole Foods crowd.” Oliver said he didn’t want to oversimplify the logistics, as “it will take a massive commitment in infrastructure, funding and resources. But the very first step here is a collective change of perceptions. “Basically, we need to stop being dicks and assuming that the unhoused are a collection of drug addict criminals who’ve chosen this life for themselves,” he concluded, “instead of people suffering the inevitable consequences of gutted social programs and a nationwide divestment from affordable housing.”Brazil’s president, Jair Bolsonaro, was met with cheers and jeers as he visited a small Italian town on Monday to collect honorary citizenship. Bolsonaro’s great-grandfather was born in Anguillara Veneta, a town of 4,200 people in the Veneto region. Tensions have been brewing since its far-right mayor, Alessandra Buoso, approved granting honorary citizenship to the far-right leader. Last week, protesters spray-painted the wall of the town hall with the words “Bolsonaro Out” while the bishop of nearby Padua described the honorary citizenship as “a great embarrassment”. Bolsonaro arrived in Anguillara Veneta after attending the G20 summit in Rome, where he was filmed walking around the city’s cultural sites and sampling food. He was greeted with cheers by supporters who had wrapped themselves in the Brazilian flag, while about 200 protesters held banners saying: “Justice for the Amazon” and “No citizenship for dictators”. The visit comes days after Brazilian senators recommended that Bolsonaro face criminal charges for the country’s more than 600,000 Covid-19 deaths. Andrea Zanoni, an environment councillor in the Veneto region for the centre-left Democratic party, was among the protesters. Zanoni said the honorary citizenship was an “incomprehensible choice” amid accusations of “crimes against humanity” against Bolsonaro and his “nefarious” handling of the pandemic. “But not only that: Bolsonaro’s policies are a disaster for the planet,” said Zanoni. “He has laid out the red carpet for multinationals that are devastating the Amazon and dismantled environmental controls. Bolsonaro’s policies are dangerous not only for Brazil but the whole world.” The ANPI, an Italian anti-fascism organisation, described the visit and citizenship as “shameful”. Buoso, from the far-right League party, defended the decision, saying the move was not a vote on Bolsonaro’s politics but a recognition of the Italians who had emigrated to Brazil, like Bolsonaro’s great-grandfather Vittorio, who was 10 when his family emigrated to Brazil. The Italian press reported that hosting Bolsonaro and his entourage had cost the town’s council about €10,000 (£8,500). Later, police used water cannons to disperse 500 protesters who reportedly tried to break through a security cordon outside the Basilica of Saint Anthony in Padua, where Bolsonaro travelled to after Anguillara Veneta. Bolsonaro’s approval ratings have slumped before his 2022 reelection campaign, in large part because of the country’s coronavirus death toll, which is the second highest in the world. Last week, the Brazilian senate committee formally approved a report calling for prosecutors to try Bolsonaro on charges ranging from charlatanism and inciting crime to misuse of public funds and crimes against humanity.* 12 solutions, if written in Morse code (Inspector Morse), have mistakenly used dots for dashes and vice versa. These must be reversed to produce the right word to be entered in the grid: A (dot-dash) for N (dash-dot); D (dash-dot-dot) for W (dot-dash-dash); E (dot) for T (dash); O (dash-dash-dash) for S (dot-dot-dot); I (dot-dot) for M (dash-dash); G (dash-dash-dot) for U (dot-dot-dash); K (dash-dot-dash) for R (dot-dash-dot); L (dot-dash-dot-dot) for Y (dash-dot-dash-dash) Across 1 sash window S(ex)A(ppeal) + SH  OW 6* time/emit (r)EMIT 9 overlooked WAS (rev/over) = SAW (looked) 10* game/unit UN(f)IT 12 video diaries I ADVERTISED O(scar) I(an) minus T(roy) (anag) 15 oliveback OLIVE  (buic)K 17* inane/manat MA(rev)NAT(rev) 18* kneel/ratty TAR(rev)+ Y(ach)T(rev) 19 royal blue B(ritain) in ALL EURO (mone)Y (anag) 20 altercations ALTER  ATIONS 24* gang/unau you (hom) + N 
<a>U 25 managerial MAN 1 in A LARGE (anag) 26* rase/knot K(1,000) + TON(100) (rev) 27 bed of nails BED + 0/F  AILS Down 1* soon/ossa AS/SO (rev) 2* sees/otto OTTO (palindrome) 3 well I declare WELL I + CLEARED (anag) 4* noose/assot A+ TOSS (rev) 5 okey-dokey O(ld)/KEY  O(ld)/KEY 7 imaginable BIG ANIMAL (anag) + E(verest) 8 even-steven EVE + N(ew)  N(ew) 11 magic lantern MAGIC(ace) + LEARNT (anag) + N(uclear) 13 rock badger ROCK  ER 14 milestones MILES (Davis) + TONES 16 arrearage A/R(olls)-R(oyce)/(E/g)ARAGE 21* imago/minus M(eals)/I(ngested)/NUS [National Union of Students] 22* mini/iman I’M/A/M(uslim) 23* elks/tyro ivORY Tower (hidden rev)    </a>Jes Staley, Barclays’ chief executive for the past six years, is stepping down after City regulators shared with him and the bank preliminary findings of an investigation over how he described his links to the sex offender and disgraced financier Jeffrey Epstein. However, Staley plans to challenge the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) and the Bank of England’s Prudential Regulation Authority (PRA) over their conclusions, meaning it could take much longer before the findings are released to the public. We take a closer look at what we know about the case and its consequences so far. What does the investigation cover? According to Barclays, the investigation focused on the way Staley characterised his relationship with Epstein to Barclays, and how Barclays subsequently described that relationship to the FCA when asked for further information. The FCA has not commented on the scope of the investigation, or its preliminary findings, which have been shared with Staley and Barclays but have yet to be released to the public. What prompted the investigation? The joint FCA and PRA inquiry was launched after emails between Staley and Epstein were handed to the UK regulators by their counterparts in the US. Those emails were reportedly supplied by JP Morgan Chase and dated to Staley’s time at the US bank. According to the Financial Times, which first reported on the correspondence, the emails suggested their relationship was friendly. JP Morgan and Barclays have declined to comment on the emails. “Obviously I thought I knew him well, and I didn’t,” Staley told reporters last year when the investigation was made public. “And for sure with hindsight of what we know now, I deeply regret having had any relationship with Jeffrey Epstein.” What do we know about Staley’s relationship with Epstein? The American banker has said he developed a relationship with Epstein in 2000, when he was hired to lead JP Morgan’s private bank, which handles wealthy clients. However, Staley stayed in contact with Epstein for seven years after he was convicted of soliciting prostitution from a minor in 2008, and visited Epstein in Florida while he was still serving his sentence and on work release in 2009. He continued his relationship with Epstein after he left JPMorgan to join hedge fund BlueMountain Capital in 2013, but claims the relationship started to taper off after he left the bank. The two men met for a final time in 2015, when Staley took his own yacht, the Bequia, to visit Epstein’s private Caribbean island. Staley volunteered to explain his ties to Epstein to Barclays in summer 2019, when media reports cast a fresh spotlight on their relationship. It is still not clear why Staley decided to cut ties with his former banking client. Epstein died in prison in August 2019 while awaiting trial on charges of sex-trafficking underage girls. A US medical examiner ruled he killed himself. Has Staley been implicated in other controversies since joining Barclays in 2015? Yes. Staley was personally fined almost £650,000, and ordered to repay £500,000 of his bonus, for twice attempting to unmask a whistleblower in 2016. Staley used the bank’s internal security unit to try to discover who had written letters to the board regarding a new hire at Barclays, who was also a former friend and colleague of Staley’s at JP Morgan. Staley apologised to the bank’s board after the investigation. Later in 2017, Staley caused a rift between private equity giant KKR and Barclays after backing his brother-in-law in a complicated legal dispute with the buyout house. While Staley argued that he was involved in a personal capacity, rather than as chief executive of Barclays, it strained the bank’s relationship with one of its longtime clients. When will we learn more about the City regulators’ findings? That is still unclear. The FCA usually shares preliminary findings with the subjects of its investigation about a month before releasing them to the public and issuing any potential fines or penalties. While most companies tend to accept and settle the investigation, often resulting in smaller fines, Staley plans to contest the findings by bringing the case to the FCA’s regulatory decisions committee (RDC). Staley could also appeal to the RDC to keep the document under wraps on privacy grounds, while the process gets under way. If he wins, and argues for privacy, it is possible that the details of the investigation are never publicly released. It is not yet clear on which grounds Staley plans to challenge the findings. It is understood that Barclays is unlikely to cover any associated legal costs, given Staley’s resignation. What does this mean for Barclays? It is not clear whether Barclays is implicated in the investigation’s findings or any wrongdoing in relation to the case. However, in the bank’s words, the inquiry not only dealt with Staley’s characterisation of the relationship with Epstein, but Barclays’ subsequent portrayal of that relationship to regulators. Barclays has said it was “disappointed” in the outcome of the investigation, which resulted in Staley’s immediate resignation. Staley has been replaced by CS Venkatakrishnan, previously Barclays’ head of global markets.As Jane Austen famously put it in Emma, “there is nothing like staying at home for real comfort”. Now the roof on the novelist’s own home is set to be restored, after funds were raised to save it through public donations and a grant from the government. Austen lived in Chawton, Hampshire, for the last eight years of her life, writing novels including Sense and Sensibility, Pride and Prejudice and Emma there – “Nobody can be more devoted to home than I am,” continues the attention-seeking Mrs Elton in the latter. The roof of the cottage was last refurbished in 1948, before it opened to the public as Jane Austen’s House Museum, and major repairs are now needed, according to staff, who have been working to raise money to restore it since last year. More than 30,000 handmade clay roof tiles are needed to restore the roof of the Grade I-listed property, with contractors also required to ensure the works do not disturb the rare bats that share the site. A public fundraising appeal to sponsor a roof tile has so far raised over £64,000, while a grant from Hampshire County Council has brought a further £85,000. A third tranche of £85,597, from Historic England and the Historic Houses Foundation from the second round of the Heritage Stimulus Fund, means work has now begun. The museum will be closed to visitors during the week while work is taking place, but will remain open on weekends and during the festive season. “It is truly excellent news that Jane Austen’s House has been awarded this grant,” said director Lizzie Dunford of the Historic England grant. “Thanks to this support, alongside that of Hampshire County Council and the thousands of people across the globe who have donated to our fundraising campaign, we can now restore the roof which sheltered Austen as she created some of the greatest masterpieces of English Literature and protect her treasured belongings and inspirational home for future generations.”Before the Map At night, I feel at home with these hills. They lie down beside me like cattle in the dirt they are in. I call them in the dark and they shift like cattle do, Sanga cows, or Highland cows, like kine, like kin. I know I’m not the only one. Secretly at night they settle down by each of us, keep us warm, and in. These are the names I give them: Kith. Oom. Sough. Ox. Gert. Brute. Tlou. Seth. Olifant Cough. Olifant Bone. Carola Luther was born and brought up in rural South Africa, came to England in 1981 and currently lives in West Yorkshire. When writing about her local environment in her third collection, On the Way to Jerusalem Farm, she often senses complications in the pastoral scene. Besides forebodings of ecological disaster, anxiety flows in from current world events and takes hallucinatory shape: in Balance, for example, an abandoned tractor becomes “a wrecked boat leaning / under the weight of birds”, while in Sheep, the single, terrified animal racing towards her begins to resemble a young woman fleeing for her life. Luther’s pastoral is prone to disorientation and estrangement. But such estrangement has a positive side: it heightens colour and light, and sometimes sets a strand of mythic-animal storytelling in progress. In this week’s poem, Before the Map, enrichment flows directly from the past, both in terms of pre-linguistic consciousness and the discovery and rediscovery of language. Feeling “at home” with the hills depends on the writer’s not having found out their written names. The map is still close-folded, places haven’t been dislodged or penned in by naming. The hills “lie down beside me like cattle / in the dirt they are in”. They are “of” as well as “in” the dirt. Their presence prompts an early memory, and the speaker seems at home with the way “they shift” when their names are called in the dark. Two breeds are mentioned, “Sanga cows, or Highland cows …” Sanga cattle are the indigenous cattle of sub-Saharan Africa; Highland cattle originally migrated from Africa and Europe to settle in Scotland and the Outer Hebrides. The difference between the breeds is unimportant. The hills resemble both, and, as “kine” they evolve easily into “kin”. “I know I’m not the only one” seems a glad rather than grudging recognition. Humans become herd creatures now in the third tercet, linked in wider kinship. The cattle “settle down by each of us” like protective ancestral spirits. The last line of the third tercet satisfyingly takes up and revises the preposition (“in”) from the first line. People are safely contained. The hills “keep us warm, and in”. Luther’s assortment of names emphasises consonantal variety. The sounds slumberous cattle make are evoked in “Sough” and “Ox”. “Gert” shortens the old name “Gertrude”, that of the German Benedictine nun and saint, adding various associations of female strength and tenacity. “Kith” echoes with the earlier terms, kine and kin; “Brute” has the heft of a bull. “Seth” has biblical connotations: it was the name of Adam and Eve’s third son, thought by Eve to be God’s replacement for the murdered Abel. There’s also a working-class ring to these once popular English-adopted Christian names. Luther draws some of the cattle names from her South African heritage. An end-note tells us that “Oom” means “uncle” in Afrikaans, and that “Tlou” and “Olifant” mean elephant “in Sesotho and Afrikaans respectively”. Even in this gentle pastoral, death is present. “Olifant Cough” may suggest that the animal, displaced in a northern climate, has caught cold, and “Olifant Bone” inevitably signals either natural death or the work of hunters and poachers. At the same time, the cough may simply be a harmless sound, and bone might indicate the living structure that has sturdily made its home in the changing hills of Luther’s imagination. • A spelling mistake in the caption has been amended. It previously read “Ilkey”, not “Ilkley”In the corner of New Art Exchange in Nottingham, I pop on a cassette tape and listen to multidisciplinary artist Simnikiwe Buhlungu. She tells me her feet are wet and that she’s lost and about self-determination. But it is her proclamation about togetherness that catches my attention: “self can be a community,” she explains. In a world where the individual is prized, hitching the concept of identity to external forces seems radical and risky. But this is exactly what Laced – a group exhibition of seven female artists with links to Africa and its diasporas – asks us to attempt. On a basic level, we are all aware of the ways in which others have shaped us – the way we intonate like our parents or vote like our friends. Laced dials it up a few notches, uncovering links to history and geography, spreading connections out across the gallery like the delicately threaded textile the exhibition is named after. My green jumper starts to disappear into the green walls, which blends into Zohra Opoku’s photograph of lush foliage. Beneath the branches is an obscured female figure – I catch a glimpse of her eye, she stares back at me – and her immersion in the landscape questions my own relationship with the natural world. The seven artists’ work responds to a poetic text formulated by curator Loren Hansi Gordon to weave together a broad selection of ideas. Laced is about race (“how we wear our hair”), Nottingham (“history of this place”), liberty (“the art of being free”), heart (“love is as love does”) and fundamentally how we are able “to find ourselves in the other”. This plethora of concepts is articulated through thick swirls of paint, colloquial dialogue, bold photography, delicate needlework and hypnotising animation by artists with links across the globe. Rather than creating incoherence, the array of topics throws out endless points of connection. It is the personal in the works that reels us in. Buhlungu’s recordings of walks include profound ponderings, observations about location, burps and songs to generate a meandering monologue that reflects the spontaneous way in which all minds travel. Wura-Natasha Ogunji’s exquisite stitched human figures depict emotions that words can’t reach, while Michaela Yearwood-Dan’s cacophony of dense acrylic flicks, scrapes and dabs with hidden phrases like “when will I finally figure out what it is to be free?” is joyous and volatile like the contradiction of being alive. Connection also means taking responsibility. Tabita Rezaire’s panoramic video explores how the internet continues to perpetuate oppressive hierarchies. From the physical infrastructure – the routes of which mimic those of the slave traders – to the way in which Google’s algorithm’s suggestions include “why is Africa poor” and “why Africans don’t wear deodorant”, Rezaire condenses history to illustrate how interconnectivity can be abusive and how our past shapes our present. “West needs new spaces to conquer” stretches out across the screen, challenging us to acknowledge the ills of previous generations and how our quest to defend “power at all costs” is far from over. A quirk of Covid rescheduling means that upstairs another seven artists tackle the topic of Black British masculinities in Cut &amp; Mix. Dialogues naturally open up between the two exhibitions, and the similarities between Amartey Golding’s flower-obscured Black men and Opoku’s fauna-hidden women narrate how excessively restrictive gender identities have negative implications on both sides of the coin. The need for women to appear a certain way boxes men into a corner too. For Black men, this corner is smaller than ever – as many of the works in Cut &amp; Mix reveal. Heavyweight Champ by Antonio Roberts features recoded video games with Black characters from fighting games. Balrog from Street Fighter II races across a Mario game, while Adam Hunter from Streets of Rage pops up i Donkey Kong. Later, Beverley Bennett places the words of female musicians in the mouths of male gospel singers, Marlene Smith wears the clothes of her late father and Michael Forbes juxtaposes multicoloured wigs and diamante-adorned hats with stern facial expressions. Reframing not only exposes the narrow and restrictive path Black men are often required to walk, it also offers an alternative where vulnerability, sensitivity and flamboyancy have a place. At the back of the gallery is a dimly lit orange room. Bennett’s gospel singers and the aroma from a scented diffuser fill the air as I look at a photographic portrait by Rotimi Fani-Kayode. Two Black men stand close, facing the camera – the first, draped in a red robe, looks heavenward – while the second nuzzles into his shoulder. The certainty and stillness of the first man allays the concerns of the second, offering him a place of refuge and rest. Senses alight in the warm, closed space, it is as though I have stumbled upon a chapel at the end of a long journey. With a head full of ideas, I too wish to rest upon this man’s shoulder. Connection is not easy, but it is all we have. Laced: In Search of What Connects Us and Cut And Mix are at New Art Exchange, Nottingham until 8 January 2022Exam boards could be asked to avoid using “complex language” including colloquialisms, sarcasm and idioms in assessments to make them more accessible for pupils. Ofqual, the exams regulator in England, has published draft guidance aimed at tackling the ways in which some pupils are “unfairly disadvantaged by irrelevant features” in exams, making it harder to determine their knowledge, skills and understanding. This includes pupils who are deaf, blind, autistic and dyslexic, as well as those who have English as an additional language, and those who are unfamiliar with certain humour and customs, as well as housing, family arrangements and certain cultural, social or travel experiences. The guidance, on which Ofqual is seeking views until 24 January, could come into force in spring 2022 if approved. It would especially apply to assessments that are not seeking to assess the understanding of complex language, such as for maths or other numerical skills-based subjects. The document recommends that exam boards replace abstract nouns, colloquialisms, metaphors, idioms and sarcasm with language that is “accessible, clear and plain” as well as “unambiguous”. It adds that source material, context, images and colour in an exam should not “use unnecessary negative, narrow or stereotypical representations of particular groups”, nor should it “advantage of disadvantage any group” of pupils, for example, by relating disproportionately to a particular socioeconomic context where this is not relevant to the assessment. The document further proposes that images be used only when integral to the assessment, since these can be open to interpretation, while layouts should be accessible and schools should improve their use of assistive technology. The draft guidance further discourages schools from setting more demanding tasks at the beginning of the exam, which might “demotivate” some learners and prevent them from fully demonstrating the required knowledge in the rest of the exam. Jo Saxton, Ofqual’s chief regulator, said: “The best interests of students are the compass that guides us. We regulate so that assessments enable every student to demonstrate what they know, understand and can do – without unnecessary barriers. It is crucial that assessments are as accessible as possible for all students.”“My doctors have said very clearly: ‘No more head injuries.’” So says Peter Tatchell, one of the world’s most tenacious, divisive and necessary activists, as he prepares to fly to Moscow in 2018 to protest against state-sanctioned homophobia. The trip, which returns him to the city where he was beaten and arrested in 2007, forms one of the few present-tense sections of this greatest hits-style documentary. Tatchell has sustained numerous injuries from his lifetime of protest, though claims of memory loss are comically undermined during a kid-gloves interview with Ian McKellen. “Fifty two years of civil disobedience, Peter!” gasps the actor admiringly. “Fifty three now,” Tatchell replies, unable to resist the lure of being right. As of this year, it’s 54. Tatchell was already an activist when he moved from Melbourne to London in 1971 at the age of 19. Among other achievements, he went on to stage the first gay rights protest in a communist country (East Germany, 1973), co-found the gay pressure group OutRage!, and attempt citizen’s arrests of Robert Mugabe (London, 1999 and Brussels, 2001). The former MP Chris Smith correctly identifies those run-ins with the Zimbabwean dictator as turning points which softened public hostility toward Tatchell. How best to describe him? Is he “a performance artist” (as Stephen Fry says)? “A brave motherfucker” (singer and DJ Tom Robinson)? Or “a little bit of an irritant” (Smith)? Dr George Carey, the former archbishop of Canterbury, calls him “a bullying kind of chap”, but then he would say that: it was Carey’s 1998 Easter Sunday sermon that was hijacked by Tatchell, who rushed the pulpit to protest at the Church’s disdain for lesbian and gay rights. Analysis is thin on the ground in this chummy but functional film, with any ambiguity fleeting or accidental. Footage of the 1983 Bermondsey byelection, for instance, at which Tatchell stood as a Labour candidate and lost after a homophobic campaign against him, shows him modifying his delivery on the doorstep, his clipped Aussie tones peppered with glottal stops and gor-blimey cheer. Why not ask about that? A ubiquitous score guides the viewer’s responses, and we get a bog-standard 1980s montage (Thatcher, royal wedding, Band Aid). One highlight is the footage of the 1990s “kiss-ins” organised by OutRage!, at which gay protesters risked prosecution by snogging in front of police and cameras. If only the film-makers had bothered to identify Derek Jarman during his 20 seconds or so of screen time, rather than reducing Britain’s foremost queer film director to Man in Crowd. Those unfamiliar with Tatchell or unconvinced of his significance will still find the film a decent place to start, though it remains a timid, by-the-book portrait of a man who is anything but. • Hating Peter Tatchell screens at the Raindance film festival, and is available on Netflix.China’s president, Xi Jinping, has called on developed countries to “provide support to help developing countries do better” in dealing with the climate crisis, in a written statement to the Cop26 climate conference that fails to make any new significant pledges. The Chinese leader also urged all parties to take stronger actions to “jointly tackle the climate challenge”, and said his country would “speed up the green and low-carbon energy transition, vigorously develop renewable energy, and plan and build large wind and photovoltaic power stations”. China is the world’s biggest source of greenhouse gas emissions, making it a key player at Cop26, the latest round of talks aimed at strengthening the fight against global heating, which began on Sunday. Despite this, Xi, who has not left China since 2020 amid the Covid pandemic, had not been expected to attend the conference in person. He was the only world leader so far to deliver remarks to the conference in written form, although another significant no-show – Russia’s Vladimir Putin – is expected to send a video message to a related UN conference on forestry and land use. “We have been very clear as hosts that we welcome everyone to participate, but it will be in-person,” said Britain’s UN ambassador, Barbara Woodward, last week. Xi’s message to Cop26 echoes his speech at the G20 summit in Rome over the weekend, in which he participated via video link. On Sunday night, he spoke to those there at length about the climate crisis, urging countries to “balance environmental protection and economic development, address climate change and safeguard people’s livelihood”, and saying that “major economies should strengthen cooperation in this regard”. “The G20 members should take the lead in promoting and applying advanced technologies, and developed countries should also earnestly fulfil their commitments to providing funds for developing countries,” he added. In updated pledges, China confirmed to the UN last week that it would bring its emissions to a peak before 2030 and cut them to net zero by 2060. It also promised to raise total wind and solar power generation capacity to 1,200 gigawatts by 2030 in order to reach its goals. However, climate watchers were hoping for new pledges to cap energy consumption and an earlier start to reducing the use of coal, currently scheduled to begin in 2026, adding to pressure on China from other world leaders to promise more. Last Tuesday, Macron asked Xi during a phone call to send the world a “decisive signal” on the climate emergency, according to the French presidency. Xi also spoke with Boris Johnson on Friday. A Chinese government statement said the two leaders spoke about topics ranging from bilateral ties to sustainability. Xi said Beijing would “do what it says” when it came to its green and low-carbon development. The statement added that he said China’s goals would mean a “broad and profound economic and societal change”, and that that would be done “step by step and [through] hard work”. Climate analysts quoted by the Reuters news agency said the latest arrangement could indicate that the world’s biggest CO2 producer “has already decided that it has no more concessions to offer at the UN Cop26 climate summit in Scotland after three major pledges since last year”. But Qin Yan, a lead analyst at Refinitiv financial analysis, said the domestic situation in China should not be ignored in understanding Xi’s decision to deliver the speech in a written format. “Complicated domestic politics ahead of the Communist party’s sixth plenum on 8-11 November in Beijing is definitely Xi’s focus now. It is crucial for him to continuing a third term at the congress next autumn. And the current energy crunch in China is complicating climate policy, too,” Qin said. She added that the choice of written statement was “also to show China’s top leadership cares about UN climate talks, but it is not its top priority”. “It looks like China prefers to leave more room for negotiations in bilateral talks rather than showing all the cards at the plenary. Look at what the EU and the US just did bilaterally over Trump-era tariffs on steel and aluminium this weekend.”WHEN THE CROWD SAY BOO, EJECT HIM If you stick a ferret down your trousers it shouldn’t come as much of a surprise when it nips your crown jewels, so it’s no great shock that Tottenham’s appointment of a conservative, counter-attacking manager did not lead to them playing the kind of liquid football all involved with the club were hoping to see after the departure of José Mourinho. When Nuno Espírito Santo was appointed by Tottenham following a long and extremely drawn out selection process in which they were turned by Mauricio Pochettino, Antonio Conte, Paulo Fonseca, Gennaro Gattuso, Dave from Chas &amp; Dave and several bewildered pedestrians hauled into their stadium boardroom off Tottenham High Road, he was immediately on the back foot because everyone on the planet knew he was nowhere near the club’s first choice. Fast forward four months and Nuno was left looking like a sad spaniel who’s just realised he’s being taken to the vet, as 62,000 enraged Tottenham fans booed one of the most “Lads, It’s Tottenham” capitulations in recent memory. To nobody’s great surprise, Nuno was finally put out of his misery this morning, with everyone apart from those who decided to employ him in the first place having known from the get-go that he’d almost certainly been on a hiding to nothing. “I know how much Nuno and his coaching staff wanted to succeed and I regret that we have had to take this decision,” said the Spurs director of football Fabio Paratici, having unceremoniously ushered the Portuguese to the training ground door marked Do One. “Nuno is a true gentleman and will always be welcome here. We should like to thank him and his coaching staff and wish them well for the future.” Having dawdled over Nuno’s appointment in the hope of attracting Antonio Conte, Spurs have moved at the speed of light today in the hope of attracting … er, Antonio Conte. Having rebuffed his White Hart Lane suitors during the summer because there was something about the club “that didn’t convince me”, the Italian now seems more enthused by a move to N17 despite presumed eyelash-batting in his general direction from Manchester United and Newcastle. Reports from his native Italy suggest the man who has won titles with Juventus, Chelsea and Inter is an “advanced talks” over an 18-month contract with Tottenham, presumably subject to certain cast-iron guarantees of investment in the January transfer window that are likely to cause Levy, a notoriously tough negotiator, more than a few sleepless nights. Having already stuck two metaphorical ferrets down his trousers with predictably disastrous consequences, it would be prudent for Levy to acquiesce to the demands of this particular cantankerous critter to avoid getting bitten yet again. LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE Hot Monday night Premier League action ahoy! John Brewin is your guide for Wolves 0-0 Everton (8pm GMT). QUOTE OF THE DAY “When I was signing my second contract at Forest, I was called into Clough’s office. He was sat there with Frank Sinatra on. He just said: ‘Do you like playing for me, son?’ I replied: ‘Yes, gaffer.’ ‘OK, son. Sign that.’ And he slid over the contract, no details on it, just his signature and a space for mine. His dog, Del, was there. It was one of the most surreal situations I’ve ever been in. So I signed. I would have signed for nothing. If Forest wanted me to sign, I’m signing” – Ian Woan relives Nottingham Forest memories in this cracking interview with Michael Butler. FIVER LETTERS “I was playing on Football Manager earlier when I got offered the Spurs job! I politely declined, hung up the phone and went back to playing my game” – James Vortkamp-Tong. “In their eternal search for the power and the glory, Spurs have turned to Harry, Jamie, and Nuno. In other words, the Father, the Son, and The Holy Ghost (what did you think Espírito Santo meant?). Sadly, none of them could do miracles. But now they’re turning to Antonio Conte – and rather happily Saint Anthony is the patron saint of lost things” – Mark McFadden. “I thought that Newcastle United fans said Steve Bruce (win ratio 29%) was the main problem rather than the lack of quality of players? Anyway, the caretaker manager has admittedly only been in charge for two games but is still on a win ratio of 0% so far after playing Crystal Palace and now Chelsea, who were missing Mount, Lukaku, Werner, Pulisic and Kovacic. Where’s John Carver when you need him?” – Noble Francis. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’ the day is … Mark McFadden. RECOMMENDED LISTENING Get your listening gear around Football Weekly. Right here. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS Watford are investigating an allegation of homophobic chanting at their match against Southampton on Saturday. Hungary fans will be barred from attending the country’s final Human Rights World Cup qualifier away to Poland after clashes with the police at Wembley last month. The Hungarian FA has also been fined 75,000 Swiss francs (£60,170) over the disorder during the game against England. Marcus Rashford has hit back at Owen Hargreaves’ claim that his goal celebration at Spurs showed he was “fuming” at being left out. “Fuming at the manager??! We won the game. That celebration was pure relief!” Rashford posted on Social Media Disgrace Twitter. More names in the frame to be the next Newcastle manager: Germany’s Sport1 reckon the club’s new owners want to prise Unai Emery away from Villarreal (current league position: 13th) while Sportitalia claim talks are ongoing with 2017’s Eddie Howe. On a good day to bury sacking news, Barnsley have given Markus Schopp the chop and League Two basement club Firewall FC have fired bundled Neil Cox through the door marked Do One. And finally, Fun and Games in South America dept: Grêmio fans stormed on to the pitch and destroyed a VAR monitor after a goal was disallowed in their 3-1 home defeat by Palmeiras. The defeat leaves the three-times Copa Libertadores winners second-bottom of the Brazilian top flight. STILL WANT MORE? Neymar turned up against Lille. Why can’t he be like this all the time, ponders Adam White. Giovanni Simeone is tired of talking about his dad, so wrote his own story against Juventus. Nicky Bandini explains. Christian Streich is leading Freiburg into a new dimension, writes Andy Brassell. Spurs have one of the great stadiums and all it cost them was the team, muses floating football brain in a jar Jonathan Wilson. Sid Lowe on the Basque derby. De Bruyne, Ramsdale, Raphinha and Potter are the protagonists in our latest batch of Premier League talking points. And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! BRING ON TUESDAYThe Morrison government’s plan to reach net zero emissions by 2050 was quickly revealed to be based on laughable projections. But even worse, the latest projections for emissions to 2030, also released last week, reveal the government has totally given up on the Paris agreement and the task to keep warming below either 1.5C or 2C. If you listened to the prime minister or read some compliant reporting over the past week you might think the latest greenhouse gas projections are a triumph. But if you examine the figures rather than the media release, it’s clear that Australia’s task to do our share to limit warming to either 1.5C or 2C is harder now than it was projected to be last year. First let’s look at the change in projections from 2020. Last year, the industry department projected Australia would emit 479m tonnes of CO2 equivalent in 2030 – 22% below the 615m tonnes emitted in 2005. But the projections also included a “high technology sensitivity” scenario – a scenario in which technology improved faster than expected. That projection had Australia emitting 436m tonnes of CO2 in 2030 – 29% below 2005 levels. And would you believe it – technology has improved faster! As Ketan Joshi first noted, the government has effectively taken the 2020 high technology scenario and made it the baseline in 2021. That sleight of hand has the government now projecting 439m tonnes of emissions in 2030. Not only that, emissions in 2005 were revised up to 624m tonnes, giving us the 30% fall below 2005 levels by 2030: If the graph does not display please click here The government insists the cuts come from measures announced in the 2021-22 budget such as “$464m clean hydrogen industrial hubs program”, “funding to support the development of carbon capture” and measures such as the “implementation of the safeguard crediting mechanism” and “support for voluntary climate action through an expanded climate active framework.” If that all sounds like bunkum, it’s because it is. The government’s own figures show that all of the difference in actual emissions from last year’s projections come from electricity – ie the shift away from coal: If the graph does not display please click here It means, as the Greens leader Adam Bandt has noted, while the figures anticipate “the closure of 11GW of coal capacity”, the government is simultaneously pursuing “electricity subsidies, carbon capture handouts and the Collinsville coal-fired power station feasibility study, all designed to keep coal in the system for longer”. Even more absurdly, these new technology improvements that will supposedly lead to greater emissions cuts are only set to occur after 2024: If the graph does not display please click here The government actually predicts more emissions until 2025 than it did a year ago. The problem is that while the government keeps reducing its estimate for emissions in 2030, it also recalculates the actual emissions that have occurred since 1990 – and they keep rising. If the graph does not display please click here The latest projections have Australia emitting a further 195m tonnes CO2 over the 40 years from 1990 than was projected last year. This matters because, as I have noted previously, we need to stay within our carbon budget. The Climate Change Authority has estimated that to stay under 2C, Australia could only emit 10,100m tonnes of CO2 from 2013 to 2050. The Climate Targets Panel earlier this year re-calculated it to be 10,400m tonnes. Last year’s projections suggested Australia had used up 4,239m tonnes of that total. But the latest figures suggest Australia had now used 4,287m tonnes. That means our remaining budget from 2021 onwards has fallen from 6,161m to 6,113m tonnes. To stay under 1.5C, Australia can only emit 7,760m tonnes of CO2, but the latest figures suggest we now have only 3,473m tonnes remaining. To put it another way, we have used up 55% of our carbon budget for the 37 years from 2013 to 2050 in just eight years. The purpose of the Paris agreement was to hold “the increase in the global average temperature to well below 2C above pre-industrial levels and pursuing efforts to limit the temperature increase to 1.5C above pre-industrial levels”. The latest figures suggest we will exceed our 1.5C budget in 2027 and the 2C budget in 2034 even if after 2030 we go on a direct path to net zero by 2050: If the graph does not display please click here To stay within our 1.5C budget we would need to start on a path to reach net zero by 2033 – this would require an 80% cut from 2005 levels by 2030. If the graph does not display please click here Even the task for staying within our 2C budget is tough. On the current projections, after 2030 we would need to cut emissions by 63m tonnes a year – nine times more than the current projections of a 7m tonnes cut each year: If the graph does not display please click here By contrast a 50% cut by 2030 would then give us until 2044 to get to net zero. The latest greenhouse gas projections are a farce, based on technological pipe dreams not even reflected in the figures. But worse, they confirm that the government has effectively given up on Australia doing its share to keep temperatures from rising by more than either 1.5C or 2C. The government’s own figures show that its net zero by 2050 target is nowhere near enough to limit global warming to safe levels. • Greg Jericho writes on economics for Guardian AustraliaCancer patients and those with acquired brain injuries were among the worst affected by Coalition reforms to the disability support pension that saw an overall increase in denied claims and a blowout in processing times, a new report shows. The report by management consultants Health Outcomes International, commissioned by the federal government in response to an audit office report, examined the revised pension assessment process brought in under Tony Abbott’s prime ministership in 2015. The changes included using “government-contracted doctors” to assess applicants and requiring them to provide existing medical evidence rather than a report from their own doctor. These followed sweeping changes to the eligibility criteria introduced by the Gillard government in 2011. Health Outcomes International found all disabilities had “higher rejection rates post implementation of the 1 July 2015 changes”. For example, among people with cancer, rejection rates increased to 60%, up from 47% before the reforms, while for those with musculoskeletal or immune system conditions, the proportion of denied claims soared above 80%. The 13 percentage point increase in denied claims for cancer patients was the highest of any condition, along with “visceral disorders”, which refers to pain in organs of the chest, belly, or pelvis, and “inherited disorders”, which refers to genetic conditions. Cancer claims make up about 3% of the approximately 100,000 applications each year. People with acquired brain impairment, chronic pain, infectious diseases, skin disorder and burns saw an 11 percentage point increase in rejected claims. The report did not analyse separate eligibility changes introduced by the Gillard government, including new “impairment tables”, which experts say made it much harder for applicants to get the pension. The Gillard and Abbott-era reforms aimed to reduce spending on the disability support pension, but in doing so have led to a record number of people who are sick or have disabilities on the jobseeker payment. The new report comes with renewed focus on the payment, amid an ongoing Senate inquiry. The disability discrimination commissioner, Ben Gauntlett, told the inquiry on Monday the eligibility criteria and application process were “onerous” and the government should consider whether they were “fit for purpose”. Last week, the social services minister, Anne Ruston, was forced to defend the system after Guardian Australia reported the story of 29-year-old brain cancer patient George Upjohn, who is struggling to make ends meet on the much lower jobseeker payment. Campaigners say cancer patients generally struggle to get on to the payment until their condition is terminal and that changes are needed to rules that require a condition to be “fully diagnosed, treated and stabilised”. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Former hospital worker Julie Stephen, 56, was rejected for the disability support pension while battling breast cancer last year. After doctors found a lump in her breast, Stephen underwent chemotherapy, including a four-week course of the so-called “red devil”, a lumpectomy and radiation. She finished radiation in April and was cleared of breast cancer in June, though she said she still had not recovered from “what they call that chemo brain”. Stephen said she was fortunate her time on jobseeker payment coincided with a massive boost to the dole through the coronavirus supplement, which was withdrawn in March. She called for more support, saying people with cancer need to focus on their recovery. “The system needs a backup to help cancer patients that does not require them to jump through hoops to be considered.” The HOI report found that people were now mostly like to have their claim fail because their condition was not “fully diagnosed, treated and stabilised”, with this making up 53% of all denied applications. Previously people had been more likely to be rejected because their condition did not garner 20 points on the impairment tables, meaning it was not considered severe enough. The report found the Abbott government’s changes were “appropriate relating to the policy intent, and effective in improving the integrity” of the disability support pension and were “cost-effective”, but noted they also “increased the time of decision making”. A person could have been expected to wait 54 days on average in 2014, a figure that rose to 84 days by 2019. For some conditions the average wait was even longer, with cancer patients waiting an average of 96 days by 2019, people with chronic pain waiting 109 days, and people with intellectual disabilities waiting 113 days. The report made a number of minor recommendations, including the introduction of a new reporting template for a person’s treating doctor to submit as part of their application. Economic Justice Australia was among the groups that welcomed that recommendation on Monday. Ruston has insisted that the system is working, but Labor’s social services spokeswoman, Linda Burney, said the 2015 changes were “problematic”, particularly “forcing people to be assessed by doctors who don’t know them, instead of their own treating doctor who knows them best”. A department of social services spokesperson said the 2015 changes were “aimed at improving the integrity of the assessment process in applying the existing eligibility criteria”. “The evaluation found that the changes were appropriate and effective,” the spokesperson said. • Do you have a story? Email luke.henriques-gomes@theguardian.comFinding a super-sized bed to sleep in or a car with a suitably generous amount of legroom are not generally details a sporting club must consider when negotiating the acquisition of a new player. But then again, Liu Chuanxing is not your average athlete. Standing at 7ft 5in (226cm), the China international will become the tallest player in National Basketball League history when he makes his first appearance for the Brisbane Bullets this coming season. The 22-year-old, already given the moniker “Big Liu” by his new club, arrived in Australia last week. Having emerged from a two-week stint in hotel quarantine, where he had the time to get to know his new teammates by searching their profiles online, Liu took part in his first training session with the Bullets on Monday. Interest has been suitably piqued by his presence, not only due to the clear novelty factor of his stature (he was asked what size shoe he takes – 18, for the record) but also for the impact a player of his size could potentially have on the game in Australia. Already capped by China, the young centre’s imposing figure is an entirely unknown entity in the NBL and how opposition defences deal with his size remains to be seen. “He’s a big fella,” said Bullets point guard Jason Cadee, who has been assigned to look after his new teammate and make him feel welcome. “He moves pretty well for someone so big.” Liu, who does not yet speak English, will also be shadowed by a translator during his time in Australia, although once he steps onto the court communication will pose a different hurdle to overcome. Cadee said it would take time, but the use of hand signals, certain words and names would be employed at the outset. “The language barrier is probably going to be one of the most difficult things, just trying to translate and talk to him on the floor,” Cadee said. “But if we can keep it simple enough I think he’ll be able to help us. “He’s going to make people look very small, he’s so big. He’s a presence. I don’t know if he’s going to be a guy who we see play 20 or 25 minutes, but if we can get him to play 10 or 12 minutes and be effective and get him in positions to be successful he’ll be a presence on the floor.” The Bullets, and Cadee in particular, have been helpful in welcoming Liu as he embarks on his Australian adventure. “The club has helped me with the whole trip, from quarantine,” Liu said. “Jason is a very good guy. He has tried to make me fit into this team as soon as possible.” Liu has had a space allocated to him next to Cadee in the locker room and Bullets assistant general manager Sam Mackinnon indicated there may even be some efforts made from the English-speaking squad to learn Mandarin in an attempt to make assimilation easier. Speaking through his interpreter on Monday, Liu said he would do his best to break down the language barrier, but he was not expecting it to be easy at first. “It’s a little bit hard to remember their names first time,” he said. “This is my first time in Australia, so it’s a new environment. It takes some time to get used to it. But I will learn a little bit of English and remember all of their names. Right now, I remember most of them.” At Brisbane airport after Liu touched down on Australian soil last week, Mackinnon pointed to the commercial benefits of having Liu on board and said the player’s ability to attract a crowd was there “for all to see today”. “Most importantly for the club, we think he can play basketball and that’s where he’s going to be a massive asset for us,” Mackinnon said. “It’s great to have him here. He’s a big fella and has a unique skills set to go with that. So he has the whole package and we’re glad he’s with us.” The move is the result of months of planning as Liu’s acquisition was organised over a series of online calls, with the difficulties posed by Covid and the player’s particular requirements presenting unique challenges. “We met him a few months ago,” Mackinnon said. “Zoom calls, talking about the opportunity with the Bullets, what he would need – like a translator. Liu was happy to come by himself but there are little things like, what kind of car does he get around in? What kind of bed does he sleep in? He’s a big guy. “Now we have him here he gets to do what he’s great at – and that’s play basketball.” Liu will be joined in the NBL by his compatriot Zhou Qi, after the former NBA player was also unveiled on Monday by South East Melbourne Phoenix. Zhou, who stands at 7ft 1in (216cm), played 12 games off the bench for the Houston Rockets between 2017 and 2019 and still harbours hopes of returning to play at the highest level in the US at some stage. The retired Sam Harris, who played for the Perth Wildcats, Singapore Slingers, and Adelaide 36ers, was previously the tallest player in NBL history, standing at 7ft 3in (221cm), while Melbourne United’s David Andersen (6ft 11in or 211cm) was tallest on Australian courts last season. The tallest player to ever grace an NBA court was Romanian Gheorghe Mureșan, who was 7ft 7in (231cm).Borrowers are rushing to lock in low interest rates amid gathering expectations Australia’s central bank will declare an end to its record low cash rate earlier than its current prediction of 2024. Economists say the Reserve Bank of Australia has little choice but to revise its rate rise timing given mounting evidence the economy is recovering quickly from the lengthy Covid-triggered lockdowns in NSW, Victoria and the ACT. It’s one year since the RBA lowered its official rate to just 0.1% and today’s board meeting is under pressure to state when it expects to raise it. No increase is imminent – and it’s now 11 years since the last rate rise – but markets are anticipating the bank will bring forward the timing of that move. “If they don’t go with a date, then my fear would be that the market will interpret that as a signal they could move as soon as early next year,” David Plank, ANZ’s head of Australian economics, said. At stake is the fate of interest rates for those with mortgages but also those seeking to enter a market where house prices continue to rise at an annual rate of more than 20%, new figures out today show. The RBA hasn’t raised rates since November 2010. Bank economists are tipping the increase will come towards the end of 2022 or into 2023, although the market is anticipating as many as four rises – or a full percentage point increase – in 2022. Analysts such as NAB’s chief economist Alan Oster dismiss the likelihood of rate rises next year as “garbage”, but they can point to a range of indicators of a reviving economy and the prospect of rising wages and prices to follow. The core consumer price index for the September quarter released last week came in at 2.1%, creeping into the RBA’s preferred 2-3% inflation band for the first time since early 2016. Job ads in ANZ’s survey, out Monday, rose 6.2% in October, returning to a level reached in June prior to the lockdowns caused by Delta Covid outbreaks. In NSW alone, new job ads last month leapt 17%. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Plank said the speed of recovery in the jobs market suggests a rethink about unemployment. Since so many people had stopped looking for work, the true jobless rate was assumed to be much higher than the official rate of 4.6%. “One of the reasons participation [in the job market] dropped was that a lot of people that got laid off got told by their employer ‘you’ve got a job back with us as soon as we reopen’,” he said. “So they didn’t bother searching because they knew they had a job.” The ultra-low interest rates have fuelled rocketing house prices although there is evidence the propellant is losing some of its force. One is that modestly tighter lending controls kicked in from today but also because borrowing costs are starting to tick higher. Still, Australia’s house prices rose another 1.5% in October according to researchers CoreLogic in data out today. The advance was in line with the September rise, and left prices 21.6% higher than for a year earlier. Among the capitals, Sydney’s house prices added 1.5% for the month, while Melbourne’s gain was just under 1%. Brisbane led the advance with a 2.5% rise in October but Perth notched its first negative monthly result since June, dropping 0.1%. “Housing prices continue to outpace wages by a ratio of about 12:1,” CoreLogic’s research director Tim Lawless said. “This is one of the reasons why first-homebuyers are becoming a progressively smaller component of housing demand.” Rents, meanwhile, were up 0.7% for the month, up from a pace of 0.6% in September, according to the figures, which are not seasonally adjusted. New borrowing commitments for housing totalled $30.3b in September, according to Bureau of Statistics data out on Monday that were adjusted to take into account seasonal changes. That figure, though down 1.4% from the previous month, remains 35.5% higher than a year earlier. Historically, about 85% of mortgages have been at variable rates and the rest at fixed ones. During the plunge in borrowing costs after Covid’s first wave, that ratio has shifted to about 50-50 as borrowers flock to secure the lower interest rates, Plank said. As loans typically take three months or so to come through, borrowers are already seeing market rates starting to rise. That is one factor curbing future house price rises, NAB’s Oster said. “You are probably going to mainly see [a slowing in the growth rate] by about early next year, and you might see house prices flattish from the middle of the year,” he said. So that means only a 5% increase or so in 2022 compared with about 25% this year. The rapid changes in the market are adding to the challenges faced by the RBA to steady the economic ship. GDP dropped at annual rate of about 3.5% in the September quarter and will probably rise about 3% in the final three months of 2021, Oster said. “So you’re going to have this sort of massive fall,” he said. “But then you get a big bounce because people are now believing that lockdowns are gone, particularly in New South Wales and Victoria.”When Dr Rebecca McGowan referred a severely asthmatic patient from Albury Wodonga to a local respiratory specialist, she considered the patient lucky to get an appointment in February. “No, February 2023,” the patient told her in tears. The respiratory clinic told McGowan it was at a point it could not take any more patients. So she pulled strings with a Melbourne specialist she knew at medical school. Her patient’s asthma is so bad that she cannot drive herself, so her sister will drive her to the capital, three and a half hours away. “It’s something rural people put up with, but it’s appalling,” McGowan says. The 17-month wait to see a respiratory specialist is the worst, but McGowan says the waiting times for endocrinologists, neurologists, pain specialists and ADHD/ASD psychology assessments are all over six months, and psychiatrists and rheumatologists are taking no new patients at all. Albury Wodonga is a large rural town of more than 100,000 people. Its oncologists service 500,000 people as they cover a lot of rural Victoria and New South Wales, who prefer to travel to Albury rather than Melbourne for specialist services such as radiation. The situation has been exacerbated recently because so many appointments and elective surgeries have been delayed due to Covid-19. Dangerous health inequity Dr Marco Giuseppin, the chair of the Council of Rural Doctors at the Australian Medical Association, says “many areas of rural Australia face long wait times to see non-GP specialists … the AMA has long been concerned about this and its effect on health inequity in rural and remote Australia”. “The consequences of delay to care can mean that conditions progress, making them more difficult to treat and increasing potential suffering in our vulnerable remote communities,” Giuseppin says. McGowan says further consequences include increased anxiety for the patient as well the GP, frustration and anger, increased instances of chronic disease and hospitalisation, as well as increased instances of death. “Rural people have much higher death rates because we don’t have the same access to quality medical treatment,” she says. Sign up to receive Guardian Australia’s fortnightly Rural Network email newsletter In a submission to the inquiry into health in rural, regional and remote NSW, the Cancer Council said residents there had poorer cancer survival outcomes compared with their city counterparts, citing distance from, and availability of specialists and diagnostic services as a significant factor. “Nationally, five-year all-cancer survival decreases with increasing remoteness, from 62% for major cities to 55% for very remote areas,” the submission said. Because of the longer wait times locally, McGowan will routinely advise her patients to go to Melbourne or Sydney for a specialist opinion. They must add the cost of taking time off work and accommodation expenses to the specialist’s fees. But even this is often not possible for anyone who cannot drive, including many elderly and disabled patients, as public transport is “abysmal”, McGowan says. The federal regional health minister, David Gillespie, a gastroenterologist, says the medical profession needs to shift its mindset to solve the problem. “The problem we face is that too many of our GPs and non-GP specialists are bedded down in the bright lights of our capital cities, aided by the metro-centric focused training of specialists required by the colleges, and the metro-centric employment and placement of interns, residents and registrars in metropolitan public hospitals rather than regional and rural hospitals,” Gillespie says. “This is not an overnight problem – it takes at least 12 years of study and training to become a doctor, sometimes longer to be a sub-specialist. And it is not a problem that the federal government can resolve without the involvement and mindset shift of the medical profession itself.” The federal government is supporting the training of non-GP specialists in regional and rural areas through the specialist training program, with rural targets for each of the 13 participating medical specialist colleges. The program has increased the proportion of training delivered in regional, rural and remote areas from 309 training posts in 2018 to 413 in 2021. The program’s integrated rural training pipeline has provided a further 93 funded rural posts in 2021. ‘Dudded for access’ Peter Wakeford is a retired physician who specialised in gastroenterology and during his career serviced the north-west of NSW from Tamworth hospital, with one other physician. Wakeford describes times he would have a “hell of a day at work, go home for dinner and a guy from Walcha would ring at eight o’clock” which would require an hour’s drive followed by an hour’s consultation. “My [professional] partner and I made a promise, we would not be the doctor who couldn’t come,” Wakeford said. Wakeford describes keeping the radio playing loudly on drives to keep himself awake but many times having to sleep by the side of the road. He was only ever paid for the time spent with the patient, as there was no recompense for travel. Wakeford says they “always had difficulties recruiting because most people wanted to stay in the larger centres where you had access to second opinions, it wasn’t such a lonely existence.” He says lower incomes and lack of access to colleagues – essentially “being thrown on your own devices” – made medical professionals reluctant to work in regional Australia. “Rural people are dudded for access. It’s not understood by the big colleges. You have to live it, it’s not just a statistic,” Wakeford says. Giuseppin says two solutions have been shown to be effective. “The first involves the promotion of specialist training in regional and rural areas. The second solution is proposed by the developing national rural generalist pathway.” A rural generalist is a GP with specialised skills relevant to their community. But Giuseppin says uptake has been limited by lack of remuneration and recognition of those skills, “as well as resistance from city hospitals who are keen to hold a monopoly on some specialised services”. Sign up for the Rural Network email newsletter Join the Rural Network group on Facebook to be part of the communityIn all the revelations to tumble out of the NSW Independent Commission Against Corruption in the last two days of hearings, one barely raised an eyebrow. With unnerving nonchalance, Gladys Berejiklian spoke plainly of directing tens of millions of dollars to Wagga Wagga for political gain. Of course she had supported grants going to the Riverina Conservatorium of Music and the Australian Clay Target Association, the former NSW premier explained, even against departmental advice. There were seats to be won. Voters to claw back. “I don’t think it would be a surprise to anybody that we throw money at seats to keep them,” she said. The evidence barely raised a ripple. Indeed, it appeared to be used by Berejiklian as a kind of protective shield from the commission’s attempts to establish whether she gave Daryl Maguire, her then secret boyfriend, favourable treatment on projects he had been pushing for in his electorate. The money was not doled out to favour Maguire, Berejiklian told the commission. Not at all. It favoured a region where the Liberal party’s fortunes had suffered dramatically as a byelection loomed. “At the end of the day, whether we like it or not, that’s democracy,” she said. Have we grown so conditioned to such brazen political conduct – albeit entirely legal – that it is now accepted as a form of defence? And what does our collective shrug of the shoulders tell politicians, current and future, about the risk-to-benefit ratio of shovelling public funds to marginal seats? Her former deputy premier, John Barilaro, has the answer. Earlier this year, he told a parliamentary inquiry into the administration of bushfire recovery grants pork barrelling was equivalent to “investment”. “When you think about it, every single election that every party goes to, we make commitments,” he said. “You want to call that pork barrelling, you want to call that buying votes, it’s what the elections are for.” Berejiklian said the process was “unfortunately not unique or uncommon” after it was revealed last year that $140m in grants given to councils prior to the previous NSW election had gone overwhelmingly to Coalition-held seats. But her Icac evidence reveals, in stark terms, where politicians draw the new line in the sand. Integrity experts warn this new apparent norm of pork barrelling, condoned by the ex-premier, should not be allowed to settle. Using public funds to benefit whichever party happens to be in power is not part and parcel of “democracy”. It is an abuse of government. It entrenches power to the incumbent. It tips the electoral scales against parties of opposition. It may not be a criminal offence, but it must be rooted out for liberal democracy to thrive. Geoffrey Watson, SC, a former counsel assisting to Icac, said as much last week, after Berejiklian’s first day of evidence. “Let’s drop this expression pork barrelling, let’s call it what it really is: misuse of public money,” he told the ABC. “It’s just wrong. I just don’t understand why we excuse this conduct. The whole idea of ‘pork-barrelling, it’s OK because everyone does it’, that would soon lead to the most appalling conduct. You just slide to the lowest denominator.” In NSW, at least, there are bodies like the Independent Commission Against Corruption to shine a light on such practices. That is sadly lacking at a federal level. Not so Berejiklian’s worldview of pork barrelling as the norm. That is very much shared by her commonwealth counterparts. Sports rorts brought that into sharp relief, more than any other scandal in recent memory. The government was condemned for directing the vast majority of the $100m Community Sports Infrastructure grants program into marginal or targeted electorates, usually against the advice of Sport Australia. But there have been plenty more examples since. Earlier this year, it was revealed the commonwealth had awarded $389m for commuter car parks one day before Scott Morrison called the 2019 federal election. Before that, we heard that a grant scheme for security cameras, known as the Safer Communities Fund, was used to distribute $8.5m to 53 projects before the last election, only five of which were in safe Labor seats. In too many instances, the money is doled out in ways that contradicts departmental advice. But when Berejiklian was faced with this proposition, she dismissed bureaucrats as lacking the requisite political nous for such decision-making. Departments, she said, were not expert at “winning byelections”. Indeed they are not. That’s why their advice is so important.Organisers of the Melbourne Cup have been working to clean up its image after the high profile deaths of seven horses in the past six years. The changes – aimed at making sure horses are fit to race and do not have undetected underlying conditions – have been rolled out alongside an advertising and social media campaign that focuses on horse welfare. But will it be enough? What is being done to prevent horse deaths in the race? In 2020, after pre-race favourite Anthony van Dyck broke down during the cup and was later euthanised, Racing Victoria commissioned a review into the injuries and deaths of international horses during the Melbourne spring racing carnival during the past decade. The review made 44 recommendations, 41 of which were adopted. The most significant – and from a racing industry perspective controversial – was the requirement that all Cup runners, local and international, undergo a diagnostic CT scan of all four limbs prior to being allowed to race. Racing Victoria will cover the cost of the scans. The number of international horses permitted to enter Victoria for the spring carnival has been capped at 24 and all international arrivals must be scanned prior to travel, at the cost of owners and trainers, as well as on arrival at the Werribee quarantine facility. Scans and veterinary checks must be conducted or have oversight by Racing Victoria veterinarians. Limits were also placed on the number of races horses could run once in Australia. The reason for this rule change is that a post mortem exam of Anthony van Dyck, who suffered catastrophic fractures to his left front fetlock, showed the five-year-old Irish stallion had signs of pre-existing stress fractures or other pre-existing conditions. A scan may have picked up the weakness and prompted the racetrack vets to order his scratching. Will this make a difference? It certainly would have made a difference for Anthony van Dyck. Scanning or X-raying before international competition has become standard in other parts of the equestrian world and most top horses have a full set of scans done annually as a precaution. The main reason not to scan, other than cost, is worry that you would discover something that would prevent the horse from competing. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning But it’s not a failsafe: horses can have catastrophic injuries without any pre-existing conditions. Concern remains that the harder ground at Flemington may increase the risk for international horses that are used to running in softer conditions. One of the three recommendations that Racing Victoria did not accept following Anthony van Dyck’s death was that the minimum targeted track rating for the Melbourne Cup be changed to “Good 4” from “Good 3”, on a scale where one is a dry hard track and 10 is very wet. Racing Victoria said it did not accept that recommendation in part because it said that track guidelines must be applied consistently to all races for the integrity of the sport. Will the whip be banned? In short, not yet. Last year, Racing Victoria took a proposal to phase out the use of whips, except when necessary for safety, to the national body, Racing Australia. It caused tensions at Racing Australia to boil over to the point that the organisation appointed an independent chairperson for the first time in its history, but there’s no public resolution on the issue so far. Racing Australia was previously chaired by Peter V’Landys, the chair of Racing NSW, which does not support Victoria’s push to reform whip use and has branded it a distracting PR exercise. There are limited studies showing the effect of whip use on horses and racing is not the only discipline to use a whip – it’s just the most high profile. But an Australian study which examined the steward reports from whip-free apprentice races in the UK found no appreciable difference in run times or safety issues. Is all of this just a PR exercise? It’s not just a PR exercise, but the positive publicity is a significant factor. Having horses die during the biggest race in the country is very negative publicity; taking steps that could reduce those deaths will both reduce that negative publicity and improve horse welfare outcomes. Most of the advertising put out by the racing industry in Victoria ahead of this year’s Cup has been focused on horse welfare, showcasing retraining facilities and registered charities which focus on rehoming ex-racehorses. The industry has also spent several years working on making thoroughbreds a marketable riding horse in the very fashion-driven world of competitive equestrian sports. There are off the track specific dressage and showjumping events and the Racing Victoria Off The Track program sponsors the Garryowen, the most prestigious horse show class in the country. These programs lack the scale to retrain and find suitable homes for the more than 8,000 horses that exit the racing industry every year. There is also still a lack of data around what happens to racehorses after they retire. Racing Australia requires trainers or owners to record where they send their horses and publishes high-level data on those statistics annually but it only tracks the first move after racing, usually made before the horse turns 10. The average lifespan of a thoroughbred is 30 years. There is increasing agreement from both the thoroughbred industry and animal welfare groups that a meaningful aftercare strategy needs to consider the horse’s entire lifespan. A senate inquiry into this issue in 2018 recommended the establishment of a national horse database that would include all horses, not just racehorses, but progress has stalled. A separate working group of the racing industry and welfare experts established after an ABC story showing racehorses slaughtered at export abattoirs is expected to release a substantive report on thoroughbred aftercare shortly.Most people know well the tedium and joy of moving into some small space and making it their own. Meticulously putting things away might not immediately seem like award-winning video game material – but Tim Dawson is hoping it will prove popular. “The whole thing is already sort of game-like,” says Dawson, one of the co-founders of Witch Beam, the Australian developers behind new indie game Unpacking. “You’ve got the delight and surprise of pulling stuff out of boxes and not knowing what will come next … and you’ve got this clear end goal where everything is finally organised.” Now available for PC, Switch and Xbox One, Unpacking won game of the year at this year’s Australian Game Developers’ Awards – the same title won in 2019 by the riotously successful Untitled Goose Game. In line with recent trends towards “wholesome” gaming, Unpacking is a self-described zen puzzler – a kind of Marie Kondo-esque balm for the chaotic world we live in. The game’s narrative is laid-back: a quiet and charming tale of a life over time, told mostly through the items brought between moves as the unseen main character grows up. Soft toys, books, a battered and chipped mug; familiar items reappear out of cardboard boxes as the years progress and the locations change from a childhood room, to a small uni flat, to a crowded suburban sharehouse and beyond. Dawson and his fellow Witch Beam co-founders, Sanatana “Nat” Mishra and composer Jeff van Dyck, split from established studios to go indie, with their first project the hyperkinetic (and critically well-received) arcade shooter Android Assault Cactus in 2015. While looking for a new project to work on, Dawson moved in with his partner, Wren Brier – an artist who had previously worked on games like Jetpack Joyride and Fruit Ninja – and an idea clicked. “I helped him with packing up his stuff, and we realised: every item is like a little adventure,” says Brier, who is the creative lead on the game. “This one came from Tokyo Disney; this one’s from when you went skiing … and unpacking it all, it’s both discovery and self-expression at the same time.” “You can tell a lot about a person from the items they own,” adds Dawson. “That was really exciting to me from a narrative storytelling point of view, to tell a story without cutscenes or lectures.” The game is, at heart, pretty simple: you click on items and place them wherever you want in a room, until you’re completely unpacked. But since it’s a puzzle game, there’s limits to where you can acceptably leave things – with wrong choices marked with an angry, pulsating outline. Kitchen knives, for instance, can’t simply be packed away on the floor, or books left strewn across a bed. “You should be able to put things where you want, within reason,” says Dawson, “but every now and then, we’re a bit more specific about something,” – like a secret diary, or a meaningful photograph – “and those points usually serve as the sort of emotional beats of the game.” Set to the extremely chilled-out backdrop of guitars and synths, a very personal form of order gradually emerges from the chaotic piles of boxes and knick-knacks. Much of the game’s charm lies in its capacity for self-expression, something the team discovered in prototyping. “I remember one friend, she took out this juicer, and she was like ‘I never use these’, and she shoved it as far back as she could behind a bunch of other items,” laughs Brier. “It turns out that people love to watch other people play Unpacking because it’s something that everyone knows how to do. “So it’s really easy to backseat drive, and you learn a lot about someone when you watch them unpack.” It also led to the discovery of some unexpected cultural differences. “Quite a few Asian-American players asked us if they could store stuff in the oven,” says Brier. “And I think it was a Latvian player, she didn’t know what the dish rack was. They have a kind of built-in dish rack cupboard above the sink, so they don’t need a separate rack.” Building the game, they were conscious of representation across cultures (“We had a strong reaction to the dreidel,” Brier says), genders (“the tampons and stuff … dudes are kind of bewildered, but women are like, ‘I’ve never seen that in a game before!’”), and even geography. The game is set in Brisbane – which most people won’t pick up on. “The first level, the kid’s room, it’s set in a Queenslander,” Dawson says. “Some people will recognise the boards on the walls, they might recognise the gum trees outside … There’s something cool about a well-realised world.” Witch Beam joins a wave of small Australian teams punching above their weight on the international stage, alongside breakout studios like Team Cherry (Hollow Knight) and House House (Untitled Goose Game), as well as more modest entrants including Beethovan and Dinosaur (The Artful Escape) and Modern Storytellers (The Forgotten City). And with Unpacking they’re hoping for an international market, for a game that deals with a universally meditative experience. “I thought we were making a niche game that would just appeal to people who liked organising stuff,” Dawson says, “but it actually seems to have a broader appeal.”A first kiss is an essential part of any coming-of-age narrative. It certainly was for Shane Jenek, the Brisbane-born performer best known as his drag alias, Courtney Act. About 60 pages into Jenek’s new memoir, Caught in the Act, he experiences his first kiss with someone of the same gender. It arrives with appropriate fanfare: “an entire lifetime of denied sexuality was unleashed in a single moment,” he writes. “Something innate and intrinsic that had lain just below the surface for the past 18 years was being acknowledged for the first time.” It was huge for Jenek – it just took him a couple of decades to realise that. “At the time, it was just exciting – and then when I was writing it, 21 years later, I was so overwhelmed with emotion, because I realised that I could never understand, at [the time of] that kiss, what it all meant, and what the 18 years leading up to that meant,” he says. Now 39, Jenek has settled into a rare kind of mainstream ubiquity for a drag performer; in Australia, he’s something of a household name, thanks to time on the first season of Australian Idol, an Australian Story episode about his life, and a stint hosting One Plus One. Despite his fame, writing Caught in the Act made Jenek realise there was a lot of his past he had never dealt with. “To reflect back on it … I just sat there sobbing, for that teenage boy who retrospectively struggled so much. I didn’t even know it was a struggle at the time, because it was just life happening.” Caught in the Act is filled with poignant moments like these, pieces of a complex puzzle that Jenek – who uses he/him pronouns out of drag, as he was during our interview, and she/her pronouns in drag – has only been able to properly assemble recently. Beginning with Jenek’s upbringing in Brisbane, the book sketches his most significant milestones: his first time in drag; competing on Idol; time spent working in clubs along Oxford Street, Sydney’s “gay Golden Mile”; an eventual move to the US, and an appearance on the sixth season of RuPaul’s Drag Race. In its final pages, he details his winning stint on the UK’s Celebrity Big Brother. Despite Jenek being a first-time memoirist, Caught in the Act is eminently readable, balancing emotional and political epiphanies with saucy, sordid party scenes and an appealing, rough-and-tumble sense of style. At its best, Caught in the Act serves as a kind of personal history of Oxford Street at the turn of the millennium, with Jenek recalling, in minute detail, the many codes and subcultures of the Sydney queer scene: the correct and incorrect ways to dress and wear makeup; the petty beefs that were fostered and abandoned; the many club nights that opened and closed but have rarely been historicised in the mainstream. The ability to look back at this period, the beginnings of Jenek’s drag career, brought on more realisations. These were related to his “prism of understanding at the time”, and how it filtered his memories. “I can see that that exact same situation might have been a hellhole for someone else, and so that was really interesting,” he says. “I can totally see how that experience was very narrow and limited to white, gay men. And even my deviations from that – being feminine, or maybe having attractions that were not strictly homosexual – were sort of just ironed out.” But on stage, it was a different story. “One thing that I did love about the drag scene was that it was – well, it wasn’t diverse in that there were no cis women,” he corrects himself, “but as far as ages and races and genders, other than cis women, it was really diverse.” While the punters were mostly white and male, backstage Jenek “just loved sitting in a dressing room with a 60-year-old queen and an 18-year-old queen” listening to “so much oral history – stories about Sydney in the 80s, during the Aids crisis, hearing stories about Sydney drag icons. I remember feeling so moved by that as a young person.” Jenek realised “that there was no access to that if it wasn’t for the oral history that was happening in dressing rooms and sewing bees”. Chronicling those stories felt like an act of respect to the people who shaped the scene, “a very small thank you to those people and that time”. In the book, Jenek alludes to the fact that gay bars like those he frequented in the 2000s – as a performer and patron – are dwindling in number. (There were about 1,400 gay bars worldwide in 2019, as compared with more than 2,500 in the US alone in 1976.) Jenek suggests it’s a loss for queer subcultures but, perhaps, a marker of gradual societal acceptance of LGBT+ people. Oxford Street was a draw for Jenek “because I didn’t feel that I could be queer in the world that I existed in – you certainly couldn’t wander down the street holding someone’s hand”. Now, “obviously the culture has changed”. Jenek points to the rise of dating apps, which have siphoned off bar patronage, making businesses less viable. This is “both a blessing and a curse”. “It’s wonderful that people don’t feel the need for these exclusive queer spaces as much, but there is a real magic in them.” Caught in the Act often grapples with this tension – between the mainstreaming and protection of queer culture, the popularity of TV shows like Drag Race and the economic impacts, both good and bad, they have on local scenes. Ultimately, Jenek sees the urgent need for more diversity – for easy access to different stories. He acknowledges that his childhood and adolescent years may not have been so suffused with shame had he been able to see queerness reflected in mainstream spaces. “When people get to hear [a] diversity of stories – whether that’s gender, sexuality, race, age, disability – all of those different stories that for so long haven’t been told, when those stories get told in the mainstream, they change the world for the better,” he says. Particularly for young people, mainstream culture is “inescapable”. “As queer people, we might find a point where we deviate away from the mainstream, but ultimately we’re, for the most part, born and exist inside the mainstream until … we’re able to break out of it. “To be able to change what the mainstream [is] to something … more inclusive to more people means that less people will have to find a way out of it. More people will be able to find value in themselves and in the world that they just already exist in – I think that’s a wonderful future.” To Jenek, this isn’t about assimilation but acceptance. “I don’t think the goal is for everyone to be straight, and the goal is not for everyone to be mainstream – the goal is for everyone to be themselves.”My memory of my mother’s sewing basket stretches as far back as I can recall. Even now, if I went looking for it I’m sure the fabric scraps, loose buttons, thimbles, pink pin cushion and spools of coloured thread would be exactly as I remember them. It seemed like something every grown-up house would have: the relevant tools to sew on lost buttons or stitch together ballet costumes. But as an adult, I’ve never owned a sewing kit. I outsource all my clothing repairs to my dry cleaner or tailor. Speaking to Nicole Mallalieu, a fashion lecturer at the Australian College of the Arts, about easy home repairs made me realise I’ve been missing out on one of life’s simple pleasures. The satisfaction and meditation of mending something for yourself. How to sew on a button Before you sew on a button, Mallalieu says to “take the time to examine the other buttons on the garment” so you can see what stitching pattern to use, and where to place it. She says to start by threading a needle with thread, doubling the thread over and knotting it at the bottom. Then, hold the button in place and starting from behind the fabric, poke the needle through the fabric and one hole of the button and pull it until the knot hits the back of the fabric. Then feed the needle back through the other hole, and push it through to the other side of the fabric. “You keep doing that until the button feels quite secure,” she says. If the button has four holes you can stitch in straight lines, or make a cross – just follow the same pattern as the garment’s other buttons. To finish, poke the needle through one hole to the back of the fabric and make a knot by wrapping the thread around the needle two or three times before pulling it through, and cutting the tail off. This is called a French knot. If you want more guidance, Mallalieu suggests looking at online tutorials like this one. How to darn a sock “The act of darning brings you into a meditative state,” says Mallalieu, “you’re fixing the sock instead of fixing life, but kind of fixing life as well.” To darn a sock, she says you need a darning mushroom which is a piece of wood shaped like, well, a mushroom. You place it inside the sock, so the hole is spread over the curve of the mushroom. She suggests getting yarn to match or compliment the colour of your sock. Starting from one corner, she says to “stitch with the yarn and a needle to cover the hole in the sock with what looks like bars in a jail”. Once you have captured all of the fabric with vertical lines, work the needle back through the stitches horizontally, “one under, one over, one under, one over as if you’re weaving fabric”. She tells me there are lots of videos online that provide clear instructions for how to do this. How to sew a patch over a hole If you don’t have a lot of skills, Mallaelieu thinks patching can be a very fun way to cover holes or stains or embellish clothes. She says to embrace the visible mending trend so “it doesn’t matter if you’re not very good at stitching”. She suggests using a “colourful yarn or thread” and doing a “running stitch by going in and out with a needle” around the edge or across the fabric which “you might need to pin in place”. Repairing fallen hems The easiest way to repair a fallen hem is to use hemming tape, that you put inside the hem and press with an iron, but this is a stopgap that will only hold until the next wash. Alternatively, you can stitch by hand using a needle with a single thread, knotted at the end. Mallalieu says to press the hem first and then stitch between the two edges of the fabric, “your aim is to have it not show on the outside”. She suggests watching an online tutorial that demonstrates different techniques like herringbone or whip stitches. If you’re handy with a sewing machine and the hem was machine stitched, she says, “you’ll need to get back onto a sewing machine, press the hem into shape and copy what’s been sewn.” According to Mallalieu adjusting the length of a hem is a two-person job, because you need “somebody else to measure it up from the floor and pin it on you” to be sure it’s even. She advises pressing the hem and then putting the garment back on to be sure it’s sitting where you want it, before cutting and sewing it into place. How to safely turn your jeans into shorts To cut your jeans into even shorts, Mallalieu says you need to lie them down flat and match the inseam from the crotch to the ankle, then fold them in half so the legs are one on top of the other. Using a big pair of scissors, cut through both legs at the same time. Keep in mind that denim will fray a centimetre or two after it’s been cut, so you need to leave a bit of extra length. How to change the length of a sleeve Mallalieu says sleeve alterations really depend on the item’s fabric and the finish you want. If you just want to cut the sleeve off and leave a raw edge, you need to be aware of the fabric’s weave. “The tighter the weave, the less likely it is to fall apart, finer fabrics with looser weaves are more likely to fray.” To prevent fraying she recommends “running a small zig zag stitch around the edge”. Alternatively, she says you can cut the sleeves off a T-shirt, or anything that’s cotton jersey without worrying because “it won’t fray, it’ll just roll up”. She says if “you’re turning a shirt into a short sleeve shirt, cut it to the length you want plus three centimetres, so you can fold it over one centimetre, and then two centimetres,” and hem it by running a sewing machine around the edge, or if you’re doing it by hand, use a herringbone stitch. Mallalieu offers some final advice, applicable to any home-mending job: “Know that it’s not that hard and give it a crack. The most important thing is knowing that you can do it, especially if you put in a little bit of time.”When the final whistle went at the end of the Basque derby, Iker Muniain embraced the referee and then made his way through the noise and the rain straight to Alex Remiro. By the time he got there, Iñaki Williams was already hugging the goalkeeper and soon more Athletic players came to comfort him. The clock had shown 90.47 when Remiro made the mistake that cost his team victory and there was little consolation, just a lost expression, but that didn’t stop them trying. “I tried to raise his spirits, give him affection, tell him it it’s OK, it doesn’t matter,” Muniain said, standing pitchside still catching his breath. Muniain and Alex Remiro are not teammates, not any more. Remiro is the Real Sociedad goalkeeper, Muniain the Athletic captain whose shot had just raced past him and into the net to make it 1-1 at the end of a wet, wild night. And if anyone knew it did matter, this Sunday especially, it was them. Which is why they were there together when it was over, Muniain laying a hand upon Remiro’s shoulder and looking for the right words. A goalkeeper who admits bad moments always follow you home, Remiro’s look meanwhile revealed this one will follow him further than that. The first league goal Real had conceded at home this season could hardly have come at a worse time. The board was just going up on a Basque derby that was the way it’s supposed to be at last, the first played before fans for 630 days, when it happened. Real Sociedad were 1-0 up, Alexander Isak having scored from the spot early in the second half, and Athletic were down to 10 men. Better still for the home supporters, it was Iñigo Martínez, the man who had walked out on them and crossed the divide, who had given away the penalty – the sixth he has conceded at Athletic, three of them against his former club – and who had been sent off. When the card was shown, Remiro had leapt into the air celebrating. Now the fans were doing the same. Backs turned to the pitch, arms locked together, they bounced. How they had missed this. “This is the game I look forward to winning more than any other and that’s true of everyone who feels Real Sociedad,” the coach Imanol Alguacil had said the day before as the rain poured at Zubieta, and this time especially. There have been three meetings over the last e18 months, sure, but it wasn’t the same, not even when one was the most historic Copa del Rey final there has been. That much was shown by Athletic and Real insisting on postponing the final. Few, if any clubs would have held on so long to get their people in, aware that that’s the whole point. Now here they were again, miles better late than never. Sunday started with the bertso derbi, the Basque street poetry sing-off won by Athletic or la Real depending on which paper you read, and ended with 21 players on the pitch of which 18 had been through the youth systems at one of these two clubs. Fans drank together and sat together. Tickets were sold out, the Reale Arena packing in 37,066 – its highest attendance ever. And they belted out the club’s anthem, holding aloft a tifo in blue and white and the colours of the Ikurriña, the Basque flag. Then they played, the noise never falling. It had been frantic, fast, and if there was not a huge amount of football, it had been quite fun too, the tension and ferocity making up for what it lacked in finesses. Athletic had more shots, 11 to eight, and more corners, eight to two. Remiro had made three sharp saves. And Aritz Elustondo had produced two superb interceptions to deny Williams, the first after just sixty-two seconds. But the threat hadn’t been overwhelming at all – in fact it had only occasionally been apparent – and now it appeared to have passed. Martin Zubimendi was in control, the defence had been reinforced and Real Sociedad, the Copa del Rey winners, were on the verge of defeating their rivals again and climbing three points clear, confirmation perhaps of their candidacy for the title. Only once had they reached week 11 on more points and now they were about to add three more, racking up an eighth clean sheet in 12 league games. Bad Moon Rising was belting round the ground, scarves twirling. Tell me how it feels, the opening line runs. But then Athletic got a free kick on the top left corner of the area, Julen Lobete fouling Muniain as he cut inside. Muniain placed the ball. “It was wet. I wanted to hit hard and on target, thinking that someone might deflect it,” he said, “Remiro tried to clear it but those kinds of balls are difficult.” His shot bent towards the near post and the Real Sociedad goalkeeper dived forwards, fists out like Superman. Rather than punching clear, though, he misjudged the flight – his and the ball’s – and it went off his knuckles and into the top of the net. It was the 91st minute and 1-1. In the top corner of the ground, 543 Athletic fans went wild. All around it, maybe a hundred more did the same, figures in red and white leaping from within the sea of blue and white. Muniain sprinted towards the bench, which was sprinting towards him, and leapt into the arms of Marcelino García Toral. His players had resisted again – they have only been beaten once this season – and Athletic’s manager wore a massive smile. They had deserved this, he said afterwards. “The draw stings but I’m proud,” his opposite number Imanol Alguacil insisted. No one was more stung than Remiro. In midweek, Australian keeper Matty Ryan had produced an astonishing performance at Celta in only his second league appearance of the season. Remiro had immediately returned to the side but now this had happened and against them, a derby decided by two men who crossed sides. On Sunday evening, Iñigo Martínez, an ex-Real Sociedad player had been sent off and given away the penalty that seemed to have gifted his former club the victory, fans laughing as he left. And Remiro, an ex-Athletic player, had gifted his former club the equaliser. Not that the cases are quite the same. Born in Navarre, raised at Lezama, Remiro never actually played a first team game with Athletic. One Friday afternoon after training in 2018, he was called into a room with the then Athletic president Josu Urrutia and the former sporting director José Mari Amorrutu and told that if he didn’t sign a new contract he wouldn’t play. Kepa was leaving, an opportunity opening up, but Remiro had been sent out on loan twice and wasn’t convinced the chance was real. The pressure helped him make up his mind: rather than bowing to it, he decided to depart, even if it meant a season not playing. With Iago Herrerín getting injured, Unai Simón, the fourth-choice keeper who would soon become first for club and country, was hurriedly recalled from his loan at Elche where he had only been for 20 days and Athletic followed through on the threat: Remiro was left out. A year later, he joined Real Sociedad. When he won the Copa del Rey with them, defeating Athletic in the final, he posted a video that emulated Williams’ “I’m so tired” celebration from the Super Cup three months earlier. It didn’t seem a particularly big deal, but it was soon turned into one. Remiro insisted that he just thought it a funny line, that he was not mocking Williams and apologised to Athletic’s players when they faced each other in the league immediately after. “Some said it was out of order, others that they didn’t care, and others not to worry about it, but I felt ashamed,” he later admitted. “I didn’t like seeing the video out there but I learnt from it: not to be a dickhead next time there’s a moment of euphoria.” The next time they met was anything but euphoric. Remiro looked devastated, eyes gone. Teammates came to him – Diego Rico literally lifted his chin up – but it was like he was lost. “He’s gutted because of the way the goal happened. His error is the most visible but it was a series of errors,” Zubimendi said. “He kept us alive until the end: he made great saves,” Alguacil insisted, “football is that: getting it right and getting it wrong. Today he got it right lots of times and got it wrong just once. He’s a professional and no doubt that tomorrow he will be up for the next game again.” Even former Real Sociedad goalkeeper Sander Westerveld, there the last time they started a season this well, leading the league early, not losing until February – against Athletic, inevitably – and chasing all the way to the line, offered support. None of which is especially unusual but they weren’t the first to Remiro, the symbol of a rivalry that’s still different to the rest. Instead, it was Iñaki Williams and Iker Muniain, the Athletic captain who had stood and applauded la Real as they lifted the trophy at the end of the cup final they had waited for their whole lives, and whose shot flew past Remiro on the night when the fans finally returned to make the derby the kind of day it’s supposed to be.Formula One will hold six sprint race meetings next season, the sporting director, Ross Brawn, has confirmed. The concept is being tested this year with three sprint races and Brawn said that while the format has been heralded as a success, F1 is almost certain to revert to awarding pole position for the grand prix from qualifying times rather than being decided by the sprint race on a Saturday. F1 has held two sprint race weekends this season, at Silverstone and Monza, with a third scheduled for Brazil in two weeks. The format features qualifying for the sprint on a Friday with the results of that race deciding the grid for the GP, with three, two and one drivers’ championship points awarded to the top three. While discussions with the teams and the FIA continue, Brawn is confident one of the biggest criticisms of the format will be addressed, that of setting the fastest lap in qualifying being rewarded with pole position. “It’s been a consistent comment amongst fans and drivers that the person who does the fastest single lap with low fuel in qualifying is the pole position holder,” he said. “I guess we hadn’t really considered that when we set out this new format. I would like to see a reversion to that being pole position. There is broad opinion that Friday should be pole position for the sprint weekends, so I would hope we can get that through for next year. I am optimistic on that.” The venues for the sprint meeting are still under discussion but they will not feature in the opening or final rounds of the 23-race season. With the sprint qualifying races this season pedestrian at best, dialogue continues as to how the format could be further tweaked for 2022, but Brawn emphasised that given F1 will be using new cars next year any changes would be “conservative and evolutionary”. He confirmed that awarding more points further down the grid, potentially one-third of race points for the top 10, was one proposal in order to offer more incentive for drivers to challenge in the sprint. “It goes far enough down for people in lower positions to want to fight for it, but is not a number that will over-influence the championship,” he said. Brawn believes reverse grids for the sprint are off the table for 2022 while the sport discusses the exact form it should take. Having it as an entirely standalone race remains an option, as does having its grid set by Friday’s qualifying. The details will be addressed in a meeting with the teams after Brazil but Brawn said the format could be adopted across the full season in future if it proves to be a success.Piers Plowright was a generous collaborator and a genial presence in a radio studio. He gave me unique opportunities to make speech and music features, and many other writers must owe their radio careers to him and his colleague John Theocharis. Together they constituted BBC Radio 3 Features, until John Birt’s Producer Choice accounting reforms of the early 1990s did away with … producer choice. With the closure of the department Piers transferred to Radio 4, and that was the end of an era and a genre.Mary Quant did a lot for fashion in the 60s, but she didn’t invent the onesie (Miniskirt mayhem! Nine ways Mary Quant revolutionised women’s clothes – and lives, 28 October). My second world war dressmaking book features an all-in-one called a “trousered unity suit for the house and emergencies”, with a hood and a front zip for speedy dressing in air raids. These were also known as siren suits. Winston Churchill wore a pinstripe one. Vivien Bailey St Albans, Hertfordshire • It is a sad day for a committed republican to say that the representative of the monarch spoke with greater conviction, incisiveness and vision than the prime minister of this country (Cop26 ‘literally the last chance saloon’ to save planet – Prince Charles, 31 October). Ken Phillips Chorley, Lancashire • The linguists should have waited until the end of Cop26 to decide the word of the year (‘Vax’ chosen as word of the year by Oxford English Dictionary firm, 31 October). Waffle would have been a strong contender. Toby Wood Peterborough, Cambridgeshire • Re Charles Harris’s letter (29 October) about raspberry picking in north London, my wife is still doing the same here in Inverness. A few indeed remain for picking on 1 November. Ron Stevenson Inverness • In Blind Date (30 October), Fred refers to “a flock of 30 bankers”. The correct collective noun for bankers is a wunch. Andy Bebington Shirley, Croydon • I too am “Metaverse” to Facebook (Letters, 31 October) and shall remain so until such time as Meta undergoes a fundamental metamorphosis. Adrian Brodkin London • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.There is much to agree with in David Harewood’s piece (It’s been a turbulent year for race in Britain. So what next?, 30 October) but on one point, I differ. He writes: “This is a country that cherishes its history and its traditions.” I would say it’s a country that cherishes its English history. I went to school in Northern Ireland; our A-level history syllabus (in the 1950s) had two strands: “British” and “Modern European”. The former contained nothing about Scottish history, save for the Anglo-Scottish wars, and nothing about Irish history, save for a single reference to William of Orange and the Battle of the Boyne. The latter started with the French revolution and Napoleon, covered the Italian Risorgimento, and discussed the formation of Germany in 1871. The syllabus ended in 1914. The only references to Africa, India and east Asia were in the context of the British empire. This reflected a cultural dissonance, in which Africa was populated by peoples who were uncultured and uncivilised, unlike us, but whose artefacts, such as the Benin bronzes, we plundered and whose monuments we dismissed as “must have been constructed by other invaders”. My fear, and regret, is that this same cultural dissonance is still alive and pervasive today. Johnston Anderson Beeston, Nottingham • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Name: Balloon bonanza. Age: The rubber balloon was invented by Michael Faraday in 1824, to do experiments with gases in his lab. Now more commonly associated with celebration than science though, right? Correct. No children’s party is complete without them. A bunch of them tied to a door are a reassuring indication that this is the house where the party is taking place. Also, people sometimes use them to take drugs, no? Apparently so. Nitrous oxide – AKA laughing gas or nos – is transferred from those silver canisters you see all over the place into balloons and then inhaled by people wanting to feel giddy, giggly or euphoric. Adults do use balloons more innocently as well, though. They are all over Instagram. It is indeed the latest celebrity trend: an extravagant display of balloons, often in an arch, the bigger and bolder the better, to celebrate a birthday, anniversary, anything really. Examples please. Made in Chelsea’s Millie Mackintosh, Love Island’s Amy Hart, Harry Kane … The former footballer? Stop it! Harry, the current Tottenham and England striker, and his wife, Katie, hosted their gender reveal party under a tasteful pastel balloon arch. Don’t tell me, Harry then tried to kick one through the arch but missed from half a yard? Enough, leave him alone. So anyway, what’s the deal, balloons are in, everyone loves balloons? Actually, not everyone. Who doesn’t? Seabirds and other wildlife. Also, Danielle Vosburgh, co-founder of Balloons Blow, a group that educates people about the destructive effects released balloons have on animals, people and the environment. Discarded and badly disposed-of balloons don’t just pollute, they can kill animals that ingest them. A 2019 study found that balloon debris is the material most likely to kill marine birds, including albatrosses. I’m feeling that balloon bubble bursting. “Balloons are a wasteful single-use product that quickly become rubbish,” said Vosburgh. Balloonacy, you might say. I blame that Nena. Nena? Ninety-nine red balloons, floating in the summer sky … But hang on, isn’t latex biodegradable? That’s what the balloon industry wants you to think. Truth is, it can take a couple of years. And, if you’re a choking gannet, you don’t have a couple of years … OK, OK, I’m out, no more balloons. Boo to balloons. Pop! Or just don’t buy them in the first place. Do say: “This year we will be celebrating by throwing leaves in the air.” Don’t say: “Oi Harry, you should’ve got a gold one. Then you could say you’d got the balloon d’or.”In your article ‘My students never knew’: the lecturer who lived in a tent (30 October) several workers in higher education share their stories of extreme precarity, including a young woman who had so little money she had to live in a tent while doing her PhD. Instead of expressing empathy and a commitment to address the brutal reality of insecure work, the Universities and Colleges Employers’ Association (UCEA) responded by downplaying the amount of casualisation in this sector, and attacking the University and College Union (UCU) with the claim that we have “repeatedly reject[ed] opportunities to work with employers in this important area”. This disappointing response reveals the dismissive attitude that the employers’ representatives bring to collective bargaining. Since the UCU was created, we have campaigned and reported on the shameful stain of precarity in higher education: currently, 68% of research-only academics are on fixed-term contracts, as are 44% of teaching-only staff, and that is just the tip of the iceberg. We have always striven to work with employers in this area, via collective bargaining. When they feel ready to join us to discuss serious proposals, they will have our full attention. And if strike action is what it takes to get them to do so, then we will stand up for our members, and all higher education workers. Vicky Blake UCU President, Robyn Orfitelli UCU HE negotiator • In the early 1990s, on returning to this country, my husband was an unemployed academic for six years, having had tenure both in the UK and New Zealand. For two years he taught supervisions for various Cambridge colleges from a mobile home in Waterbeach. I remember his embarrassment when an undergrad turned up at our door with an overdue essay. So much for the image of bookish gentility in a comfortable college room. He was informed of these teaching opportunities by the husband of a leading Conservative thinktanker. Teresa Rodrigues Crediton, Devon • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.When it was revealed last year that Jes Staley had sailed his luxury yacht to a meeting with the convicted sex offender Jeffrey Epstein on his private Caribbean island, the Barclays boss told colleagues he was “going nowhere”. But on Monday Staley resigned as chief executive of Barclays after the board said it had been made aware of the preliminary conclusions of an investigation by City regulators into how he had characterised his relationship with Epstein to Barclays. Staley intends to contest the report’s findings. Staley’s relationship with Epstein – who died by suicide in 2019 while awaiting trial on charges of sex-trafficking underage girls – had dragged Barclays into a reputational crisis that one of its largest investors said led to a “destabilising situation, which has become a circus”. The activist investor Sherborne Investors, run by Edward Bramson, last year formally called on the board to remove Staley, 64, as CEO “as soon as possible.” Staley survived the attempted ousting, even though it followed hot on the heels of a scandal in which Staley had ordered his staff to launch a transatlantic investigation to try to unmask a whistleblower. Now his character and the transparency surrounding Epstein are under examination by regulators, who are comparing the version of events Staley shared with Barclays’ board (and the bank in turn shared with investigators) with a trove of emails that Staley’s former employer, the US bank JP Morgan, has handed to the authorities. “Obviously I thought I knew him well, and I didn’t. For sure, with hindsight, with what we know now, I deeply regret having any relationship with Jeffrey,” Staley said last year, adding that he had been “very transparent” with investigators, who he said were focusing on his “transparency and openness with the bank”. Staley had known Epstein since at least 2000, when he was the boss of JP Morgan’s private bank and Epstein was one of his most valued ultra-wealthy clients. He has said his relationship with Epstein started to “taper off” when he left JP Morgan in 2013. However, in April 2015, Staley and his wife, Deby, sailed to Epstein’s private island, Little St James, in the US Virgin Islands, on their 91ft wenge wood yacht Bequia. Staley describes Bequia, which is named after the Caribbean island on which the couple spent their honeymoon, as “not a big yacht, but it is a big boat”. While the yacht was designed primarily for relaxed cruising, Staley sailed it across the Atlantic to complete one of his “bucket list” life goals, and won the Loro Piana Superyacht regatta in Porto Cervo, Sardinia, in 2013. Staley was born in Boston, and remains an avid Red Sox fan, but moved cities frequently during his childhood because of his father’s job at PQ Corporation, a chemicals company. Barclays has agreed to pay for relocation costs if he moves back to the US, where he owns an apartment on Park Avenue in Manhattan and a house in Southampton, the Long Island playground of the Wall Street elite. Friends have described Staley as not your typical brash, boastful investment banker, but a sensitive, reflective and respectful soul who concentrates on building strong teams around him rather than bullying subordinates. Staley, who was christened James but has been known since childhood as Jes, joined a forerunner of JP Morgan straight after graduating from Bowdoin College, Maine, with a degree in economics in 1979. He had been widely tipped as frontrunner to succeed Jamie Dimon as CEO of JP Morgan, but is said to have grown bored with waiting for Dimon, who has been CEO since 2005, to leave. He left JP Morgan in 2013 to join the New York hedge fund BlueMountain Capital as managing partner and joined Barclays in 2015.I echo the comments in Patrick Butler’s piece (Millions will not benefit from Sunak’s ‘tax cut for low paid’, say activists, 27 October). We need to look at inequality in terms of jobs, not just pay. Work-related inequality for disabled people is an issue that runs deep. Disabled people are still shouldering more of the pandemic’s economic impact than their non-disabled peers. Easing the drop in universal credit payments for low-earners in work is a step in the right direction, but doesn’t do enough to account for the extra costs of having a disability, or that disabled people are more likely to be out of work. The latter will still have faced a welfare cut with the end of the £20 universal credit uplift, to say nothing of rising inflation. Gemma Hope London • In reducing the universal credit taper rate from 63% to 55%, the chancellor has recognised that the taper rate is in effect a tax. How then can he justify a marginal tax rate of 55% for the lowest paid, while those with an income of more than £150,000 only pay 45%? Prof Rhys Jenkins Norwich • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Ian Perkes knows better than most the post-Brexit vision that was sold to the fishing industry by the Vote Leave team and the now prime minister, Boris Johnson. Looking out over Brixham harbour from his office, the fish merchant recalls meeting Johnson in August 2019, less than six months before the UK ended its membership of the European Union. “He’s telling me we’re going to have to take on extra staff because we’re going to be so busy,” Perkes says. “With all this free trade, they’re going to want our fish.” Asked how he now views the prime minister, he pauses. “I’m disappointed,” he replies bitterly. “He never mentioned the extra costs.” To Perkes and others in the Brixham fishing industry, the current dispute with France over the number of licences issued to French fishermen to operate in UK waters is the latest in a long line of issues to hit business after Brexit. “If there wasn’t any Brexit, there wouldn’t be any issues,” he said. “We were getting on fine before that.” But Perkes surprises with a key admission – he voted to leave the EU. “I’ve been trolled since I first revealed this – but I wish I had voted to stay in. I never realised we were going to incur all these costs. We were told it was going to be free trade.” Brexit created mountains of paperwork for Perkes and his industry peers. He says sales are down and costs are up, and it’s all down to the departure from the EU. And the latest fight – with the French threatening to blockade their ports, is adding to their woes. “It does impact Brixham,” he said. “They start blockading the port, we’re not going to be able to send fish.” But despite his regrets, he believes the way forward is for the UK to “toughen up” its stance towards France. “They want to bring their wines and cheeses and delicacies into the UK? Let’s make it tougher for them,” he said. “Let’s put tariffs on it. Let’s stop Citroen and Renault bringing cars in. Let’s make it difficult, as difficult as they’re making it for us. Because it can work both ways.” Morris Reid, a skipper on the Margaret Anne, a scallop boat, said a blockade at the French ports could potentially see them lose up to £20,000 every few days. But he believes if Brexit had not happened, the industry would still be facing one dispute or another. “It’s ridiculous. The French, if you look at the charter and how the quota is broken down … have got about 90% of the quota … it just seems they want more and more and more,” he says. “It’s all for the votes. There’s an election in France after Christmas. Macron is just trying to get the votes. It’s ridiculous. “We’ve been looking into it. If they blockade the ports, we’ll put more stuff through Holland.” “Boris Johnson needs to grow a backbone and just say enough’s enough. We should start blocking the harbours, see how they like it. It’s ridiculous. There’s a very tight timeline. If scallops are held up 24 hours, they will spoil.” Lowic Farnham, 31, the skipper of the fishing boat Sanderling, has relocated from Jersey to Brixham because of the wider implications of Brexit. “Since Brexit, we’ve been shafted,” he said. Previously, Jersey fishers could head straight into French ports, but since Brexit they are required to return to Jersey, narrowing the window in which they can fish. He now finds himself living on his small boat, and his wife and children are back in Jersey. He doesn’t expect to see them again until Christmas. “I can see over here how they feel [about EU membership], but in Jersey it should never have affected us,” he said. “We didn’t even get to vote. We’ve been sucked up into it. I wish things had stayed as they were. I need to support my family. If I don’t fish, I don’t get any money. Brexit put so many more restrictions. Too many variables.” Others are more optimistic. Mending nets on the harbourside on a sunny Monday morning, Wesley Lowland says it is true that costs have risen, but so has the price of fish. “Shellfish [trade] is suffering, but I’m not worried. The fish [trade] has been pretty good.”Britain’s business leaders are demonstrably the modern Bourbons, forgetting nothing and learning nothing. They permanently complain about the manifest iniquities of business rates, but completely fail to grasp the obvious alternative despite it being regularly set out and available for more than a hundred years (Retailers warn budget will cause ‘unnecessary loss’ of jobs and shops, 27 October). Very simply – one taxes land, not property. When one reads of property prices rising it is not that bricks and mortar have increased in value but the land. Why? Because they stopped making it aeons ago and its supply is limited. Also, the value of a site is largely dependent on the planning permission it holds, ie the decision of the public authority. The value of my house in Leeds is double what it would be if one applied general inflation rather than land value inflation. Why should I have this potential windfall? If a business increases its profitability it is penalised by an increase in its business rate, whereas taxing land encourages its profitable use as its valuation is on its “maximum permitted use”. Furthermore, taxing property encourages huge enterprises and many public utilities to hold land banks for future use because they pay nothing in rates. Taxing land values discourages such unprofitable holdings and encourages their use. Spreading the tax base reduces the rate of tax charged. The practicalities of valuing land are relatively straightforward, even with transitional arrangements during a changeover. The switch lacks only the political will to introduce it. It became Liberal party policy in 1893 and Lloyd George put it into his radical 1909 budget, only to see it defeated in the Lords. It is high time the Confederation of British Industry, Chambers of Commerce and other organisations for business stopped mere complaining and put all their weight behind this much overdue change. Michael Meadowcroft Leeds • In the rush (including from the opposition) to redress the apparent iniquity represented by business rates, I haven’t seen any suggestions for making up the consequent shortfall in income for already cash-strapped local authorities. Can anyone enlighten me? Mike Wake Wortley, Sheffield • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.The big names over the jumps are emerging week by week and Cheltenham’s November meeting is on the horizon but the international Flat season has one final flourish to come. The pulling power of Del Mar on the Pacific coast in California – “where the surf meets the turf” – has attracted a huge European team for the 2021 Breeders’ Cup meeting later this week. More detail about running plans will arrive when the draw for stall positions takes place later on Monday, but the quarantine barn at Del Mar is currently home to 40 horses from stables in Europe. They include Dermot Weld’s Tarnawa, who will attempt to become only the third dual winner of the Turf, and Audarya from James Fanshawe’s Newmarket yard, who defends her title in the Filly &amp; Mare Turf. The Group One winners Love, Glass Slippers, Teona and Mother Earth are also engaged on the main card on Saturday – which means that half a dozen fillies and mares are the team leaders this weekend – while the juvenile events on turf on Friday’s card are also packed with European challengers. Hello You (Juvenile Fillies Turf) and Go Bears Go (Juvenile Turf Sprint) are due to line up in the increasingly familiar purple colours of football agent Kia Joorabchian, while Dubawi Legend, the runner-up to Europe’s champion two-year-old Native Trail in the Dewhurst last time, is among several live contenders for the Juvenile Turf. The Breeders’ Cup’s claim to be the “world championships” of racing may still grate with some on the other side of the Atlantic but it is, by a country mile, as close as we are ever likely to get. As the most valuable meeting in what is still the world’s biggest racing industry, its significance is also understood by international Flat racing’s biggest players. The longstanding, entirely justified complaints about race-day medication should also now be a thing of the past, as this will be the first Breeders’ Cup at which all 14 races are Lasix-free. While one potential source of controversy has been addressed, another remains in the unmistakable form of the trainer Bob Baffert. The controversy over Medina Spirit’s failed drug test after winning the Kentucky Derby in May has slipped down the news agenda somewhat over the last few months, but the situation is still unresolved and Medina Spirit himself is a contender for Saturday’s $7m Classic. The British Horseracing Authority has often been criticised for the glacial speed of its disciplinary procedures, but the Medina Spirit case is becoming a “hold my beer” moment for racing in the US. As yet, nearly six months on from the Run for the Roses, Medina Spirit has not been disqualified for testing positive for betamethasone, a banned steroid. Baffert’s struggle to avoid a DQ for Medina Spirit has disappeared into the rabbit hole of America’s legal system. It is anyone’s guess when a decision might finally emerge. The trainer claims that the positive test was down to inadvertent use of an ointment for a skin complaint, having initially suggested it may have been contaminated by a stable hand urinating in the horse’s box. Against this backdrop, the Breeders’ Cup approved Baffert to run horses at this year’s meeting two weeks ago, while imposing strict conditions on his runners, including tighter out-of-competition testing in the run-up to the meeting and heightened security at this barn. In addition to Medina Spirit, Baffert’s runners are expected to include Gamine, the defending champion in the Filly &amp; Mare Sprint and another horse with a chequered medication record. She was disqualified from third place in the Kentucky Oaks in September 2020 after testing positive for betamethasone, which is permitted for use in racing stables as an anti-inflammatory, but with a recommended withdrawal period of 14 days before a race to ensure that it has left the horse’s system. At a meeting which is always thick with plotlines, this is the one that the Breeders’ Cup could have done without. But it does at least guarantee the eyes of the racing world will be firmly focused on Del Mar throughout the meeting as one of the sport’s biggest events unfolds on the Californian coastline. Breeders’ Cup draw adds complications Several of the leading European contenders for the Breeders’ Cup at Del Mar in California this weekend were handed tricky outside draws when the final fields for the $31m meeting were drawn on Monday. Tarnawa, the defending champion in the Breeders’ Cup Turf, will start from stall 13 in a 14-strong field, while Teona, the Prix Vermeille winner, is on her immediate inside in 12. Tarnawa’s hold-up running style should give her a fair chance to show her best form, however, even around Del Mar’s tight turf track, and she remains a clear favourite at a top price of 7-4, with Teona on offer at 7-1. Audarya, the defending champion in Saturday’s Breeders’ Cup Filly &amp; Mare Turf, will also start from a wide stall as she attempts to become the first horse to win the race in consecutive years. James Fanshawe’s mare is in 12 and edged out to 5-1 (from 9-2) with Coral as a result. Kevin Ryan’s Glass Slippers, the defending champion in Saturday’s Turf Sprint, drew stall one, alongside stable companion Emaraaty Ana (2) and likely favourite Golden Pal (3). Glass Slippers is 13-2 (from 9-1) with Coral, while Emaraaty Ana is 5-1 (from 11-2). The main contenders from British stables in Friday’s Juvenile Turf ended up on opposite sides of the track, as Dubawi Legend, the runner-up behind Native Trail in the Dewhurst Stakes last month, drew widest of all in 14 while Modern Games and Albahr, from Charlie Appleby’s Newmarket yard, will start from stalls one and two respectively. Dubawi Legend, the most obvious loser among the big European team after the draw, was pushed out to 9-2 (from 3-1) with Paddy Power, while Modern Games is now the new favourite at a top price of 4-1.Time for a recap: Barclays’ chief executive, Jes Staley, is stepping down after an investigation by the City watchdog over how he described his links to the sex offender and disgraced financier Jeffrey Epstein. Factory output growth in the UK has hit an eight-month low, as port disruption and logistical delays force some overseas clients to cancel orders. US factories have also been squeezed by supply chain problems last month, with bosses reporting severe supplier delays, and problems recruiting skilled staff. Manufacturers on both sides of the Atlantic continued to hike their prices too, as they passed on surging input costs onto customers. Despite these challenges, stocks on Wall Street hit new record highs today. with the Dow Jones industrial average clearing the 36,000-point mark. European stock markets also climbed to new records, while the FTSE 100 has hit its highest level since the pandemic crash over 20 months ago. A meme coin based on dystopian TV show Squid Game which launched just last week has plunged to to virtually zero, in an apparent ‘rug-pull’ scam that will have cost speculators. UK diesel prices have reached a record high at the pumps, one week after petrol prices hit their highest ever level in a blow to hard-hit households and small businesses. The move comes as the UK automotive industry privately lobbies against the proposed 2040 introduction of a ban on sales of new diesel trucks, amid a split between manufacturers over when heavy goods vehicles should abandon fossil fuels. A survey has found that almost a quarter of workers are actively planning to change employers in the next few months, amid a “great resignation” prompted by a high number of vacancies and burnout caused by the pandemic. The solution could be to offer higher pay, a shorter working week or enhanced benefits to keep unhappy staff onside: Training is another option -- with the holiday park operator Haven launching a training scheme for 200 chefs in the latest attempt to address a shortage of skilled kitchen staff. Ryanair will pull its share listing from the London Stock Exchange in the next six months because of Brexit, as the airline made a quarterly profit for the first time since 2019. And fashion brand French Connection is also departing the stock market, after shareholders backed the £29m takeover led by a Newcastle-based businessman, putting the company back into private hands for the first time since 1983. In the City, the FTSE 100 index of blue-chip shares has ended the day at a new pandemic closing high. The Footsie finished 51 points higher at 7,288.6 points, up 0.7% today, having briefly traded over the 7,300 mark. That’s its highest close since the markets began to crash in late February 2020. BT Group finished as the top riser, up 4.4% after confirming that it has hit its cost reduction targets early. Retailer Next (+2.7%), precious metals producer Fresnillo (+2.5%) and educational publisher Pearson (+2.4%) also rallied, with (most) banks also having a solid day. But cybersecurity firm Darktrace had another rough day, plunging by 15% to finish at 681.5p. They’re under pressure since an analyst note raising doubts about its valuation and as the expiry looms of a lock-up on insiders selling their stakes. Housebuilders also fell, with traders anticipating that a rise in UK interest rates might hit demand. Barclays ended the day down 0.7%, as investors came to terms with Jes Staley’s departure. Michael Hewson of CMC Markets sums up the day: BT Group shares have popped higher ahead of this week’s H1 numbers after the company said it had delivered on its £1bn of gross annualised cost savings 18 months ahead of its March 2023 deadline. Ryanair shares are modestly higher after reporting its first quarterly profit since the beginning of the Covid-19 pandemic. Today’s first half numbers still translated into a loss of €48m, due to a poor Q1, but the number of passengers carried saw a rise of 128% compared to a year ago, with the load factor rising to 79%. Revenues came in at €2.15bn, although the business cautioned on a return to profitability due to its focus on capacity over prices which are likely to be kept low over the rest of the year in order to put pressure on its competitors. The airline also said it is considering delisting its shares from the London Stock Exchange. IAG shares are also higher, after its British Airways operation announced it had agreed a £1bn 5 year committed credit facility with UK Export Finance, on top of a £2bn facility that was agreed at the end of last year, and drawn in March 2021. Barclays share price has fallen back on the announcement today that CEO Jes Staley has stepped down with immediate effect, to be replaced by Head of Global Markets, C.S Venkatakrishnan. Staley is said to be contesting the preliminary conclusions of an FCA and PRA investigation into his “characterisation to Barclays of his relationship with the late Mr Jeffrey Epstein”. On the flip side, both Lloyds Banking Group is building on its gains from last week, finally overcoming the 50p level, taking out its previous peaks in June, and hitting its highest levels since February 2020 in the process. Another UK energy supplier has collapsed. This time Bluegreen Energy, which has 5,900 domestic customers, has been dragged under by the record wholesale energy prices that have hammered the sector. The company says: Due to the energy crisis in the UK, we find ourselves in an unsustainable situation and regrettably, Bluegreen Energy Services Limited is forced to make the difficult decision to cease trading. Under Ofgem’s safety net, all Bluegreen Energy customers are well protected, and your supply of Gas/Electricity is secured and will not be subject to interruptions. Energy regulator Ofgem will now appoint a new supplier to take on Bluegreen’s customers, through its Supplier of Last Resort process. I think this is the 15th UK energy company to collapse since August, and the 17th collapse during 2021. SQUID’s rapid rise, and even more rapid plunge to nearly zero, is a timely warning of the risks of the crypto fever. While bitcoin, ether and even ‘joke coin’ dogecoin have all rocketed in value since their early days, looking for the next sensation can be risky amid a speculative frenzy. Here’s Bloomberg’s take: Investors drawn to cryptocurrencies can be forgiven for having an expectation of high returns, especially lately. After all, even as the S&amp;P 500 Index more than doubled in the past five years, Bitcoin rocketed more than 80-fold -- albeit with much of the rally occurring in the past year. “Memecoins” such as Dogecoin and Shiba Inu have also surged, often for no particular reason. Big gains aren’t a given, though, especially in a market as untamed, sprawling and speculative as crypto. And the inflation in value is often ephemeral. For evidence, there’s Squid Game, or SQUID, the latest memecoin sensation, inspired by the Netflix hit. It surged more than 230,000% in the past week to $2,861.80, according to CoinMarketCap pricing -- only to plunge 100% to less than half a cent as of Monday in New York. “Betting on the right coin can lead to jaw-dropping riches,” said Antoni Trenchev, co-founder of crypto lender Nexo, in an email Sunday. “The problem is, what goes up in a straight line tends to retreat in a similar fashion.” He added, “you hear that some memecoin investors don’t care about the losses. They are in it for the ride,” but that “once the selling starts, a cascading effect can play out, so it’s wise to only use money you can afford to lose.” Speculators who bet on a cryptocurrency linked to the Netflix sensation Squid Game have suffered grisly losses. SQUID was the latest memecoin sensation to grip the crypto world. Launched last week at just one cent, it quickly soared to over $38 by late Sunday night. Then suddenly today, it surged to $2,861 before immediately plunging almost 100%, to just a quarter of a cent, wiping out those who bought the coin after its value began rising sharply. SQUID was billed as a “play-to-earn” cryptocurrency’ -- a token which would be used to play an upcoming online game based on the show, in which indebted contestants play children’s games for cash, but are shot dead if they fail. But concerns about the coin quickly emerged, after users said they were unable to resell their tokens on cryptocurrency exchanges. Now, SQUID has collapsed, heightening suspicions the entire venture was a scam, known as a ‘rug-pull’. Gizmodo has a good take on this cautionary tale: The anonymous hucksters behind a Squid Game cryptocurrency have officially pulled the rug on the project, making off with an estimated $2.1 million. Remember on Friday morning when Gizmodo told you it was an obvious scam? It was only obvious because investors could purchase the crypto but couldn’t sell it. But plenty of people didn’t get the warning in time. The SQUID cryptocurrency peaked at a price of $2,861 before plummeting to $0 around 5:40 a.m. ET., according to the website CoinMarketCap. This kind of theft, commonly called a “rug pull” by crypto investors, happens when the creators of the crypto quickly cash out their coins for real money, draining the liquidity pool from the exchange. The SQUID crypto coin was launched just last week and included plenty of red flags, including a three-week old website filled with bizarre spelling and grammatical errors. The website, hosted at SquidGame.cash, has disappeared, along with every other social media presence set up by the scammers. You can see an archived version of the website here. Shortages at US factories are constraining activity and pushing up prices, says Andrew Hunter, Senior US Economist at Capital Economics. While the ISM index remains at a strong level by past standards and consistent with solid GDP growth, we already know that shortages – particularly in the autos sector – contributed to a sharp slowdown in third quarter, with little sign of any easing to those supply chain issues any time soon. Those problems are also far from just a US phenomenon and, based on the deterioration in the international manufacturing surveys in recent months, particularly in China, the US ISM index looks set to drop below 55 by the end of the year. Back in the UK, holiday park operator Haven is launching a training scheme for 200 chefs in the latest attempt to address a shortage of skilled kitchen staff. The company, which operates 40 sites across the UK, said successful applicants would receive 18 months of training from professional chefs and would have a talent coach and mentor. After an eight-week course at selected Haven centres, the trainees will learn on the job at one of the company’s parks. Haven said trainees would be paid £8.91 an hour, the legal minimum for those aged 23 and over, and would gain a professional apprenticeship qualification through its training partner, Lifetime. Ann Blyth, the talent director at Haven, said: “This carefully curated programme will be hugely beneficial to all those selected, giving applicants the tools they need to begin a fantastic career and get that essential on-the-job training, which is very hard to come by these days.” A second survey of US factories, from the Institute of Supply Management, also shows that growth slowed last month. The ISM’s US manufacturing PMI dipped to 60.8%, down from 61.1% in September. Although that shows the economy grew for the 17th month in a row, the report also found that supply chain bottlenecks continued to hold back the recovery. It says: New Orders, Production and Employment Growing Supplier Deliveries Slowing at Faster Rate; Backlog Growing Manufacturing Inventories Growing; Customers’ Inventories Too Low Prices Increasing, Exports Growing and Imports Contracting ISM Manufacturing Business Committee Chairman Timothy Fiore, explains that shortages of materials, components and skilled staff are all hitting the sector: “Business Survey Committee panelists reported that their companies and suppliers continue to deal with an unprecedented number of hurdles to meet increasing demand. All segments of the manufacturing economy are impacted by record-long raw materials lead times, continued shortages of critical materials, rising commodities prices and difficulties in transporting products. Global pandemic-related issues — worker absenteeism, short-term shutdowns due to parts shortages, difficulties in filling open positions and overseas supply chain problems — continue to limit manufacturing growth potential. Growth across the US factory sector has been hit by supply chain problems -- matching the problems in the UK. American manufacturers have reported that production growth hit the slowest in 15 months in October, as severe supplier delays hit output. And with input costs surging, US manufacturers raised their prices at the fastest rate on record. That’s according to data firm IHS Markit’s latest Purchasing Manager’s Index. It has dropped to 58.4 in October, down from 60.7 in September, which is the lowest reading in 10 months (any reading over 50 shows growth). The report found that shortages of materials and long delays receiving them knocked output growth to its lowest since July 2020, and left firms struggling to satisfy another rise in new orders. The report says: Companies continued to highlight strong demand conditions, but some noted that raw material shortages were hampering demand from clients as stocks of inputs had already been built or delivery times were too extensive. The pace of new order growth was the slowest for ten months. New export sales rose only fractionally as foreign demand was also weighed down by the knock-on effects of uncertain supply. In line with capacity constraints, production growth slowed to the softest since July 2020 in October. Raw material and labour shortages were commonly cited as hampering the upturn. Business confidence fell to its lowest in a year, as firms worried about supply chain disruption and inflation. The US stock market has opened at a fresh record high. The Dow Jones Industrial Average, which contains 30 of the largest US companies, has surged through the 36,000 points mark for the first time, continuing its strong rally. Fast-food restaurant group McDonald’s are the top Dow riser, up 1.5%, followed by enterprise software firm Salesforce.com (+1.4%), Visa (+1.2%) , Boeing (+1.1%) and Disney (+1%). The broader S&amp;P 500 index, and the tech-focused Nasdaq, are both also at new highs. Investors are shrugging off the ongoing supply chain crisis, which slowed US growth over the summer, and the prospect that the Federal Reserve starts to taper its stimulus programme this week. Fiona Cincotta, Senior Financial Markets Analyst at City Index, says an encouraging earnings season has boosted stocks: US stocks rose at the open amid optimism surrounding the economic recovery as global earnings continue to impress and European stocks hit record highs. Of the 280 S&amp;P 500 companies that have reported 82% have exceeded expectations. Strong earnings are supporting the belief that the economy will be OK despite headwinds from rising prices, labour shortages and supply chain issues. Stocks are looking to power higher even as inflation expectations remain high and the bets are rising that the Fed could move to hike rates sooner. Comments by US treasury secretary Janet Yellen, who expressed confidence in the economic recovery from the pandemic is also helping sentiment. Back in the City, telecoms group BT continues to lead the FTSE 100 risers after hitting its cost savings plans early. BT confirmed this morning that it has achieved its target of £1bn gross annualised cost savings 18 months early (it was aiming for March 2023), after the Sunday Telegraph reported it was ahead of schedule. BT shares are up 4% at 144.5p, on track for their highest close in three weeks, ahead of the company’s Q2 financial results on Thursday where it could announce new savings targets under its modernisation programme. They had jumped over 200p in June, for the first time since the pandemic, after telecoms entrepreneur Patrick Drahi surprised investors by taking a 12.1% stake in BT. At the time, Drahi’s Altice said it had informed the board of BT that the stake was not part of a wider takeover plot. But there remains speculation that the Altice boss could launch a bid, once an obligation not to make a takeover approach expires in December. UK diesel prices have reached a record high at the pumps, one week after petrol prices hit their highest ever level in a blow to hard-hit households and small businesses. About 12.5 million diesel car drivers faced an average price across the UK of 147.94p a litre on 31 October, narrowly surpassing the previous high of 147.93p set on 12 April 2012. More here: Another worrying sign -- directors’ confidence in the economy has dipped again, to its lowest since last winter’s lockdown. The Institute of Directors says its Economic Confidence Index has fallen to -6 in October, from -1 in September 2021, which shows that more directors are pessimistic about the UK’s outlook than optimistic. Thats’s the weakest reading since January 2021 (when it was -11, after having plunged last autumn). Inflationary pressures are worrying bosses, with 77% expecting costs will be higher over the next year, and just 5% seeing a fall. Kitty Ussher, Chief Economist at the Institute of Directors, explains: “Directors are still nervous about the state of the UK macroeconomy, in contrast to the exuberance of the early summer, with October’s data continuing to show more people pessimistic than optimistic about prospects for the wider UK economy in the year ahead. Nearly nine in ten business leaders expect inflation to be higher than the Bank of England’s target in 2022 and wage pressures are also being felt acutely. “However, within that, there are encouraging signs that business leaders are feeling more positive about prospects for their own firms than last month, with correspondingly steady increases in investment and employment intentions. Whether this is sufficient to fulfil the OBR’s prediction of a massive 16% increase in business investment across the economy next year is, however, far from clear.” The survey found that a third of directors predict UK inflation will be between 4% and 6% by the end of next year, with another 49% seeing it over the Bank of England’s 2% target (but below 4%). Around 4% think it will be above 6%, a level that would alarm the central bank and probably force a sharp tightening of monetary policy..... The supply chain disruption hitting UK manufacturers could last until the second half of next year, warns Martin Beck, senior economic advisor to the EY ITEM Club: “After falling for four successive months, the manufacturing PMI edged up from 57.1 in September to 57.8 in October. But digging into the detail, the picture was more mixed. On the plus side, growth in new orders and employment strengthened. But with firms reporting production increasingly disrupted by severe capacity constraints and shortages of inputs, manufacturing output growth slowed to an eight-month low and was barely in expansionary territory. This is a picture that is mirrored across the world, and anecdotal evidence suggests supply chain challenges won’t be completely resolved until the second half of 2022. These ongoing shortages and congestion at the ports could encourage some manufacturers to move their supply chains back within the UK, says Dave Atkinson, SME &amp; Mid Corporates head of manufacturing at Lloyds Bank: “Strong demand is holding up, but it’s not getting any easier for manufacturers to match that with supply. Materials and labour shortages persist and sustained gas price rises have now been thrown into the mix, particularly affecting construction supplies and food production. “Some manufacturers are safeguarding against global logistics challenges by bringing supply chains back to the UK. Yet it’s also an option more are likely to consider as customers increasingly examine the carbon impact of their supply chains, with shipping parts from all over the world becoming less palatable. Scrutiny of sustainable practices is only likely to grow beyond COP26.” Fhaheen Khan, senior economist at manufacturers group Make UK, warns that rising energy costs could force some factories to shutdown this winter : “Shortages in labour, a supply chain crisis and input costs rising at record rates continue to hamper manufacturers who are being stalked by the after-effects of a post-pandemic boom and a new trading environment. Though the latest data is an improvement, the data masks the true nature of the situation which is partly a reflection of higher stock building to prepare for the cold months ahead. “Manufacturers continue to report supplier lead times, fuel, transport, and energy bills rising that could result in some having to reduce, or even shut down, production to weather the incoming storm. It is only going to get worse with a sharp increase in consumption expected in the weeks leading up to Black Friday and Christmas. Supply chain problems are turning into a ‘nightmare’ for some UK manufacturers, warns Duncan Brock, Group Director at the Chartered Institute of Procurement &amp; Supply. Here’s his take on October’s slowdown in factory output growth -- which hit an eight-month low of 51.3, from 52.7 in September (a reading of 50 shows stagnation). “A slowdown in manufacturing output growth to an eight-month low is a strong indication of how the effects of staff shortages and the delivery of raw materials are continuing to impact the manufacturing sector even though overall productivity was maintained. This modest expansion was buoyed up by domestic demand as new order levels improved. However, pipelines of export work slipped back as customers in the EU and beyond became tired of waiting for their undelivered goods and resorted to cancellations. With Brexit adding to the slowdown, the issue here is not one of supply, as goods and materials are being produced, but that logistics challenges have become a nightmare for some companies. The jump in prices charged by manufacturers will add to the UK’s inflationary pressures, Brock adds: “Levels of job creation remained strong with another rise for the tenth month in a row to meet this increased demand as the spotlight now shifts to the quality of workforces. If businesses are forced to compromise on skills to get backlogged jobs out of the door, there may be further drags on delivery times and quality as business are spooked into making decisions just to adapt and survive. “Input price inflation continues to be a headache for manufacturers who are now charging their customers at shockingly high survey record rates. This will fuel inflation growth fears for the rest of us as the central bank’s interest rate decision looms and balance is sought in the UK economy.” Output at UK factories has slowed as manufacturers continue to suffer from supply chain disruption and staff shortages, which have prompted them to hike prices at a record pace. Supply difficulties caused a “severe headwind” last month, with new export orders dipping for the second month running, according to the latest survey of purchasing managers at UK factories. Data firm IHS Markit reports that factory output growth slowed in October, to its slowest rate since February, before lockdown restrictions were eased. Companies reported that supply chain delays, and shortages of raw materials, staff and certain skills all led to slower output growth. The PMI survey also found that firms lifted prices at the fastest pace on record, as they passed on higher costs to consumers. Worryingly, some companies reported that overseas clients “were cancelling or postponed orders due to longer lead times caused by port delays and freight capacity issues”. That follows delays at Felixstowe port, which handles about 40% of containers coming in and out of the UK, and the shortage of lorry drivers. The overall manufacturing PMI rose to 57.8 in October, up from 57.1 in September, due to a pick up in new orders, employment, stock purchases...and longer delays for supplies. That shows a rise in overall activity. Rob Dobson, director at IHS Markit, says the weaker production growth is a concern: Strained global supply chains are disrupting production schedules, while staff shortages and declining intakes of new export work are also stymieing the upturn. This low growth environment is occurring in tandem with a severe upshot in inflationary pressures, with manufacturers reporting both a near-record increase in input costs and record rise in selling prices. “There are also positive notes to take from the survey. A slight improvement in new order growth, led by the domestic market, suggests the trend in demand is stabilising following its recent slowdown. Businesses also remain relatively optimistic about the year-ahead outlook, with 62% expecting production to be higher. This alongside rising backlogs of work – a by-product of material and staff shortages – is driving a recovery in jobs growth. However, these positives could potentially be at risk if supply-chain, Brexit or COVID headwinds rise during the coming months, especially if high inflation leads to higher borrowing costs. Speaking of diesel....the UK automotive industry is privately lobbying against the proposed 2040 introduction of a ban on sales of new diesel trucks, amid a split between manufacturers over when heavy goods vehicles should abandon fossil fuels. In July the government revealed plans to ban internal combustion engines in new lorries after 2040, following a ban on petrol and diesel cars after 2035 to help tackle the climate crisis. It is now consulting on the measure. The automotive lobby group, the Society for Motor Manufacturers and Traders (SMMT), says publicly that the proposed ban is a “bold commitment” that would require financial support from the government. However, it has told MPs privately that a ban should be delayed, according to responses to the official consultation. The responses were obtained through a formal request by InfluenceMap, a thinktank that tracks climate lobbying, which shared them with the Guardian. The Road Haulage Association (RHA), which represents trucking companies, said the ban should be delayed until 2045 for lorries over 32 tonnes in weight. It supported earlier bans for smaller lorries. Here’s the full story: The price of diesel at UK forecourts hit a new record high yesterday. Motoring body the RAC reports that the average price of diesel across the UK hit 147.94p a litre on Sunday 31 October, just surpassing the previous high of 147.93p set on 12 April 2012. This comes a week after petrol hit a new record of 142.94p. It has kept rising since, RAC Fuel Watch data shows, and reached 144.35p/litre yesterday. The price of a litre of diesel has risen by 30p a litre in a year, making a full 55-litre tank £16 more expensive (it now costs £81 on average, up from £65....making electric cars a more attractive option...). Sales of diesel cars have fallen since the emissions scandal broke, but the RAC says there are still 12.5m diesel car drivers in the UK, while most of the country’s 4.5m vans running on diesel too. Fuel prices have been pushed up by rising crude oil prices - Brent crude hit a three-year high over $86/barrel last month. RAC fuel spokesman Simon Williams said that rising cost of biodiesel (which makes up 7% of ‘B7 diesel’) is also a factor: “While this isn’t unexpected as petrol has already hit a new record price, it’s still another body blow to drivers and businesses across the country who were already struggling to cope with rising prices. “As well as hitting household budgets this will have a knock-on effect on the price we pay for goods and services as diesel is very much the fuel of business and, as such, will contribute further to inflation. “While the price of diesel on the forecourt has primarily shot up due the cost of a barrel of oil doubling in the last year from around $40 to more than $80, the price of biodiesel is now two and a half times what it was 12 months ago. This means the biodiesel content in a litre has rocketed from 7p to 16p, while the pure diesel component has doubled from 20p to 40p. Almost a quarter of workers are actively planning to change employers in the next few months, a report has claimed, as part of a “great resignation” prompted by a high number of vacancies and burnout caused by the pandemic. A survey of 6,000 workers by the recruitment firm Randstad UK found that 69% of them were feeling confident about moving to a new role in the next few months, with 24% planning a change within three to six months. The company said it would normally expect up to 11% of workers to move jobs every year. It has warned that such a move will have considerable cost implications for employers – as much as £25,000 for each worker – and said it has been advising clients to start looking at whether they needed to improve pay and other conditions to help them retain their best staff. Ryanair has reported its first quarterly profit since before the onset of Covid-19, but said it expected to post an annual loss of up to €200m (£169m) as it would be forced to discount tickets to fill its planes over the winter, Reuters explains. The Irish airline, which operated more flights this summer than its European rivals, reported on Monday an after-tax loss of €48m for the six months to September. A company poll of analysts had forecast a loss of €43m. While it did not break out its after-tax profit for the three months ended September – its second quarter – the €273m loss it reported in the first quarter implies a second quarter profit of €225m. That marks its first quarterly profit since October-December, 2019 – before the pandemic disrupted travel. Ryanair also said it is considering delisting from the London Stock Exchange due to a fall in trading volumes this year after British shareholders’ voting rights were restricted post-Brexit. The airline (which has its primary listing on Euronext Dublin), said: “The Board of Ryanair is now considering the merits of retaining the standard listing on the LSE.” “The migration away from the LSE is consistent with a general trend for trading in shares of EU corporates post Brexit.” In the City, the FTSE 100 has touched a new pandemic high this morning. The blue-chip index gained 0.6% to hit 7281.59 points, just above last week’s 20-month high, lifted by a slightly weaker pound (it’s down 0.2% at $1.366). BT Group are the top riser (+3.9%), followed by medical devices maker Smith &amp; Nephew (+2%), Lloyds Banking Group (+1.9%) and Royal Mail (+1.7%). Housebuilders are lagging, though, on concerns that a rise in interest rates could hit demand and slow the economy. Barclays is still lower (-1.8%), while cyber-security firm Darktrace are now down 9.9%. On Barclays, Neil Wilson of Markets.com says: Shares in Barclays fell more than 1% after the announcement, whilst peers rose - Lloyds rallied about 2% and NatWest over 1%. CS Venkatakrishnan, previously head of global markets, will take the reins. A safe pair of hands but we probably need to see a bit more. Today’s release mentions that “the Board has had succession planning in hand for some time”, which if you had Jes Staley as your CEO would have been a prudent step to take. Europe’s financial markets have begun November with fresh gains, at the start of a big week for central bankers. The pan-European Stoxx 600 index has hit a new record high this morning, up 0.6% at 478.52 points. Healthcare stocks, banks and utilities are the best-performing sectors, followed by energy and industrials. Investors seem upbeat, even though the US Federal Reserve is expected to announce plans to slow its bond-buying stimulus programme on Wednesday. Then on Thursday, the Bank of England’s monetary policy committee could vote to lift UK interest rates from their current record low of 0.1%, in an attempt to tackle rising inflation (although they may hold off until December’s meeting...). This follows strong gains in Japan, where the ruling conservative party secured a comfortable victory in Sunday’s general election. The Nikkei index jumped 2.6%, on hopes that prime minister Fumio Kishida’s Liberal Democratic Party should push through more stimulus measures to help the economy recover from the pandemic. In an internal memo to Barclays staff, and seen by the Guardian, Jes Staley said: “The reasons for my decision are simple. The FCA and PRA let me know on Friday evening the draft conclusions of their investigation into the characterisation of a professional relationship I developed earlier in my career. I do not want my personal response to those matters to be a distraction from the fantastic work you do every day to support our customers and clients.” Commenting on the appointment of his successor, C.S. Venkatakrishnan, Staley said that the two had known each other “for many years”. Staley said: There is no better person to lead this organisation forward. He has a deep understanding of the business of banking, and an unshakeable belief in the power of our purpose and values. I know that under his leadership you will achieve ever greater success as Barclays delivers on its potential.” He thanked staff for their support over the past six years and said they had helped set the bank on the “right course for a successful future” “Although I will not be with you for the next chapter of Barclays’ story, know that I will be cheering your success from the sidelines, and that I will remain forever humbled by having had the opportunity to lead this great organisation.” Here’s Susannah Streeter, senior investment and markets analyst at Hargreaves Lansdown, on Jes Staley’s departure from Barclays today: ‘’The repercussions from the Jeffrey Epstein scandal stretch far and wide, and now Barclays finds itself at the centre of the storm. For the Chief Executive, Jes Staley to step down following an investigation by city regulators into his into his dealings with Epstein, it’s clear the conclusions of the probe are critical. While the probe did not centre on Mr Staley’s role at Barclays but what he disclosed about his previous position at JP Morgan, what was under question was how he characterised his former relationship with the disgraced financier. Although detail is limited, it appears regulators believe there was a distinct lack of transparency over this relationship. It’s understood Mr Staley will contest the conclusions, and clearly the board want to distance Barclays from what could be a long drawn out process. While other organisations focus on the environmental aspect of ESG this week under the shadow of COP 26, this development is a reminder of how the G, as in governance, is increasingly important for companies and investors not to lose sight of. Sudden change at the top is always unsettling, and the departure of Mr Staley who propelled its successful investment banking expansion strategy may be particularly unnerving for investors, with shares falling 3% in early trading. However, continuity will be provided to some extent by C.S. Venkatakrishnan, head of global markets, who will take over as chief executive.” The investigation into Jes Staley’s characterisation of his dealings with Epstein centred on emails exchanged between the pair. Those messages were handed to UK regulators by JPMorgan Chase, and could show whether Staley’s relationship with Epstein was a professional one, as he told Barclays (and Barclays then told the FCA), or more friendly. The Financial Times explains: UK regulators opened an investigation into the links between Staley and Epstein last February after receiving a cache of emails supplied by JPMorgan Chase. The emails between the two men — dating back to Staley’s time as an executive at JPMorgan when Epstein was a client of the bank — suggested their relationship was friendlier than claimed by Staley, who had categorised the association as professional. The emails were provided by JPMorgan to US regulators, who passed them to their counterparts in the UK. Epstein was until 2013 a key client of JPMorgan’s private bank, which Staley used to run. Staley developed a relationship with Epstein and visited the sex offender’s island on his yacht in 2015. Barclays chief executive Jes Staley is stepping down after an investigation by the City watchdog over his links to the sex offender and disgraced financier Jeffrey Epstein, my colleague Kalyeena Makortoff writes: The bank said its board reached an agreement over Staley’s resignation after being notified on Friday of the preliminary conclusions in an investigation by the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) and the Prudential Regulation Authority into how Staley had characterised his relationship with Epstein to Barclays. The investigation, which began in late 2019, also looked at the information in light of the fact that it was subsequently shared with the FCA, which covers conduct related issues in the City. Barclays said that the outgoing chief executive plans to challenge the investigation’s findings. Barclays said in a statement on Monday morning: “In view of those conclusions, and Mr Staley’s intention to contest them, the board and Mr Staley have agreed that he will step down from his role as group chief executive and as a director of Barclays,” More here: Shares in Barclays have dropped 1.7% in early trading, to 198.7p, as investors digest Jes Staley’s departure. That puts the bank among the top fallers on the FTSE 100 index of blue-chip shares (behind cyber-defence firm Darktrace (-2.2%), and housebuilder Barratt (-2%).) Mr Staley will receive 12 months pay, totalling £2.4m, following his departure from Barclays, as well as his pension allowance of £120,000 for the year. Barclays says: Mr Staley is entitled to 12 months’ notice from Barclays under his contract of employment and will therefore continue to receive his current fixed pay (£2.4m per annum delivered in cash and Barclays shares), pension allowance (£120,000 per annum) and other benefits until 31 October 2022. Under Barclays’ directors’ remuneration policy, Staley (who is American) is also eligible to receive repatriation costs to the US. No decisions have yet been made about any further remuneration payments, Barclays adds [such as from the bank’s Long Term Incentive Plan, for example] Victoria Scholar, head of investment at Interactive Investor, says Staley’s departure is a surprise to the markets: In light of an investigation into Jes Staley’s relationship with Jeffrey Epstein, the Barclays’ CEO is stepping down, effective immediately and is being replaced by C.S. Venkatakrishnan, who is co-president and head of global markets. The FCA’s investigation looked at “Staley’s characterisation to Barclays of his relationship with the late Mr Jeffrey Epstein and the subsequent description of that relationship in Barclays’ response to the FCA.” The news comes as a surprise to the market, and deals a blow to the British lender, which delivered a strong set of forecast topping earnings under Staley’s leadership less than a fortnight ago. Barclays has been enjoying a winning streak lately, recovering 155% since the Covid lows of March 2020. However, the share price has disappointed since the start of Staley’s tenure in December 2015, shedding more than 10%. The UK’s City watchdog, the Financial Conduct Authority, isn’t giving any further details on its investigation into Jes Staley. A FCA and PRA spokesperson says: “The FCA and PRA do not comment on ongoing investigations or regulatory proceedings beyond confirming the regulatory actions as detailed in the firm’s announcement.” Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. We start with some breaking news -- Jes Staley, the chief executive of Barclays Bank, is stepping down, following an investigation into his dealings with the sex offender and disgraced financier Jeffrey Epstein. The move follows an investigation into the way Staley described his relationship with Epstein to Barclays, which began early last year. In a statement, Barclays says: Barclays and Mr Jes Staley, Group Chief Executive, were made aware on Friday evening of the preliminary conclusions from the FCA and the PRA of their investigation into Mr Staley’s characterisation to Barclays of his relationship with the late Mr Jeffrey Epstein and the subsequent description of that relationship in Barclays’ response to the FCA. In view of those conclusions, and Mr Staley’s intention to contest them, the Board and Mr Staley have agreed that he will step down from his role as Group Chief Executive and as a director of Barclays. It should be noted that the investigation makes no findings that Mr Staley saw, or was aware of, any of Mr Epstein’s alleged crimes, which was the central question underpinning Barclays’ support for Mr Staley following the arrest of Mr Epstein in the summer of 2019. It emerged back in February 2020 that an inquiry had been launched into Staley’s characterisation of his dealings with Epstein, after emails between the two men were handed to the UK regulators by their counterparts in the US. Staley, who joined Barclays in 2015, worked with Epstein during his time at JP Morgan. He took over running the JP Morgan private bank in 2000, when Epstein was already a client. Staley remained in touch with Epstein for seven years after the financier was convicted of soliciting prostitution from a minor in 2008;. He visited Epstein in Florida in 2009 while he was still serving his sentence and out on work release, and sailed his own yacht, the Bequia, to Epstein’s private Caribbean island in 2015. Staley has said his final contact with the financier was in “middle to late 2015”, shortly before he took over as Barclays’ chief executive in December. Barclays adds that they are “disappointed” at this outcome: The Board is disappointed at this outcome. Mr Staley has run the Barclays Group successfully since December 2015 with real commitment and skill. Supported by the senior team which he largely helped build and on whom the Barclays Group will be relying for the future, Mr Staley clarified the Barclays Group’s strategy, transformed its operations and materially improved its results. The regulatory process still has to run its full course and it is not appropriate for Barclays to comment further on the preliminary conclusions. Staley is to be replaced by C.S. Venkatakrishnan, known as Venkat, Barclays’ global head of markets, who was made a co-president of Barclays in September 2020. The bank says: The Board has had succession planning in hand for some time, including reviewing potential external appointees, and identified Venkat as its preferred candidate for this role over a year ago, as a result of which he moved from the position of Group Chief Risk Officer to Head of Global Markets. More to follow... The agenda 9.30am BST: UK manufacturing PMI for October 1.45pm BST: US manufacturing PMI for October 2PM BST: US construction spending for SeptemberA lobbyist at a company with close connections to the Conservative party will help select the next chair of the media regulator, it has been announced, after ministers cleared the former Daily Mail editor to apply for the job for a second time. Michael Prescott, a former political editor of the Sunday Times, has been unveiled as the senior external interviewer who will work with the veteran civil servant Sue Gray to decide which candidates should be approved. Prescott is currently a senior executive at Hanover Communications, a company founded by John Major’s former director of communications which is regularly used as a recruiting ground for Conservative special advisers. His appointment was confirmed as ministers relaunched the recruitment process for a new individual to oversee Ofcom – but only after tweaking the job description to favour a more confrontational candidate. Paul Dacre has been Downing Street’s preferred choice to oversee Ofcom since last summer but unexpectedly flunked his interview on the first attempt in May. The original panel believed he did not fulfil the required criteria for the £142,500 a year, three-day-a-week role running the board of the media regulator. Rather than accept a different candidate who did pass the vetting process, ministers instead decided to rerun the entire recruitment process to give Dacre a second shot. Five months later, after struggling to find people to help run the interview process, ministers have finally readvertised the role. The new job description for Ofcom chair has been amended to describe a more confrontational candidate. Originally the successful applicant for the role was required to prove their commitment to working “collegiately” with fellow board members and show they could build a “positive relationship” with the Ofcom chief executive, Melanie Dawes. This time around, the successful applicant only has to commit to working “effectively” with fellow board members and show they could have a “productive relationship” with the chief executive. The requirement for the Ofcom chair to “support the chief executive” has also been replaced with the lesser requirement to “challenge” the chief executive and only give them “appropriate support”. The new job advert has removed a requirement for the successful candidate to “be the most senior representative and ambassador of Ofcom”. In addition, the need for first-hand “familiarity” with the world of regulation has also been replaced with a requirement for a lesser “understanding” of regulation. Ministers will have the final say on who gets to oversee Ofcom, with the final candidate required to attend a hearing of the House of Commons culture select committee before the appointment is confirmed. That committee is led by Julian Knight, who has previously said Dacre should not be allowed to reapply for the job after failing on the first attempt. Any member of the public can apply for the position of Ofcom chair if they think they meet the criteria, although the last time it was advertised only nine people put their names forward after it was made clear the government wanted Dacre. Prescott was approach for comment and a government spokesperson responded on his behalf. They said: “The recruitment process for the Ofcom chair is fair and open and there are no conflicts of interest. Mr Prescott’s role on the panel has been approved by the independent Commissioner for Public Appointments.”Re-establish the team’s identity It been nearly two years since Mauricio Pochettino was dismissed after an awful start to the 2019-20 season yet Tottenham have never really moved on from the manager who had led them to the Champions League final a few months earlier. Five of the side that started against Liverpool in Madrid remain at the club – Hugo Lloris, Harry Winks, Dele Alli, Son Heung-min and Harry Kane – but neither José Mourinho nor Nuno Espírito Santo was able to establish their imprint on a squad created by Pochettino and weakened by poor recruitment. The expected appointment of Antonio Conte is a statement of intent given the Italian’s vast experience of finding a winning formula, albeit often only in the short term. He demands that players stick to his plan; anyone who does not quickly finds themselves out in the cold. Introduce a new formation Conte usually favours a three-man defence with wing-backs – a system that has brought him league titles at Juventus, Chelsea and Internazionale. Nuno, during his brief spell in charge of Spurs, opted against a similar approach that served him so well at Wolves, but adapting to the likely change of formation will be crucial to Tottenham’s recovery. Whether Conte would be able to mould a solid backline from Cristian Romero, Eric Dier, Davinson Sánchez and Joe Rodon remains to be seen, although there are two potentially exciting wing-backs in Sergio Reguilón and Emerson Royal, even if both will be under pressure to improve their defensive performances. Strengthen midfield and finally replace Eriksen Tottenham’s main issue under Nuno was a lack of creativity in midfield: no club averages fewer shots per game in the Premier League and neither Alli nor Son has created a scoring chance. Finding an effective partner for Pierre-Emile Højbjerg in midfield and a creative outlet to finally replace Christian Eriksen, who joined Inter in January 2020, will be two of the most important challenges for Spurs. The Denmark international racked up 62 assists and 51 goals at the club and has not been replaced effectively, with Giovani Lo Celso, Tanguy Ndombele and Alli so far failing to step into his shoes. It will be intriguing to see whether Lo Celso, who has shown glimpses of his ability since arriving from Real Betis a few months before Pochettino’s sacking, can thrive under the new manager and whether there is any role for the other two. Get recruitment right Conte and Tottenham’s managing director of football, Fabio Paratici, enjoyed spectacular success in three seasons together at Juventus between 2011 and 2014 that yielded three Serie A titles and a record 102 points in the manager’s final campaign. Their relationship has been a key factor in attracting the 52-year-old former Italy manager for talks with Spurs and Conte would expect his compatriot to be on his side if it comes to discussing transfer budgets with a notoriously prudent chairman. Tottenham’s net spend over the past five seasons is £94.6m – one of the lowest in the Premier League – but the new manager will surely demand more investment, with several targets earmarked for January and Daniel Levy likely to come under pressure to match his manager’s ambition. Restore Harry Kane’s desire The hangover from a summer of doubt over the England captain’s future seeped into the start of the season and appears still to be affecting Kane. His return of one goal from nine Premier League appearances is partly down to the negative approach under Nuno and a lack of opportunities created by teammates but Tottenham’s star player has looked demotivated at times. In the short term, Kane will relish the opportunity of working with a manager who has made winning trophies a habit. But with less than three years remaining on the 28-year-old’s contract and with Kane having made no secret of his desire to leave for Manchester City, time is against Spurs to persuade Kane that the grass isn’t always greener. Win a trophy The drought that stretches back to 2008 and six permanent managers since Juande Ramos led Spurs to victory over Chelsea in the League Cup is always mentioned when a new face arrives. Coming through a tricky Carabao Cup quarter-final against West Ham in December could be Tottenham’s best chance of a trophy this season after defeat by Manchester City in the 2020-21 final and the club will expect to go further than the fifth round of the FA Cup for the first time since 2018. The new manager’s approach to the Europa Conference League may not be so warm. The new tournament could be viewed as one distraction too many. • This article was amended on 2 November 2021 to remove a reference to José Mourinho being manager of Tottenham for the 2020-21 Carabao Cup final. Interim manager Ryan Mason was in charge after the sacking of Mourinho six days earlier.Earlier today I set you the following “three-dimensional” logic puzzles, a genre thought to have emerged decades ago in Hungary. (For more details about the Hungarian link here’s the story.) The idea is that the solution is mapped out on a three-dimensional grid. 1. Date night Andy, Bill, Chris, and Daniel are out tonight with their dates, Emily, Fran, Gina, and Huong. We have the following information. 1. Andy will go to the opera 2. Bill will spend the evening with Emily, 3. Chris would not want to go out with Gina, 4. Fran will see a movie 5. Gina will attend a workshop. We also know that one couple will see an art exhibit. Who will go out with whom, and what will they do? Solution Here’s what I hoped you would do, which is to draw a 3D grid like the one below with the four alternatives on each axis. It’s as if you are looking at cube directly at a corner, showing three faces. Once you have the grid, you go through the statements, inputting the information where you can. Statement 1 says that Andy goes to the opera. So you put a tick for Andy/opera, which appears on the right face of the cube. We need to assume that each date takes place in one location, so we can mark crosses in the cells Andy/movie, Andy/workshop and Andy/art, since we know he didn’t go to any of those places. Bill, Chris and Daniel don’t go to the opera, so the corresponding cells also gain an X. Statement 2 says that Bill goes with Emily, so the top face will get a tick in the cell for Bill/Emily. If you continue in this way, you will fill up the grid with ticks and crosses. Each face will have four ticks only, and none of these ticks will share the same row or column. Finally, you will reach the conclusion that Andy and Huong attend the opera, Bill and Emily hang out at the art exhibit, Chris and Fran enjoy a movie, and Daniel and Gina go wild at the workshop. 2. Condo conundrum When Mr and Mrs Verona opened the door to their condominium at 11am this morning, they saw a terrible sight: their beautiful home had been burgled. They called the police, who came over immediately. The upcoming investigation revealed the following. 1. There are six condominiums in the building, numbered 1 to 6, the Veronas owned #4. 2. The Veronas left their home at 6pm last night. 3. The night guard of the building, Mr. Safe, works from 6pm till 10am. 4. There were six visitors in the building during last night: Mr A. Bream, Miss F. Green, Mr R. Hill, Dr T. Smith, Miss T. Taylor, and Mr Z. White. They all visited one of the six condominiums, each a different one, some time between 6pm and midnight. Mr. Safe could not recall, however, who visited which place; but he was sure that none of them stayed longer than an hour. Furthermore, they all stayed during different hours; the first one between 6pm and 7pm, the second between 7pm and 8pm, and so on. 5. Mr Bream was at a huge party at the country club. He arrived there at 8pm and stayed till midnight. 6. Miss Green was also at the country club; she arrived at 9pm and left with Mr Bream. 7. Mr Hill could not provide any credible alibi for the night before. 8. Miss Taylor was at her home watering her front yard between 7.45pm and 9pm. Several of her neighbors saw her. 9. Mr White was at the party at the country club. He arrived at 7pm and left at 10pm but, surprisingly, he came back again at 11pm and stayed till after midnight. 10. No one could enter the condominium without going through the lobby where Mr. Safe was stationed. 11. None of Dr. Smith’s, Miss Taylor’s, or Mr White’s fingerprints were found in condo #5. 12. Dr Smith could not have visited condos #1, #3, or #6. 13. Miss Green couldn’t have visited condos #3 and #6. 14. Mr Safe recalled that shortly before 8pm a visitor left either condo #1 or #4. 15. Nobody entered condos #5 and #6 before 7pm. 16. A visitor arrived at 8pm, and entered condo #1, #3, or #6. 17. Nobody visited condos #2, #3, and #6 between 10pm and 11pm. Well, these were all the clues that the police investigation revealed during the first day of the investigation. Can they solve this terrible crime without further information? Solution This time you need to draw a 6 x 6 x 6 cube grid, with the suspects along one axis, and the condos and the time slots along the two other axes. Gradually fill in the cells until you deduce that fishy old Bream did it. I hope you enjoyed the puzzles. I’ll be back in two weeks. Thanks to Béla Bajnok for today’s puzzles. He is is Professor of Mathematics at Gettysburg College in Pennsylvania and director of American Mathematics Competitions. I set a puzzle here every two weeks on a Monday. I’m always on the look-out for great puzzles. If you would like to suggest one, email me. I also give school talks about maths and puzzles (restrictions allowing). If your school is interested please get in touch.If you have more money than sense, spending £850 on a gold-covered steak at a Knightsbridge restaurant is a perfectly reasonable thing to do. If you have more sense than money, then head to Durham or Sunderland. The breathtakingly expensive gold tomahawk steaks sold in the celebrity-packed restaurants of Nusret Gökçe, known as Salt Bae, have attracted many headlines and a fair degree of mockery. For John Stirk, a butcher and steakhouse owner, it prompted exasperation. “I love it when people post pictures of the food they’ve had and give us a good review. What annoys me about the restaurant in London is that there’s a lot more pictures of people posting receipts for how much they’ve paid for the food rather than the quality.” An example that went viral was a £37,023.10 receipt from the recently opened London branch of Bae’s Nusr-Et steakhouse chain. Top of the food bill was the £850 golden tomahawk. Stirk’s team have created their own version of the steak, which has been added to the menu at his restaurants in Belmont, near Durham, and Sunderland. It feeds two and it costs £100. “This time last year people couldn’t afford to feed their kids and now social media is full of receipts for how much they’ve spent at a restaurant,” said Stirk. “It just feels wrong. It doesn’t sit right with me. “For me it was about showing that the gold-covered steak could be done cheaper and could be done better. It doesn’t have to cost the earth.” Stirk said he was not saying £100 was cheap. “It’s not something you go out and have for your tea.” But if it was a special occasion, people might consider it, said Stirk, who has been surprised at how popular the golden steaks have been at his steakhouses. “The reaction has been out of this world. We sold about 30 over the weekend. The sentiment behind it wasn’t about putting a gold, flashy steak on our menu, it was about quality of food.” Stirk, a former contestant on the BBC show Young Butcher of the Year, is not alone in taking on Salt Bae. Gareth Mason, the head chef at Absolute bar and bistro in Westhoughton, Bolton, covered his signature whist pies in 24-carat gold to mock the “ludicrous” Salt Bae steak. Also covered in gold were carrots, chips and sausage and bacon butties. “It’s more Morecambe Bay than Salt Bae,” Mason said. “We’ve got the traditional Lancashire dishes covered in gold for a fraction of the price you’d pay at his restaurant.” As well as Stirk Bae and Morecambe Bae there has been Plant Bae, courtesy of the vegan food company THIS, which set up a food truck outside the Knightsbridge Nusr-Et restaurant handing out free vegan rolls. Andy Shovel, co-founder of THIS, said: “We felt sorry for all these people turning up for a nice meal and then being whacked with a massive bill. You shouldn’t have to sell your kidney or to have delicious food.”Joe Biden has warned that the climate crisis poses “the existential threat to human existence as we know it” and urged other world leaders to embark upon a transformational shift to clean energy, as questions linger over the US president’s ability to deliver this vision at home. Biden, addressing a sparse chamber at crucial UN climate talks that have begun in a frigid and drizzly Glasgow, said that the conference must act as a “kickoff of a decade of ambition and innovation to preserve our shared future”. The president added: “We meet with the eyes of history upon us. Will we do what is necessary? Or will we condemn future generations to suffer?” Biden’s administration is attempting to reassert America’s credibility at the gathering of nearly 200 countries in Scotland, known as Cop26, after Donald Trump’s decision to pull the US from the Paris climate agreement and his dismissal of climate science. Scientists have warned the world is badly off track to avoid disastrous climate change, with leaders of poorer, vulnerable countries using the talks to warn their populations face looming cataclysm. “We will demonstrate to the world the United States is not only back at the table but hopefully leading by the power of our example,” Biden said in his speech, in a tacit acknowledgement of Trump. “I know it hasn’t been the case, which is why my administration is working overtime to show our climate commitment is action not words.” “Right now, we are falling short, there’s no time to hang back, sit on the fence or argue amongst ourselves,” the president continued. “This is the challenge of our collective lifetimes, an existential threat to human existence as we know it and every day we delay the cost of inaction increases.” Biden said that wealthy, major polluters such as the US have an “overwhelming responsibility” to aid smaller countries that are struggling to cope with growing floods, fires and heatwaves spurred by global heating. Before arriving in Glasgow, Biden also took aim at some other leading emitters for not doing enough to prevent global heating surpassing 1.5C. He said these countries are “not only Russia but China (which) basically didn’t show up in terms of commitments to deal with climate change. I found it disappointing myself”. At a side event, Biden also effectively apologized for his predecessor. “I guess I shouldn’t apologize, but I do apologize for the fact that the United States – the last administration – pulled out of the Paris accords and put us sort of behind the eight ball,” Biden said. But climate activists, many of whom gathered outside the Glasgow venue that hosted more than 120 world leaders on Monday, argue that Biden is failing to live up to his own words. The president touted vast proposed climate legislation that would be the “most significant investment to deal with the climate crisis that any advanced nation has made, ever,” but the bill remains stalled in Congress, after being winnowed away by a senator who has extensive ties to fossil fuels. “Biden is at Glasgow empty handed, with nothing but words on paper,” said Varshini Prakash, executive director of Sunrise Movement. “It is humiliating and fails to meet the moment that we’re in.” Biden has also been attacked over his administration’s reluctance to drastically scale back oil and gas drilling in the US. The president’s narrative of “climate leadership” contradicts the daily suffering by communities on the frontline of gas and oil production in the US, activists say. In the first six months of the Biden administration, about 2,500 new oil and gas permits were authorized – a figure Trump’s administration took a year to reach. Speakers outside Cop26 on Monday – only 23 civil society observers were allowed in to hear the leaders’ speeches – included Black and Indigenous leaders whose communities are on the frontline of fossil fuel extraction impacts, including air pollution and contaminated drinking water and land across the US. Tom Goldtooth, Native American leader from the Indigenous Environmental Network, said: “We’re here as the original people of the US to denounce the polluters conference – it’s not a climate conference – it’s been taken over by corporate interests. If we Indigenous people don’t come we’ll be on the menu. We’re here to defend our people, we want to live.” Biden’s speech came shortly after an official opening of Cop26 that acknowledged the growing anguish over the escalating, and largely unchecked, climate crisis. Boris Johnson, the British prime minister, said “the people who will judge us are children not yet born”, adding “if we fail they will not forgive us”. Antonio Guterres, the secretary general of the UN, warned that “we are digging our own graves” due to the failure to dramatically cut planet-heating emissions.The value of a cryptocurrency inspired by the popular Netflix series Squid Game collapsed on Monday less than two weeks after investors could start buying tokens. After jumping more than 310,000% in value as of Sunday night, Squid lost all its value after Twitter flagged the cryptocurrency’s account and temporarily restricted it due to “suspicious activity”. Right before its collapse, the token’s value had spiked to $2,856. The token’s website and social accounts have disappeared, along with a white paper describing Squid. The token was made available for purchase on 20 October with the idea that the cryptocurrency would be a pay-to-play token to play an online game, inspired by Squid Game, the hit series in which heavily indebted people play deadly versions of children’s games to win cash. The game was set to launch in November and its promoters said winners would be rewarded with more Squid tokens. But even as the cryptocurrency’s price spiked in value last week, many noted that the token could be fraudulent. Investors were having trouble selling their tokens and the cryptocurrency’s white paper was laden with grammatical errors, according to multiple reports. The creators of the cryptocurrency could have made off with as much as $2.1m after the token’s crash, according to Gizmodo. CoinMarketCap, a cryptocurrency price-tracking website, warned potential buyers before the crash of the cryptocurrency’s possibly fraudulent nature, telling investors to “please do your own due diligence and exercise caution while trading” and warning them that investors were having trouble selling their tokens. An anonymous Squid investor told CoinMarketCap, “I lost all of what I had in this project” after investing $5,000 into the cryptocurrency. Experts have warned investors to be careful when considering purchasing “meme” cryptocurrencies based on cultural phenomena, even if it appears the currency is doing well on the market. “Remarkably, many such coins rapidly catch investors’ fancy, leading to wildly inflated valuations,” Cornell University economist Eswar Prasad told the BBC. “Naïve retail investors who get caught up in such speculative frenzies face the risk of substantial losses.”Pamela Rose, who has died aged 103, landed her first significant role as an actor on the London stage in 1941, under her maiden name, Pamela Gibson, but it would be another 60 years before she made her West End debut. Instead she took her language skills to the secret wartime codebreaking centre at Bletchley Park in Buckinghamshire, where she ran Naval Hut 4’s indexing section. Later, she had little truck with the media glare Bletchley attracted: “It was something of a disappointment to a young woman and definitely a cushy berth”, but conceded that “a common enemy draws people together like nothing else”. As part of the forces entertainment programme Ensa, Pamela had begun the second world war in a reserved occupation, acting in Bournemouth and then at the Prince of Wales theatre in Birmingham. She was frustrated by Ensa’s below par productions, so it was welcome news that she had been offered her first West End role in Watch on the Rhine. In the meantime came an approach through a family friend: “I know you are doing splendid work entertaining the troops but there is a place where they want girls exactly like you. Here’s the address …” Part of the social network through which Bletchley Park recruited its cohort of civilian women and with good German, Pamela impressed her interviewer, Frank Birch, a thespian-academic working in naval intelligence. Torn between the West End and the prospect of unspecified secret war work she sought Birch’s advice. His answer was unequivocal: “The stage can wait, the war can’t.” Pamela thought at first that “I was going to be dropped from an aeroplane into Germany. Goodness knows my German wasn’t really good enough for that but one has exalted ideas when one is young.” Her arrival at Bletchley Park was an anticlimax for the 24-year-old, but her utility was not in question. A linguist in the indexing section of Naval Hut 4, she was the recipient of decoded German messages from which all significant information had to be recorded and indexed. It was assiduous work that required a good memory. “Requests for the latest movements of a German battleship had to be accessed and cross-referenced with all other relevant information.” Pamela was quickly promoted to index leader of this unprecedented data system (pre-microchip and housed on cards) and given the task of managing a clutch of former debutantes who included the wild Jean Campbell-Harris, later Lady Trumpington. She attended section head meetings and was privy to a level of knowledge about the code-breaking nexus that most women were not. Among her female peers, many of whom were just out of school, she made an impression. One Bletchley recruit, Rozanne Colchester, remembered a woman on “the verge of being a rebel. She was more than stylish, she had her own style. And she was terribly brainy, creative and very quick at picking up languages.” Pamela was born in London into a family in which musical performance was the governing force. Her father, Thornley Gibson, was an opera singer and her mother, Dolly (nee Coit), was also passionate about music. Growing up Pamela recalled PWE – “pleasant Wednesday evenings” – when her parents orchestrated musical gatherings on gold chairs and she and her brother were occasionally expected to perform. She was sent off to boarding school aged six, at Broadstairs preparatory school, then Westonbirt school for girls, in Gloucestershire, and elocution lessons reinforced her ambition to become an actor. A self-reliant child, she told herself: “Whatever happens I have always got me. I remember thinking that was quite a comfort.” A reluctant debutante, Pamela left the 1936 season early to cycle to France, where the Moulin Rouge singer Yvette Guilbert taught her French and cabaret performance. Staying in Munich a year later to hone her German, with characteristic candour she later said: “I’m ashamed to say I don’t think I was aware of the ghastly things that were going on. I was like so many young people, preoccupied with myself. I wanted to get back to London and act.” She enrolled on a Webber Douglas course and did just that, and even at Bletchley Park channelled her acting into theatrical revues. “I directed Candida, by George Bernard Shaw. I didn’t want anything too experimental; we had to bear in mind the ability of the actors.” She might have returned to the stage after the war but meeting Wing Commander Jim Rose at the Park changed that. They married in 1946. After the war, Jim became a journalist and founded the International Press Institute in the 1950s. Pamela recalled that he told her: “‘If you go back on the stage you’ll be going out to work just as I am coming in’ so I gave up acting. I wanted to spend my life with Jim and I thought you can’t have everything. I doubt I would’ve thought like that now but one is conditioned by the way others think and I was a product of my time.” She ran a mentoring scheme for African-Caribbean children in a London comprehensive school, was vice-chair of the NSPCC and served as chair of the Stroke Association. Jim died in 1999, and she finally appeared on the West End stage later that year, in Lady Windermere’s Fan. “It was terrifying but great fun and it helped subdue the grief.” I met her while writing The Bletchley Girls (2015) and that year she appeared as a castaway on Radio 4’s Desert Island Discs, aged 97. She attributed her long life to “luck, optimism and a great belief in the human spirit”. Pamela is survived by her daughter, Harriet, and son, Alan, five grandchildren, Chloe, Charlotte, Matthew, Clare and Hannah, and six great-grandchildren. • Pamela Rose, wartime indexer and actor, born 29 November 1917; died 17 October 2021The effort to combat toxic masculinity in the US has led men to consume more pornography and play more video games, the Missouri senator Josh Hawley claimed in a speech to a group of Republicans. Speaking at the National Conservatism Conference in Orlando, Florida, Hawley addressed the issue of “manhood”, which he said was under attack, and called for men to return to traditional masculine roles. The Donald Trump supporter who notoriously raised a fist in support of a mob outside the US Capitol on 6 January appeared to echo talking points made by the likes of the Proud Boys, a far-right group that opposes feminism and believes men are under attack from liberal elites. “Can we be surprised that after years of being told that they are the problem, that their manhood is the problem, more and more men are withdrawing into the enclave of idleness and pornography and video games?” Hawley said. “While the left may celebrate this decline of men, I for one cannot join them. No one should.” Hawley, 41, did not cite sources for his belief that men were watching pornography more frequently. Nonetheless, on Monday his speech was republished by the Federalist, a rightwing outlet. In the address, Hawley said he wanted to discuss “the left’s attempt to give us a world beyond men”. “The left want to define traditional masculinity as toxic,” he said. “They want to define the traditional masculine virtues – things like courage, and independence, and assertiveness – as a danger to society.” Hawley is the son of a banker who attended private school before studying at Stanford and Yale. He clerked for the supreme court’s chief justice, John Roberts, and later became a law professor. Given his background, he has repeatedly raised eyebrows for railing against elites. Hawley’s apparent claim to speak for all men, in the name of a return to a vaguely defined masculinity of old, swiftly became a new subject of ridicule on Twitter. Hawley, who was a staunch defender of Brett Kavanaugh when he was accused of sexual assault during his supreme court nomination hearings in 2018, claimed: “Boys are increasingly treated like an illness in search of a cure.” “Hollywood delivers the toxic masculinity theme ad nauseum in television and film,” he said, going on to link traditional masculinity as “vital to self-government”. “Observers from the ancient Romans to our forefathers identified the manly virtues as indispensable for political liberty,” Hawley said. As well as pornography, Hawley tied the supposed decline in masculinity to issues including unemployment, people marrying at a later age and the preservation of liberty. Hawley said: “For centuries, lovers of liberty have praised these qualities as the highest standard of manhood. That’s not to say that women don’t possess them. But it is to say that these virtues are the bright side of the aggression and competitiveness and independence that psychologists, no less than philosophers, have long observed in men. “Assertiveness and independence are strengths when used to protect and empower others.” Hawley offered few solutions to the problems he claimed to present. On Monday, he used Twitter to promote his new podcast, co-hosted with his wife. “In the second episode of This is Living, Josh and Erin Hawley share the story of how they met, what drew them to each other, and how two people so different decided to get married,” a blurb for the podcast reads. The Hawleys met while studying law at Yale. Erin Hawley also clerked for Roberts and became a law professor.India will meet a target of net zero emissions by 2070, the country’s prime minister has told the Cop26 global climate summit. Speaking at the world leaders’ summit at the UN conference in Glasgow, Narendra Modi made five key pledges for how India would decarbonise over the next few decades. India, a developing country of more than 1.3 billion people, is the world’s third largest emitter of carbon dioxide after the US and China. India was one of the last remaining major economies that had held out on a net zero commitment, despite months of pressure from the US, and Modi’s announcement marked one of the most significant moments of the summit’s opening day. Modi also made significant shorter-term commitments, promising to have 50% of India’s power generated by renewable energy by 2030, increase its non-fossil energy capacity to 500GW by 2030 and reduce its projected carbon emissions by 1bn tonnes between now and 2030. By 2030, he also committed to a 45% reduction in the carbon intensity of the economy. While the 2070 net zero target falls behind the 2050 commitment made by the US and Europe and the 2060 commitment made by China and Saudi Arabia, it is in line with what many climate experts have modelled as the most feasible scenario for India to achieve net zero. A recent report released by the Delhi-based thinktank the Council on Energy, Environment and Water (CEEW) put forward 2070 to 2080 as India’s most realistic roadmap for achieving carbon neutrality. “India has clearly put the ball in the court of the developed world,” said Arunabha Ghosh, the chief executive of CEEW. “This is real climate action.” Unlike countries in the west, and even China, India is decades away from its peak in terms of economic growth and energy consumption, and India’s energy demand is expected to grow faster than any other country over the next few years. Its population is also expected to overtake that of China to make it the largest in the world. Currently, 70% of all power in India is generated by coal, and while it is one of the cheapest producers of solar energy in the world, there is still not the technology available to integrate it into the energy grid on a large scale. Advancements in hydrogen technology and storage will also be needed to help India’s industrial sector wean itself off coal, which is unlikely to happen until around 2040, according to experts. India is already bearing the harsh consequences of climate breakdown. Millions across the country are exposed to severe heat, water shortages, extreme weather events such as flooding and coastal erosion, which have all been increasing in recent years. In the build-up to the conference, Indian officials had appeared to rebuff calls to commit to net zero, emphasising instead the need for climate funding and climate justice for developing countries, who historically have emitted far less greenhouses gas than countries such as the US but are now bearing the economic costs that come with net zero commitments. The commitments drew praise from the eminent climate ecologist Nicholas Stern, who said: “This was a very significant moment for the summit. [The action] might mean that India’s annual emissions of greenhouse gases could peak by 2030. This demonstrates real leadership from a country whose emissions per capita are about one-third of the global average. The rich world must respond [and] deliver a strong increase in international climate finance.” In his speech, Modi called out previous commitments of climate finance as “hollow” and demanded developed countries make $1tn available as climate finance to developing countries “as soon as possible today”. Modi told his fellow world leaders: “I am sure that the decisions taken in Glasgow will safeguard the future of generations to come and give them a safe and prosperous life.” He apologised for running over his allotted speech time but said he believed it was his “duty to raise my voice for developing countries”.Years and years went by when no one in a novel had a job, and almost no one in a mainstream American sitcom or dramedy had money worries. Roseanne wasn’t earning enough but ever since that show was canned in 1997, people have had cute scrapes where they lost their job or their credit card – but grinding, day-to-day poverty, unable to make ends meet or imagine a future in which you would ever be able to? That wasn’t what sitcoms were about. Instead, we’d take an office (The Office), or a police precinct (Brooklyn Nine-Nine), or a family (Modern Family), or a dojo (Cobra Kai – and yes, before you ask, I do watch a lot of telly), and some people would be richer than others, and some would make bad choices, and others would get into hilarious pickles, but one convention was always observed: nobody was struggling, or if they were, it was because they were on drugs. Then came Superstore, created by Justin Spitzer, one of the writers on the American Office. It’s an ensemble piece, about workers on the minimum wage vying to see who can avoid emptying the rat traps and cleaning the unaccountably ubiquitous aisle-vomit in a hangar-scale US supermarket, as hilarious chaos ensues. I didn’t think I could take it at first – too many primary colours, too heartwarming, too many unlikely romantic pairings. But obviously I could take it, because TV is the only way my kids will ever remain proximal to me for any length of time, because it is a context in which I won’t always be talking. So I sat noncommittally through 10 episodes, to be completely caught off-guard by the season finale. What’s the big answer to the gnawing questions all these personal interactions have thrown up? Join a union. The staff spontaneously unionise, and then the union is busted at the start of season two. It’s all pretty slapstick and reality has remained immutable, yet you can’t help but notice: this show just made a direct pitch for unionisation. And even while it failed, the message was emphatically not: “That was all a bit silly, wasn’t it, ladies and gentlemen?” The show has now cycled through a number of pressing and impossible questions: how do you survive if you’re an undocumented migrant, it’s illegal to employ you, but you still need to eat? What happens if you drop out of college, owing $200,000, and every day you’re alive, you rack up more debt than you earn? If you injure yourself and can’t afford medical attention, and then you have a long-term suppurating wound the length of one leg, how does that smell? If you live in one of the few societies on earth with no maternity leave entitlement, and yet have the brass neck to have a baby, do you seriously have to turn up to work two days later? If you were ever wondering what it would look like if Ken Loach directed Friends, it’s this. But I never was wondering that, because why would you? Meanwhile, in the mini-series Maid – an adaptation of a book subtitled Hard Work, Low Pay and a Mother’s Will to Survive – the lead character’s wages and outgoings flash up on screen throughout the episode to create the constant dread of a mortal enemy, but the big bad is just poverty. It’s not as though any of this is news – nobody needed Netflix to alert them to wage stagnation. It’s more that, once TV starts to confront reality, it’s hard to see subsequent shows returning to the prelapsarian state of culture where the hardest financial decision a character had to make was whether to buy shoes or go to Hawaii. Pablo Iglesias, who founded the Spanish leftwing upstart party Podemos, once said the key to success for political movements was “to achieve a connection between the reality you have diagnosed and what the majority actually feels”. Podemos’s own success is a question for another time, but what happens when telly starts to achieve that connection? What will that success look like? Zoe Williams is a Guardian columnistThomas Tuchel wants us to think differently. The statistic shows that half Chelsea’s 26 goals in the Premier League and Champions League have come from defenders this season, but Tuchel has an alternative way of viewing the numbers after seeing Reece James rumble up the right flank to score two cracking goals during Saturday’s 3-0 victory at Newcastle. According to the German, the trend is a consequence of the positional freedom he has given to his wing-backs. Tuchel has even come to see Marcos Alonso, Ben Chilwell and James as midfielders rather than defenders and, in any case, it is hardly as if the European champions expected a large portion of their goals to come from the back after spending £97.5m on Romelu Lukaku in the summer. “If you want to reach the highest level in any competition you need consistent goalscoring threat from your strikers,” Tuchel said, speaking as he prepared for Chelsea’s visit to Malmö in the Champions League on Tuesday night. “We hope we can have our strikers at the end of the season on top of the list.” It is a regular refrain from Tuchel, who knew something had to change after Jorginho finished last season as Chelsea’s top scorer in the Premier League, with seven goals. He thought an elite forward was required if Chelsea were going to challenge for the title, and signing Lukaku, who had enjoyed two prolific campaigns for Internazionale, was supposed to be the final piece in the jigsaw. However it has not quite clicked yet for the Belgian, who had four goals from 11 appearances before twisting an ankle during last month’s 4-0 win over Malmö at Stamford Bridge. The Belgian will not return until after the international break and, to complicate matters, the hamstrung Timo Werner and the unwell Mason Mount will also be absent against the Swedish champions. At least Christian Pulisic has travelled after a persistent ankle problem. The American winger is a threat in the box and his return is a boost for Tuchel, who started with Kai Havertz, Callum Hudson-Odoi and Hakim Ziyech in attack against Newcastle. Yet it is not just about the forwards. Chelsea have goals from all over the pitch. James has four, Chilwell has three and Trevoh Chalobah has two. Alonso, Andreas Christensen, Antonio Rüdiger and Thiago Silva have one each. This is a versatile team, notable for Rüdiger’s runs from centre-back, and Tuchel is delighted when he sees Chilwell and James threatening on the flanks. “The statistic would look a bit different if you maybe interpret the wing-backs more as midfielders,” said the manager, who is without N’Golo Kanté because of muscle tightness. “If you play in a back three it is not really a full-back position and there are more midfield positions. “I would not call them defenders. Although they have to defend in some moments they are more free to attack as they have a shorter distance to goal than they would do as a full-back. It is necessary that they are included and that we bring them to the box at the end of our attacks to increase the goal threat. I am happy when we create chances and when we have five or six players in the box to be dangerous.” All the same Chelsea, second in Group H with six points from three games, need more from their forwards. Havertz and Ziyech have to become more consistent and Tuchel wants Hudson-Odoi to push on after three consecutive starts. “It’s all about performance and this is what Callum shows at the moment,” he said. “It’s important he shows consistency, stays hungry and keeps progressing.”French Connection shareholders have backed the £29m takeover of the fashion brand led by a Newcastle-based businessman, putting the company back into private hands for the first time since 1983. The new owners are expected to take over on 8 November. The 75-year-old chair and chief executive, Stephen Marks, who co-founded the chain in 1972 and owns nearly 42% of the company, is to receive about £12m for his stake in the business. Apinder Singh Ghura, who in February bought a 25% stake in French Connection from Mike Ashley’s Frasers Group, the owner of Sports Direct, teamed up to buy out the brand with a Manchester-based business partner, Amarjit Singh Grewal, and KJR Brothers, which is led by Rafiq Patel, a textile businessman. Ghura spent years in the clothing industry before shifting to other investments including property and care homes. The French Connection deal comes after the three acquired the Bench fashion brand in March via a group called Wraith Holdings International, one of whose directors is the former Sports Direct executive Peter Wood. Wood also co-owns a group called Apparel Brands with Grewal, which holds distribution rights for revival brands including Bench as well as the 1980s casuals label Farah, and Dunlop, the tennis shoe brand that was once owned by Sports Direct. The takeover deal requires final court approval before shares are expected to cease trading on 5 November. Ghura said: “We are delighted with the strong support for the recommended acquisition shown in this morning’s shareholder vote. We look forward to working with French Connection’s management to execute and implement our strategic plans to facilitate the future growth and profitability for the business. “We must also pay tribute to French Connection founder, Stephen Marks, for his support during the acquisition process.” The consortium face a battle to revive French Connection after years of problems for the brand, which was once highly sought after because of its controversial FCUK branding that launched in the 1990s and ran until the mid-00s. The group has not made a pre-tax profit since 2012 and has suffered from high street pandemic lockdowns. Last month the Financial Reporting Council, an accountancy watchdog, said it was investigating the audit of French Connection’s accounts for the year to January 2020 by the accountancy firm Mazars. French Connection owns the Great Plains and You Must Create (YMC) brands, and operates 67 stores and concessions in the UK. The group, which has 780 staff, operates in 161 locations overseas under franchises and licences.The archbishop of Canterbury, Justin Welby, has apologised for likening the threat posed by the climate crisis to the Nazis, while saying the current generation of political leaders will be “cursed” in history if they fail at the Cop26 summit. Interviewed by the BBC at the climate change gathering in Glasgow, Welby said the stakes at Cop were so high that for the leaders attending, “in two generations’ time they will be remembered for this fortnight, and probably this fortnight alone”. He said: “They could have been brilliant in everything else they’ve done, and they will be cursed if they don’t get this right. They could have been rubbish at everything else they’ve done. But if they get this right, the children of today will rise up and bless them in 50 years.” Questioned about the use of the word “cursed”, Welby – who was an oil industry executive before entering the church – replied: “It was consciously a strong word. It will be: people will speak of them in far stronger terms than we speak today of the politicians of the 30s, of the politicians who ignored what was happening in Nazi Germany, because this will kill people all around the world for generations, and we will have no means of averting it.” Asked if he was arguing that a failure to tackle the climate crisis would be worse than not stopping genocide, Welby said: “It will allow a genocide on an infinitely greater scale. I’m not sure there’s grades of genocide, but there’s width of genocide, and this will be genocide indirectly, by negligence, recklessness, that will in the end come back to us or to our children and grandchildren.” But in a subsequent tweet, Welby wrote: “I unequivocally apologise for the words I used when trying to emphasise the gravity of the situation facing us at Cop26. It’s never right to make comparisons with the atrocities brought by the Nazis, and I’m sorry for the offence caused to Jews by these words.” In the interview, Welby was asked what sort of commitments he was seeking from the leaders at Cop26, with the archbishop saying that one key thing was providing sufficient money for developing nations. “All moral thinking starts with the idea that if you’re going to do the right thing, it needs action: money,” he said. “Are they going to reach the amounts of money committed – the $100bn a year – which is a fraction of what was paid out during the great banking crisis, in 2008-9 – are they going to reach the amount of money that actually says we’re serious about this?”Boris Johnson is flying back from the Cop26 climate conference on a private plane rather than the train after spending two days warning world leaders to reduce their emissions. The prime minister left himself open to accusations of hypocrisy after urging other countries to do everything possible to pledge lower emissions and warning that they would be judged by their children if they fail to act. Johnson flew into Cop26 in Glasgow from Rome after attending the G20 of world leaders. But instead of getting the train, which takes about four and a half hours, he has decided to take a short internal flight from Glasgow to London. Earlier, he told a roundtable of leaders of developing nations: “When it comes to tackling climate change, words without action, without deeds are absolutely pointless.” The prime minister is one of hundreds of world leaders and businesspeople who have chartered planes to attend the conference aimed at limiting global temperature rises to less than 1.5C. Jeff Bezos, the boss of Amazon, was one of those who flew in to Scotland for the conference. Johnson’s spokesperson defended the move, saying the plane ran partly on “sustainable aviation fuel” and emitted about half the emissions of other aircraft. The plane will still cause far more emissions than a trip by train. “It’s important the PM is able to move around the country. We have obviously faced significant time constraints,” Johnson’s official spokesperson said. The plane – an Airbus A321 – appears to have been leased from a company called Titan Airways, while the prime minister’s usual Voyager is being serviced. His spokesperson said: “The plane is one of the most carbon-efficient planes of its size in the world. It produces 50% less CO2 emissions than, for example, the larger Voyager plane.” Prince Charles also flew from Rome to Glasgow on a private plane separately from the prime minister. It also used sustainable aviation fuel – a mixture of conventional fuel and biofuel.When the UK landed the Cop26 presidency two years ago, Boris Johnson sensed a huge opportunity to showcase the UK on the world stage. The conference fit his post-Brexit vision of a “global Britain”, free of the EU and still a player on the world stage. He believed “Glasgow” would be remembered as a historic gathering, like the previous landmark climate summits in Kyoto and Paris. As recently as the end of September, Johnson told the UN general assembly in New York that the Glasgow summit should be a “turning point”. But then a week ago he began to scale down expectations, admitting success was “touch and go”. Johnson’s characteristic optimism blinded him to the uphill struggle he still faces. Previous landmark Cops succeeded through strong leadership, top-level political engagement and the hard graft of diplomacy over fine detail. Glasgow can still be a success, but not on the basis of the sort of empty sloganeering that brought us global Britain. Johnson is by nature a proponent of big promises. Initially, it was said, he had toyed with the idea of going further than Paris by beefing up its 1.5C wording. This would be against the wishes of his Cop26 president, Alok Sharma, the former business secretary, who was said to have expressed frustration at Johnson’s overpromising. Johnson is also accused of not engaging fully with Cop26 until relatively late in the day – in contrast to Laurent Fabius, the former French prime minister who chaired the Paris conference, and Gordon Brown, the UK prime minister who travelled the world before hosting a successful London summit during the financial crisis. Sharma himself was not Johnson’s choice for the role; he had previously approached David Cameron and William Hague. Johnson’s holiday in Spain last month also came at a critical moment in the run-up to Glasgow and raised eyebrows in Whitehall. Senior UK officials insist progress had already been made. Only 30% of the world economy had committed to net zero greenhouse gas emissions by the middle of the century, when the UK took over the rotating Cop presidency, a figure that has risen to 80%. However, the countries signed up to the 1.5C limit account for about 65% of global GDP, leaving a big gap to bridge. Crucially, the UN’s assessment of the nationally determined contributions offered by individual nations shows that they still leave global temperatures on track to rise by 2.7C. Johnson’s critics argue he has been too focused on the 2050 target when he should have put more energy into securing the halving of emissions required by 2030; they are on course to fall by only 7.5%, according to the UN. Some insiders see this as an example of his looking at the big picture rather than mastering the detail. He has also been stymied by poor relations with other world leaders, something that doesn’t bode well for the negotiations in the coming weeks. Brexit has left a legacy of trust issues. Emmanuel Macron, the French president, has warned that the dispute with the UK over fishing rights is a test of Johnson’s “credibility” on the world stage. In London, this was seen as deliberately timed to embarrass Johnson as he prepared to host Cop26. “He is trying to rain on our parade,” one Tory MP claimed. And despite the need to win the trust of the poorest countries, the UK’s Cop presidency has been undermined by the government’s controversial decision to trim £4bn a year from overseas aid in the middle of a pandemic. “It has fuelled the trust problem,” one Whitehall source told me. Another insider admitted: “It’s a bad advert for global Britain.” Rishi Sunak did not use any of the £50bn at his disposal in last week’s budget to reverse the cut before 2024-25. However, all is not lost for Johnson. His government’s ambitious strategy to achieve net zero emissions by 2050 has passed the credibility test and given him the clout needed to progress-chase at Cop26. In his opening speech this morning, he indulged his flair for the dramatic, warning of a James Bond-like Doomsday Clock set at “one minute to midnight”, and that “aspirations” must now be matched by “action”. He will point to movement by the rich nations towards their promise to provide $100bn a year to help poor countries cope with climate breakdown, although it will arrive three years late, in 2023. He also expressed hope the summit will agree a landmark deal to halt global deforestation by 2030 and reduce methane emissions by a third by 2030. Not the blockbuster announcements of Paris or Kyoto, but real progress on important details left unfinished by previous summits. This progress depends on many factors coming together. Without more movement by China, the largest emitter of greenhouse gases, overall momentum will stall. “India is unlikely to jump unless China does,” said one UK official. The outcome in Glasgow might depend on the last-minute efforts of John Kerry, the US climate envoy, to extract concessions from China. When Johnson spoke to President Xi Jinping on Friday, he rebuffed the prime minister’s call for China to bring forward its emissions peak from 2030 to 2025. Johnson hopes to be able to argue this summit kept the 1.5C target alive, even while admitting much more needs to be done over the next few years to achieve it. This Cop is one where the big announcements of previous conferences need to be backed up by the concrete details and deals needed to achieve them. This is not really Johnson’s style. But, were he to pull it off, it would be a big achievement for climate politics and a signal that Britain is a responsible global player. One idea being toyed with by the UK government is for world leaders to review progress against targets more frequently, perhaps every year or two years, to ensure more action is taken in the current “decisive decade”. Cop26 might prove a stepping stone, but the word “Glasgow” is unlikely to be remembered as the triumph for global Britain Johnson hoped for in the heady days of 2019. Mujtaba Rahman is the managing director for Europe at Eurasia Group, a political risk research and consulting firmThe Treasury committee hearing has ended so that’s all from me for today. Thanks for reading and commenting. Here’s a summary of the key events covered today: The chancellor, Rishi Sunak, was grilled on the budget by MPs on the Commons Treasury committee. He defended the decision to raise taxes as making a “progressive” improvement to people’s quality of life and essential to fix the problems caused by the pandemic. However, he insisted he would bring down taxes in future. The European Union called a meeting involving officials from the UK, France, Jersey and Guernsey as the fishing row escalated. There were fears of Brexit violence in Northern Ireland after armed and masked men hijacked a bus and set it on fire, citing the protocol as their reason. The Conservative party readmitted MP Rob Roberts after he was expelled for sexually harassing a staff member. Follow our Covid blog here: The DUP will hold back on its threat to collapse Stormont over the Northern Ireland protocol for a few more weeks to enable negotiations between the UK and EU to continue, the party leader, Jeffrey Donaldson, has said. PA reports: Donaldson faced questions at to why he has not followed through on his ultimatum to withdraw ministers from Stormont at the start of November – thus collapsing powersharing – if major changes to the contentious Irish Sea trading arrangements had not been secured by that date. There have been suggestions the hijacking and burning of a bus in a loyalist area of Newtownards, Co Down, on Monday morning was timed to mark the DUP’s missed deadline. Condemning the “paramilitary elements” behind the attack, Sir Jeffrey insisted they would not influence his political strategy to remove the Irish Sea border. He said it would be “churlish” to pull down Stormont at this point, claiming the UK government was making progress in efforts to slash the red tape burden imposed by the protocol. His comments come as negotiations between the EU and UK remain deadlocked. Asked what levelling up means to him, Sunak said: “Levelling up is meant to be the golden thread that runs through the entire SR [spending review].” The two areas he is most focused on are “pride in place”, in which people feel that their communities are becoming a “richer, nicer place to live in” through investment in culture and sports, as well as access to opportunity regardless of wherever you grow up. “That will manifest itself in different ways” depending on where you live, he said. More from PA on today’s Treasury committee: Defending the scrapping of the triple lock on state pensions, Sunak said there was “lots of other support for pensioners that comes through the system”. The chancellor pointed to winter fuel payments and free prescriptions as examples, and he said: “There’s lots of other support for pensioners separate to the state pension and, actually, pensions relative to earnings in this country are the highest they’ve been in over 30 years.” He said that reducing the pension triple lock to a double lock for a year from 2022-23 was “a reasonable and fair thing to do in the circumstances”. Asked why the government was not acting to reduce train ticket fares to encourage more people to choose rail travel, Sunak said the government was currently subsidising it with “billions of pounds” to reflect the fact that “not that many people are travelling on it compared to pre-coronavirus”. Asked about why he had cut passenger duty on flights, Sunak said he had also created a new rate for ultra-long haul flights so that these travellers pay more. He said: “If you look at the impact of those two things from a carbon emissions point of view they probably offset each other.” He added that the government was putting investment into sustainable fuel research. Asked about OBR forecasts showing that trade with EU is 15% lower than it was pre-pandemic, equating to a 4% reduction in productivity, Sunak said: “Our trading relationship with the EU has changed post-Brexit, we have a free trade agreement but it’s not exactly the same as before and that means trade patterns take some time to adjust.” But he added: “I think the trajectory is on an upward flow.” More from PA on the Treasury committee: Sunak said it was “slightly unfair” to focus on taxpayers’ cash lost to fraud during the emergency rollout of schemes during the coronavirus pandemic. Labour’s Angela Eagle raised concerns about the £37bn spent on the test-and-trace scheme and the possible £27bn lost to fraud under Covid support schemes. Sunak responded: “People should expect and demand their money is spent properly. “I do think it’s slightly unfair to focus on Covid schemes that were put in place at a time of national crisis at enormous speed. “On the Covid side, that is what it is, and I said it at the time when you’re in a crisis you’re going to end up casting the net wider than you would in peacetime.” But “now we’re through that”, he added: “The state is taking a lot of money from people, we’ve talked about the tax rate being high, we’ve talked about the state doing a lot, it is absolutely right that that money gets spent really well.” The European Commission has called a meeting involving officials from the UK, France, Jersey and Guernsey as Emmanuel Macron’s deadline for action to resolve the dispute looms, PA reports. A spokesman said: “A meeting, convened by the commission, is taking place this afternoon bringing together senior officials from the commission, France, the UK, as well as from Jersey and Guernsey, to allow for a swift solution on the outstanding issues.” Downing Street said the talks were part of the “regular, technical, ongoing engagement”. “We will continue to work with them to grant licences where the evidence and data can be presented to back up the application for a licence,” a No 10 spokesman said. Asked whether he raised taxes to cut them shortly before the next general election, Sunak said: “The last thing I would do is voluntarily raise taxes.” Instead he said this had been to fix the damage caused by Covid, solve the NHS backlog and fund “landmark reforms” to social care. More from PA on the committe: Sunak has insisted he will aim to bring taxes down in future. He said: “That’s very much my goal, my mission, over the remainder of this Parliament, and we took a step in that direction at budget.” After giving the example of the new tapering rules for Universal Credit, Labour MP Siobhan McDonagh interrupted to say: “That’s not a tax cut, that’s a benefit change.” Sunak said it was a “combined approach” but McDonagh said: “That really isn’t a tax cut. You’re just desperate to find a tax cut. “We’re sitting in the Margaret Thatcher room and you hope to emulate her. But the British Prime Minister and the British Tory government that you are most emulating at the moment is Ted Heath’s, low growth and therefore high tax. Is that not the case?” Sunak replied: “Actually, we’re forecast this year to grow at, well, historically very high rates as we recover from the pandemic.” A VAT cut on energy to help ease the pressure of increased costs on households would “not be a sustainable thing to do”, Sunak said. “It means the bulk of that very expensive tax cut would go to the wealthy,” he said He said the £500m household support fund for the most vulnerable families was “a lot better use of cash”. Downing Street said “robust” measures were in place should the French authorities carry out their threats over the fishing dispute. PA reported a No 10 spokesman as telling reporters: “As you would expect, we have robust contingency plans in place. I’m not going to get into the detail of them here. “It is the French that made these threats and we are continuing to call for them to step back from those threats.” The spokesman said it was down to the French whether they carried out their threats in the row over post-Brexit fishing rights. He said: “It is entirely up to France if they choose to go ahead with the threats they have set out. We continue to hope that they step away from the threats they have made.” The spokesman said meetings were continuing with the French and with authorities in Jersey and Guernsey on the issuing of individual licences. “We are happy to continue with the work to assist them getting the evidence that is needed as they seek more licences,” the spokesman said. More on the treasury committee from PA: Other organisations and governmental departments are interested in moving to the Treasury’s northern hub in Darlington, the chancellor has said. Rishi Sunak told the Commons Treasury committee his department was set to be “joined by several other departments ... either related to government or other bits of government”. But he said the names of the organisations were not public yet. The report also cites Sunak as acknowledging that hitting the targets in his new fiscal rules would be a challenge but saying it was “better than a cat in hell’s chance”. Commons Treasury committee chair Mel Stride said the Office for Budget Responsibility (OBR) charts put Mr Sunak’s fiscal headroom looking “rather pale by comparison” to his predecessors. Stride said that while the OBR “didn’t say not a cat in hell’s chance” of hitting his targets, it does appear there is a “strong risk those targets will not be met”. The committee heard OBR modelling put the likelihood of meeting the targets as being 55-60%. “Which I probably describe as better than a cat in hell’s chance, but the numbers are the numbers,” Sunak added. The education secretary, Nadhim Zahawi, has pledged to look at lengthening the school day. PA reports that Nadhim Zahawi told MPs there were some “excellent examples” that he would examine, before he urged all schools to ensure they moved to the average school day length of 6.5 hours. It has been suggested an extension to the school day will help children prosper after the coronavirus pandemic and catch up on lost learning. Asked about tax increases as a result of the budget eroding people’s living standards, Sunak said “quality of life is influenced by the quality of public services”. He added that the government had taken a “high progressive approach” in which “those on lowest income are benefiting disproportionately more than others”. Asked about how the government plans to address stagnating real wages, which are being further eroded by increases in inflation, Sunak said the government’s focus was on improving those at the “lower end of the spectrum” since in previous years “a lot of wage growth wasn’t evenly shared”. However, he acknowledged: “Wages more generally since financial crisis here and in other countries it’s been a struggle to reach the growth rates we saw previously.” He said the government’s view was that the best way to address this was to improve opportunities for skills and retraining, including those outlined in the budget. Asked whether the social care plans went far enough given the increasing level of demand, Sunak said the £1.6bn that had been allocated represented “historically very high level of social care spend in general”, describing the reforms as “landmark”. To address recruitment and retention challenges in the social care workforce, there needed to be a “real sense of career progression and qualifications people can get”, he said, adding that £500,000,000 would go towards “improving the quality of the training”. Asked why the government had opted not to cut taxes further, Sunak said he was constrained by the lack of fiscal headroom as well as the government’s broader plans to invest in future growth, skills and infrastructure as well as levelling up left-behind regions. “We’ve got a bunch of commitments we want to deliver and we’ve done that across the board with what are historically generous settlements across all departments,” he said. The education secretary, Nadhim Zahawi, said “there is no place for anti-vaxxers harassing or coming anywhere near school leaders” as he insisted the vaccine programme for secondary school pupils “continues at pace”. PA reported Zahawi as telling MPs: “It was the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation [JCVI] that did not initially make the decision and then went further and asked the four chief medical officers to then make that decision. “So, as we have done throughout the vaccination programme, we’ve operated by taking the advice of the JCVI, by taking the advice of the chief medical officers and we moved swiftly the moment that advice was made available to vaccinate 12- to 15-year-olds, and of course through the holiday period that was expanded to out-of-school vaccination and now that they are returning back into school that continues at pace.” Responding to Labour, he said: “He is right to highlight the dangerous behaviour of some anti-vaxxers, there is no place for anti-vaxxers harassing or coming anywhere near school leaders and I have the reassurance of the home secretary that she’ll make any resources available that the sector needs to make sure those people in our schools are protected and are able to get on with the job of teaching children and protecting them.” Asked about why the government had abandoned its £2bn target for science and research spending, Sunak said: “It’s just the balance between all these things.” He said the government had spent the “largest amount that any government’s spent on the key priorities of science and innovation community”. This includes ensuring the UK can remain part of the EU’s Horizon funding programme, “generous settlements” for core research and a doubling of Innovate UK’s funding to £1bn to fund later-stage research and development. He said that part of the reason the UK compared poorly with similar countries on science spend was that it funded more research through tax credits than other countries, which rely more on direct investment. On supply chain problems, Sunak said “we can ease the bits that government is responsible for”, such as testing requirements for HGV drivers and regulatory easement. He added that the government announced last week extra funding to improve the quality of facilities for HGV drivers. Asked about whether immigration could represent a potential risk, Sunak said: “As it relates to particular supply chain challenges, the government has made flexibility available on HGV side, agricultural side.” He added that there had been work on scale-up visas to make it easier to recruit staff for fast-growing companies. “On that side we’re making quite a lot of progress,” he said. Asked whether there was a political barrier to relaxing immigration rules, he added that “in the short term there is an obvious desire for pragmatism”. Pressed on what other risks there were ahead in delivering plans outlined in his budget, Sunak cited higher inflation and interest rates. “In general, as the OBR have pointed out, the public finances are quite sensitive on the debt side to changes in [the Retail Price Index] RPI because we have a relatively large stock of inflation-linked debt, which is about double the G7 average,” he said. But the government’s objective was for “low and stable inflation” he added. The chancellor of the exchequer, Rishi Sunak, is being questioned by MPs on his spending commitments and tax measures announced in the budget. Asked about his “pale” fiscal headroom, Sunak agreed that “if you look historically there is slightly less headroom than previous chancellors would have had”. He added that the fact the government had fixed budgets for the next three years “gives us an enormous amount of certainty compared to previous fiscal events”. Here’s the full report on the events in Northern Ireland early this morning from the Guardian’s Ireland correspondent Lisa O’Carroll. The chancellor is set for a “wild ride” in order to reduce his deficit under new rules announced at the budget, according to the government’s Office for Budget Responsibility (OBR). PA reports: Officials from the body warned that the amount of wiggle room for chancellor Rishi Sunak to cut the deficit in the next three years and reduce national debt was the second-smallest level on record. They also told MPs on the treasury select committee they expect inflation to fall in between six months and a year but said the number of people leaving the workforce could keep it higher. The economic forecasters said they also feared public transport may face a permanent black hole in its finances without service cuts as passenger numbers remain below pre-pandemic levels. In a two-hour grilling by MPs on the details of chancellor Rishi Sunak’s budget, OBR chairman Richard Hughes suggested the Treasury may struggle to hit its new deficit targets, especially if interest rates rise, and would be in for a “wild ride”. He said: “The chancellor set himself some new fiscal rules in this budget and they are to get debt falling as a share of GDP (gross domestic product) by 2024-25 and balance the current budget. “The headroom he set aside to reach those targets is the second-lowest headroom that any chancellor has had when setting fiscal rules.” He added: “Just a 1% interest rate rise could easily wipe out the chancellor’s headroom.” Irish premier Micheal Martin has urged the UK government to act constructively in a post-Brexit fishing row with France. Speaking at the Cop26 climate conference in Glasgow, Taoiseach Micheal Martin said that Ireland stands in solidarity with other EU countries amid fresh tensions with the UK over fishing. PA reported that Martin said that there was a concern that the UK has not been engaging with the EU in a “constructive manner”. “We believe the European Union and the UK government need to engage constructively on a whole range of issues, not least fisheries.” “I believe there is discussion under way between the UK government and the French government and that they may be in a position to get that issue resolved.” “We would like to see that resolved, independent of the protocol,” he told reporters. Here’s the full report from the Guardian’s political correspondent, Aubrey Allegretti, on the readmission to the Conservative party of MP Rob Roberts after he sexually harassed a member of staff. Covid scandals have eroded public trust in MPs by exposing poor behaviour among politicians, including breaches of lockdown rules and awarding of public procurement contracts to ministers’ friends, research by the anti-corruption watchdog has found. A survey of 1,590 people on behalf of the committee on standards in public life found participants were “visibly angry as they recounted the strict pandemic rules they had to follow, which they believed were disregarded by various politicians who subsequently faced few or no consequences,” PA reports. A report on the survey singled out Boris Johnson, David Cameron and Matt Hancock as “immediately associated with the word ‘sleaze”’ and not possessing “the core values expected from political leaders”. In total, 41% of people felt ministers’ standards of conduct were quite low or very low, compared with 24% who felt they were quite or very high. For MPs the figures were even worse. Just 20% of people surveyed felt that MPs’ standards of conduct were quite or very high, while 44% felt they were quite or very low. Polling also found that 43% of people felt standards had got worse. The survey was published on Monday, along with a report from the CSPL that recommended tougher sanctions for politicians with “poor ethical standards”. The committee found there was “an underlying sense of resignation, bordering on cynicism” that politics would never be entirely ethical, but that improvements could still be made. Richard Hughes, the chairman of the OBR, has warned that public transport may need to permanently have subsidies to ensure no cuts to services. He told MPs on the treasury select committee: “It remains to be seen what the financial model for public transport is in the long term. “We don’t know to what extent people are going to start returning to work five days a week. Revealed preference seems to suggest people are going to work from home more.” He added: “Assumptions about when ticket revenues into the transport system recover to pre-pandemic levels I think have to be kept under constant review and it may be the case there is a permanent hole in the rail system, the Underground in London and local transport systems, which are going to have to be subsidised in perpetuity if they’re not going to cut services.” Hughes also told MPs that the impact of EU migrants leaving the UK during the pandemic was having an impact on the economy, with about 50% of those who left not expected to return. He said: “There is an element of loss of migrants who would have otherwise come here or stayed here to stay in the workforce. That is a minority of the effect on the labour force but it is nonetheless a significant one.” Hughes added: “EU migrants were particularly favourable to the UK finances in the sense that we tended to not pay for their education. “They came here and were largely in employment. They often didn’t bring dependents with them. What we didn’t know is whether they would stay and collect a pension, or go home,” he said, adding that compared with migrants from other nations, EU workers “had some fiscal advantages”. He added: “The bigger loss comes from the fact that we have a less trade-intensive economy which is less connected in terms of trade with the rest of the world and it has consequences for the long-run productivity of the economy as a whole rather than necessarily the individuals who were either here or not.” Overall, the number of people leaving the workforce, either through returning to home countries or residents taking early retirement, was expected to be about 160,000, he said. Downing Street said the prime minister’s thoughts were with those injured in the Salisbury train crash, adding that the government was investing to ensure the railway network remained “one of the safest in the world”. PA reports that a No 10 spokesman said: “The Rail Accident Investigation Branch (RAIB) have been deployed to the site and are conducting forensic investigations, obviously the prime minister’s thoughts remain with those who were affected by the incident. “It would be inappropriate for me to comment further at this time while the RAIB are working to investigate what happened.” The spokesman added: “I think it’s important that we let the RAIB investigate this thoroughly, but more generally in terms of safety standards on the network it’s obviously a top priority for this government, which is why we have allocated £40bn worth of spending to ensure that the railways continue to be one of the safest in the world.” There’s more on the Northern Ireland bus hijacking on PA: Stormont’s infrastructure minister, Nichola Mallon, said the two masked men who hijacked the bus “muttered something about the protocol” as they held the driver at gunpoint. Mallon told BBC Radio Ulster’s The Nolan Show: “Two masked men entered the bus. They held the driver, a male, at gunpoint, they said something about the protocol, and they then proceeded to spray the inside of the bus with flammable liquid. They forced the bus driver off the bus and then they set it alight. “The faceless, mindless cowards who did this have done nothing more than attack their own community.” She added: “We understand that they muttered something about the protocol. “I do not know what these people thought they were setting out to achieve by putting at risk a bus driver just trying to do his job and attacking a bus that is there to transport people in the community. It is mindless.” Downing Street has not set out whether there are contingency plans if France carries out threats in the fishing rights row, or when it understands the French deadline to be. PA reported that when asked if there were contingency plans in case of disruption, a No 10 spokesman said: “We are keen for France to take a step back from the threats.” He pointed towards the foreign secretary Liz Truss’s warning that the UK could launch dispute settlement proceedings under the Brexit trade deal, and the Brexit minister Lord Frost’s threat of retaliatory “practical responses”. Asked for a second time if there were contingency plans, he said: “It is the French who have issued the threat, we’re keen to continue to abide by the TCA [Trade and Cooperation Agreement] and continue to look at licences and the validity of them as they’re applied for.” Asked whether it was clear if the deadline for an agreement on licences set by France for Tuesday was at the beginning or the end of the day, the spokesman said: “That would be a question for the French.” Pressed on what the British understanding of the deadline was, he said: “It’s the French who have set out the timescale as per their threat, our focus is on trying to work with them and hope they step back from the threats they’ve made.” The disgraced MP Rob Roberts has been given his Tory membership back despite a warning the move would “let him off the hook” for sexually harassing a member of staff. PA reports: The Conservatives confirmed on Monday morning that Mr Roberts was a Tory party member again after a 12-week suspension. The MP for Delyn in North Wales will continue to sit as an independent as the Tories are still withholding the party whip in the House of Commons. Labour party chair Anneliese Dodds described the scheduled end of Mr Roberts’ suspension as “scandalous”. “Rob Roberts should have resigned as an MP the moment he was suspended. That he is now set to return to the Conservative Party shows they’ve let him off the hook,” she added. France’s seafood sector is divided over government sanctions on British trawlers due to start on Tuesday, with processing companies warning they will cost jobs but fishers insisting that after 10 months waiting for UK permits, tough action is needed. The Guardian’s Jon Henley reports that Paris has said it could ban British trawlers from unloading in French ports, carry out extra licence checks on boats, tighten checks on trucks and reinforce customs and hygiene controls unless London grants more licences to fish in UK waters. But the head of the fish wholesale association in Boulogne, France’s largest fishing port, said the planned measures were “excessive” and “disproportionate”, warning they risked doing more harm to the sector overall than good. The British foreign secretary, Liz Truss, said on Monday France had 48 hours to back down or the UK would begin dispute talks. President Emmanuel Macron said the ball was in Britain’s court and that France had tabled concrete de-escalation proposals. Here’s a fuller report on events in Northern Ireland from the Guardian’s Lisa O’Carroll: Unionist leaders have condemned the “thuggery” and “stupid actions” behind this morning’s petrol bombing of a double decker bus in Northern Ireland fuelling fears of a new wave of loyalist violence linked to opposition to the Brexit protocol. The BBC in Northern Ireland reported that loyalists had claimed the hijacking, saying it was to coincide with a deadline set by the DUP to resolve issues around the NI protocol. The DUP leader, Sir Jeffrey Donaldson ,moved to head off further violence, warning that “thuggery and terrorism will do nothing to remove the NI protocol” and “violence has no place” in Northern Ireland. “There was never any justification for people with guns on our streets and damaging property – there never will be,” he added. Doug Beattie, the head of the Ulster Unionist party, described the dawn attack that left the bus driver “shaken” as the “utterly disgraceful, depressing and stupid actions of thugs and criminals”. He asked in a tweet: “In what way does this help address issues concerning the protocol, it simply hurts their own community.” The shadow Northern Ireland secretary, Louise Haigh, described the attack as “ utterly reprehensible”, adding: “There is no place for these sickening acts of violence and intimidation.” A senior official in Northern Ireland’s Department of Health has admitted that health waiting lists have spiralled “out of control” in documents provided for a landmark case. In one testimony seen by the Guardian, the offical said the delays were “extremely regrettable” but that the health minister had repeatedly said a significant increase in funding was necessary to make a return to acceptable levels, the Guardian’s Lisa O’Carroll reports. “While doctors, nurses, other health professionals and managers have made every effort to ensure that any negative impact on patients has been kept to a minimum, waiting times have continued to grow to a level where many believe that they are now out of control,” he added. Mark Dayan, policy analyst at the health services thinktank, the Nuffield Trust, said that Northern Ireland’s waiting lists began to “spiral to more and more unacceptably poor levels relative to the rest of the UK” 10 years ago. He said “one year-plus waits” were “almost unheard of” in England before Covid, but had been “common in Northern Ireland”. Out of an estimated 460,000 on a waiting list, 250,000 had been on it for more than a year, he said. Two landmark cases will be heard in December and January featuring the Northern Ireland health minister, Robin Swann, the UK chancellor, Rishi Sunak, and the health secretary, Savid Javid, as defendants. The DUP leader, Sir Jeffrey Donaldson, has denounced the bus attack, saying “violence has no place” in Northern Ireland. In a strong condemnation aimed at heading off any further unrest, he said “thuggery and terrorism will do nothing to remove the NI protocol”. He tweeted: Fears of a new wave of violence in Northern Ireland linked to loyalist opposition to the Brexit protocol were prompted today after a double-decker bus was hijacked and set on fire in a town close to Belfast. The incident happened in Newtownards at dawn, with local press reporting the men cited the Northern Ireland protocol during the attack, raising concerns it may be linked to today’s date of 1 November. The Democratic Unionist party had given a deadline of the end of October for substantial changes to the Northern Ireland protocol to be agreed with the EU. A PSNI spokesperson said: At approximately 6.30am, two masked and armed men boarded the bus and poured fuel over the vehicle before setting it alight. The driver managed to get off the bus unharmed but has been left badly shaken by the incident. Negotiations between the UK and the EU aimed at reaching a solution to the other dispute over the Brexit arrangements are entering their third week, with the UK’s Brexit negotiator, Lord Frost, still threatening to trigger article 16 if the substantial gap in positions is not bridged. The foreign secretary, Liz Truss, has criticised the French, accusing Paris of making unreasonable and unwarranted threats and again hinting that the president, Emmanuel Macron, is playing to the crowd, with the upcoming election in mind. French officials have warned they will bar UK fishing boats from some ports and tighten customs checks on lorries entering the country unless more licences are granted – starting tomorrow. Macron said on Sunday that the ball is in the UK’s court. This morning, Truss has told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: Those threats are completely unwarranted. We allocated the fishing licences completely in line with what is in the trade agreement with the EU and the French need to withdraw those threats. Otherwise we will use the dispute resolution mechanism in the EU deal to take action. We are simply not going to roll over in the face of these threats. The dispute was triggered by decisions made by the authorities in the UK and Jersey over licences for small French boats to operate in British waters, with officials arguing permission can be given only to vessels which can demonstrate a history of fishing there.The weekend seizure of two key towns on the main road to Addis Ababa has alarmed Ethiopian leaders who fear that the rapid advances by Tigrayan rebel forces may soon threaten the capital itself. The sudden push into the towns of Dessie and Kombolcha was accompanied by short bursts of intense fighting that had reportedly subsided by Monday evening. While Dessie was confirmed to have fallen to the rebels on Sunday, the fate of Kombolcha was less clear, with accounts of continuing sporadic gunfire. Nevertheless, the rebel offensive was the most decisive yet in the year-long conflict with Ethiopian government forces, and led the country’s prime minister, Abiy Ahmed, to call for loyalists to double efforts to defend the seat of power. “Use any type of weapons to block the destructive [rebel push], to overturn it and bury it,” he said. “Dying for Ethiopia is a duty for all of us.” Government officials claimed, without offering evidence, that up to 100 youths had been executed during the Tigrayan takeover of Kombolcha – adding weight to rebel boasts of having seized control of the northern town. Kombolcha residents contacted by Agence France Presse described chaos as rebels approached. “The night was filled with many gunshots,” one man told the news agency. “I heard an airstrike past midnight outside Kombolcha borders.” A second man, Hamdiu, a shopkeeper in Kombolcha, said he heard what sounded like an airstrike in the late evening. “Huge gunshots were heard until morning”, he said. Federal government forces have frequently used airstrikes in the Tigray region as the war has ground on, but denied having done so in Kombolcha. As fears mounted of a continued push to Addis Ababa, 380km farther south, a spokesman for the Tigray Peoples Liberation Front (TPLF), Getachew Reda, denied the organisation had designs on the capital and claimed the offensive aimed only to break the government siege on the Tigray region, which had been imposed by Ahmed in 2019. The seeds of the fighting, which has sparked mass internal displacement and reports of a near-famine in some regions, were laid as Ahmed attempted to consolidate his authority, after taking power a year earlier, partly by merging opposition and regional political parties into his own. The TPLF, which had dominated Ethiopian politics for nearly three decades, refused to join and subsequently held regional elections that the Ahmed-led government declared illegal. Since fighting erupted in 2019, it has drawn in troops from nearby Eritrea and Ethiopia’s Amhara region and threatened to spill even further throughout the country and across its borders to Sudan and Somalia. The war has led to frequent claims of rapes, massacre, enslavement and widespread humanitarian abuses. Chronicling the suffering has been all but impossible, with most aid agencies, including the UN, Médecins Sans Frontières and the Norwegian Refugee Council, banned from the country, and journalists forbidden from covering the fighting. Agencies have estimated that about 4.5 million people are in need of aid, and about 1 million are in areas that are inaccessible. In June, the UN estimated that 400,000 people were already at risk of famine-like conditions. International reaction to the Tigrayan advance has been restrained. The US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, said Washington was alarmed by the “reports of the TPLF takeover of Dessie and Kombolcha. “Continued fighting prolongs the dire humanitarian crisis in northern Ethiopia,” he said on Twitter. Regional authorities in Amhara had earlier estimated that almost 250,000 people had taken refuge in both towns, having fled fighting elsewhere in the country. Officials in Amhara on Monday ordered government institutions to stop work and join the war effort. Before Ahmed took power, Tigrayans had held sway over much of the Ethiopian military and had brought much of that power to bear on the battlefields. Government forces, however, have control of the skies and widespread reports have emerged of Ahmed’s war effort being supported by drones supplied by the United Arab Emirates and flown from bases in nearby Eritrea. AFP contributed to this reportHere is the report. So there we go. Sri Lanka are out, but England are now four and 0; they’ll be in the semis, and are overwhelming favourites to become the first team to hold the 20 and 50-over World Cups simultaneously. Our report will be up here shortly; enjoy the rest of your day. Morgan is “incredibly proud” of how his team played. They had to fight hard to win, he’s delighted with how Livingstone and Moeen stepped up when necessary, and he loved being at the other end Buttler constructed one of his best-ever innings. He thinks he’s one of the best there is and talks about his “unbelievable skill level” with his mindset and ability to read the game, understanding when to go and where to go. On his own performance, he reckons that if you don’t believe, no one else will, and he’s pleased to have got some runs, especially with one of his best mates out there with him. It’s a moving thought, that – I can’t imagine the friendship you can forge touring and competing with the same lads over so many years, and the existence of such an atmosphere is almost all captain’s work. He is so ridiculously inspiring, and in the least nauseating manner imaginable. Shanaka is relatively happy with how his team played, acknowledging that the match was lost in the second half of England’s innings. He’s got a young side that is improving and he’s pleased with how they fought. On conditions, Buttler explains that the dew was significant and that’s why Rashid bowled out early. They may have miscalculated when handing Moeen the penultimate over but he was up for it and the field placings were good. He’s really happy with how the team are catching, saving and throwing; it shows how unselfish the team are, he reckons. Buttler tells Sky he can back himself to catch up when falling behind where he’d like the rate to be, and is really happy to be putting all aspects of his game together. On Morgan, he says he never shows too much emotion so wasn’t too down about his relative lack of form. He stayed calm, which is one of his best qualities. “The batting, bloody hell,” says Paul Mitchell. “But England have left one wicket on the table in 4 games. Brilliant cricket.” Yes, you never know how it’ll go in the semis and final but they couldn’t be in better nick. They’re not only outplaying everyone, they’re out-thinking everyone too. Buttler is player of the match and says the key was patience. For a while, they thought 120 would e a decent score, but they tried to target a side each and he loves batting with Morgan. The run out was his favourite aspect of the day, though, because he knew it was getting tight and Moeen would be bowling at the death, an unusual state of affairs. I can’t wrap my head around how dazzling that innings was, just the pure expertise of it – he was in total control throughout, and when he needed a six to bring up his ton off the final ball of the innings, it was just so obvious what was going to happen. The other thing is that England won after batting first while accustoming themselves to another surface - it’s been a decent little evening’s work, and Morgan is now the most successful T20 captain in history. So Sri Lanka are out, while England are as good as through. That was a really enjoyable match. England were superb, again – it’s not at all normal how good Jos Buttler is nor how well he’s playing – and the way they forced the issue when things ought to have got nervy was understated spectacular. Sri Lanka, though, bowled very well in the first 10 overs and were tenacious in staying in the match. Theekshana skips down and yeets one over the top, but picks out Jordan on the long on fence and he doesn’t drop gornisht. 19th over: Sri Lanka 137-9 (Theekshana 2, Kumara 1) Target 164 This is superb work from Moeen, who concedes just three from his next three balls. Eoin Morgan is a genius. Everywhere he’s put a fielder, the ball has gone, and when Karunaratne unloads the suitcase looking down the ground, he picks out Roy who holds on easily. 19th over: Sri Lanka 134-7 (Karunaratne 0, Theekshana) Target 164 Yup, Moeen bowls the spare one and it’s going to be the penultimate. This is what happens when you’re good: things suddenly get close, then just as suddenly they get unclose. Chameera flicks a half-volley to deep backward square ... and right into Malan’s midriff! 18th over: Sri Lanka 134-7 (Karunaratne 0, Chameera 4) Target 164 That Woakes drop aside, England have been superb in the field, and two colossal interventions have settled a match just when it looked like getting close. But when Chameera chucks everything at a drive, he thick-edges past Buttler for four and Sri Lanka need 30 from 13. Shanaka tries a cut but instead the ball loops up to Buttler, standing back, and he monsters a throw that smashes the stumps as Karunaratne sends his captain back. Buttler is absolutely on one, and the best cricketer in this competition; he’s earned every bit of his Flintoff celebration. 18th over: Sri Lanka 130-6 (Shanaka 25, Hasaranga 34) Target 164 England’s batters and bowlers are good, but we mustn’t sleep on their fielding. Roy has matured into a real asset, and his presence of mind, plus that of Billings to back him up BUT EXCUSE ME WHILE I INTERRUPT MYSELF! 17th over: Sri Lanka 130-6 (Shanaka 26, Karunaratne ) Target 164 Hasaranga is a serious cricketer and that was a very fine knock indeed. England have three overs left, one of which will be Woakes and one of which will be Jordan; Moeen will presumably take the other, and will presumably be the one the batters target. Yes it is! The soft signal is out! I think this is gawn... But wait! The umpires want to check Roy really didn’t touch the fence! This is excellent behaviour! Hasaranga charages again and splatters over cover, Roy runs around the fence and, feart he’ll touch the rope, tosses to Billings, next to him and on as sub! That is surely that! 17th over: Sri Lanka 129-5 (Shanaka 25, Hasaranga 34) Target 164 This has been a fine effort from Sri Lanka, who’ve showed serious vertebrae and skill to hang in there; as recently as the summer, they might’ve folded. Livingstone has bowled alright here, but in every over there’s been a boundary ball and that’s what happens here too, a single to each batter elevated by Shanaka coming down and slamming an inside-out drive over point for four! 16th over: Sri Lanka 123-5 (Shanaka 24, Hasaranga 29) Target 164 Jordan returns and Shanaka takes a single to Woakes at mid off, who misses with his shy. There’s then a kerfuffle over the seam, presumably because of the dew, while we learn that Mills has indeed got quad-knack. Two more singles follow and England won’t mind those, they just need to avoid boundaries, then Hasaranga chucks the bat to hoist two over the off side infield; the throw goes to Buttler, who hurls at the non-striker’s but can’t hit, and Hasaranga only goes and drives over mid off for four! He backs it up with a single, and Sri Lanka need 41 from 24 deliveries! 15th over: Sri Lanka 113-5 (Shanaka 22, Hasaranga 21) Target 164 I wonder if Morgan would’ve had Livingstone finish off for Mills if he’d not bowled the previous over, but here he is again, ceding three dots from his first four balls - that’s a good effort because despite what I said earlier Sri Lanka are still just about in this and oooh yeah! Shanaka ambles down to devastate six over wide long on! A single follows, and Sri Lanka need 50 off 30! 14th over: Sri Lanka 103-5 (Shanaka 14, Hasaranga 19) Target 164 Livingstone’s ability to bowl different varieties has Watson talking about David Warner spending a season of his youth batting righty, which is why his switch hit is basically a slog sweep. Anyhow, Hasaranga can bat, and he absolutely murders Mills’ first ball downtown for six! Mills is playing for his place here – his lefty angle is desirable, but he’s not as good as Wood, and following a single and a wide, Shanaka misses a glance around the corner, instead gloving just wide of Buttler’s dive and earning himself four. But what’s this? Mills is limping, absolute sake, looks like a quad situation, and that might be his tournament. I really hope not, he’s done and been through everything to get himself to this position, but that’s where we are and Woakes will finish off his over; that costs him one of his own, so he’s only got one left. Morgan took a while to decide on that, so he’s got a plan, and in the meantime, the three deliveries yield two singles. 13th over: Sri Lanka 82-5 (Shanaka 9, Hasaranga 11) Target 164 “Jos Buttler, goodness me what a superstar he is,” says Watto, as Livingstone returns to the England attack and sees his first ball, short and wide like a Glaswegian child, cut hard to the fence for four. Still, though, his ability to bowl both off and leg breaks is pretty nifty, and his over yields seven; the required rate is now 10.71. 12th over: Sri Lanka 82-5 (Shanaka 8, Hasaranga 5) Target 164 Rashid returns to finish off yet another superb spell, after a single to each batter, Hasaranga lifts a nice shot over the top, but picks out the man at wide long on so only gets two. Next ball is punished down the ground, but Rashid extends a leg to turn a boundary into a dot and when his final delivery yields a single, he ends with 2-19 off his four. Bowling. 11th over: Sri Lanka 77-5 (Shanaka 7, Hasaranga 1) Target 164 Hasaranga eases to third man to get himself away, but he knows what we all know: this is done. Woakes tries a slower ball off-cutter and Rajapakse is through his shot too quickly ... but it still takes a fine catch to dismiss him, Roy racing in and diving forwards. 11th over: Sri Lanka 76-4 (Rajapakse 26, Shanaka 7) Target 164 Woakes returns, and the sweat and humidity have done wonders for what’s already a tremendous head of hair. Less usually, Woakes could do with something here after being hit for six in his first over, then dropping that catch ... and well! Rajapakse takes one that bounces over deep square for six, then when Woakes tries to go wide, hammers him through mid off for four! 10th over: Sri Lanka 66-4 (Rajapaske 16, Shanaka 7) Target 164 Here we go, you need 106 from 66, now here’s Tymal Mills. Cricket, what a brute. Shanaka takes his first ball for a single to third man, then wears his next on the pad – there’s an appeal but it’s a matter of principle. So Mills digs deeper, getting himself up to 140kph, so Shanaka waits for him and glides four to deep backward point. He’s a worthy successor to Angelo Mathews in so many ways, and after a single to each batter, it’s drinks. 9th over: Sri Lanka 58-4 (Rajapakse 15, Shanaka 1) Target 164 This is pretty much over, you’d think, and Shanaka can manage just a single from the two balls he faces, bunting one to cover to retain the strike. This is the deadest of dead, a full one that hits the bottom of the pad as Aviksha misses his sweep in front of middle. 9th over: Sri Lanka 57-3 (Avishka 13, Rajapakse 15) Target 164 The required rate is over nine now but Morgan doesn’t allow Livingstone another over, recalling Jordan, who concedes one from his first ball and has Bairstow save a boundary from his second, tanking around the fence to dive brilliantly. 8th over: Sri Lanka 54-3 (Avishka 11, Rajapakse 14) Target 164 Rashid continues, and England know another tight one will really amp up the pressure, while Sri Lanka know that after this he’s only got one over left. And he nearly gets another! Rajapaske gets down on one knee to heave a sweep and Woakes is under it! He doesn’t drop them, but he loses the ball to begin with, running the wrong way, corrects and gets into position ... then shells it! Goodness me, now I’ve seen everything, on which point I never thought I’d see Three Lions played between overs, and yet here we are. 7th over: Sri Lanka 50-3 (Avishka 8, Rajapakse 13) Target 164 Livingston and his little tweakers come into the attack, so the batters have a look, taking a single apiece off his first two balls, then Rajapaska decides he knows what’s what, skipping down to mash him over his head for six! Livingstone responds well enough, two singles ceded from the three remaining balls, and the required rate is now up to 8.76. 6th over: Sri Lanka 40-3 (Avishka 6, Rajapakse 5) Target 164 Sri Lanka are in terrible trouble now, but after Avishka takes a single, Rajapaske hammers over the top for four then adds a single to leg. Perera unloads the suitcase at a googly, sends up another steepler, and again it’s the captain making it his. He’s exactly the kind of mensch you want under a high ball. 5th over: Sri Lanka 34-2 (Perera 7, Avishka 5) Target 164 Morgan introduces Ceej to the attack, and after two dots, Aviksha monsters him through cover for four. I doubt Sri Lanka win here or even get close, but they’re setting about the chase in suitable fashion while Simon Doull asks Nasser when his son Joel’s birthday is and he doesn’t know. Other hand, my dad knows mine, but he didn’t furnish me with Test captain genes; England were also 34-2 off five. “Random aside,” says AB Parker, “but the Yorkshire report into the racism suffered by Azim Rafiq called the P-word ‘banter’ and the panel accused Rafiq of using ‘offensive, racially derogatory comments’ when referring to a player of Zimbabwean heritage as ‘Zimbo from Zimbabwe’. The panel viewing this as a ‘racist, derogatory term’ is a disgrace. Hope there’s something on the website on it soon.” I’m certain that’ll be the case. 4th over: Sri Lanka 28-2 (Perera 6, Avishka 0) Target 164 I’m just not having that Rashid isn’t England’s best Test spinner, and after Perera forces two to backward point, he befuddles him with a gorgeous googly; Perera, though, survives and sends the over’s final delivery around the corner for two more. Very good bowling from Rashid, who goes front of the hand again, enticing Asalanka down as the ball slides on, and he can’t get hold of it, sending one spiralling up towards mid off. Moeen duly runs over to snaffle the snaffle. 4th over: Sri Lanka 24-1 (Perera 2, Asalanka 21) Target 164 With Morgan presumably mindful of the dew situation, he tosses Rashid the ball; not a bad option at all and he beings with one out the front of the hand. 3rd over: Sri Lanka 24-1 (Perera 2, Asalanka 21) Target 164 The lefty, Perera is on strike so Moeen keeps at it, and after Perera takes one, Asalanka clatters a sweep for four ... then does it again two balls later! This is terrific stuff and so much better than what we saw during the English summer! A single follows and Sri Lanka are up with the rate! 2nd over: Sri Lanka 14-1 (Perera 1, Asalanka 12) Target 164 Chris Woakes is not what you want to see if you’re chasing a phat total, but well! Asalanka knows that something straight and back of a length is coming, so frees arms and smashes over midwicket, then edges an attempted swipe over the stumps and for four! Sri Lanka aren’t going to go quietly. 1st over: Sri Lanka 2-1 (Perera 0, Asalanka 1) Target 164 Shanaka did a great job in the first 10 overs, manipulating his bowlers, but he left Hasaranga until the game looked gone and for some reason asked for a fuller line. But that shouldn’t distract from a knock of terrifying certainty for Buttler, who waited to go until the time was right, knowing he could stay in and tick over in the meantime. Pressure! That was a huge risk, but Perera didn’t feel he could turn it away and you feel him; you feel for him. 1st over: Sri Lanka 0-0 (Nissanka 0, Perera 0) Nissanka shoves one into the on side then Perera tries to pinch one to the off ... and Morgan’s throw allows Buttler to take off the bails! I think this is going to be gone! Righto, I was about to wonder if England would start with spin, but there’s Moeen with the ball so that’s that one answered. Anyway, let’s try and process – I’ll be back in a few with Sri Lanka’s reply. Paul Collingwood tells Sky that after a few overs England reckoned 110 might be defendable, but Buttler has made that look ridiculous – as he has so many other things. Sri Lanka probably needed another spinner, though when you come up against genius sometimes you just have to accept whatever it serves you with. That will, you’d think, be enough for England, who are 20 or so runs over par. Sri Lanka might chase that down, but it’d take something amazing. Jos Buttler, though – the numbers won’t do it justice because they don’t tell you about the pitch, or about wickets falling around him, or about carrying his bat. Drink him in, because we’ll never see anyone like him again; we’re privileged to be living in his time. 20th over: England 163-4 (Buttler 101, Ali 1) Buttler skips off side and scoops a full toss over fine leg for a one-bounce four; his ability to wield both rapier and broadsword is remarkable. A squirt to midwicket follows and they sprint two, then a heave becomes a top-edge and on the fine leg fence, Nisskana races in only to spill a chance that looked a lot harder before he got right underneath it. That leaves Buttler on 95; can he get his ton? He plays away two dots, turning down a single then missing with a reverse scoop, so it’ll need to come off Chameera’s final delivery ... AND THERE IT ABSOLUTELY IS! JOSS BUTTLER YOU ARE AN ABSOLUTE JOKE! A SICK JOKE, AND VERY, VERY POORLY! 19th over: England 149-4 (Buttler 86, Ali 1) England send in Moeen not Livingstone, presumably because he’s a good smasher of spin but also to keep the left/right combination. He gets off the mark with a turn to long on, then Buttler takes a single to deep square; his 87 is his highest in T20 internationals, but Sri Lanka will be pleased to have conceded just eight off the penultimate over even though a single from its final delivery keeps Buttler on strike. Hasaranga tries another googly but this time Morgan doesn’t come down, he waits to sweep, but misses by plenty and that’s the end of an knock the captain really needed. 19th over: England 147-3 (Buttler 86, Morgan 40) Hasaranga returns - good luck old mate, rather you than me – and Morgan picks his googly, sashaying down the ground to smite six back over the bowler’s heed! 18th over: England 141-3 (Buttler 86, Morgan 34) This has been a brilliantly understated innings from Buttler, without the pyrotechnics of Saturday but with everything his team needs. AND HAVE A LOOK! after Morgan takes one to cover, he violently swats a knuckle ball over midwicket for six, then clears pads and does it again to a slower ball over long on! That raises the hundred partnership, and when Shanaka tries a toe-crusher, Buttler skips leg side, waits, and somehow crafts four to fine leg! He is so, so good and two further singles mean 19 from the over. Sri Lanka have bowled pretty well today, but Buttler, whose 86 not out is the highest score of the tournament, has probably taken England out of sight in the second half of the innings. 17th over: England 122-3 (Buttler 69, Morgan 32) Chameera returns and Morgan welcomes him to the crease in the classic style, pulling him high over square leg and onto the roof, baseball-style! Chameera, though, responds just about well enough, a single, a wide and a two following, Fernando doing a great job of running around the rope without stepping over it, cutting off Buttler’s drive. The final two deliveries yield two singles, but only just – Morgan takes on Shanaka at extra cover, who makes a fine stop and shies while sat on his buttocks, missing by a fraction. England will be pretty happy with where things are now. “There’s a case surely for Morgan being as significant an England captain as Illingworth, Brearley, Gooch, Hussain, Vaughan, May or Jardine, despite having never had an important role in a test team,” says Chris Dale. “He’s professionalised the culture and expectations in the limited overs teams similar to how Gooch and Hussain did the Test team, and left more of an impact on English cricket than any of his Test captain contemporaries.” I couldn’t agree more. His attitude and mentality have been a huge force for good – and possibly bad if we think about the wanton tossing of wickets we’ve seen in the longest format – but that’s not his fault. 16th over: England 110-3 (Buttler 66, Morgan 24) So far, pin has been much more effective than pace, all the more so because the quicks have been going full, not into the pitch. I’m not sure England will make that error, nor that Woakes, Jordan and Rashid won’t bowl with more overall discipline, but in the meantime, Shanaka invites himself to have a go and it’s a good one, the over ceding just five. 15th over: England 105-3 (Buttler 63, Morgan 22) Has Hasaranga bowled Morgan into form? Kumara returns and when he offers width, he disappears over extra cover and into the stands! A leg bye follows, taking the partnership to 55 off 55, then Buttler nudges towards the off side and when one appears in that zone, he zetzes it over long off for six! Sri Lanka are bowling a bit full here and the next delivery should get the treatment too, but Buttler doesn’t get all of another slower ball full-toss, making do with a single. Next comes a wide – I’d love to bet on what’s going to happen to the extra ball – and shonuff, after a single, Buttler makes room to hoist the third six of the over into the crowd at long off! The total increases by 22 and England are on the move! 14th over: England 83-3 (Buttler 50, Morgan 15) Shanaka cleverly restores Hasaranga to the attack just as England are looking to speed things along. Morgan really needs to improve on his nine from 20, but after Buttler takes one to cover, he can only do likewise to long off. Buttler then flicks another one to backward square, raising his slowest-ever T20 50, and when Hasarange responds with a leg-side full-toss, even a man in Morgan’s form can’t miss out, the ball clouted to the fine leg fence. Two singles follow, and there’s a decent score out there for England now. 13th over: England 75-3 (Buttler 48, Morgan 9) Hold tight! Karunaratne returns and Morgan takes one to midwicket, then Buttler steps back and punishes four to mid on ... before absolutely carting a half-volley slower ball over the same area for six! He toe-ended that, but his hands are so intense that it made no difference – tangentially, I love the incongruity between his voice and his batting – and a flowing cover-drive adds two more to the total, then he jams down on what would’ve been a wide. They run one, making it 14 from the other, and here comes the charge. 12th over: England 61-3 (Buttler 35, Morgan 8) I daresay Morgan will move things along soon – he needs to get runs or get out, all the more so given Buttler is in the anchor role now. But it takes the latter three balls to get off strike, forcing one to mid off, and Morgan just can’t get Theekshana away, allowing two dots before digging his final delivery down the ground for a single. Theekshana finishes with 4-13 off his four overs, a nifty spell. 11th over: England 59-3 (Buttler 34, Morgan 7) England are going to want at least another hundred here, which won’t be easily done. As with the great Australia sides, there’s always a chance that if one discipline goes badly, the other will redeem it, but in the meantime, Buttler clatters Kumara through cover for four, then fends off his hip for two more. Yup, England want to get this moving, and following a wide, Buttler sends an attempted yorker to deep square and hauls Morgan through for a tight two; two singles follow, and that’s 12 off the over – more than in the previous four combined. 10th over: England 47-3 (Buttler 24, Morgan 6) In commentary, they wonder if Moeen should’ve come in above Morgan, given the form differential. But I guess England need their skipper in the runs, and after another over, bowled by Theekshana, yields just three runs, Athers asks Watto about playing for Micky Arthur, Sri Lanka coach, and whether he’s done his homework. There’s laughter, but no detail, which is a shame. Drinks. “Watched a short profile of Hasaranga on TV prior to the match,” says Colum Fordham, “and he really is a find for Sri Lanka. I was impressed by the fact that his googly is hard to read (as Roy has just found out to his cost). I think batting first is a good test for England for later in the tournament – presuming we get there.” Yup, he was good in the summer too. If Sri Lanka can keep bowling tightly, they’ll be one good knock away from a win. 9th over: England 44-3 (Buttler 22, Morgan 5) Buttler nurdles one more to leg, and that’s another exceedingly useful over, just three singles from it. England will want to get a wriggle on. Buttler shuffled across just enough, so that it was umpire’s call on impact and bouncing over the stumps – ok, ok, sometimes it happens. 9th over: England 31-3 (Buttler 21, Morgan 5) I meant to say earlier, England are in red trousers – a fitting tribute to the MCC – but also because Sri Lanka are in blue, and it’s against the rules for strides to clash. Shanaka introduces Karunaratne to his attack as Watto explains that if you hit the pitch, you know the ball won’t bounce much higher than the stumps so bowlers are in the game. His first three balls yield two singles, then Buttler shuffles across and misses a twizzle to leg. The appeal is rejected, but Shanaka reviews again! 8th over: England 41-3 (Buttler 20, Morgan 4) In co-comms, Shane Watson’s saying that in Sharjah, if you get your line nice and straight, you’re in business, going on to say that England’s performance against Australia was one of the most complete he’s ever seen. Anyhow, Theekshana returns and sees his first two balls sent for singles then hits Morgan on the pad – there’s an appeal, but that was going down, well down, by the look of the replay – then two more singles follow. Sri Lanka have got a lid on this at the moment, which tells us that arms will soon be freed because no way do England let this drift. 7th over: England 37-3 (Buttler 18, Morgan 2) By the looks of things Bairstow also suffered from one that kept low, but when he was struggling in Tests, Morgan was playing on the crouch and also isn’t the tallest, so this track might suit him. Kumara returns and sends down three dots, Morgan missing the third by swiping over the bounce. He could use a score, and adds one by forcing to long on, the only run from the over. 6th over: England 36-3 (Buttler 18, Morgan 1) That was a terrific review, but if there’s any man you want coming in at this point, it’s Eoin Morgan, and he gets away with a swish to leg. This is brewing! Bairstow didn’t play much of a shot and the ball was hitting leg stump. That’s a first-baller, and England are under pressure for the first time this tournament! 6th over: England 35-2 (Buttler 18, Bairstow 0) These two are arguably the best in limited overs England have ever produced, but have a look! Buttler takes a single, then Bairstow comes down, misses, and wears it one on the pad! The appeal is rejected, but that looked decent to me and this time Sri Lanka review! It’s an undersight! Coming from around, Chameera flings down one that keeps low, and Malan misses his cover-drive. This is a decent start from Sri Lanka now! 5th over: England 34-1 (Buttler 17, Malan 6) Chameera returns and there’s a rarity, Buttler missing with a scoop, and the bowler deduces that he’ll go again, foiling the ruse with a slower ball. Good bowling. They run one, though, then Malan flicks nicely over midwicket for four, his first of the match. But after a dot, Malan misses with a pull and there’s an appeal but no review – the replay seems to suggest an under-edge! What an oversight! “Dawid Malan is the Bryan Adams of T20 cricket,” tweets Chris Jones. “Been number one for ages and no one can really explain why.” I’m not having that, that’s far too harsh: Everything I Do is a tune. I what the why for my wife nearly every day. Anyhow, Malan can play, and is a different kind of batter to the others England have – though on these tracks, I’d be picking Root to bat in his spot. 4th over: England 29-1 (Buttler 16, Malan 2) Just the one over for Hasaranga – Theekshana come on to open his variety pack of carrom balls, off-breaks and leftover Start that no one wants. He bowls a decent over too, ceding a single to each batter before ruining things a little with consecutive wides – following the first, his captain advises him to go around only for the same thing to happen again. Lovely stuff. 3rd over: England 25-1 (Buttler 15, Malan 1) Kumara replaces Shameera and Buttler gets onto tippy-toes to leap into a square drive to the point fence. He is seeing it, so he is, meaning the last thing Sri Lanka needs is him edging boundaries, but that’s what happens when a drive at a nip-backer goes wrong. A two to backward point follows, and that’s another decent over for England, 10 off it. “Don’t forget where the Baywatch writers got the idea for CJ in the first place,” emails Ian Forth. “Reggie Perrin’s boss at Sunshine Desserts.” “I didn’t get where I am today wondering what life’s all about.” Sage words. 2nd over: England 15-1 (Buttler 5, Malan 1) Malan slaps into the off side to get off the mark with a single, then Buttler turns around the corner to complete a much better over for Sri Lanka. Hello! Roy goes to sweep a googly that keeps low, misses, and loses his off-peg. That’s a Sharjah dismissal right there. 2nd over: England 13-0 (Roy 9, Buttler 4) That first over was the most profitable of the tournament so far and Buttler begins the second – bowled by the excellent Hasaranga – by turning a single into the leg side. 1st over: England 12-0 (Roy 9, Buttler 3) Roy twizzles Chameera’s loosener away behind square and they race through for two, but though he can only toe-end the second delivery – there’s that Sharjah low bounce – he guides the next down into the ground, through the covers, on the up and to the fence. That’s a delectable shot, it really is, and when it’s followed by a single to deep backward square, Buttler is there to ease away a three, which brings Roy back onto strike; he forces to deep point, and a fumble turns one into two. That’s 12 off the first over, with only one boundary – that’s ominous – and over the PA, we hear what sounds like a remix of Beggin’. It’s not great. The England players and staff take the knee; the Lankans stand to attention. Chameera, who has a bit of zip, will open the bowling... Righto, the players are with us; can Sri Lanka stop England monstering the powerplay? I wonder if and when England plan to use Mark Wood. Tymal Mills took some tap against Australia, so perhaps if similar happens today. But they’ve bowled so well it’s going to be hard to Morgan to make changes. Scuzz reckons the track might suit the Sri Lanka bowlers, but obviously still reckons his boys will sort them. If they can take pace off the ball, England might find it hard to find the fence, and if they’re under pressure when they bowl they might not do so as well as they have been. Might is a big word, though. The pitch looks shiny and has plenty of cracks, so we should see the ball skidding on; the boundaries are short. I like to think that whoever nicknamed Chris Jordan “CJ” was a Baywatch fan. I wonder if CJ Parker was ever abbreviated to “Ceej”. “That England team,” emails Andrew Benton. “They could win the Ashes.” It’s a funny thing isn’t it. There’ve been times I’ve thought, and probably printed, similar on here. I’m not sure there’s quite the bowling, though I’d love Rashid to have been given greater scope in Tests and Morgan is obviously a wonderful captain. I’d also enjoy Buttler teeing off – he could hardly have done a worse job than the various post-Cook openers – and you could even make a case that the true nature of Aussie pitches would suit Roy. Alternatively, they might get skittled for 32, which would not be unamusing. England: 1 Jason Roy, 2 Jos Buttler (wk), 3 Dawid Malan, 4 Jonny Bairstow, 5 Eoin Morgan (capt), 6 Liam Livingstone, 7 Moeen Ali, 8 Chris Woakes, 9 Chris Jordan, 10 Adil Rashid, 11 Tymal Mills. Sri Lanka: 1 Pathum Nissanka, 2 Kusal Perera (wk), 3 Charith Asalanka, 4 Dhananjaya de Silva, 5 Bhanuka Rajapaksa, 6 Dasun Shanaka (capt), 7 Chamika Karunaratne, 8 Wanindu Hasaranga, 9 Dushmantha Chameera, 10 Maheesh Theekshana, 11 Lahiru Kumara. If Sri Lanka won today, they can still qualify – they’ll need to beat West Indies too and hope South Africa and Australia lost their last two matches. England, meanwhile, will be more or less through with a win today; they could still finish level on points with the aforementioned, but their net run-rate should take care of them in that instance. Yes, you read that right - it’s not a misprint. He’s wearing a medallion. Sam Cuzz is in the Sky studio, hair bleached, with a blue jacket, pink rollneck and a medallion. It’s a mood. England would’ve chased too, and Eoin Morgan says that to win the tournament, you need to be able to bat first and second. He knows that conditions in Sharjah are different to elsewhere - Sri Lanka are used to them, England aren’t – but again, Morgan sees this as a positive. Both teams are unchanged. For the first time this tournament, England won’t be able to chase. That’s a deal – how big remains to be seen. “Re the photo of Liam Linvingstone warming up,” says Anthony Salisbury, “the EDGE of his bat is the same thickness as my ENTIRE bat! Presumably that is the (only?) reason these chaps hit the ball so far.” I daresay there’s a modicum of skill and power involved too, but yes, those edges are sub sub sub sub substantial. Email! “In a fantasy world it would be wonderful to see Gloucestershire’s Gilbert Jessop (Wisden cricketer of the year in 1898) play T20,” reckons Richard Davies. “He was the ultimate bar-emptier with an average hourly scoring-rate of more than 70. And in those days you had to hit the ball out of the ground to get a six.” Yup, the greatest one-day player that never was. In theory, T20 should be difficult to predict. The shortness of the format means that one incendiary blast can be enough to secure victory, and pretty much every team has at least one player capable of that. In theory. So far in this competition – and for much of the last few years – England have made a nonsense of that proposition, partly because they’ve so many incendiary blasters that it’s impossible to keep them all quiet and partly because they’re just so bloody good. Those of us mired in middle-age will never be entirely comfortable with this state of affairs, and writing the words is a bizarre experience, but here we are. So far in this World Cup, England have been devastating, and there’s no reason to think that’s going to change today – a slip-up would still leave their last-four participation in jeopardy. Though Sri Lanka are a much better outfit than the one which crumbled when visiting the green and pleasants just a few months ago, and though they’re still fighting for a semi-final spot, it’s hard to see where enough runs are coming from. But you never know – they did, after all, beat the favourites in the 50-over World Cup – and ultimately T20 is still T20 and England are still England, so while there’s a match there’s a chance. Play: 6pm local, 2pm GMTAbout 9,000 New York City municipal workers were put on unpaid leave for refusing to comply with a Covid-19 vaccine mandate that took effect on Monday, Mayor Bill de Blasio said, adding that thousands of firefighters had called out sick in apparent protest. Firehouses remained open but 18 of 350 units were out of service and “many units are understaffed”, Daniel Nigro, the fire commissioner, said. Officials have been battling fierce resistance among a minority of workers in some critical public safety jobs, including police officers and firefighters, with a pending legal challenge to the mandate from the largest police union. As of Sunday, one in four of uniformed New York firefighters had not had a first dose of the vaccine, as required. About one in six police personnel and one in six sanitation workers were still unvaccinated. About 2,300 firefighters were out sick, up from a norm of around 1,000 a day, in what Nigro said appeared to be a protest against the vaccine mandate. The fire department medical office normally saw about 200 people a day, Nigro said. Over the past week, it had been 700 a day, most of them unvaccinated. As officials prepared for staffing shortfalls, calling in vaccinated employees for overtime shifts, Nigro called on firefighters to stop misusing sick leave. “These are understaffed units,” he said. “That understaffing could end immediately if members stopped going sick when they weren’t sick. Once the members come to their senses and stop using medical leave improperly, they can help out not just the citizens of the city but their brothers and sisters staffing the units.” De Blasio said the city was watching to see if the firefighters union was coordinating the sick-outs and would take it to court if there was evidence of an illegal strike. He said firefighters found to be faking illness would be “awol effectively” and would face internal discipline. The head of the union that represents New York City firefighters, which has fought the vaccine mandate, warned that public safety could be at risk. The fire department has said it is prepared to take up to 20% of companies out of service and have 20% fewer ambulances on the road. “We’re here today because of a mandate that was put not only on our members, but also all New York City employees, given nine days to make a life-changing decision on their career or whether or not they’re going to take a vaccine,” said the Uniformed Firefighters Association president, Andrew Ansbro. On Friday, six firefighters were suspended for four weeks without pay after they drove a fire engine to the Brooklyn office of a New York state senator, Zellnor Myrie, to protest the vaccine mandate. According to Myrie’s spokesman, Matt Baer, the firefighters asked to discuss the mandate. They asked where the senator lived and said the city would have blood on its hands due to the mandate. Over the weekend, numerous FDNY members also protested outside Gracie Mansion, the mayor’s residence. Signs read “Essential Workers aren’t Disposable Heroes”, “My Body My Choice” and “#NaturalImmunity”.“Progress in AI is something that will take a while to happen, but [that] doesn’t make it science fiction.” So Stuart Russell, the University of California computing professor, told the Guardian at the weekend. The scientist said researchers had been “spooked” by their own success in the field. Prof Russell, the co-author of the top artificial intelligence (AI) textbook, is giving this year’s BBC’s Reith lectures – which have just begun – and his doubts appear increasingly relevant. With little debate about its downsides, AI is becoming embedded in society. Machines now recommend online videos to watch, perform surgery and send people to jail. The science of AI is a human enterprise that requires social limitations. The risks, however, are not being properly weighed. There are two emerging approaches to AI. The first is to view it in engineering terms, where algorithms are trained on specific tasks. The second presents deeper philosophical questions about the nature of human knowledge. Prof Russell engages with both these perspectives. The former is very much pushed by Silicon Valley, where AI is deployed to get products quickly to market and problems dealt with later. This has led to AI “succeeding” even when the goals aren’t socially acceptable and they are pursued with little accountability. The pitfalls of this approach are highlighted by the role YouTube’s algorithm plays in radicalising people, given that there is no public understanding of how it works. Prof Russell argues, reasonably, for a system of checks where machines can pause and “ask” for human guidance, and for regulations to deal with systemic biases. The academic also backs global adoption of EU legislation that would ban impersonation of humans by machines. Computers are getting closer to passing, in a superficial way, the Turing test – where machines attempt to trick people into believing they are communicating with other humans. Yet human knowledge is collective: to truly fool humans a computer would have to be able to grasp mutual understandings. OpenAI’s GPT-3, probably the best non-human writer ever, cannot comprehend what it spews. When Oxford scientists put it – and similar AIs – to the test this year, they found the machines produced false answers to questions that “mimic popular misconceptions and have the potential to deceive”. It so troubled one of OpenAI’s own researchers that no one knew how such language is being made that he left to set up an AI safety lab. Some argue that AI can already produce new insights that humans have missed. But human intelligence is much more than an algorithm. Inspiration strikes when a brilliant thought arises that can’t be explained as a logical consequence of preceding steps. Einstein’s theory of general relativity cannot be derived from observations of that age – it was experimentally proven only decades later. Human beings can also learn a new task by being shown how to do it only a few times. Machines, so far, cannot. Currently, AI can be prompted – but not prompt itself – into action. Ajeya Cotra, a tech analyst with the US-based Open Philanthropy Project, reckoned a computer that could match the human brain might arrive by 2052 (and come with a $1tn price tag). We need to find better ways to build it. Humans are stumbling into an era when the more powerful the AI system, the harder it is to explain its actions. How can we tell if a machine is acting on our behalf and not acting contrary to our interests? Such questions ought to give us all pause for thought.Prince Andrew’s attacks on Virginia Giuffre’s character in an attempt to get her sexual assault lawsuit against him thrown out may fail and risk doing further damage to his reputation, British lawyers have said. Having initially attempted to prevent service of the suit, which alleges that he sexually abused Giuffre when she was 17, the prince’s lawyers went on the offensive over the weekend in an attempt to get her “baseless” claim dismissed. Their filings accuse Giuffre of seeking a “payday” at Andrew’s expense and contain references from friends and in newspaper articles to her being a “money hungry sex kitten” and recruiting girls for the convicted sex trafficker Jeffrey Epstein, who died in custody in 2019, awaiting trial. At the same time they argue that a 2009 settlement agreement between Giuffre and Epstein, formerly a friend of Andrew, absolves the prince from responsibility, a notion rejected by Giuffre’s lawyer. Mark Stephens, a partner at Howard Kennedy and UK media law expert, said it would take a brave judge to dismiss the case and suggested Prince Andrew had potentially opened himself up to further embarrassment. “He’s obviously got fed up with the criticism that he’s taken so he has instructed lawyers to engage,” said Stephens. “The problem of course, is that he’s now embarked on a route towards a case. He’s saying it should be struck out because she’s unreliable but also that he’s covered by the plea deal from Epstein in any event, which seemed to be sort of contradictory. “The problem you’ve got is he clearly as a human being wants to explain himself, he wants to make clear that he’s not responsible but his only way of doing that is in the court hearing. And if he does that, he has to get into what he actually did with her, how did the photograph [with Giuffre] come to be taken etc [allies of Andrew have claimed the photo was faked and he says he has “no recollection” of meeting her] and she will undoubtedly give graphic and detailed evidence about what she says were their liaisons”. Andrew, 61, has “absolutely and categorically” denied having sex with Giuffre but the allegations have already done huge damage to his reputation. The Queen’s second son stepped back from royal duties in 2019 in the aftermath of a disastrous interview with Emily Maitlis for BBC’s Newsnight in which he was perceived as unsympathetic towards Epstein’s victims. His lawyers’ latest strategy risks exacerbating that perception, according to a senior partner at a leading London law firm, who described the allegations in the filings as a “smokescreen”. The solicitor, who did not want to be named, said: “This looks like putting up a smokescreen to tarnish her [Giuffre’s] reputation but it has no legal relevance whatsoever. Whether or not she was complicit in assisting Epstein with his child abuse is neither here nor there when you consider the allegations against Prince Andrew, which are that he raped and molested her. However he tarnishes her character, it makes absolutely no difference to that issue.” He said an English judge would ignore it and while there was more chance of US jurors being swayed by it, there was no guarantee. “A jury might think, ‘This is an American citizen, and who’s this prince trying to blacken the character of one of our own?’, so it’s a high-risk strategy even with a jury, I would have thought,” he said. In her lawsuit, Giuffre alleged the prince “stonewalled”, rejecting a request to explore alternative dispute resolution. The attempts to challenge service and jurisdiction further raised uncertainty about his level of engagement with the case but Richard Spafford, partner at Reed Smith, said it was “fairly standard” to try to stop the lawsuit in its tracks and only when those tactics failed, address the actual merits of the case. “I can only assume that it’s been decided within his advisory team that, notwithstanding the fact that his application will attract publicity, that it’s nonetheless the appropriate step to take,” said Spafford. “On the basis of that there must be a view that these arguments raise the possibility that the case will be dismissed by the judge, or, alternatively, that the plaintiff may be more likely to conclude that it’s appropriate to settle it.” Thomas Garner, partner at Fladgate, said the attacks on Giuffre showed the gloves were off even if it might do “irreparable” damage to the prince’s reputation. “If there was any doubt as to how he would handle the claim, this application makes it clear that if [the judge] doesn’t dismiss the claim then Prince Andrew intends to go on the attack,” he said.So that answers that one, then. In a tournament where everything had gone England’s way, this time it all went against them: asked to bat first after losing the toss, labouring to work out how to pace their innings, bowling as dew drenched the outfield on a heavy, humid night, watching Tymal Mills limp off midway through his second over to shred their death bowling plans as Sri Lanka accelerated towards their target. But they refused to throw in the towel – after all, they needed it to soak dew off the ball – and thanks to the genius of Jos Buttler an often unpleasant evening became one to savour. Sri Lanka were beaten by 26 runs and with a 100% record after four games a place in the semi-finals is all but secured. Buttler led the team off, his colleagues walking 10 paces behind and applauding him all the way. Forty-eight hours after his 32-ball 71 powered England to victory over Australia in Dubai, their diamond demonstrated several other facets of his brilliance with a 67-ball century, transforming an innings that for a while, as so many have in this tournament, got lost in the doldrums. But with the wind in his sails there are few batters to match Buttler and he accelerated to his first international Twenty20 century – becoming the second English player, after Heather Knight, to hit hundreds in all three formats – by lifting the final ball of the innings over square-leg for six. Over the course of 20 overs he was England’s opener, their anchor and their finisher. How they needed him. The thing about auras of invincibility is that, handsome as they are when they settle upon you, they are not very hardwearing. Just a couple of scratches and off it comes. It had taken three wonderfully dominant victories for England to construct the one they sported coming into this fixture, but within 20 minutes it was looking distinctly ragged. What has set this England team apart as they have clambered from white-ball ignominy to supremacy over the past six years is an unwavering consistency of intent. They go hard and, no matter the circumstances, they keep going hard. No let-up, no respite. Here, though, for an extended period they went worryingly limp. On an unfamiliar ground, on a wicket that was skating-rink flat and sometimes similarly skiddy, they could not find their footing for a long time. It did not help their cause that Sri Lanka, who had played three times in Sharjah at this World Cup, have a gem of their own in Wanindu Hasaranga, who claimed the wickets of Jason Roy, Jonny Bairstow and Eoin Morgan in four excellent overs. He has taken 34 wickets in 2021, the most by any bowler in any single year in this format. But once Buttler started his acceleration Sri Lanka had no answer. His first 50 took 45 balls and his second 22, as he made the short boundaries look positively microscopic. Morgan took 19 balls to reach eight and then another 17 to reach 40 and between them they dragged England to a total of 163 for four. Sri Lanka, so soundly beaten in England in June and July, are a rapidly improving side, and this was a compelling contest until the final minutes. Once again England took three wickets in the powerplay, but Sri Lanka remained on some kind of track to reach their target until a dramatic late implosion. Mills’s injury helped, the fast bowler pulling up halfway through the 14th over to force Morgan into an on-the-hoof rethink of England’s tactical plans. He settled on a devilishly cunning one: robbed of the man who often bowls the 20th over, England ended the match in 19. Hasaranga was primarily responsible for keeping Sri Lanka’s hopes alive that long, the 24-year-old scoring 34 off 21 and putting on 53 for the sixth wicket with his captain, Dasun Shanaka. But once he went the innings crumbled in a few chaotic minutes of wild hitting and superlative fielding. It started with Hasaranga scooping Liam Livingstone to long-off, where Jason Roy sprinted to his left and aware that he was heading inexorably towards the rope tossed the ball to the substitute fielder, Sam Billings, to complete the catch. Four balls later Shanaka was run out by Buttler, running around from behind the stumps, flinging off his gloves as he went, before hitting the stumps from 15 yards. Three catches in the deep later 129 for five had become 137 all out. Sri Lanka had shown that England are fallible, but they could not make them fall.Scandals at Barclays have cost the UK bank two chief executives in less than a decade. We take a look at some of the controversies that have plagued the bank since the 2008 financial crisis. 2012: Financial crisis fundraising The Serious Fraud Office launches an investigation in 2012, and eventually accuses Barclays bankers of funnelling secret fees to Qatari investors in exchange for emergency funding at the height of the financial crisis in 2008. It resulted in the only criminal trial brought against UK banking executives during the financial crisis, and involved four senior bankers, including the chief executive, John Varley. Varley was acquitted by an appeals court in June 2019, while the three remaining executives were found not guilty in a criminal trial in February 2020. 2012: Libor rigging scandal Barclays is fined for manipulating the benchmark Libor interest rate in 2012, after revelations stretching back to 2005. The scandal, which engulfed a number of its global banking peers, results in the resignation of its chief executive, Bob Diamond, after just 18 months in the post. 2013: Salz review An independent review of Barclays’ business practices urges the bank to strengthen its board, cooperate more closely with City watchdogs, and link pay more closely to the bank’s performance after discovering a “winning at all costs” culture at the lender. 2017: Whistleblowing scandal The chief executive, Jes Staley, is fined almost £650,000 and ordered to repay £500,000 of his bonus for twice attempting to unmask a whistleblower in 2016. Staley used the bank’s internal security unit to try to discover who had written letters to the board regarding a new hire at Barclays, who was also a former friend and colleague of Staley’s at JP Morgan. Staley later apologised to the bank’s board. 2017: KKR dispute Staley caused a rift between the bank and its private equity client KKR after backing his brother-in-law in a complicated legal dispute with the buyout house. While Staley argued that he was involved in a personal capacity, rather than as chief executive of Barclays, it strained the bank’s relationship with one of its longtime clients. 2020: Staveley lawsuit Businesswoman Amanda Staveley takes Barclays to court after learning that it had offered her Abu Dhabi client a worse deal than that it offered to Qatari investors when it was seeking emergency funding in 2008. Staveley lost the court battle in February 2021, despite the judge finding that the bank was “guilty of serious deceit” in the way it raised money to avoid a UK government bailout at the height of the financial crisis. 2020: Epstein investigation Barclays announces that City regulators have opened an investigation into Staley over his characterisation of his relationship with the sex offender and disgraced financier Jeffrey Epstein to Barclays, and “the subsequent description of that relationship in the company’s response to the FCA [Financial Conduct Authority]”. Staley resigns in November 2021 after being made aware of the preliminary findings of the inquiry, but plans to contest its conclusions.On average around 4,300 cases a week are heard in the family courts in England and Wales – adding up to a total of 224,902 last year. It is estimated that 62% of cases involve allegations of domestic abuse. Almost a quarter are disputes between separating or separated couples, usually over their children. For the past three years, the number of applications for children to be taken into council care has been around 13,000; the number in care now stands at a record 80,000, up from 65,000 a decade ago. Yet despite such startling figures, and the strong public interest in understanding the societal issues that underlie them, remarkably little is known by most people about what goes on in family courts. What is known is more likely to be anecdotal, via word of mouth or personal experience, than by a formal public channel such as the press or other media. That’s because since 1960 there has been a presumption of secrecy in all cases involving children. Journalists and legal bloggers have the right to attend court, but not to report on what goes on there. In recent years there have been several attempts to open up the courts to increased scrutiny, while continuing to respect confidentiality so that children are never publicly identified. But the transparency review published last week by the president of the high court’s family division, Sir Andrew McFarlane, should ensure that real change at last takes place. Having convened a panel and taken evidence, Sir Andrew has come down emphatically on the side of journalists and open justice campaigners. His report says that the pace of change so far has been “glacial”, and calls for a “major shift in culture and process” so that openness becomes “the new norm”. Specifically, journalists will be allowed to report on what goes on in family courts as of right, subject to anonymisation, and family members will be allowed to speak to reporters. Judges will be instructed to publish 10% of their judgments in anonymised form. More details of cases will be included on court lists, and there will be an annual report. Sir Andrew also wants to build a relationship of trust between the judiciary and the media, starting with a pilot reporting scheme in two areas. Sensitive questions remain. These include which documents reporters will have access to, particularly when these include descriptions of abuse. There are also resource considerations, both on the courts’ and on the press’s side. With the court service already under enormous pressure due to legal aid and other cuts, and rising poverty and the withdrawal of support services leading to higher caseloads, it is not clear how the anonymising of thousands of judgments will be accomplished. It remains to be seen what use news organisations will make of the increased access, at a time when coverage of the criminal courts has been reduced. But these are caveats. The overarching purpose, as Sir Andrew sets out, is not merely to reveal what goes in the family courts but to learn from it. More data, and the accountability that follows from increased scrutiny, should be expected to lead to improved practice. Family judges hold immense power, and society as a whole would benefit from an increased understanding of what they do, why they do it, and how this alters the course of hundreds of thousands of lives every year.Plants that look and smell like parsnips but are highly poisonous and potentially deadly have been washed up on beaches in Cumbria after the recent stormy weather. Coastguards have warned people to avoid the plants called hemlock water dropwort (Oenanthe crocata), which is also known as dead man’s fingers. The coastguard rescue team based in Millom said they had received reports of the plant being washed up on local beaches. “Even a small portion can prove fatal to humans by attacking the nervous system,” they said on their Facebook page. “It is also fatal to animals. The plant has a highly poisonous root that looks and smells like parsnip. “It is highly likely that this is happening due to the aftermath of recent stormy weather. We advise people, especially with children and animals, to stay vigilant, avoid this plant and take extra care when visiting the beach.” Hemlock water dropwort, with leaves and stems which look like parsley, is one of Britain’s most poisonous indigenous plants. Eating it can cause nausea, vomiting, fever, seizures and hallucination. Deaths have occurred but are far more common in animals than humans, said Geoff Dann, a foraging teacher and writer who is about to publish a new book on edible plants. “It is known to kill livestock. Usually what happens is that it gets disturbed by the edge of a river by earthworks, or something, and the roots are exposed and are eaten by livestock. “There are also cases of people digging it up and thinking it is a plant you can eat, like water parsnip or wild celery … but that is pretty rare.” It is highly poisonous “but you’d have to eat a lot of it to die”, he said. “They are great big fat tubers, but who walks along a beach and picks up a random wild plant washed up on a beach and eats it? It seems a weird thing to do.” Deaths are rare but the unpleasantness and dangers of the plant was highlighted by a report in the Emergency Medical Journal (EMJ) about eight young adults on holiday in Argyll. They collected what they thought were water parsnips from a stream and made a curry. Ten hours later one of the group had a seizure and was taken to hospital. Others also became unwell and nauseous and a further person had be admitted to hospital after eating leftovers. The EMJ report concluded: “It is possible that with increasing interest in ‘natural’ foods, accidental poisoning of this nature may become more frequent. These cases illustrate the potential dangers of this, but highlight the fact that even in small communities expertise is available and if accessed appropriately can be invaluable.” Researchers in Italy have also written that hemlock water dropwort was used in pre-Roman Sardinia for the ritual killing of older people considered a burden. The plant, it has been said, leaves corpses with what could be described as a sardonic grin. Dann said the plant was not Britain’s most toxic. That accolade, he believes, should go to monkshood, or wolf’s bane. “There was a case a few years ago of a guy clearing it and he had a cut on his hand. The sap went in to the cut and it was enough to kill him.”Donald Trump was to host a Virginia campaign event on Monday for Glenn Youngkin, the Republican candidate for governor in a race headed down to the wire. But Youngkin was not planning to participate, as he attempted to balance appeals to the former president’s supporters with a semblance of independence. Trump hoped a phone-in “tele rally” would hoist Youngkin past his Democratic opponent, the former governor Terry McAuliffe. The contest is seen by many as a referendum on the Biden presidency and a bellwether for midterm elections next year. On the day before polling day, the realclearpolitics.com polling average had Youngkin ahead by less than two points. Fivethirtyeight.com put the Republican up by one. McAuliffe had scheduled rallies in Roanoke, Virginia Beach and Richmond and in northern Virginia. Youngkin was to rally in Roanoke, Richmond, Virginia Beach and Loudon county. In Richmond, Youngkin addressed “an energetic crowd of what his campaign said was around 800 people” at a small airport, the Associated Press reported. “This is a moment for Virginians to push back on this left, liberal progressive agenda and take our commonwealth back,” he said. McAuliffe, who has called himself a “pro-business pro-progressive”, is a close ally of Bill and Hillary Clinton and has campaigned with President Joe Biden, Vice-President Kamala Harris, former president Barack Obama and other high-profile Democrats. Nonetheless he has struggled to generate enthusiasm in a state Biden won by 10 points. Youngkin, a businessman, has not appeared with Trump. On Saturday, he told reporters: “I’m not going to be engaged in the tele-town hall. The teams are talking, I’m sure.” Youngkin has however comfortably dealt in Trump-esque attack lines, most prominently and potentially fruitfully focusing on how race is taught in schools. In return McAuliffe has sought to tie Youngkin firmly to Trump, not a tough task in the debate over education. Youngkin has repeatedly raised the subject of critical race theory, an academic discipline turned into a bogeyman by Republicans nationwide. CRT examines the ways in which racism operates in US laws and society. It is not taught in Virginia public schools. Regardless, Youngkin has treated it as a genuine threat, stoking anger on the right, and has promised to ban it. Speaking to NBC’s Meet the Press on Sunday, McAuliffe said Youngkin had gone too far. Citing a meeting with a voter in Hampton, he said the former school board member told him “our school boards were fine. Soon as Glenn Youngkin got nominated, all of a sudden, these people started showing up, creating such a ruckus, calling such obscene things”. “This was an African American woman,” McAuliffe said. “I can’t repeat on air what they’ve said about her. This was last night, up here in northern Virginia … we just lost a school board member … She said, ‘I was getting death threats. But when they said they were going to rape my children, I can’t take it anymore.’ “That’s what Glenn Youngkin has done here in Virginia. He’s created hatred and division just like Donald Trump, and that’s why Donald Trump, his final campaign is going to be for Glenn Youngkin here in Virginia. “We don’t want Trump. We don’t want Youngkin. We don’t want the hatred and division.” In a statement on Monday, Trump freely demonstrated his willingness to exploit hatred and division. Taking barely veiled shots at the Lincoln Project – anti-Trump Republicans who have campaigned against him in Virginia, sometimes controversially, and who Trump referred to only as “perverts” – the former president said his enemies were “trying to create an impression that Glenn Youngkin and I are at odds and don’t like each other. “Importantly, this is not true. We get along very well together and strongly believe in many of the same policies, especially when it comes to the important subject of education.” Trump reiterated the need for Republicans to vote. He also sought to thread the needle between his insistence on mass voter fraud against him and the need for high Republican turnout – a trick he failed to pull off in Georgia in January, when Democrats won two Senate runoffs. If enough of his supporters voted, Trump said, they would overcome the fact that he was “not a believer in the integrity of Virginia’s elections”.The engine maker Rolls-Royce has entered into a long-term partnership with the Gulf state of Qatar to invest billions in green engineering projects to fund entrepreneurs finding new ways to help transition to net zero. The deal will include the creation of about 1,000 jobs at two campuses – one in northern England and one in Qatar – where climate technology businesses will be created, launched and developed. It is hoped that a further 10,000 roles will be created at the businesses launched at the campuses and in the wider clean-tech economy. The goal is for five “unicorn” companies – private firms valued at more than $1bn (£732m) – to be created at the centres by 2030, rising to 20 by 2040, which would in time provide returns to investors. The design of the campuses and the exact UK location has yet to be decided, and there will need to be access to local skills and manufacturing supply chain. Derby-based Rolls-Royce has several sites and suppliers based in the north of England. The Qatar Foundation, the state’s non-profit organisation created in 1995 to focus on education and research, will provide the funding to develop the campuses and support their operations for two decades. Meanwhile, Rolls-Royce will bring the knowhow in engineering and high-end manufacturing, and will use the centre to develop emerging climate technologies. Startup businesses will be provided with academic help and funding for research and development on campus, combined with early-stage venture capital investment, so they can test, prove and later scale-up their technologies. Rolls-Royce has an ongoing relationship with the state-owned Qatar Airways, which is one of the company’s biggest customers for its Trent jet engines. Warren East, the chief executive of Rolls-Royce, called the transition to net zero “a societal imperative and an excellent commercial opportunity”. He added that the company wanted to accelerate the energy transition in sectors that were the hardest to decarbonise. The firm, which is also pushing ahead with plans to create a fleet of mini nuclear reactors, has pledged to reach net zero emissions from its operations by 2030. “This partnership with Qatar Foundation will enable us to accelerate progress in clean energy, including by allowing us to fully take advantage of nascent technologies that could have a significant impact on tackling climate change,” East said. The venture was announced on the sidelines of the Cop26 climate crisis conference, being held in Glasgow, as the British prime minister, Boris Johnson, met the emir of Qatar, Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad al-Thani. Qatar is the smallest – and richest per capita – of the Gulf states, as well as the world’s biggest exporter of liquefied natural gas. However, its partnership with Rolls-Royce will enable it to take its place in the top five countries globally that are investing in research and development in clean energy. Part of Qatar’s 2030 national strategy involves gradual economic diversification away from a dependence on fossil fuels such as oil and gas.The BBC has rejected complaints that it published a transphobic article and has instead given a commitment to covering different viewpoints in the name of impartiality. The corporation has faced protests outside some of its regional newsrooms, petitions from trans campaign groups and disquiet among many LGBTQ+ staff members over a piece published online last week entitled “We’re being pressured into sex by some trans women”. On Monday the BBC said it stood by the article about the experience of some lesbians, adding it had been subject to a rigorous editing process, and that it met its editorial guidelines. In response to people who said the piece was “transphobic and poorly evidenced”, the BBC said: “We have a strong commitment to impartiality, which means we constantly consider and evaluate which stories to cover and how. Impartiality is fundamental, and includes covering stories on any point of the spectrum of debate. And stories should be seen not just individually, but in the broader context of our wider coverage.” Tim Davie, the corporation’s director general, has repeatedly emphasised the need for impartiality and including a wider range of viewpoints in the BBC’s output. However, there remains confusion within the BBC over topics that are considered beyond debate in the corporation’s news output and which topics are considered matters of political debate, where multiple arguments must always be presented in the name of impartiality. Many external critics of last week’s article focused on its use of a self-selecting survey of 80 people produced by a small campaign group that has claimed trans activism within the LGBTQ+ movement is erasing lesbians. The BBC argued that the lack of data on whether lesbians are being pressured to have sex with trans women justified the caveated inclusion of the group’s survey, which was just one part of a longer piece. The BBC said readers are free to click a link to the survey findings and “make up their own minds” about the validity of the responses. One BBC source saidthe broadcaster has received 4,819 complaints about the article but a further 5,520 people wrote in to note their approval of the piece. The Guardian understands the article had been the subject of debate for some time before it was published and was subject to extensive back-and-forth editing. Bosses were acutely aware of the likely reaction to it on social media – and among the BBC’s own staff, who are often deeply split on the issue of trans rights. Because it was reported by a Nottingham-based journalist in one of the BBC’s regional newsrooms, it was ultimately the responsibility of the BBC England division. Although the distinction would not be apparent to the typical reader, this means it was subject to a different editorial commissioning process to material produced out of the BBC’s national news headquarters. It was also published soon after the release of a 10-part podcast made by BBC Northern Ireland’s Stephen Nolan which looked at whether the BBC had itself been “captured” by the LGBTQ+ rights organisation Stonewall. That series was alternately celebrated and decried by BBC staff, depending on their attitude towards trans rights.The conference is over for today. So it’s goodbye from me for now. We’ll be back tomorrow morning, but here’s a roundup of what’s happened this afternoon: Biden apologises for Trump quitting the Paris UN climate agreement: “We will demonstrate to the world the United States is not only back at the table but hopefully leading by the power of our example,” he said. China’s president, Xi Jinping, called for developed countries to “provide support to help developing countries do better” in dealing with the climate crisis, in a written statement that failed to make any new significant pledges. Xi, along with Jair Bolsonaro of Brazil and Vladimir Putin of Russia, decided not to appear in person at the summit. India has pledged to target of net zero emissions by 2070. He also committed to India getting half of its energy from renewable resources by 2030. Modi demanded developed countries make $1tn available as climate finance. While not attending the conference in person, Bolsonaro claimed in a speech today that when it comes to fighting climate change, Brazil had always been part of the solution, not the problem. Finally, it emerged later in the day that Boris Johnson would be flying back from the Cop26 climate conference on a private plane rather than getting the train. Johnson flew into Cop26 in Glasgow from Rome after attending the G20 meeting of world leaders. Prince Charles also flew from Rome to Glasgow on a private plane separately from the prime minister. My colleague Nina Lakhani is at a protest in Kelvingrove Park. She says hundreds of climate activists from Scotland and across the world have been prevented from holding a protest outside the Kelvingrove museum where world leaders will be dining tonight. Police have blocked every road into the Park and the lights have been switched off making it dangerous for walking with wet leaves covering the ground. Still not to be deterred, protesters armed with banners and drums are trying to find away to the main road where the leaders will Drive past. There’s a huge police presence. When asked how residents could get to their homes, one cop advised ‘they come back tomorrow’. Cat Scothorne from Glasgow Calls Out Polluters said: “How dare these world leaders have a fancy dinner on the first night of COP26, as if they have something to be proud of. The continued support of the fossil fuel industry by the heads of state, particularly in the global North, is killing millions of people. The consequences of climate change are faced by people not in power, but those mainly in the global South and people on sites where extraction occurs, yet the perpetrators sit in luxury, insulated from it all.” Angela Mendes, daughter of murdered Amazon rainforest defender, Chico Mendes said: “The Amazon is burning while leaders share toasts by the Clyde. It’s essential that real action is taken to stop the destruction of our rainforests and respect the people who live here. We have been blocked from being at the meetings but we will not be held hostage by nationalist governments. We know how to live in harmony with nature - our rights must be respected!” Downing Street has defended Boris Johnson’s decision to return from the Cop26 climate change summit by plane, citing “significant time constraints”. The Prime Minister’s official spokesman confirmed Mr Johnson will fly back to London from Glasgow when the leaders’ conference section of the summit ends this week, PA Media reported. Pressed on why the Prime Minister could not go by train for a journey within the UK, the spokesman said it was important he was able to travel round the country while facing “significant time constraints”. He said the private charter jet he is using for the flight uses a special mix of “sustainable” aviation fuel and is one of the most carbon-efficient aircraft of its size, while the emissions will also be offset. It produces less than half the emissions produced by the RAF Voyager which the Prime Minister sometimes uses for foreign travel. The spokesman said: Our approach to tackling climate change is to use technology so that we do not have to change how we use modes of transport, rather we use technology on things like electric vehicles so that we can still get to net zero. That has very much been at the core of our approach.” It is important that the Prime Minister is able to move round the country and obviously we face significant time constraints. The plane the Prime Minister used on his travels is one of the most carbon-efficient planes of its size in the world. It produces 50% less CO2 emissions than, for example, the larger, Voyager plane. It uses a specific type of fuel that is a blend of 35% sustainable aviation fuel and 65% normal fuel, which is the maximum amount allowed. Mr Johnson used the aircraft, operated by Titan Airways, to fly out to the G20 summit in Rome on Friday and then carried on to Glasgow on Sunday. On India’s pledge to reach net zero emissions by 2070, eminent climate economist Prof Nicholas Stern, at the London School of Economics, has said: “This was a very significant moment for the summit. [The action] might mean that India’s annual emissions of greenhouse gases could peak by 2030. This demonstrates real leadership from a country whose emissions per capita are about one-third of the global average. The rich world must respond [and] deliver a strong increase in international climate finance.” In response to President Biden’s speech at COP26, Thomas Damassa, Oxfam America’s associate director for Climate Change, urged the US and other rich countries to ramp up investments toward the $100 billion promised every year to help poorer nations adapt to climate change and reduce emissions. Additionally, rich countries must find a way forward to address climate impacts in vulnerable countries and establish a new funding mechanism for loss and damage. Back in Washington, the US must back up its global climate commitments with congressional action. The time has come to end the chokehold fossil fuels have on our economy by ending subsidies that allow fossil fuel companies to profit even more from climate destruction. My colleagues Oliver Milman and Nina Lakhani have now published an update on Biden’s speech this afternoon. It includes reports of an apology from Biden about Donald Trump: At a side event, Biden also effectively apologised for his predecessor. “I guess I shouldn’t apologize, but I do apologize for the fact that the United States – the last administration – pulled out of the Paris accords and put us sort of behind the eight ball,” Biden said. Meanwhile, China has called on developed countries to “provide support to help developing countries do better” in dealing with the climate crisis, in a written statement to the Cop26 climate conference that fails to make any new significant pledges. India will meet a target of net zero emissions by 2070, the country’s prime minister Narendra Modi has told the Cop26 global climate summit. This was one of five pledges he listed at the world leaders’ summit at the UN conference in Glasgow. The others included that India will increase its non fossil energy capacity to 500 GW by 2030 and it will get half of its energy from renewable resources by the same date. He also pledged that India will reduce its projected carbon emissions by one billion tonnes between now and 2030, and reduce the carbon intensity of its economy by 45%. Some commentators on Twitter saying India should be given financial support to bring that 2070 date forward. It’s also brought some much-needed optimism to the conference for others at the end of day 1. This was the full doomsday quote from Boris Johnson earlier: It’s one minute to midnight on the doomsday clock and we need to act now. If we don’t get serious about climate change today, it will be too late for our children to get serious about it tomorrow. We can get real on coal, cars, cash and trees. We have the technology to deactivate that doomsday ticking device. We all talk about what we’re going to do in 2050, or 2060.... the average age of this conclave of leaders is over 60. The children that will judge us are children not yet born, and their children... if we fail they will not forgive us. They will know that Glasgow was that historic turning point when history failed to turn. They will judge us with bitterness and resentment. Some interesting reaction to Boris Johnson’s James Bond moment in his speech this morning, where he drew an analogy between a ticking bomb that Bond must defuse in a film and the situation humanity finds itself in. I’d be stroking my cat if I were a oil and gas lobbyist, says professor Myles Allen, director of the Oxford Net Zero initiative. Boris Johnson has compared COP26 to a James Bond scenario – well, if I were an oil and gas industry lobbyist, I’d be stroking my cat at how well it is all going. You can smell the red herrings from Oxford. Everyone is taking every opportunity to talk about anything except the main point, which is how we stop fossil fuels from causing global warming before the world stops using fossil fuels. The answer is simple: we need to enforce safe and permanent disposal of carbon dioxide, as a licensing condition of selling fossil fuels, and stop fly-tipping it into the atmosphere like Glasgow’s bin-bags. The Guardian’s environment editor, Damian Carrington, reports that while Brazil’s Jair Bolsonaro is not at Cop26, he has made a speech today that is extraordinary given the Amazon rainforest destruction that his presidency has resulted in. “Brazil is a green powerhouse. When it comes to fighting climate change, we have always been part of the solution, not the problem,” said Bolsonaro. “We will favour actions and projects for forest conservation, rational use of natural resources, mitigation of greenhouse gases emissions and, mostly, the creation of ‘green jobs’. “We will act responsibly, developing real solutions for an urgent transition,” he said. “We are committed to providing better living conditions for all Brazilians, and thus contributing to a better quality of life in the whole world. Brazil is part of the solution to overcome this global challenge. The results already achieved by our country until 2020 demonstrate that we can further raise our ambition.” Brazil also increased its pledge to cut emissions today, from 43% to 50% by 2030, although the baseline year is unclear. However, Amazon forest defenders today urged delegates at Cop26 not to trust the “greenwashing” promises of Bolsonaro’s government. They said the world should pay more attention to Brazil’s destructive policies of the recent past than to vague promises about the future, which they say are aimed at securing cash from rich nations. Carlos Rittl, at the Rainforest Foundation Norway, said: “The world needs to hold Brazil accountable to the truth. The satellites don’t lie.” Bolsonaro’s green turn is ascribed to Donald Trump no longer being US president: while Trump was in office, Bolsonaro was emboldened to denigrate international cooperation on the world stage, but no longer. Nonetheless, Bolsonaro’s supporters in Congress are still trying to change the law to allow more legal forest clearance and invasions of indigenous land. Joe Biden from the US, Emmanuel Macron from France, Joko Widodo from Indonesia, Angela Merkel from Germany and Justin Trudeau from Canada have all now given speeches at the conference this afternoon. But three world leaders who won’t be here in person will be Xi Jinping of China, Jair Bolsonaro of Brazil and Vladimir Putin of Russia - countries seen as key to the summit’s success. It appears that coverage of the Cop26 in some of the countries where the leader is not attending is unfavourable. The details of the speech by China’s president, Xi Jinping, to the conference this afternoon are starting to emerge (it will be a written statement only - see earlier post) Speeches from the leaders of the world’s biggest emitters including China, Germany and the United States may garner most of the attention today, but we have also been hearing from representatives of smaller emitting countries whose populations are most at risk from the climate crisis. Sonam Phuntsho Wangdi (the Kingdom of Bhutan) is chair of the Least Developed Countries Group at UN climate change negotiations, which represents the world’s poorest 48 nations. World leaders will be “cursed” if they fail to reach an agreement on climate change, warns the archbishop of Canterbury, Justin Welby. From BBC political editor Laura Kuenssberg Earlier today, before US president, Joe Biden, spoke, Nina Lakhani, climate justice reporter for Guardian US, was outside the Cop26 blue zone entrance where American grassroots activists from Build Back Fossil Free gathered to demand Biden take executive action to stop the approval of fossil fuel projects and declare a climate emergency. Those present included representatives of frontline communities who suffer the impacts of oil and gas production, as well as climate justice activists arrested in Washington DC last month. Protesters are enraged at Biden’s watering down of his campaign promises to tackle the climate emergency. His narrative of “climate leadership” contradicts the daily suffering by communities on the frontline of gas and oil production in the US, they say. In the first six months of the Biden administration, around 2,500 new oil and gas permits were authorised – a figure Trump’s administration took a year to reach. After making big promises on confronting the climate crisis during last year’s election campaign, Biden comes to Glasgow with even weakened climate provisions faltering in Congress. His latest Build Back Better framework offers no policy to limit fossil fuel production. Last month, more than 600 activists were arrested during a week of protests in Washington DC known as People vs Fossil Fuels Speakers include Black and indigenous leaders whose communities are on the frontline of fossil fuel extraction impacts including air pollution and contaminated drinking water and land across the US. Tom Goldtooth, Native American leader from the Indigenous Environmental Network, said: “We’re here as the original people of the US to denounce the polluters conference – it’s not a climate conference – it’s been taken over by corporate interests. If we Indigenous people don’t come we’ll be on the menu. We’re here to defend our people, we want to live.” Collin Rees, 31, a climate activist from Oil Change International, was detained in Washington last month. “Joe Biden could stop 24 fossil fuel projects with the stroke of pen which would prevent 1.6 gigatons of carbon entering the atmosphere – more than his congressional plan. He cannot come here and talk about climate leadership when he could be doing so much more.” Biden finishes his speech saying his administration is working to rebuild trust in the US’s commitment to tackling climate change. This is a reference to former president Donald Trump’s decision to withdraw from the UN Paris climate agreement in 2019 (the US formally left in 2020 but rejoined in 2021 after Biden had taken over as president). High energy prices are a call to action, says Joe Biden and only reinforce the urgent need to diversify sources and double-down on clean energy development. The US president, Joe Biden, has just started speaking, saying climate change is destroying livelihoods every day. We can keep 1.5C within reach if we come together and do our part as nations, he says. As world leaders are making their speeches at the conference more than 1 million people have signed an open letter from climate activists, including Vanessa Nakate and Greta Thunberg, listing five key demands from them at the conference: Keep the precious goal of 1.5C alive with immediate, drastic, annual emission reductions. End all fossil fuel investments, subsidies, and new projects immediately, and stop new exploration and extraction. End ‘creative’ carbon accounting by publishing total emissions for all consumption indices, supply chains, international aviation and shipping, and the burning of biomass. Deliver the $100bn promised to the most vulnerable countries, with additional funds for climate disasters. Enact climate policies that protect workers and the most vulnerable, and reduce all forms of inequality. World leaders will continue giving their opening statements to delegates this afternoon, with US president Joe Biden and French president Emmanuel Macron among those due to speak. One very notable absence will be China’s president Xi Jinping, who will not address the conference in person or via video. The official schedule simply states: ‘Written statement to be uploaded on the conference website.’ China has said recently that it will aim to peak its emissions by 2030 and reach net zero emissions by 2060. But analysts say the country could peak emissions by 2025, which would be a major boost to global efforts to remain within 1.5C. I’m Tom Levitt and I’ll be here posting updates of those speeches and other updates from the conference throughout the rest of the afternoon. You can email me at tom.levitt.casual@theguardian.com, or send me a message on Twitter at @tom_levitt. The opening ceremony is over, and Cop26 has officially begun. Here’s a short roundup of what’s happened so far today: Huge queues outside the venue as delegates and observers were made to wait for hours outside. After a 25-minute delay, the UK prime minister, Boris Johnson, opened the conference with a speech warning his fellow leaders that they will be judged by generations of children who have yet to be born. UN secretary general António Guterres said countries should update their climate pledges annually rather than every five years. My colleague Tom Levitt will be taking over the blog for the afternoon, when we’re expecting short speeches from many more world leaders. You can reach him at tom.levitt.casual@theguardian.com, or @tom_levitt on Twitter. We asked Guardian readers around the world to send their messages for world leaders, and we have published a selection of their responses. Sachin Ganpat from Trinidad and Tobago says: “Where I live now is likely to be flooded out by rising seas in less than 100 years. It means my grandchildren are unlikely to continue to live in our generational home – I’m the third generation to live here. The area we live in used to flood once every 10 years, now it’s every year. In the Caribbean, it’s become a waiting game every hurricane season. There is a sense of helplessness. We need you to commit to taking drastic action and to actually do it. There is no more time left to delay.” Read more from Sachin and other readers in Indonesia, the Netherlands, Norway, the UK, France, the US and Brazil here: Greenpeace UK’s head of politics, Rebecca Newsom, has responded to Boris Johnson’s speech: “Boris Johnson was right to match a grave tone about the climate crisis with words of hope about the potential for more action over the next fortnight. But with just one minute to midnight on the climate clock, why is the prime minister still taking steps in the opposite direction? “Today’s announcement about UK climate finance is a complete distraction as it’s not new money and it’s not even guaranteed. Meanwhile, Johnson has left the door open to new oil and gas licences at a time when climate scientists and energy experts have made clear this is incompatible with the global goal of limiting warming to 1.5C. We hope world leaders listen to Johnson’s warnings, but maybe he needs to listen to them himself.” “Children cannot live on words and empty promises, They are waiting for you to act. Please open your hearts,” says Wathuti. And with that, the opening ceremony is over. She invites leaders to join her in a moment’s silence for the billions of people whose stories are not being heard. “Please open your hearts,” she urges them. “If you allow yourself to feel it, the heartbreak and injustice is hard to bear.” “I have seen with my own eyes three young children crying at the side of a dried-up river after walking 12 miles with their mother to find water,” she says. Algeria, Uganda and Nigeria are also being hit hard by the impacts of climate breakdown, she says. By 2050, half the world’s population will face water scarcity, and 86 million people will have been displaced in sub-Saharan Africa alone, she says. Young Kenyan activist Elizabeth Wathuti closes the ceremony. She talks about what is happening in her home country. “Over 2 million of my fellow Kenyans are facing climate-related starvation. In this past year, both of our rainy seasons have failed. Scientists say it may be 12 months until the rains return again. Meanwhile, our rivers run dry.” The sometimes obscure procedures of the Cop process can baffle even the most dedicated follower. Fiona Harvey has put together a guide for the layperson that we hope will help explain everything you’ve ever wanted to know about Cop26 but been afraid to ask: Cop26 should be a “bloody uncomfortable” experience for world leaders because not enough is being done to tackle the climate emergency, Scotland’s first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, has told a side event at the Glasgow summit. Sturgeon – whose own role at Cop is somewhat peripheral given it is being hosted by the UK government – argued that her own country also had to face up to difficult decisions, for example its economic reliance on oil and gas. “This summit should not be comfortable for anybody in a position of leadership and responsibility,” she told a panel hosted by the WWF wildlife charity. “It should be bloody uncomfortable, because not many yet are doing enough, and that’s the reality.” Sturgeon said: “You take oil and gas. For a country like Scotland, tens of thousands of jobs depend on oil and gas. But that can’t be an excuse for saying, let’s just keep going with oil and gas indefinitely, because that’s catastrophic for the planet. Facing up to that is our biggest challenge, working out how we move away from it as quickly as possible. We’re trying to create the alternative jobs so we’re not leaving people on the scrapheap. “If we only face up to the relatively easy things, we won’t get anywhere. This has to be a moment that leaders, all of us, around that negotiating table, are held to account for the reality of what we promised. “What can everybody do? Make life really uncomfortable for any government, any leader, that’s not doing enough. At times that will be my government, and rightly so. We’ve all got to be pushed much harder, much faster.” “For those who have eyes to see, for those who have ears to listen, for those who have a heart to feel, we need 1.5C. Two degrees is a death sentence,” says Mottley. “We have come here to say: ‘Try harder.’” “Our world, my friends, stands at a fork in the road,” Mottley says. Back then, many countries represented at Cop26 did not exist, she adds. “But we want to exist in 100 years.” “The leaders of today, not 2030, not 2050, must make this choice. It is in our hands. Our people and our planet need it more than ever.” Next up is Mia Mottley, the prime minister of Barbados. She speaks of the need for more finance for adaptation to the effects of climate change. She refers to the absence of “some of the needed figures” at Cop26 - possibly a reference to Vladimir Putin and Xi Jinping not attending the conference. “Simply put, when will leaders lead?” she asks. “We are watching and we will take note.” “In my lifetime, I’ve witnessed a terrible decline. In yours, you could and should witness a wonderful recovery,” says Attenborough. He finishes by reminding the gathered leaders of their responsibilities over the next two weeks. “We must use this opportunity to create a more equal world, and our motivation should not be fear, but hope,” Attenborough says. Attenborough says we need a new industrial revolution powered by sustainable innovation, including taking carbon out of the air. This could provide a clean new world, he says, and we can use nature as our ally. “Is this how it is doomed to end?” he asks, questioning whether humanity’s downfall will be our shortsightedness. But he says there is still a chance to turn tragedy into triumph. “We are, after all, the greatest problem-solvers ever to have existed on Earth.” It is a story of inequality, he says. “Those who have done the least to cause this problem are the hardest hit.” But soon we will all see the impacts of climate breakdown, he warns. Attenborough gives the delegates a potted history of climate, showing a graph which shows how stable the climate was for many centuries before the era of climate change. “We are already in trouble. The stability we all depend on is breaking.” David Attenborough is now up. He was expected at 1pm, so they’ve made about 12 minutes back from the earlier delays. Charles’s speech is largely about what the private sector are doing or can do. “There is absolutely no doubt in my mind that the private sector is ready to play its part.” He stresses that the cost of inaction is far greater than the cost of prevention. “I can only urge you to find ways to work together … to save this precious planet.” Fiona Harvey has written an early report on Guterres’s speech Charles tells the delegates they must cooperate and coordinate to find a solution based on creating a renewable, sustainable economy. He speaks about the need for the private sector to contribute to speeding up the process. If you are finding Cop26 confusing you are not alone, says eminent climate scientist, Gavin Schmidt: Prince Charles is next up. He opens by speaking about the links between the climate crisis and the biodiversity crisis. He urges the world leaders to act decisively: “Time has quite literally run out.” Guterres sums up with what may be a Trainspotting reference: “Climate action tops the list of people’s concerns, across countries, age and gender. We must listen, we must act, and we must choose wisely. On behalf of this and future generations, I urge you: choose ambition, choose solidarity, choose to safeguard our future and save humanity.” And with that, he has finished. Guterres speaks about the importance of reaching the $100bn a year target for climate finance promised in Paris in 2015: “The $100bn a year climate finance commitment in support of developing countries must become a $100bn climate finance reality. This is critical to restoring trust and credibility. “I welcome efforts led by Canada and Germany to help get us there. It is a first step — but it delays the largest support for years, with no clear guarantees. But beyond the $100bn, developing countries need far greater resources to fight Covid-19, build resilience and pursue sustainable development. “Those suffering the most – namely, least developed countries and small island developing states – need urgent funding. More public climate finance, more overseas development aid, more grants and easier access to funding.” Guterres says the G20 countries are responsible for 80% of emissions and so have greater responsibility. He says countries should return to Cop with new commitments every year, rather than every five years as previously: “Let’s have no illusions: if commitments fall short by the end of this Cop, countries must revisit their national climate plans and policies. “Not every five years. Every year until keeping to 1.5C is assured. Until subsidies to fossil fuels end, until there is a price on carbon, and until coal is phased out.” “A number of countries have made credible commitments to net-zero emissions by mid-century,” says Guterres. “Many have pulled the plug on international financing of coal. Over 700 cities are leading the way to carbon neutrality. The private sector is waking up. The Net-Zero Asset Owners Alliance — the gold standard for credible commitments and transparent targets — is managing $10tn in assets and catalysing change across industries. “The climate action army - led by young people - is unstoppable. They are larger. They are louder. And, I assure you, they are not going away. “I stand with them,” he says. “As we open this much anticipated climate conference, we are still heading for climate disaster. Young people know it. Every country sees it. Small island developing states — and other vulnerable ones — live it. For them, failure is not an option. Failure is a death sentence.” Guterres gives a picture of the changes already taking place: “Our planet is changing before our eyes — from the ocean depths to mountain tops; from melting glaciers to relentless extreme weather events. Sea-level rise is double the rate it was 30 years ago. Oceans are hotter than ever — and getting warmer faster. Parts of the Amazon rainforest now emit more carbon than they absorb.” António Guterres, the secretary general of the UN, is now speaking. He begins by thanking Johnson and Cop26 president, Alok Sharma, for hosting the conference. He says the six years since the Paris agreement are the six hottest on record, and that humanity has been pushed to the brink. “Either we stop it, or it stops us,” he says. Next up is Txai Surui, an indigenous activist from Rondonia in Brazil who is part of a lawsuit suing the Brazilian government over its climate inaction. She urges the world leaders to believe that it is still possible to turn things around and urges them to keep indigenous peoples in mind. Now speaking is Brianna Fruean, a campaigner who grew up in Samoa and is now based in New Zealand. She speaks of the threat to small island nations and the difference between a temperature rise of 1.5C and 2C above pre-industrial levels. She urges the politicians to keep in mind the fate of the millions living in small island nations when making decisions. “We may not feel much like James Bond. Not all of us necessarily look much like James Bond. But we have the opportunity to make this summit the moment humanity began to defuse that bomb. “Yes, it’s going to be hard, but yes, we can do it,” says Johnson as he wraps up. Johnson is not getting the laughs he is expecting for some of his lines about belching cows and his hopes of remaining in Downing Street until 2050. Johnson says the average age of the conclave of world leaders is over 60, something he says may dismay the young protesters outside. “The children who will judge us are not yet born, and their children … we must not fluff our lines or miss our cue because they will not forgive us … they will judge us with a bitterness and resentment that eclipses that of any of the clime activists today. And they will be right.” Johnson speaks about the importance of harnessing the private sector, which he says has the potential to provide trillions to countries to help adaption and mitigation efforts. He describes the UK hopefully as “the Saudi Arabia of wind”. Johnson strikes an optimistic tone, talking about planting trees, finding innovative methods to produce energy, and drawing carbon from the air. “We in the developed world must recognise the special responsibility we have to the rest of the world,” he says. Johnson says it was in Glasgow that James Watt created the steam engine that helped kickstart the industrial revolution: “Yes friends, we brought you to the very place that the Doomsday machine began to tick.” “If we don’t get serious about climate change today, it will be too late for our children to do so tomorrow,” Johnson warns. He speaks about his experiences at the Copenhagen and Paris Cops. “All those promises will be nothing but blah, blah, blah, to coin a phrase,” he says, a reference to a Greta Thunberg line a couple of months ago. Johnson speaks about the urgency of action and the consequences if it is not taken - wildfires, droughts, starvation and flooding. “The longer we fail to act, the worse it gets and the higher the price when we are forced to act.” The UK prime minister, Boris Johnson, welcomes delegates to Glasgow by talking about the city’s most famous fictional son, James Bond. He draws an analogy between a ticking bomb that Bond must defuse in a film and the situation humanity finds itself in: “The doomsday device is real, and the clock is ticking to the furious rhythm of hundreds of billions of turbines and systems … covering the Earth in a suffocating blanket of CO2.” The microphone kicked back in for the final lines of her poem: Anything later than now is too little, too late. Nothing will change without you. Now the delegates are being shown a short film about the insignificance of humanity in the scheme of the universe. Poet Yrsa Daley-Ward is now reciting a poem to the gathered leaders, but her microphone is not on and it’s impossible to make out what she’s saying from the live stream. The lights are dimmed and the ceremony is finally beginning, 25 minutes late. A piper is performing, after which we can expect Johnson and Guterres to speak. A reader who is working at Cop26 has been in touch to say the delay is because they are waiting for the US president, Joe Biden, to arrive. Biden flew in to Edinburgh earlier today and has been driven to Glasgow in a motorcade. Pictures are just coming through of Biden at the entrance to the conference hall, so hopefully the delay won’t be too long now. World leaders and politicians are milling around the plenary hall ahead of Boris Johnson’s opening speech, with Angela Merkel and Liz Truss among those arriving early. Emmanuel Macron did fist/elbow bump Boris Johnson earlier in the day at the meet-and-greet but he did not appear to be in a good mood as he spoke to French reporters in a scrum outside the main hall, following his ongoing row with Australia’s Scott Morrison about whether France was misled about the Aukus defence pact. Ursula von der Leyen declined to comment on whether the UK-French fishing spat was undermining focus on the vital climate goals of the summit. We’re still waiting for the opening ceremony to start. Delegates have been asked to take their seats three times now but many are still milling around without any clear sense of urgency. Meanwhile, CNN have sent veteran correspondent Wolf Blitzer to report on proceedings - but from Edinburgh, about 40 miles away from the conference in Glasgow. Our economics editor, Larry Elliott, has been to Aberdeen to find out how Britain’s oil industry boom town is planning to adapt to life beyond fossil fuels. He found a mixture of concern and optimism that the city can weather the change. Some say it has taken a long time for the penny to drop in Aberdeen. “They should have been thinking about this ages ago,” says Andrew Carter, the chief executive of the Centre for Cities thinktank. “I never got the impression they were fully committed or serious about it.” But Carter says Aberdeen is better placed to weather structural change to its local economy than other cities. “Our data shows a pretty dynamic economy. Business startups are good. There is a fair-size stock of activities going on and more than 50% of people have a degree or higher. It is better placed than some one-industry towns, such as Sunderland were Nissan to leave.” Read the full piece here: Chaotic scenes at the entrance to the world leaders event. Delegations are squabbling with security to get let into the hall as presidents and prime ministers push past. Nicola Sturgeon, Liz Truss and the prime minister of Thailand have just made it through. The beginning of the opening ceremony appears to have been delayed - Boris Johnson was supposed to have started speaking by now. The conference room appears to be far from full still. The House of Lords environment and climate change committee has sent a letter to the Cop26 president, Alok Sharma, as the conference begins, criticising the preparations for the event. The committee chair, Kate Parminter, wrote: “The climate change emergency is one of the greatest challenges of our time and Cop26 is the biggest political event that Britain has ever hosted, so we would have expected clear leadership from the top and effective processes in place to coordinate action across departments. “The absence of an effective climate change machinery across government has hindered preparation for Cop26 and limited wider progress. “Not all departments are embedding climate change sufficiently into their policy-making and it is unclear how the centre of government is holding departments to account firmly. “It’s hard to conclude that the delivery of Cop26 across government will be equal to the scale of the challenge.” The opening ceremony is scheduled to begin at noon, though it’s not clear whether all the delegates have managed to get inside yet. Speakers will include the UN secretary general, António Guterres, and the UK prime minister, Boris Johnson. If you want to watch it live, you can follow it on this page. UPDATE: The UNFCCC feed appears to have crashed, but you can watch our stream of the event here: I am outside the Cop26 blue zone entrance where American grassroots activists from the Build Back Fossil Free coalition are expected at 12 to demand Joe Biden take executive action to stop the approval of fossil fuel projects and declare a climate emergency. Protesters are furious at Biden’s likely narrative of “climate leadership” which they say contradicts the daily suffering by communities on the frontline of gas and oil production in the US. In the first six months of the Biden administration, about 2,500 new oil and gas permits were authorised - a figure Trump’s administration took a year to reach. After making big promises on confronting the climate crisis during last year’s election campaign, Biden comes to Glasgow with even weakened climate provisions faltering in Congress. His latest Build Back Better framework offers no policy to limit fossil fuel production. Last month, more than 600 activists were arrested during a week of protests in Washington DC known as People v Fossil Fuels. It’s very cold but there are a couple of small protests already taking place including a delegation from Uganda demanding Boris Johnson take action against the country’s president, Yoweri Museveni, who is accused of a wide range of human rights violations including environmental destruction. The Liberian president and former footballing great George Weah has arrived at the conference. He may well be fond of the city already - his son Timothy won the Scottish Premiership with Celtic in 2019. The shadow energy secretary, Ed Miliband, has commented on the conference this morning, as reported by PA Media: Miliband said he is “glad” the prime minister has acknowledged how difficult a successful outcome will be at Cop26, but wished Boris Johnson’s realisation had occurred sooner. Ed Miliband said: “The prime minister has finally woken up to how difficult this is, but I wish he’d woken up two years ago, not two days before the summit begins. “There’s a real sense with the prime minister that he does these things at the last minute - lastminute.gov, essay-crisis prime minister. “You can’t do that with Cop26, it’s too important and too complex a negotiation.” He added: “We are a long way away from where we need to be - his job now is to put pressure on all the big emitters, the Australias, the Chinas and others, to say: ‘You’ve got to step up and do more’.” My colleague Jonathan Watts has written about warnings from environmentalists not to trust Brazil at the conference. Under far-right president Jair Bolsonaro deforestation has surged and protections for indigenous groups have been removed. However, things have improved slightly in the past year. At Glasgow, Brazil will show a less fractious face. This is largely due to the shift in Washington. While Donald Trump was in the White House, Bolsonaro was emboldened to denigrate international cooperation on the world stage. Since Joe Biden came to power, he has been forced to drop his two most globally toxic representatives: the former foreign minister Ernesto Araújo, and the former environment minister Ricardo Salles. The new environment minister, Joaquim Leite, who will head the Brazilian delegation at Glasgow, is far more personable, but activists say he has done little to change the destructive policies of his predecessor. Read more here: I’m in the pavilion area. This is a like a makeshift village where countries and organisations have dedicated areas where they can show off what they’re doing and stage talks. Lots of plywood, plants and people wearing suits. Everyone claims to be taking it more seriously than their neighbour. Scotland’s first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, has just met Swedish school strike activist Greta Thunberg and Ugandan activist Vanessa Nakate inside the venue. Nakate wrote for the Guardian on Friday about the need to set up a climate compensation fund for poor countries: I believe in the “polluter pays” principle. A recent analysis identified the countries historically responsible for the climate crisis. We know who did this – but they don’t want to pay the bill. Rich countries providing finance only for the mitigation of our emissions and protections against future impacts is no longer enough. Climate-vulnerable countries need funds to deal with the loss and damage we are suffering now. Read the full piece here: Oil-rich Saudi Arabia has often tried to frustrate progress at previous Cop26 climate summits, but it appears to be seeking better PR. Environment editor Damian Carrington reports being sent this unsolicited DM via Twitter: “Hi dear, we have a Saudi campaign promoting the environment initiatives happening there. We would like you to participate with us by tweeting about it. May i know if its possible and how much would u charge per tweet” A source at the Saudi embassy in the UK said the approach had nothing to do with the government of the kingdom. Scenes like this have not been seen at a Cop since the poorly prepared Copenhagen conference in 2009. A crowd of many hundreds, probably at least 2,000 just in the forward bit, gathered at the entrance, where there seemed to be no preparation, no attempt to encourage people to queue rather than simply press forward, no pretence at social distancing. People are packed together closely with no option but to press ahead because of the stream of new people arriving behind. The queue has been moving at a speed of roughly 10 to 15 feet per hour by the estimates of a few people here. There seems little prospect of improvement and at this rate thousands of people will be standing outside for hours. I stood in a similar queue on Friday. This time, thankfully, it is not raining but they could have had a better plan for queue management. Like many people here I’ve already had a long journey, having left before 8am to get here, so there’s a lot of weariness in the crowd here before we even get started but everyone is still in good spirits and just eager to get in. It is inexplicable that the UK hosts have not managed this better having had nearly two years to prepare. They knew 30,000 people would come. • This post was amended on 1 November 2021. The UK government is hosting Cop26, not the Scottish as stated in an earlier version. My colleague Damian Carrington has done a deep dive into almost 40 recent polls on climate from around the world, and found that across the world, the public overwhelmingly back urgent action on the climate crisis. However, people do not have confidence in their elected representatives that the necessary action will be taken. Read the full piece here: Once delegates do get in, at least they won’t go thirsty - as long as they like Irn-Bru It seems the queues for security outside the venue are causing chaos. Chris McCall of the Daily Record says some delegates are trying to skip the queue: While Paul Waugh at the i describes the scenes as “utter chaos”: Our own Phoebe Weston says she queued for an hour before getting in A dinosaur with a message for Joe Biden poses outside the Glasgow Gallery of Modern Art. Kate Proctor of PoliticsHome (and formerly of the Guardian) has tweeted from the enormous queues to get through security: She says security staff are going down the line asking people not to take photos, which sounds like a doomed effort. Travel chaos hampered many delegates and observers’ arrival in Glasgow for Cop26 yesterday, with a tree on the tracks taking out the west coast main line for a large part of the day. Trains on the east coast line were also delayed after overhead wires near Peterborough sustained damage. Guardian reporters Patrick Greenfield (who ended up having to hire a van from Luton and drive to Glasgow) and Phoebe Weston (who endured a heavily delayed journey up the east coast line) have more details here. Fortunately trains appear to be running smoothly again this morning. John Vidal, the former environment editor of the Guardian, has written about the seven stages of a Cop meeting, of which he’s seen his fair share. We are currently in stage one. 1. The arrival. Here we go again. Teams of jet-lagged lobbyists, diplomats, journos, bankers and business folk queue with delegations of indigenous peoples and youth groups, lawyers, NGOs and economists to enter the parallel universe that is a UN climate Cop. Within hours, the complaints will start about the price of coffee, the distance between meeting rooms, the Glaswegian accents, the rain, the trains, the traffic, the UN security, the heavy policing and the dearth of good restaurants. So far I’ve seen complaints about queues, coffee, rain, trains, traffic and restaurants being booked out, so nearly a full bingo card already. Read the rest of the piece here: Protesters in a Scottish pipe band have arrived in Glasgow wearing grotesque masks bearing the likenesses of (from left to right) Russia’s Vladimir Putin, Italy’s Mario Draghi, France’s Emmanuel Macron, Joe Biden of the US; the British PM, Boris Johnson; the German chancellor, Angela Merkel; the Canadian PM, Justin Trudeau; the Indian PM, Narendra Modi; and Xi Jinping of China. Each of the days of the conference is dedicated to a theme. Tue 2: forests Wed 3: finance Thu 4: energy Fri 5: youth and public empowerment Sat 6: nature Mon 8: adaptation, loss and damage Tue 9: gender, science and innovation Wed 10: transport Thu 11: cities, regions and the built environment Then negotiations are scheduled to end at 6pm on Friday 12 November - but in practice at the vast majority of previous Cops negotiations have overrun into Saturday and even Sunday. It’s not often an environment story makes the front of almost all the papers, but all the UK’s main national titles have run Cop26 stories on their front pages with the exception of the Sun and the Star, who have gone with Simon Cowell deciding not to host a TV show and a forecast of bad weather later in the week respectively. My colleague Fiona Harvey, who has been to more Cops than almost any other journalist in the world, has written about her optimism before Cop26: In my years reporting on this issue, I’ve seen so many triumphs and disasters. The bottom line on our struggle against climate catastrophe is this: we don’t have a choice but to win, and we absolutely can. There was a time when it seemed impossible to solve the problem of acid rain, but we did. It’s true that greater challenges lie ahead, and they will require action from the whole global economy, but we have the technology and the ingenuity. I have no time for people who say this is too expensive – if we don’t have a planet then we don’t have an economy. So solving these problems is a question of “how”, not “if”. Read more here: World leaders are beginning to arrive at the SEC, where they are being greeted by the UK prime minister, Boris Johnson. Many were disappointed when it was confirmed that the Chinese leader, Xi Jinping, would not attend in person, as although he has not left China since the beginning of the coronavirus pandemic some feared it might signal a lack of ambition from China. Although it had been rumoured over the weekend that he would join the conference by video, it has been confirmed that instead a written statement will be uploaded on the conference website this afternoon. You can see the full list of speakers for today’s session here. There is a sense of occasion in Glasgow this morning. While walking to the convention centre on the banks of the river Clyde, it felt like I was on the way to a major concert or football cup final. Climate negotiators, scientists, business people, NGO staff and journalists were making their way through the city to the impressive security operation at the SEC centre. Everyone has to show proof of a negative lateral flow test, ID and an invitation letter. Today is all about the world leaders’ announcements. We will be bringing you updates throughout the day and interesting bits from the convention centre. Welcome to the Guardian’s live coverage of the Cop26 climate conference. Each day we will bring you the latest news from the negotiations in Glasgow, as well as updates and reaction from around the globe. Delegates and world leaders have been arriving in Scotland over the weekend ahead of the official opening ceremony at noon GMT today. Here’s a timetable of what to expect today: From 8am: heads of state arrive at conference “blue zone” 12 noon: opening ceremony for world leaders summit 1.30pm: the Cop26 president, Alok Sharma of the UK, will welcome delegates to the high-level segment of the conference 1.45pm: national leaders give brief statements, with more to follow tomorrow. Big names on Monday include Emmanuel Macron of France, Joko Widodo of Indonesia, Ursula von der Leyen of the EU, Angela Merkel of Germany, Scott Morrison of Australia and Mario Draghi of Italy. A full list of speakers can be found here. 5pm: leaders visit Kelvingrove art gallery for a reception I’m Alan Evans, and you can email me at alan.evans@theguardian.com, or send me a message on Twitter at @itsalanevans.Farewell then, Nuno. It was, let’s face it, almost entirely doomed from the start, to the extent there is pretty much zero point in analysing the gains, the losses and the legacy of Nuno-era Spurs. What memories will Tottenham’s 35th permanent managerial appointment leave in north London? A way of standing. An expression of sympathetic bafflement. The sense, above all, of a head coach who seemed at all times to be encrusted with an ancient sadness, a courtly keeper of the grail in someone else’s castle, whose final words, dispatched by the hand of Daniel Levy, will be “He chose … poorly”. But what did Spurs expect from a manager who plateaued out at Wolverhampton, who lost 17 league games last season, whose football is about control and caution and who they didn’t really want in the first place? Instead, as the club turns its sights towards next things and the electrifying prospect of Antonio Conte, there are only two points worth taking from the Nuno Espírito Santo interlude. Both of these are familiar territory. Both will speak to whatever it is Conte can expect to achieve in this job. First, what is a Tottenham manager for? This is a club defined too often by the appearance of progress, by light, noise and drama that exist in their own space, unrelated to any obvious substance. Consider, for example, the past seven months. Spurs have fired José Mourinho less than a week before a cup final, tried and failed to kickstart a super league, successfully demotivated Harry Kane, hired a fancy director of football, appointed the last man on the long list, sacked the last man on the long list and enacted a dramatic pursuit of the most high-profile unemployed manager in world football. In that time Spurs have moved from seventh in the Premier League to eighth. What has this cost? What has been the price tag on that mild nudge down the league table? Presumably anything up to £50m in payoffs, wasted wages and the declining value of your chief playing asset. It is, if nothing else, a very dramatic way of not doing very much. But then this has been the role of the Spurs manager, which involves, in its simple form, a kind of El Tel impresario quality, injecting some kind of life, vibes, energy, into this carefully metered environment. Nuno was never likely to win much. But he was never going come close to this model, he is a naturally conservative coach with the look on the touchline of a kindly hill farmer concerned by the travails of his favourite sickly heifer at the hands of the local vet. This is the second point. Is Levy prepared to reach for anything beyond this? To play that game for real? Because Conte is something else entirely. Not just a serious pedigree upgrade but a more profound shift of culture. This is an appointment that may just amount to a calling of the Levy bluff, a flushing out of that ruthless, strictly-business executive culture. Here is a manager who also doesn’t want a long-term thing. But he will make you win if you’re really serious. Muck this one up, fail once again to take the leap forward, and it will be entirely on Levy. Conte knows how to do this thing. There have been some oddly negative noises off in the past few days, a suggestion English football may have reason to be wary of a manager this ruthlessly driven. It is to be taken with a pinch of salt. He may lack the brand-friendly PR chops of a Solskjær. But Conte is a restless, angry, precision-engineered tactician. This is a manager who began slowly in his first season at Chelsea, went home for an insomniac holiday during the autumn break, came back with a plan and ran way with the league title playing Victor Moses at wing-back and David Luiz in a back three. It wasn’t all about control. Chelsea scored 85 goals. Conte got another title season out of Eden Hazard. He has five league titles at three clubs. Everything is urgency, fixes, fast-forward planning. He may have the right stuff for Kane, who needs someone bigger than him, some hard coaching and a clarification of what kind of player he wants to be. You want success? The man who can provide it is already at the door, scowling in through the fanlight, rattling at the locks. But he demands seriousness in return, a total commitment, an absence of flannel. This is the subtext to every move at Tottenham. This is a club run by a chairman who walks a strange kind of tightrope, balancing the demands of the crowd, the opera of fandom, with both a professional and a proposal eye on profit and loss. Levy sees the financial absurdities of his profession, errs towards probity and caution, but also seems to have bodged the chance to invest in something more. How much does this club really want success? And what would it look like? Is it simply existing close to the elite, preserving its income, doing the executive dance? Or the cold hard lust for trophies, for the kind of moments supporters crave? The biggest mistake Spurs made was the failure to back Mauricio Pochettino when times were good. They posted record profits the year they reached the Champions League final. But that squad was allowed to age, Kane to run himself into the ground. The asset was sweated to death when it could have been nourished, made into a team to sustain that level. If Conte does arrive he will be the fifth occupant of that manager’s office in two and half years since the move to the multi-use mega‑ground. His presence is also a kind of endgame, a calling-out of what the wider ambition really is here. Conte doesn’t care what your excuses are. He has employers waiting elsewhere if you’re going to send him out to battle with a baguette in his hand. It will, at the very least, be fascinating to watch. Over to you, then, Mr Levy.The main things that happened on day one of the Cop26 climate conference in Glasgow included: Chaotic scenes as the world descended on Glasgow The day started off with a popular British pastime: queueing. About 2,000 delegates and journalists were kept in large crowds queueing outside the conference centre, with Guardian reporters noting there seemed to have been a lack of planning, as no attempt was made to encourage people to queue rather than simply press forward. Boris Johnson channels spirit of James Bond Johnson drew an analogy between a ticking bomb that Bond must defuse in a film and the situation humanity finds itself in with the climate crisis. It’s one minute to midnight on the doomsday clock and we need to act now. If we don’t get serious about climate change today, it will be too late for our children to get serious about it tomorrow. Climate optimism an illusion, warns UN chief There was less optimism from the UN secretary general, António Guterres, who dismissed the suggestion that the climate situation was improving, and exhorted the more than 120 national leaders present to “choose to safeguard our future and save humanity” instead of continuing with the addiction to fossil fuels. David Attenborough says be ‘motivated by hope not fear’ David Attenborough called in his speech at the conference for a new industrial revolution powered by millions of sustainable innovations. Looking directly at world leaders in the audience, he also urged them to work together. In my lifetime, I have witnessed a terrible decline. In yours, you could and should witness a wonderful recovery. Biden apologises for Trump quitting Paris agreement Biden attempted to reassert America’s credibility at the UN climate talks by apologising for the behaviour of his predecessor. “We will demonstrate to the world the United States is not only back at the table but hopefully leading by the power of our example,” he said, adding: “I know it hasn’t been the case, which is why my administration is working overtime to show our climate commitment is action not words.” Xi Jinping no-show and no significant climate pledges China’s president, Xi Jinping, called for developed countries to “provide support to help developing countries do better” in dealing with the climate crisis, in a written statement that failed to make any new significant pledges. Xi, along with Jair Bolsonaro of Brazil and Vladimir Putin of Russia, decided not to appear in person at the summit. India to target net zero emissions by 2070 The most positive news came late in the day, with Narendra Modi’s pledge that his country will meet a target of net zero emissions by 2070. He also committed to India getting half of its energy from renewable resources by 2030. Modi demanded developed countries make $1tn available as climate finance. Bolsonaro’s ‘green powerhouse’ speech criticised While not attending the conference in person, Bolsonaro claimed in a speech on Monday that when it came to fighting climate change, Brazil had always been part of the solution, not the problem. But Amazon forest defenders are urging delegates at Cop26 not to trust the “greenwashing” promises of Bolsonaro’s government. Johnson to fly back to London – avoiding the train Finally, it emerged later in the day that Boris Johnson was still channelling James Bond as it was confirmed he would be flying back from the Cop26 climate conference on a private plane rather than getting the train. Johnson flew into Cop26 in Glasgow from Rome after attending the G20 meeting of world leaders. Prince Charles also flew from Rome to Glasgow on a private plane separately from the prime minister.Antonio Conte has agreed to take over as Tottenham’s manager on a contract to June 2023 and is ready to sign the deal subject to final details. He will replace Nuno Espírito Santo, who was sacked on Monday after four months and 17 matches in charge. Negotiations between Conte and Tottenham broke down in the summer but he did not take another job and the club’s managing director of football, Fabio Paratici, made the former Juventus, Chelsea and Internazionale manager his No 1 target. By Monday afternoon paperwork was being prepared by Spurs to confirm the appointment and Conte travelled to London with his representatives. Conte is generally averse to taking a job midway through a season but let it be known he would make an exception for Manchester United if Ole Gunnar Solskjær were sacked. Spurs convinced him to take the same view of their offer. Conte has asked for guarantees regarding the next transfer windows to rebuild a squad that has lost five times in the Premier League this season. Tottenham’s talks with Conte collapsed in June after the club thought they were close to a deal. At that point Paratici, who worked with the manager for three successful seasons at Juventus from 2011, had not been hired and his presence has been crucial. Initial contact was made on Saturday night and Conte has been assured he will get more say over transfers and the chance to mould the team. Conte, who won league titles with Juve, Chelsea and Internazionale, left Inter in May over their plan to sell players. His spell at Juventus is the only time he has managed a team for more than two years and his Spurs contract is due to run for less than that. Nuno has gone after a 3-0 home defeat by Manchester United on Saturday, during and after which he was barracked by supporters. Spurs turned to Nuno having failed to land a number of preferred candidates including Conte, Paulo Fonseca and Gennaro Gattuso. The former Wolves manager began with three Premier League wins, the first against Manchester City, and was named August’s manager of the month. But comprehensive defeats by Chelsea, Arsenal and United, coupled with an uninspiring style of play, prompted his dismissal. Spurs have gone two hours and 16 minutes without a shot on target in the Premier League. The Spurs chairman, Daniel Levy, also a target for fans’ anger on Saturday, and Paratici held talks after the United game before concluding a change was imperative. Tottenham are eighth in the Premier League and third in their Europa Conference League group, although they have reached the quarter-finals of the Carabao Cup. Paratici said: “I know how much Nuno and his coaching staff wanted to succeed and I regret that we have had to take this decision. Nuno is a true gentleman and will always be welcome here. We should like to thank him and his coaching staff and wish them well for the future.” The team have scored nine goals in 10 Premier League games and Harry Kane, who had hoped to leave for City in the summer, has looked well below his best. Nuno succeeded José Mourinho after Ryan Mason had been placed in interim charge. Spurs confirmed Nuno’s coaches – Ian Cathro, Rui Barbosa and Antonio Dias – have also left.