Global carbon emissions are shooting back to the record level seen before the coronavirus pandemic levels, new analysis has shown. Scientists said the finding is a “reality check” for the world’s nations gathered at the Cop26 climate summit. The emissions driving the climate crisis reached their highest ever levels in 2019, before global coronavirus lockdowns saw them fall by 5.4%. However, fossil fuel burning has surged faster than expected in 2021, the international research team said, in stark contrast to the rapid cuts needed to tackle global heating. The data shows world leaders have failed to build back greener, with just a small proportion of pandemic spending going to sustainable sectors. But the scientists said hopes of keeping global heating to 1.5C remain alive if Cop26 leads to rapid global action. The Global Carbon Project (GCP) report shows emissions from coal and gas jumping this year by more than they fell in 2020. Oil use is also rising in 2021, but more slowly because transport activity remains below normal. Unlike most countries, emissions in the world’s biggest polluter, China, actually rose slightly during the pandemic in 2020 and are expected to rise another 4% in 2021. India has very low emissions per person but will see CO2 rise 12.6% in 2021, almost double the fall in 2020. The US and EU27 will also see sharp rises of 7.6% in 2021, but remain on a longer term trend of slowly declining emissions. Renewables were the only energy source that continued to grow during the pandemic. The scientists said 2022 could set a new record for global emissions, depending on whether the expected increased in oil consumption, as travel recovers further, is offset by reversal of the surge in coal burning seen in 2021. The world’s “carbon budget” is the total emissions allowed to retain a 50% chance of keeping global temperature rise below 1.5C, but analysis shows this will be blown in 11 years if the current rate of emissions continues. “What is surprising is that [the rebound in emissions] happened so quickly, in spite of the fact that much of the global economy has not yet recovered,” said Prof Corinne Le Quéré, at the University of East Anglia, UK, and one of the analysis team. “This is really a reality check.” “However, we do not yet see the effect of the climate policy decisions that will be taken at Cop26 in Glasgow, which could be really a gamechanger,” she said. “1.5C is still alive. The decrease in emissions needed is very large indeed, but feasible with concerted action.” Glen Peters, at the Centre for International Climate Research in Oslo, Norway, said: “Many of us were [expecting] a recovery spread out over a few years, as opposed to a big hit in 2021.” He said Covid recovery funding had been too “dirty”, with not enough low-carbon investment. “If we continue on the current trajectory, then that may push emissions in 2022 up.” Prof Pierre Friedlingstein, at the University of Exeter, UK, said: “To achieve net zero by 2050, we must cut emissions every year by an amount comparable to that seen during Covid. This highlights the scale of the action that is now required, and the importance of Cop26.” The 196 nations at the Cop26 summit are charged with pushing national pledges to cut emissions towards that needed for 1.5C, with India’s new commitment to net zero a notable advance. But the $100bn promised by rich nations to poorer nations has yet to be delivered. Voluntary international pacts to end deforestation, cut methane emissions and make green technology the cheapest option have been announced. But global heating will only stop when emissions reach net zero. The GCP report was produced by almost 100 scientists from 70 organisations across the world and, based on the figures to date, calculated that CO2 emissions from fossil fuels will rise by between 4.1% and 5.7% in 2021, compared with a fall of 5.4% in 2020. That fall is bigger than seen after the global financial crisis in 2008 (1.2%) and the collapse of the Soviet Union (3.1%). Emissions will have to be reduced by even greater amounts to hit net zero by 2050. But Le Quéré said: “We know what to do: move out of coal, electrify transport, and reforest.” She said a quarter of emissions come from countries that had been steadily decreasing emissions while growing their economies, including the UK, Germany, the US, Japan and Mexico. “The key message is to resist the temptation to be discouraged by our latest findings,” she said. “The commitments being put in place at Cop26 are really important. It’s important that the countries agree on what they’re going to do and then, of course, plan for immediate implementation.” The surge in emissions in 2021 resulted from Covid recovery packages largely funding existing, polluting industries including steel, cement and construction, particularly in China, Peters said: “China is, on the one hand, making extremely good progress, deploying solar and wind and electric vehicles. On the other hand, its economic recovery packages tend to go back to the old way of doing things. But there’s another 70% of global emissions that are not from China as well.” Whether 2022 sees a new record for global emissions depends on whether the burst of coal burning seen during the pandemic recovery was a temporary “sugar hit” or continues, he said.ExxonMobil and Chevron are the world’s most obstructive organisations when it comes to governments setting climate policies, according to research into the “prolific and highly sophisticated” lobbying ploys used by the fossil fuel industry. The biggest US oil companies, as well as American Petroleum Institute, a lobby group, were found to be the worst offenders in a global report by lobbying experts at the thinktank InfluenceMap. It concluded that companies were manipulating governments to take “incredibly dangerous paths” in their approach to climate action. Oil giants have mounted “intense resistance” to Joe Biden’s green agenda, according to the report, as the US president’s administration attempted to shift the country away from fossil fuels. The report was published on Thursday before talks at the Cop26 climate summit in Glasgow to accelerate the transition from fossil fuels to clean energy. It also came a week after ExxonMobil’s chief executive, Darren Woods, was accused of lying to the US Congress when he denied that the company had covered up its own research about oil’s contribution to the climate crisis. The report said corporate lobbying tactics in part explained why regulators in some countries such as Australia have struggled to build support for more ambitious climate policy in the lead-up to Cop26 and were increasingly viewed as “a road block in global negotiations”. Toyota was the worst-ranked carmaker and the third overall in the report, which drew from more than 50,000 of pieces of evidence, covering hundreds of the world’s most significant firms and trade groups, to analyse corporate climate lobbying activities. The report put Toyota among some of the worst polluting companies in the world because of its opposition to phase out deadlines for fossil fuel and hybrid vehicles. Ed Collins, a director at InfluenceMap, said it was clear that the transition to a clean energy future would remain extremely challenging until governments took meaningful action to tackle “the obstructive and anti-science lobbying of vested interests from fossil fuel value chain sectors”. “The corporate playbook for holding back climate policy has come a long way from science denialism but it is every bit as damaging,” he said. “What we are seeing is not limited to efforts to undermine regulations directly. It also involves prolific and highly sophisticated narrative capture techniques, leading governments down incredibly dangerous paths.” The thinktank’s report noted a strong shift among many fossil fuels companies towards pro-gas lobbying and away from coal. This includes lobbying from BP, which was ninth on the global list, the Austrian energy company OMV, which was 10th, and the Russian state-owned gas giant Gazprom, which was 17th. A spokesperson for Exxon said: “There are competing views about how best to address the risks of climate change. ExxonMobil supports certain climate policies and opposes others. But it would be a mistake to equate such policy disagreements with promotion of climate ‘disinformation.’” Chevron and Toyota were also contacted for comment.Covid infection rates roughly doubled in the over-65s between September and October, according to researchers at Imperial College London who warn the virus is spreading from schoolchildren into more vulnerable age groups. Scientists on the React-1 study analysed about 67,000 swabs taken across England between 19 and 29 October, and found higher rates of infection in every region apart from Yorkshire and the Humber when compared to September. While infection rates were highest among schoolchildren, with nearly 6% of 5 to 17-year-olds testing positive, the study found rises in every age group, including the oldest and most vulnerable where rates doubled to 0.8% in 65- to 74-year-olds and 0.67% in the 75s and over. “Although the rates are much lower in these older and more vulnerable people, we did see a doubling of rates in that group and clearly that’s a worry,” said Prof Paul Elliott, director of the React study. “It’s driven from young school age but going right across the population.” The study, which analyses swabs from a representative group of people in the community whether they have symptoms or not, recorded its highest overall infection rate ever for England, at 1.72%. The study launched in May 2020, however, after the spring wave that year, and because of a pause in data taking, missed the peak of last winter’s wave. By far the sharpest rise in cases between September and October was seen in the south-west, home to the 10 lower tier local authorities with the highest rates in the country. According to the study, prevalence of the infection almost quadrupled from 0.59% in September to 2.18% in October in areas around Bristol, Swindon and Gloucester. Elliott said the study could not explain why cases had surged in the south-west, but added that the rise might be related to issues at the Immensa lab which issued tens of thousands of false negative test results in the region, leading infected people to believe they were safe to mingle. The UK Health Security Agency is investigating how the lab failed to spot the problem before the public did. Genome sequencing of some of the virus samples revealed that the newly emerged relative of the Delta variant known as AY.4.2 is spreading faster than the original Delta variant. The AY.4.2 variant made up only 4.6% of cases in the September round of the React study, but rose to 10.3% in the latest October analysis. “It is slowly increasing and the UK Health Security Agency is keeping a watching brief on that,” said Prof Graham Cooke, a member of the team. Towards the end of October, the study shows that infection rates began to fall across the country, including in the south-west, but the researchers stress that the decline coincides with the school half-term break when children mix far less than during term time. Further rises were still “very possible”, said Cooke. • This article was amended on 4 November 2021. An earlier version referred to the Immensa lab issuing “tens of thousands of false positive test results”; that should have said false negative test results.A global research effort worth tens of billions of dollars is needed to ensure the world is better prepared for the next pandemic, which could be far worse than Covid, Bill Gates has said. The Microsoft founder said the “completely horrific” death toll and economic damage inflicted by coronavirus should drive funding into projects aimed at improving vaccines, treatments and diagnostic tests that will be needed to contain the next pandemic more effectively. In an interview with the former UK health secretary Jeremy Hunt for the Policy Exchange thinktank, Gates said research and development budgets should focus on weaknesses exposed by the rapid spread of Covid around the world. “You know, we didn’t have vaccines that block transmission. We got vaccines that help you with your health, but they only slightly reduced transmission,” he said. “We need a new way of doing the vaccines.” Covid vaccines partially block transmission of the virus but are more effective at preventing severe disease. The vaccine effectiveness expert panel that feeds into the government’s Sage committee estimates that protection against infection is 65% after two shots of AstraZeneca and 75% after two doses of Pfizer, with both offering about 95% protection against hospitalisation. The immunity wanes over time, however. Gates went on to lament the lack of effective treatments for Covid, adding that while the steroid dexamethasone and the new antiviral drug molnupiravir could help, the impact of therapeutics was “way less than should have been the case”. He further criticised the failure to get diagnostic testing up and running to the point that it could dramatically keep death rates down. Gates, who warned in a 2014 Ted talk that the world was not ready for the next pandemic, said he hoped to write a book in five years’ time about how the world was now prepared for the eventuality. “It’ll take tens of billions in research and development,” he said, “and probably about a billion a year for a pandemic taskforce at the WHO [World Health Organization] level”. The WHO taskforce would perform pandemic surveillance and run what Gates called “germ games” where countries practise responses to events that could spark the next crisis, such as a bioterrorist unleashing smallpox at 10 airports. “There’s naturally caused epidemics and bioterrorism-caused epidemics that could even be way worse than what we experienced today,” Gates said. “And yet the advances in medical science should give us tools that, you know, we could do dramatically better. So you’d think this would be a priority. The next year will be where those allocations have to get made, including this global pandemic taskforce.” A lot of the work needed to prepare for the next pandemic involved making vaccines cheap, having big factories to manufacture them, and “eradicating” influenza and the common cold, Gates added. Vaccines could be “just a little patch you put on your arm” and would be “incredibly beneficial” even outside a pandemic, he said. “Along with the climate message and the ongoing fight against diseases of the poor, pandemic preparedness is something I’ll be talking about a lot,” Gates said. “And I think it’ll find fertile ground because, you know, we lost trillions of dollars and millions of lives. And citizens expect their governments not to let that happen again.”John Lewis is returning to a tried-and-tested formula of unusual friends sharing Christmas for this year’s festive ad, with an alien stepping in where a dragon, penguin and monster under the bed have gone before. For more than a decade John Lewis’s festive ad has become a big annual TV moment that kicks off the Christmas shopping season. This year it has launched a week earlier than usual after a rise in searches for Christmas products on the department store’s websites, as shoppers try to dodge supply problems in the run-up to the big day. Its campaigns – from the Hare and the Bear in 2013 to Monty the Penguin in 2014 and 2019’s Excitable Edgar the dragon – generally call on cute characters that draw millions of viewers online. After last year’s effort, which featured a montage of quirky animations about kindness and giving to charity, rather than giving presents, and a misfiring ad for insurance, this year’s festive promo features more products than ever – all of which will be highlighted at the department store’s online shop and social media. The back-to-Christmas-basics ad, set to a soundtrack of the 1985 Philip Oakey and Giorgio Moroder hit Together in Electric Dreams reworked by the 20-year-old singer Lola Young, sets the tone for the season as retailers dream of a return to normal after last year’s high street lockdowns in November and December. A magical mood is also picked up by Marks &amp; Spencer and Boots, which both launch their TV ads on Thursday. M&amp;S, which is returning to promoting its clothing on the small screen after a break in 2020, has gone for a traditional ad inspired by the heyday of musicals such as Singin’ in the Rain and Busby Berkeley’s 1930s showgirls. A separate food ad includes an animated Percy Pig and a fairy voiced by the comedian Dawn French. Boots goes for a magical world where it is possible to splurge on presents and dance at parties before hugging your gran. Retailers and brands are expected to spend almost £1bn more marketing their products this festive season than last year, in a return of the annual big-budget Christmas advertising battle. Charlotte Rogers, the features editor at the trade journal Marketing Week, said John Lewis’s ad reflected a yearning for something comforting and familiar after more than a year of pandemic. “Last year felt so tough and different [brands] didn’t know what tone to strike and if they would be around [for Christmas],” she said. This year, she said, “a lot of brands are doing stuff in the digital space but they know that if they want eyeballs they have to be on TV. They want to get back to normality”. John Lewis’s two-minute ad, entitled Unexpected Guest, will be launched in an email to loyalty cardholders at 6.30am on Thursday before hitting the department store’s website and social media channels at 8am, and getting its first TV airing at 8.15pm during The Pride of Britain Awards on ITV. Interest was kicked off this week with an installations on South Bank in London and in Newcastle featuring an apparently crashed spacecraft and a sign saying “Christmas is landing 04/11/21 #UnexpectedGuest”. The TV spot, created by John Lewis’s usual agency Adam&amp;eveDDB in a process taking about 10 months, features a teenage romance as Nathan finds an alien, Skye, who has crash landed her star-shaped craft in his local woods and introduces her to the delights of Christmas, including mince pies, festive knitwear and fairy lights. All those items, and almost everything else in the ad, apart from the alien and her ship, will be on sale at John Lewis: from the bobble hat worn by Nathan as he heads into the woods after spotting Skye’s ship from a bus window, to the baubles his family put on the tree at home. A 10% share of the profits from sales of a Christmas jumper featured in the ad – albeit without the additional lights shown on screen – will go to FareShare and Home-Start UK, the same charities that benefited from last year’s Give a Little Love campaign. The company said it had spent the same amount as usual, although it would be running a single-brand campaign this year after two years of teaming up with its sister retailer, Waitrose supermarket. Waitrose’s ad will launch at a later date. The campaign will include a Snapchat filter that creates space traveller selfies and an online game, as well as areas in stores to take pictures alongside replicas of Skye’s spacecraft. Claire Pointon, the customer director at John Lewis, said: “After the last 18 months, we wanted our advert to really celebrate this as we look forward to a brighter future. We know our customers are excited for this festive season more than ever, as they reconnect with family and friends.” She said the latest ad was more about “moments” rather than giving gifts and had tried to broaden its appeal to a family audience by featuring teenagers for the first time. “You have got to think about where to push advertising when you have something that has been around for 10 years. You have got to start moving forward but in a way that customers have loved before,” she said.The Democratic governor of New Jersey, Phil Murphy, has narrowly won reelection, eking out a victory that spared Democrats the loss of a second gubernatorial seat. Murphy, a former executive at Goldman Sachs and ambassador to Germany, became the first Democratic governor to win reelection in New Jersey in 44 years. He defeated Jack Ciattarelli, a Republican and former assembly member. Murphy won after a tight race that was widely viewed as a referendum on the Democrat’s leadership throughout the pandemic. The governor issued stringent health orders to slow the spread of Covid-19, and has earned high marks from constituents for his leadership. He was one of the first governors to require Covid-19 vaccinations for public school teachers. But Ciattarelli, like many Republican politicians across the US, seized on growing backlash and frustrations over mask mandates, school closures and other pandemic restrictions, waging a formidable campaign with spending that nearly equalled the governor’s. But while Republican voters came out in much higher rates for Ciattarelli this year than they did for his GOP predecessor in 2017, Murphy’s advantages, including 1 million more registered Democrats, proved too much for the Republican to overcome. That the race remained so close well into Wednesday evening, however, is likely to be an encouraging sign for Republicans ahead of the 2022 midterms, especially given the party’s victory in the Virginia gubernatorial election, where Glenn Youngkin, a Republican businessman, staged an upset victory over former Democratic governor, Terry McAuliffe, who was seeking to return to the post. The Virginia race and other elections on Tuesday were seen as an early referendum on Joe Biden’s presidency and the Democrats’ national agenda, providing the first tests of voter sentiment since the president took office. McAulliffe’s loss and Murphy’s narrow victory point to a potentially painful year ahead for Democrats as they try to maintain thin majorities in Congress. The closeness of the race has surprised experts, who watched public polls showing Murphy leading comfortably and looked to his party’s registration advantage of more than a million voters. “If you asked anybody several months ago within the state, I think anyone would have predicted a high double digit landslide for Murphy,” said Ashley Koning, the director of the Eagleton Center for Public Interest Polling at Rutgers University. Murphy built his campaign around the progressive accomplishments he signed into law, such as a phased-in $15 an hour minimum wage, paid sick leave, and taxes on the wealthy. He also brought on Democratic allies, including Senator Bernie Sanders, to campaign for him. A spokesperson for Ciattarelli said Wednesday that the campaign was focused on the vote count and said that a possible legal pursuit of a recount was on the table. Murphy also called Wednesday morning for every vote to be counted. Ciattarelli is a former state Assembly member, serving until 2018. He’s the founder of a medical publishing company called Galen Publishing, and served as a local and county official in Somerset. • This article was amended on 4 November 2021 because an earlier version referred to a victory by Youngkin in Virginia over McAuliffe “the incumbent Democratic governor”. McAuliffe is a former governor of that state who was seeking to return to the post.That’s it from me, Samantha Lock, for today. Stay tuned in to all the latest Covid developments here. And join us later when we launch our next live blog in a few hours time. Germany is enveloped in a “massive” pandemic of the unvaccinated, health minister says. Jens Spahn has warned: “The pandemic is far from over. We are currently experiencing a pandemic of the unvaccinated, which is massive. There would be fewer coronavirus patients on intensive care units if more people would let themselves be vaccinated.” The Covid pandemic has caused the loss of 28m years of life, according to the largest-ever survey to assess the scale of the impact of the pandemic. The enormous toll was revealed in research, led by the University of Oxford, which calculated the years of life lost (YLL) in 37 countries. Latvia declares three month state of emergency starting from Monday following a surge in Covid-19 infections to record levels as its vaccination rate remains one of the lowest in the EU. The number of daily infections is now well over 1,000 in the Baltic country of 1.9 million people, overtaking the peak infection rate seen during the pandemic earlier this year. Turkey will begin administering booster shots to people who have received two doses of the Pfizer Inc/BioNTech coronavirus vaccine, its health minister Fahrettin Koca said. France reports highest daily cases since mid-September. Health authorities reported 10,050 daily new Covid-19 infections on Wednesday, the first time the tally has topped 10,000 since September 14. The UK recorded another 41,299 Covid cases, and a further 217 deaths within 28 days of a positive test, in the latest 24-hour period. This is compared to 293 deaths and 33,865 positive infections reported a day prior. UK launches trial of drug to tackle fatigue in long Covid patients. The first trial of a drug, called AXA1125, is set to target the fatigue and muscle weakness experienced by more than half of people with long Covid/ The drug targets cellular power plants called mitochondria, which it is thought could be dysfunctional in the subset of long Covid patients with severe fatigue. The US is set to begin giving Covid vaccines to children aged five to 11, with roughly 28 million school-age kids eligible for the shots that provide protection against the illness. A new study suggests that Covid-19 does not infect human brain cells, raising hopes that Covid-related damage to sense of smell may be more superficial than previously feared. The study, published in the journal Cell, contradicts earlier research that suggested the virus infects neurons in the membrane that lines the upper recesses of the nose. This membrane, called the olfactory mucosa, is where the virus first lands when it is inhaled. Within it are olfactory sensory neurons (OSNs), which are responsible for initiating smell sensations. They are tightly entwined with a kind of support cell called sustentacular cells. Read the full story here. Hi I’m Samantha Lock and I’ll be taking over from my colleague Nadeem Badshah for the next short while. It’s a rainy morning over here in Sydney, Australia, where I’ll be reporting to bring you all the leading Covid headlines. Covid has caused the loss of 28m years of life, according to the largest-ever survey to assess the scale of the impact of the pandemic. The enormous toll was revealed in research, led by the University of Oxford, which calculated the years of life lost (YLL) in 37 countries. The study measured the number of deaths and the age at which they occurred, making it the most detailed assessment yet of the impact of Covid-19. Alongside significant falls in life expectancy in most countries, the number of years lost from premature deaths soared. Researchers said the true toll was likely to be even higher as they did not include most countries from Asia, Africa and Latin America in the study, due to a lack of data. The US administered 425,272,828 doses of Covid-19 vaccines in the country as of Wednesday morning and distributed 525,071,855 doses, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said. Those figures are up from the 423,942,794 vaccine doses the CDC said had gone into arms by Nov. 2 out of 521,502,845 doses delivered. The agency said 222,268,786 people had received at least one dose while 192,931,486 people were fully vaccinated as of 6:00 a.m. ET on Wednesday., Reuters reports. Chilean presidential candidate Gabriel Boric, has tested positive for Covid-19, less than three weeks before the Andean country votes. In a post on Twitter, center-left former student leader Boric, 35, said he had just received the positive test and called on his contacts to follow pandemic protocols. The leader of the broad leftist Frente Amplio coalition, which includes the country’s Communist Party, had gone into preventive isolation earlier in the week when he posted that he had a fever, a challenge for his team ahead of the November 21 vote. Boric is seen just behind ultra-conservative candidate Jos Antonio Kast in election polls, with many surveys showing the leftist winning a likely second-round run-off in December. Denmark’s prime minister Mette Frederiksen, facing a probe over the slaughter of the country’s entire mink herd last year, has denied that she knew then that the government did not have legal authority to order the move. Responding to the rising spread of coronavirus from mink to people, including a new mutated strain, Frederiksen’s Social Democratic government in November 2021 ordered all of the country’s 17 million minks killed, Reuters reports. The government later admitted it did not have the legal authority to kill healthy mink herds, only those infected with coronavirus, leading to the exit of the minister of agriculture. Parliament launched a probe in December into whether other ministers including Frederiksen knew of but ignored the faulty legal basis for the order. “What motive should the government have had for not disclosing the lack of legal basis? Let me make it very clear: I did not know,” Frederiksen told a press briefing. Latvia has declared a three-month state of emergency starting from Monday following a surge in Covid-19 infections to record levels as its vaccination rate remains one of the lowest in the EU. The number of daily infections is now well over 1,000 in the Baltic country of 1.9 million people, overtaking the peak infection rate seen during the pandemic earlier this year, AFP reports. Under the new rules, masks are now obligatory in all buildings accessible by the general public and anyone employed in government must have a vaccine by November 15 at the latest. Unvaccinated people will only be allowed to shop for food and other essential items in designated stores and only shops considered essential will be allowed to open at weekends. All Latvians are being encouraged to work from home where possible. Turkey will begin administering boosters to people who have received two doses of the Pfizer Inc/BioNTech coronavirus vaccine, its health minister Fahrettin Koca said. Turkey has already administered a third dose to more than 11.2 million people who received two doses of the vaccine developed by China’s Sinovac, whose efficacy rate officials believe falls faster. Koca said the booster shots for Pfizer/BioNTech recipients would begin on Thursday with the elderly, those with chronic illnesses, health workers and those in other high-risk jobs, Reuters reports. He said 59% of the population had so far received two vaccines doses, adding: “That rate needs to get over 70% to achieve herd immunity.” Brazil registered 164 Covid-19 deaths on Wednesday and 14,661 further cases, according to data released by the country’s health ministry. The South American country has now registered a total of 608,235 coronavirus deaths and 21,835,785 total confirmed cases, Reuters reports. U.S. president Joe Biden said there will be enough Covid-19 vaccines by next week for children and these shots will be available at about 20,000 locations around the country. The US has started administering the vaccine to children ages 5 to 11, the latest group to become eligible for the shots that provide protection against the illness, Reuters reports. Canadian employers are firing or putting on unpaid leave thousands of workers who refused to get Covid-19 jabs, Reuters reports. Prime Minister Justin Trudeau promised vaccine mandates as a central part of his successful campaign for re-election in September, setting a precedent that has spread from the public to the private sector. The mandate for federal workers is one of the world’s strictest, and the government has extended it to federally regulated spaces, which include airports, and to air and rail travelers. Across Canada, hospitals, banks, insurers, school boards, police and some provincial administrations are now implementing similar policies for current and future hires. Unvaccinated workers whose livelihoods are on the line - in a country where more than 83% of the eligible population over 12 years old have had their jabs- are flooding labour lawyers with calls. The latest Covid developments in Australia and elsewhere: Los Angeles mayor Eric Garcetti tested positive for Covid-19 on Wednesday while attending the U.N. climate conference in Glasgow, Scotland, an event that has drawn world leaders and tens of thousands of other people from around the world. More people may die from other conditions such as cancer than directly from Covid-19 due to the effect the pandemic has had on health services, according to a UK professor of respiratory medicine. Professor Michael Peake, who received an OBE for services to medicine, said: “Not the direct effect of having Covid as an infection, but how that’s altered health services and access for patients to both GPs and hospital and access to tests, PA reports. “And we’re beginning to quantify what that is. “It’s a huge... there’s probably going to be more people who die of other conditions - heart disease, cancer, kidney disease - than will have died directly of Covid, probably, just because of the effect of Covid on those services.” French health authorities reported 10,050 daily new Covid-19 infections on Wednesday, the first time the tally has topped 10,000 since September 14. Hospitalisations for the disease are up by 84, at 6,764, a rise unseen since September 6th. The cumulative total of new cases now stands at 7.18 million, Reuters repots. The number of Covid-19 patients in intensive care rose by 5 in 24 hours to 1,096 and by 58 over a week. France also registered 35 new deaths, taking the total to 117,783. The U.S. Federal Reserve has announced it is winding down the massive stimulus programme it put in place at the onset of the Covid-19 pandemic amid fears that the central bank may have to raise rates soon to control rising inflation. Fed officials have been debating for months over whether and when to taper the stimulus programmes that it set up to head off the economic headwinds caused by the pandemic. They announced on Wednesday that they would begin cutting that stimulus by $15bn a month but left interest rates unchanged. Here is a quick recap of some of the main developments from today: The UK recorded another 41,299 Covid cases, and a further 217 deaths within 28 days of a positive test, in the latest 24-hour period. This is compared to 293 deaths and 33,865 positive infections reported a day prior. Russia’s one-dose Sputnik Light vaccine had a good safety profile and induced strong immune responses especially in people who had already encountered Covid, according to the results of phase I and II trials published in The Lancet medical journal. The vaccine, a single-dose version of the two-dose Sputnik V vaccine unveiled last year, has already entered later phases of studies and is widely used in Russia, but the publication of the early research in a top Western journal is a milestone as Russia moves towards making Sputnik Light its main vaccine for export. Face masks will again become compulsory from next week for French school kids in 39 regional departments where the Covid virus has been ramping up, government spokesman Gabriel Attal said. The Saudi Food and Drug Authority said on Wednesday it had given its approval to use Pfizer’s Covid vaccine for those between five and eleven years of age. Four Russian regions said they would extend a one-week workplace shutdown that took effect nationwide on 30 October in response to a surge in Covid cases. The president Vladimir Putin ordered the shutdown last month, giving regional authorities the option of extending it. Authorities in the Kursk and Bryansk regions, the Chelyabinsk region and Tomsk said their shutdowns would be prolonged. Italy’s medicines agency AIFA recommended a booster of the Pfizer/BioNTech or Moderna vaccine to those inoculated with the Johnson &amp; Johnson shot, a source close to the agency told Reuters. All those who have had a single shot of the J&amp;J vaccine, regardless of age, about 1.6 million people in Italy, will be eligible to receive the booster, the source added. The first trial of a drug to target the fatigue and muscle weakness experienced by more than half of people with long Covid has been launched in the UK. It is also the first drug trial in patients with long Covid who were not hospitalised during their initial infection. Full story here. Nadhim Zahawi, the UK education secretary, said he has “no plans whatsoever” to close schools again during the pandemic. He pledged to keep schools open as he said testing pupils for Covid and vaccinating eligible children will help keep them in class. His comments came as a bill was set to be introduced in the Commons calling for a “triple lock” of protections to ensure that any future school closures would have to be approved by parliament. The World Health Organization approved Indian drugmaker Bharat Biotech’s Covid vaccine, Covaxin, for emergency use, paving the way for the homegrown shot to be accepted as a valid vaccine in many poor countries. The emergency use listing would allow Bharat to ship the vaccine to countries that rely on WHO guidance for their regulatory decisions. Covid vaccination is to be made mandatory for the NHS’s 1.2 million full-time staff in England from April next year, despite criticism that forcing frontline personnel to get jabbed is “heavy-handed” and will lead some to quit. Story here. The US is set to begin giving Covid vaccines to children aged five to 11, with roughly 28 million school-age kids eligible for the shots that provide protection against the illness. Germany is experiencing a “massive” pandemic of the unvaccinated, the health minister Jens Spahn said, calling for tougher action to combat a resurgence in Covid cases. Spahn expressed frustration that uptake of jabs has slowed and that a significant group of 18 to 59 year olds remain unvaccinated. He called for tougher checks at establishments or events where only those who can show they have been vaccinated, have recovered from Covid or have recently tested negative, are allowed to enter. He also called for a bigger push on booster jabs. We reported earlier on Germany’s health minister Jens Spahn’s warning that the country is going through a “massive” pandemic of the unvaccinated. Here is Philip Oltermann’s report: Two-thirds of fully vaccinated over-80s in England have received an extra dose of Covid-19 vaccine, new figures suggest. A total of 1.9 million people aged 80 and over in England are now estimated to have had either a third dose or a booster - the equivalent of 70% of those currently eligible for an extra jab. The figures, from NHS England, also show that almost 66% of eligible double-jabbed people aged 75 to 79 are likely to have received an extra dose as of November 2, along with nearly 51% of those aged 70 to 74. In total, 6.3 million extra doses of vaccine have been delivered to over-50s in England - the equivalent of around three in 10 of all double-jabbed people in this age group, according to analysis by the PA news agency. Data for the number of boosters and third doses in England is not reported separately, even though they are being delivered to different categories of people at different stages in the vaccine roll-out. Booster doses are offered to people who are at least six months on from receiving their second dose of coronavirus vaccine. If eligible, people who can receive a booster dose include all adults aged 50 and over; frontline health and social care workers; and those living in residential care homes for older adults. Booster doses are also being made available to people aged 16 to 49 with underlying health conditions that put them at higher risk of severe Covid-19, and adult household contacts of immunosuppressed individuals. By contrast, third doses are being offered to individuals aged 12 and over who may not be able to mount a full immune response following two doses of Covid-19 vaccine, due to underlying health conditions or medical treatment. A third primary dose of vaccine should ideally be given at least eight weeks after the second dose, according to official guidance from the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation. Unlike in England, data for boosters and third doses is reported separately in Wales. Around 61% of double-jabbed people aged 80 and over in Wales have received a booster dose, along with more than 57% of 75- to 79-year-olds and 45% of 70- to 74-year-olds, latest figures show. Scotland and Northern Ireland do not publish take-up of booster doses broken down by age. Nearly 21% of all double-jabbed people in north-west England have received an extra dose of vaccine - the highest proportion for any region. London has the lowest proportion of any region, at around 16%. The virus that causes Covid-19 does not infect human brain cells, according to a new study published in the journal Cell. The findings will raise hopes that the damage caused by Sars-CoV-2 might be more superficial and reversible than previously feared. Read the full story here: The UK has recorded another 41,299 Covid cases, and a further 217 deaths within 28 days of a positive test, in the latest 24-hour period, the latest government data shows. This is compared to 293 deaths and 33,865 positive infections reported a day prior. Russia’s one-dose Sputnik Light vaccine had a good safety profile and induced strong immune responses especially in people who had already encountered Covid, according to the results of phase I and II trials published in The Lancet medical journal. The vaccine, a single-dose version of the two-dose Sputnik V vaccine unveiled last year, has already entered later phases of studies and is widely used in Russia, but the publication of the early research in a top Western journal is a milestone as Russia moves towards making Sputnik Light its main vaccine for export. Scientists from the vaccine’s developer, the Gamaleya Institute, oversaw 110 volunteers aged 18-59 in St Petersburg, who were inoculated in January 2021, looking at the response of the immune system and the main side effects. The results analysed virus neutralisation against the original variant and showed a slight but statistically significant decrease in the antibody response for the Alpha and Beta strains. Russia’s dominant strain is now the Delta variant. Russia has already said that subsequent research showed Sputnik Light demonstrated 70% effectiveness against the Delta variant three months after injection. “Sputnik Light might be considered not only for primary vaccination, but also could be useful as an efficient tool for further revaccination or vaccination after previous Covid-19 infection,” the study said. Last week, the health minister Mikhail Murashko said that with the spread of the Delta variant, the ministry recommended the usage of Sputnik Light for re-vaccination only. The Kremlin later said Sputnik Light was a standalone Covid vaccine, but some Russian regions reported that they had begun to administer it only to people with antibodies. Sputnik Light was approved for clinical use in Russia on 6 May based on the results of trials published in The Lancet and Gamaleya has started an international and placebo-controlled phase III study with 6,000 participants. “We believe Sputnik Light vaccine could contribute towards accelerating the pace of vaccination in Russia as well as in other countries that are lacking sufficient vaccine supply,” the scientists wrote. Face masks will again become compulsory from next week for French school kids in 39 regional departments where the Covid virus has been ramping up, government spokesman Gabriel Attal said on Wednesday. French health authorities reported 7,360 daily new Covid infections on 30 October, the first time the tally has topped 7,000 since 21 September. France’s cumulative total of new cases stood at 7,170,782 as of 2 November, with the number of patients with Covid in intensive care units reaching 1,091, a rise of 22 over 24 hours. The Saudi Food and Drug Authority said on Wednesday it had given its approval to use Pfizer’s Covid vaccine for those between five and eleven years of age. The authority added in a statement its decision was “based on data provided by the company, which showed the vaccine met the special regulatory requirements”. The World Economic Forum said on Wednesday that it is postponing its event planned for later this month in the Chinese city of Tianjin due to the outbreak of Covid cases in the country, where new locally transmitted cases hit a near three-month high. “Regretfully, due to the circumstances around the ongoing Covid-19 pandemic and recent cases in major cities and provinces in China, the Annual Meeting of the New Champions will be rescheduled,” the WEF said in an email to participants. Covid-19 deaths and infections have declined across the Americas for the 8th consecutive week, the Pan American Health Organization (PAHO) said on Wednesday, warning that a very high percentage of hospitalised cases now are unvaccinated people. In North America, all three countries reported drops in weekly cases and deaths, and there has been a notable decline in hospitalisations in the United States and Canada, PAHO said, with similar declines in South and Central America. The regional health branch of the World Health Organization said 46% of the Latin American and Caribbean population have been fully vaccinated, and a majority of countries have already reached the WHO’s 40% vaccination coverage target set for the end of the year. “Vaccine inequity remains the biggest barrier to reaching our coverage targets,” PAHO assistant director Jarbas Barbosa said in a briefing. Given the limited supply of vaccines, he urged authorities to prioritise the elderly, frontline workers, and people with pre-existing conditions, to protect them and also to prevent health systems from becoming overburdened with severe cases. PAHO recommends providing booster doses to people who are immunocompromised, including cancer patients, HIV positive individuals, patients on corticoids and transplant recipients. PAHO said people over the age of 60 who received inactivated virus vaccines made by China’s Sinovac Biotech and Sinopharm should also get booster shots. Four Russian regions said on Wednesday they would extend a one-week workplace shutdown that took effect nationwide on 30 October in response to a surge in Covid cases, Reuters reports. It comes as the daily Covid death toll from the country’s epidemic hit a record high. A further 1,189 deaths were reported on Wednesday, and the government coronavirus task force also reported 40,443 new infections in the last 24 hours. The president Vladimir Putin ordered the shutdown last month, giving regional authorities the option of extending it. Authorities in the Kursk and Bryansk regions, which border Ukraine, the Chelyabinsk region near the Ural mountains and Tomsk in Siberia said their shutdowns would be prolonged. “The tense epidemiological situation forces us to extend the period of non-working days by another week,” the Tomsk governor Sergei Zhvachkin said in a statement. “One non-working week is not enough to stop the chain of infection.” Moscow authorities, meanwhile, said businesses there would reopen on Monday. “The spread of the disease has stabilised in terms of its detection and its severe forms requiring hospitalisation,” RIA news agency quoted the capital’s mayor, Sergei Sobyanin, as saying. Other measures, including a requirement that companies have at least 30% of their staff work from home, would remain in place, Sobyanin said. The health consumer watchdog in Moscow said it had recorded violations of Covid regulations at more than a quarter of the businesses it inspected last week. The Moscow region, which includes the small cities and towns surrounding the city, also said it would not prolong the shutdown. The Novgorod region announced on Monday it was extending its shutdown by a week. Italy’s medicines agency AIFA on Wednesday recommended a booster of the Pfizer/BioNTech or Moderna vaccine to those inoculated with the Johnson &amp; Johnson shot, a source close to the agency has told Reuters. All those who have had a single shot of the J&amp;J vaccine, regardless of age, about 1.6 million people in Italy, will be eligible to receive the booster, the source added. Italy started to inoculate vulnerable groups and the over 60s with a third vaccine dose in September. More than 44.8 million Italians, or 83% of the population over the age of 12, are fully vaccinated against Covid. Italy has registered 132,161 deaths linked to Covid since its outbreak emerged in February last year, the second-highest toll in Europe after the UK and the ninth-highest in the world. The country has reported 4.78 million cases to date. The weekly incidence of cases, after months of decline, has been rising rapidly since last week, the National Health Institute said in a report on Friday. In Europe, Spain and Germany have already authorised boosters for those who have had the J&amp;J vaccine. The US Food and Drug Administration on 20 October authorised booster doses of Covid vaccines from Moderna and Johnson &amp; Johnson, and said Americans can choose a different shot from their original inoculation as a booster. Children as young as seven were held for hours in a Beijing school before being sent to centralised quarantine for two weeks after a staff member tested positive for Covid-19. The incident, which drew alarm from parents and observers, came amid a rush of extreme measures imposed on the city over about 40 cases of the Delta variant, part of a national outbreak affecting at least 16 of China’s 31 provinces. Tighter curbs are expected after the National Health Commission reported a near three-month high on Tuesday, with 93 new local symptomatic cases, up from 54 a day earlier. The Huajiadi Experimental primary school in Chaoyang district was quickly sealed off on Monday afternoon after it emerged a teacher had been diagnosed with coronavirus, local media reported. Parents were called to the school but spent hours gathered outside the gate waiting for information on their children caught inside by the lockdown. According to reports, school authorities said the children were all being tested and some would have to remain there overnight. Read the full story here: The first trial of a drug to target the fatigue and muscle weakness experienced by more than half of people with long Covid has been launched in the UK. It is also the first drug trial in patients with long Covid who were not hospitalised during their initial infection. The drug, called AXA1125, targets cellular power plants called mitochondria, which it is thought could be dysfunctional in the subset of long Covid patients with severe fatigue. If successful, it could pave the way for similar trials in patients with other forms of post-viral fatigue, including myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS). Read the full story here: The risk of reinfection with the dominant Delta variant of coronavirus is 74% greater than with the previous Alpha variant that was first spotted in Kent last year, official figures from the UK show. A report published by the Office for National Statistics on Wednesday recorded 358 Covid reinfections in 20,757 people between July 2020 and October 2021. While overall rates of reinfection were low, they climbed significantly after May 2021 when the Delta variant became dominant, reflecting the variant’s increased transmissibility. The ONS estimates that the rate for all Covid reinfections in the UK was 11.9 per 100,000 participant days at risk, meaning that once the participants had accrued 100,000 days at risk of reinfection between them, statisticians would expect to see about 12 cases. Most reinfections were seen seven to eight months after the initial infection. People who had the lowest amount of virus in their system during their earlier Covid infection were at greater risk of contracting the virus again, as were people living in multiple-occupancy houses. Teachers and others working in education were also at higher risk of reinfection, probably because of the high levels of infection in schools, the ONS found. The UK education secretary has said he has “no plans whatsoever” to close schools again during the pandemic, PA Media reports. Nadhim Zahawi has pledged to keep schools open as he said testing pupils for Covid and vaccinating eligible children will help keep them in class. His comments come as a bill is set to be introduced in the Commons that calls for a “triple lock” of protections to ensure that any future school closures would have to be approved by parliament. Zahawi told MPs that a review of extending the school day – which has been suggested by experts to help children recover learning lost during the pandemic – will be published before the end of the year. Addressing the Commons education committee, he said: Protecting face-to-face learning is my absolute priority. I have no plans whatsoever to close schools again. I know that the way we maintain face-to-face learning is through boosting the most vulnerable in our society … vaccinating the 12- to 15-year-olds as well, and of course the testing programme. Zahawi told MPs: My commitment to you is that this secretary of state will keep schools open because actually we know the damage by shutting schools. A bill from Tory MP Robert Halfon, who chairs the education committee, aims to redefine schools as “essential infrastructure” to protect millions of pupils from future shutdowns. Zahawi told MPs that he would look at Halfon’s bill, adding: This is not a snowflake generation. They were really resilient, but actually keeping schools open has to be my priority. His pledge came after the latest government figures showed that the number of children out of school for Covid-related reasons in England rose to nearly a quarter of a million in the week before the October half-term. During the hearing, Zahawi was also questioned over whether the Department for Education (DfE) plans to lengthen the school day to help pupils catch up on lessons following school closures. He said: “What the chair is asking about is ‘are we going to have a longer school day?’. No, we’re not on the whole. We’re saying we’ve got targeted funds to deliver.” Last week, the government announced it would provide an extra £1.8bn to help children recover learning lost during the pandemic, bringing total catch-up funding so far to £4.9bn. Zahawi said: Let me deliver that 5 billion, continue to evaluate, come back to your committee and show you, I hope, how well we’ve done, because the evidence suggests that actually targeting and extending the day for 16- to 19-year-olds, which we’re doing, is the right thing. The World Health Organization on Wednesday said it had approved Indian drugmaker Bharat Biotech’s Covid vaccine for emergency use, paving the way for the homegrown shot to be accepted as a valid vaccine in many poor countries. “The Technical Advisory Group has determined that the Covaxin vaccine meets WHO standards for protection against Covid-19, that the benefit of the vaccine far outweighs risks and the vaccine can be used,” the WHO said in a tweet. The WHO’s advisory group was expected to make a decision on the shot known as Covaxin last week, but asked for additional clarifications from Bharat Biotech before conducting a final risk-benefit assessment for the vaccine’s global use. Covaxin was also reviewed by WHO’s Strategic Advisory Group of Experts on Immunization, which recommended its use in two doses, with an interval of four weeks, in all age groups 18 and above. The emergency use listing would allow Bharat to ship the vaccine to countries that rely on WHO guidance for their regulatory decisions. Covaxin is the seventh to win WHO backing following two mRNA shots by Pfizer/BioNTech and Moderna, adenovirus vector vaccines developed by AstraZeneca and Johnson &amp; Johnson, and China’s inactivated vaccines from Sinovac Biotech and Sinopharm. The nod also mean that the shot may be accepted as a valid vaccine for millions of Indians who have received it and want to travel nL4N2RM0WR outside the country. Oman last week and Australia on Monday said they will recognise Covaxin as a valid vaccine for travellers. Covid vaccination is to be made compulsory for the NHS’s 1.2 million full-time staff in England, despite criticism that forcing frontline personnel to get jabbed is “heavy-handed” and will lead some to quit. However, the tough new approach will not come into force until next April year, after Sajid Javid heeded warnings that introducing it soon could lead to an exodus of staff during the winter, the health service’s busiest time of year. An announcement is due as soon as Thursday, the Guardian understands. The health secretary appears to have been influenced by NHS Providers and the NHS Confederation, the two organisations that represent NHS trusts in England, strongly advising him to delay implementing the move until next year. Read the full story here: The US is set to begin giving Covid vaccines to children aged five to 11 as soon as Wednesday, with roughly 28 million school-age kids eligible for the shots that provide protection against the illness, Reuters reports. On Tuesday, the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommended the Pfizer/BioNTech shot for broad use in that age group after a panel of outside advisers voted in favour. While about 58% of Americans are fully vaccinated, children under 12 have not yet been eligible for shots. The Delta variant of the virus has led to thousands of children being hospitalised and they make up 25% of US cases. The vaccine, shown to be more than 90% effective at preventing symptomatic infection in children, offers an avenue for fewer quarantines or school closures and more freedoms. The CDC director Rochelle Walensky said on Monday: There has been a great deal of anticipation for parents surrounding the authorisation of vaccines for our children. I deeply understand the urgency and concern over providing the best protection to our children against the virus. The US government will start sending 15 million vaccines for children this week to distribution centres around the country, with the paediatric program expected to be running full steam next week, White House officials said. Once the shots are delivered, rather than mass vaccination centres, the rollout will rely on paediatrician’s offices, children’s hospitals and pharmacies, the White House has said. The federal government has purchased 50m doses of Pfizer’s vaccine for the rollout, and has enough supply for all 28 million eligible children, US officials said this week. Pfizer’s shot for younger children contains a lower 10-microgram dose of vaccine than the 30 micrograms given to those aged 12 and older. Following the CDC’s decision, parents can visit the vaccines.gov website to find locations offering the vaccine for the children, White House coronavirus response coordinator Jeff Zients said. The US Food and Drug Administration authorised the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine for emergency use for children aged five to 11 years on Friday. So far, only Pfizer’s shot has been authorised for use in the US for those under the age of 12. A few other countries including China are already vaccinating children. Moderna said on Sunday it would delay filing its request for an emergency use authorisation for its vaccine for children aged six to 11 while the FDA reviews safety data in connection with its application for 12- to 17-year olds. The states with the highest adult vaccination rates against Covid are also preparing bigger pushes to get children inoculated than states where hesitancy remains strong, potentially widening the gaps in protection nationwide, public health officials and experts said. Still, it remains unclear how parents will react. Many people who have been vaccinated themselves are more divided over whether or not to vaccinate their own younger children given that severe Covid is much less common for them. While the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine has been used in more than 400 million people, there is no long-term data yet for its use in adults or children. California, New York and Washington state, all led by Democratic governors who have promoted vaccination and mask-wearing during the pandemic, are setting up mobile sites and high-volume vaccination clinics for children, spokespeople for the public health departments of those states said. California has also mandated that school-age children get a vaccine once their age group is eligible, a measure being considered in New York and Washington. Republican state governors have largely resisted measures such as mask mandates or vaccine requirements in workplaces, schools and public venues. More than a dozen states, including Florida and Texas, have tried to block schools from imposing such requirements themselves. “The best-case scenario would be everyone... did their best to get the age group vaccinated because it’s going to protect their younger siblings, their older relatives and people who just don’t respond well to these vaccines,” said Pamela Zeitlin, the chair of the department of pediatrics at National Jewish Health, a hospital in Colorado. Slovenia registered a record high new daily 3,456 Covid cases on Tuesday, or 44.7% of the number of people tested, the state health institute said, as medical experts suggest tighter restrictions to rein in the pandemic. Currently there are 29,354 active infections in the small Alpine state of some two million people. There are 1.12 million fully vaccinated people, or 53% of the overall population. Medical experts this week proposed tightening curbs on gatherings, including shorter opening hours for bars and restaurants and work from home for public sector employees, national television reported. The government is expected to discuss the pandemic on Thursday. Hundreds of Greek health care workers protested in central Athens against mandatory coronavirus vaccines for their profession on Wednesday, the Associated Press reports. The protest comes a day after the government imposed more restrictions on unvaccinated Greeks amid a spike in infections, hospitalisations and deaths. About 300 demonstrators chanted slogans and held up banners outside the parliament building, protesting regulations that call for unvaccinated health care workers to be suspended from their jobs. Health care unions have said they do not oppose the vaccines but object to them being required. Vaccines against the coronavirus are compulsory for workers in Greece’s health care sector and those working in care homes for the elderly. On Tuesday, Greece reported a record 6,700 new daily Covid cases and 59 deaths, bringing the total in the country of around 11 million to over 750,000 infections and more than 16,000 deaths since the start of the pandemic. Intensive care units for patients with Covid are at over 82% capacity, while regular coronavirus wards in hospitals are nearly half full, officials said. The health minister Thanos Plevris said on Tuesday that tougher restrictions would be imposed as of Saturday for all unvaccinated people in Greece. Anyone without a certificate of vaccination or recent recovery from Covid will need to display a negative PCR or rapid test, conducted at their own cost at a private facility, for access to a wide range of facilities, including banks, public services, shops, hair salons and entertainment venues. Public and private sector employees will also have to take two tests per week, up from the current one, to enter their workplaces. Around 61% of Greece’s total population has been fully vaccinated, and people age 12 and over are eligible for shots. Booster shots are available for those over 50, and will be available starting Friday to all adults who received their last vaccine dose six months earlier. Germany is experiencing a “massive” pandemic of the unvaccinated, the health minister Jens Spahn has said, calling for tougher action to combat a resurgence in Covid cases. “We are currently experiencing mainly a pandemic of the unvaccinated and it is massive,” Spahn told reporters on Wednesday. “In some regions in Germany intensive care beds are running out again.” Germany, Europe’s most populous country with some 83 million people, has been grappling with a fourth wave of infections in recent weeks that has seen the seven-day incidence rate hit highs not seen since May. The country added 20,398 cases over the past 24 hours, the Robert Koch health institute said Wednesday, while another 194 people died. More than 66% of the population is fully vaccinated, but Spahn expressed frustration that the uptake of jabs has slowed and that a significant group of 18 to 59 year olds remain unvaccinated. He also called for tougher checks at establishments or events where only those who can show they have been vaccinated, have recovered from Covid or have recently tested negative, are allowed to enter. In some hard-hit regions, he said, access should be limited to those who are fully vaccinated or can show proof of recovery - a system knowns as 2G in Germany. “It’s nothing to do with vaccine bullying,” he said, “but with avoiding an overloading of the health care system”. His final recommendation was for a bigger push on booster jabs, saying the current pace “is insufficient”. Good morning from London. I’m Lucy Campbell, I’ll be bringing you all the latest global developments on the coronavirus pandemic for the next eight hours. Please feel free to get in touch with me as I work if you have a story or tips to share! Your thoughts are always welcome. Email: lucy.campbell@theguardian.com Twitter: @lucy_campbell_ England’s deputy chief medical officer Prof Jonathan Van-Tam had some strong words this morning, saying that “too many people believe that this pandemic is now over. I personally feel there are some hard months to come in the winter and it is not over.” He warned the UK public that “the caution that people take or don’t take in terms of interacting with each other: that is going to be a big determinant in what happens between now and the darkest months of the winter.” Prof Jeremy Brown of the UK’s Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI) has said it is “far too early” to be following the lead of the US by vaccinating children aged 11 and under against coronavirus – but added that there may be a case for some youngsters receiving a jab. The UK has had its highest number of daily Covid deaths reported since late February, as another 293 people have died within 28 days of a positive Covid-19 test. Health expert Prof Devi Sridhar in Scotland has described the scenes of delegates queuing at the Cop26 conference in Glasgow as “really concerning” during a pandemic. The Netherlands is bringing back coronavirus measures including a requirement for face masks in many public spaces to combat a surge in cases. Neighbouring Belgium is also experiencing a sharp rise in the number of cases. Hong Kong will roll out booster doses of Covid-19 vaccines from next week, health secretary Sophia Chan said today. “The elderly are the most fragile group and we have a responsibility to protect their health,” Chan said. About 1.86 million people are eligible for the booster, which they can start booking from 5 November, to receive it as soon as 11 November. Tighter curbs are expected in China after the National Health Commission reported Covid cases surged to a near-three-month high with 93 new local symptomatic cases recorded for Tuesday, up from 54 a day earlier. China has already urged its citizens to stockpile daily necessities, prompting panic-buying, amid surging vegetable prices linked to recent extreme weather, fears of supply shortages South Korea has said it would ramp up Covid-19 testing at schools after a sharp rise of infections among children, weeks ahead of a plan to fully reopen schools nationwide. Philippines president Rodrigo Duterte said on Wednesday that local government officials will be punished for falling behind their targets for Covid-19 vaccinations. Russia today has confirmed 40,443 new Covid-19 infections and a new official pandemic record of 1,189 daily deaths. The country is in a week long enforced shutdown in order to try to stem the rising tide of infections. There have been protests in Kyiv, Ukraine today against government moves to try and halt the current wave of the virus. Ukrainian health minister Viktor Lyashko told a televised news conference “Trust me, this anti-vaccination spirit quickly disappears in intensive care units.” The number of daily Covid-19 cases reported in the Czech Republic neared 10,000 for the first time since March, health ministry data showed. Poland reported more than 10,400 Covid-19 cases on Wednesday, a 24% rise week on week, government spokesman Piotr Muller said. The number of foreign tourists visiting Spain more than quadrupled in September from a year ago to nearly 4.7 million, official data showed as widespread vaccination and looser travel restrictions enticed back more visitors. Seven gang leaders, representing four of New Zeland’s most well-known street gangs, joined forces in a video urging their communities to get vaccinated. Alan Evans has got our live coverage of Cop26, while Andrew Sparrow has UK politics live. Lucy Campbell will be here shortly to lead you through the rest of the day’s coronavirus news from the UK and around the world. I’m Martin Belam signing off – I’ll see you here tomorrow. This next block comes with an “awkward football analogy” health warning, as PA Media rounds up some of the things that England’s deputy chief medical officer Jonathan Van-Tam said to the media this morning, including that he thinks we are “kind of half-time in extra time” of dealing with the pandemic, with the final whistle coming in spring. It is unclear if he thinks we then go to penalties. More seriously, here are some more of his key quotes: Christmas, and indeed all of the darker winter months, are potentially going to be problematic, and I think the things that are really going to determine this are, first of all, human behaviours and caution over the winter months, but particularly in the next couple of months if you’re talking about Christmas, so it’s how cautious we are. The other things that are going to be really important are how people respond if they are in need of a booster, if they are in need of flu vaccine, if they are partially vaccinated, or indeed if they are unvaccinated – that will be another really important factor in terms of what happens over the next few months. It’s of concern to scientists that we are running this hot this early in the autumn season. And so, from that perspective, I’m afraid it’s caution, followed by caution, and we need to watch these data very carefully indeed over the next days and weeks. Last November, the WEAR-TV news station in northern Florida aired a segment on Dr Benjamin Marble, a local doctor who created a free telehealth website offering consultations for Covid-19. Marble, the reporter said, had made it so “patients don’t have to pay a cent” for coronavirus treatment and believed his site could replace Obamacare. To the average viewer, the segment on the ABC affiliate, which is owned by Sinclair Broadcasting, was a local news report touting a local service. What the report didn’t mention, however, is that Marble is a member of America’s Frontline Doctors, a rightwing political group that gained notoriety in summer 2020 after some of its members appeared in a viral video touting unproven Covid-19 treatments as miracle cures. AFD’s founder, Dr Simone Gold, has headlined anti-vaccine rallies and is facing charges for storming the Capitol during the 6 January riot. Also visible in a photo included in the clip was Dr Stella Immanuel, an AFD member who has claimed masks don’t help curb the spread of Covid-19 and repeatedly said some real world illnesses were caused by people having sex in their dreams with demons and witches. Marble’s telehealth page itself links to anti-vaccine information and websites promoting unproven Covid-19 treatments such as the anti-parasite drug ivermectin. Since the start of the pandemic, local newspapers, broadcast television and radio stations across the US have been among the most popular sources for information about Covid-19. Many anti-vaccine activists as well as doctors and groups promoting unproven Covid-19 treatments have turned to those same channels to spread their message. Read more of Nick Robins-Early’s report here: How anti-vaxxers and ivermectin advocates have co-opted local news in the US By the way, we’ve got two other live blogs running this morning. Andrew Sparrow has our UK politics live blog which I would expect to see dominated by the Tory sleaze row as they try and avoid Owen Paterson being suspended from parliament for thirty days by re-writing the way that the cross-party Commons standards committee works. There will also be PMQs. You can find that here: Also blogging live at the moment is Alan Evans, who is covering Cop26 in Glasgow for us. You can follow the day’s progress in Scotland with him here. England’s deputy chief medical officer Prof Jonathan Van-Tam had some strong words appearing on the BBC this morning, saying that “Too many people believe that this pandemic is now over. I personally feel there are some hard months to come in the winter and it is not over.” Reuters quotes him warning the UK public that “the caution that people take or don’t take in terms of interacting with each other: that is going to be a big determinant in what happens between now and the darkest months of the winter.” In other comments to the media this morning, he said the flu vaccine has “never been more important”. PA Media quotes him saying: “Don’t forget flu. We have very few restrictions in society at the moment – this means all the other respiratory winter viruses will come back. “We didn’t have any flu to speak of last winter because of the lockdowns and so forth, and that means we have a population who are more susceptible, less immune to flu at the moment. “So, for the people who are at high risk who need a flu jab in the winter, it could never have been more important than right now that you come forward to get it.” A member of the UK’s Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI) has said it is “far too early” to be following the lead of the US by vaccinating children aged 11 and under against coronavirus – but added that there may be a case for some youngsters receiving a jab. Jeremy Brown, professor of respiratory medicine at University College London Hospitals, said it is not the right time as the British regulatory bodies have not yet looked at the data from the US. But he added that if the vaccines are approved for children aged 11 and under by regulators, they could be used for those who have underlying conditions. PA Media quotes Prof Brown told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: “I think there’s a case for using a vaccine on those children that have underlying diseases that make them more vulnerable to Covid, having severe side-effects from the Covid infection. That’s possible.” Hong Kong will roll out booster doses of Covid-19 vaccines from next week, health secretary Sophia Chan said today. “The elderly are the most fragile group and we have a responsibility to protect their health,” Chan said. The vaccination campaign in the global financial hub has lagged many other developed economies, with about 65% of the eligible population fully vaccinated with shots from either China’s Sinovac, or Germany’s BioNTech. Reuters report that about 85% of those older than 80 in the Chinese-ruled city of 7.5 million have not been vaccinated. The elderly will get priority for the booster shots, along with health workers, cross-border truck drivers and others in categories deemed to be at higher risk of getting the disease. About 1.86 million people are eligible for the booster, which they can start booking from 5 November, to receive it as soon as 11 November. Russia today has confirmed 40,443 new Covid-19 infections and a new official pandemic record of 1,189 daily deaths. The country is in a week long enforced shutdown in order to try to stem the rising tide of infections. South Korea has said it would ramp up Covid-19 testing at schools after a sharp rise of infections among children, weeks ahead of a plan to fully reopen schools nationwide. The surge comes as new social distancing rules aimed at a phased return to normal came into effect on Monday as a part of the country’s plan to gradually move toward living with Covid-19. South Korea has fully vaccinated nearly 90% of its adult population but only began inoculating children aged between 12 and 17 in recent weeks, administering just 0.6% of the age group with both doses so far. “There is a growing concern as the frequency of new cluster outbreaks has been increasing, centred on educational facilities such as private tuition centres and schools,” interior and safety minister Jeon Hae-cheol said, Reuters reports. The country recorded 2,667 new cases for Tuesday, an increase of more than 1,000 from the day earlier. Nearly a quarter of the new cases were found in teenagers, officials said. “The teenagers spend a lot of time in communal living such as schools and tuition centres and they are also active in social activities,” Son Young-rae, a senior health ministry official, told a briefing. “We believe that the risk of infection will inevitably rise and the confirmed cases will continue to surge stemming from these teenagers.” England’s deputy chief medical officer, Prof Jonathan Van-Tam, has said he is worried that increasing numbers of deaths show “the infection is now starting to penetrate into older age groups”. “Deaths are increasing – there might be some artefacts in the very latest figure – but essentially deaths are increasing,” PA Media quotes him telling BBC Breakfast and BBC Radio 5 Live. “If you then look at hospital admissions, those have plateaued in the last four days. And if you look at the total number of patients in hospital with Covid, those have gone down in the last two or three days, but only a small bit. “So what that tells me is that we have to just wait and see a bit longer – this could be a pause before things go up, it could be the very first signs that things are beginning to stabilise but at a high rate. “On cases, they are now starting to fall, but that mainly reflects the fact that this big wave we’ve had in teenagers is now starting to slip away. But my worry is that the deaths are increasing and that shows that the infection is now starting to penetrate into those older age groups. Faced with rising case numbers, the Ukrainian government has enacted a series of anti-Covid measures. Teachers, government employees and other workers have been told to get fully vaccinated by 8 November or face having their salary payments suspended. In addition, proof of vaccination or a negative test is now required to board planes, trains and long-distance buses. That has led to protests in the street today in the capital Kyiv. Reuters reports that Ukraine lagged behind other European countries in obtaining coronavirus vaccines earlier this year and is now struggling to persuade a sceptical public to take them. “Such rallies of people that we see today, with calls not to get vaccinated, in my opinion, make a mockery of our doctors and families, who, unfortunately, have lost their relatives due to the coronavirus,” Ukrainian health minister Viktor Lyashko told a televised news conference. “Trust me, this anti-vaccination spirit quickly disappears in intensive care units, and fake certificates don’t work,” he said. A health expert in Scotland has described the scenes of delegates queuing at the Cop26 conference in Glasgow as “really concerning” during a pandemic. Prof Devi Sridhar, a professor of global public health at the University of Edinburgh, said seeing pictures of hundreds of people in close proximity has left her anxious knowing how “fragile” the situation has been. PA Media reports that, asked about the queues, Prof Sridhar told BBC Good Morning Scotland: “It is really concerning, this week I have been quite anxious seeing all that and knowing how fragile the situation has been. “We’ve controlled the situation for quite a long time. Can we control it even after this big gathering? That’s the question. Will it lead to a spike, will it lead to a wave, will actually the mitigation measures have been enough? “I know they thought a lot about making sure people were fully vaccinated, people were testing, it’s a really tricky one because obviously this is the worst timing ever during a pandemic, but at the same time I listened to those people who work in climate and they are saying now is the time, if not now we have an existential threat to humanity.” Yesterday, Scotland’s health secretary, Humza Yousaf, said “scale and worldwide draw” of the summit “poses a risk of spread of Covid-19 both within delegates and to or from the local population of Scotland and the UK”. The number of foreign tourists visiting Spain more than quadrupled in September from a year ago to nearly 4.7 million, official data showed as widespread vaccination and looser travel restrictions enticed back more visitors. However, Reuters reports that number was still far below the 8.8 million who came to Spain in September of 2019, before the coronavirus pandemic hit. Poland reported more than 10,400 Covid-19 cases on Wednesday, a 24% rise week on week, government spokesman Piotr Muller said. Reuters note that the last time the number of daily infections in Poland was above 10,000 was in late April. “Unfortunately over 10,400 infections have been reported today, that’s over 24% more than last week,” Muller told Radio Plus. Ukraine is also one of the countries towards the east of Europe that is seeing rising numbers of Covid cases. This morning, the health ministry has reported 23,393 new cases, which is up on the previous day. The figures state that this number includes 1,406 children and 421 medics among the caseload. There were 720 further deaths, according to a statement the ministry posted on Facebook. The number of daily Covid-19 cases reported in the Czech Republic neared 10,000 for the first time since March, health ministry data showed. Reuters reports the country recorded 9,902 new infections yesterday, up from 6,284 on the same day a week ago. Hospitalisations reached more than 2,000 for the first time since May, including 288 people in intensive care. Yesterday, the head of the Institute for Health Information and Statistics in the Czech Republic, Ladislav Dušek, told Czech Radio that the number of cases was less important than the number of hospitalisations, which he predicted would soon reach 3,000. He also said that cases in the country were growing not among young people, as was the case in September, but among unvaccinated 30- to 50-year-olds. Economic secretary to the Treasury John Glen was asked about Covid in the UK on Sky News during his interview, and was pressed on two things in particular. Firstly he was asked about prime minister Boris Johnson saying he did not accept the premise that the UK was in a worse Covid situation than other comparable western European nations. Glen didn’t really have an answer for that – the numbers speak for themselves – he instead tried to simply go on about the success of the UK’s vaccination programme. Here is a map of case prevalence that clearly shows what an outlier the UK is – although both Belgium and the Netherlands have case numbers gathering pace. Those vaccine figures don’t bear out Johnson or Glen’s argument though. The EU has collectively given one dose to 80.3% of eligible people, and has 75.2% of people fully vaccinated. The respective figures for the UK are 87% with a first dose and 79.5% fully vaccinated. So the UK rollout has performed better than the EU as a whole. However, that EU-wide figure includes the extremely low rates in states such as Bulgaria and Romania, where the rate is about 27% and 40% respectively. The UK’s nearest neighbours, France and Ireland, both have higher first dose vaccination rates than the UK. Secondly, the minister was pressed on what the situation with deaths and hospitalisations would have to be for the government to take action to enact “plan B” and introduce further Covid mitigation measures back to England. He was unable to lay out that scenario, instead arguing that rates differed all over the country, that restrictions have consequences for people’s lives, and that the government continued to have a rolling discussion about the situation. Philippines president Rodrigo Duterte said on Wednesday that local government officials will be punished for falling behind their targets for Covid-19 vaccinations. The Philippines has so far fully immunised a little over a third of 77 million people eligible for shots. Duterte said there was no reason why daily vaccinations could not be ramped up to at least a million from an average of 500,000 since the country has sufficient stock of vaccines. “We saw fault lines in the overall picture of our vaccination programme. I am not contented,” Duterte said in a recorded address. Karen Lema reports for Reuters that Duterte said local officials “who are not performing nor using the doses given to them in a most expeditious manner” would be sanctioned and made accountable. He did not spell out penalties. The government has been gradually easing Covid-19 curbs, and on Wednesday it announced it was lifting the nightly curfew imposed in the capital region from Thursday. The seven-day average for new cases in the Philippines is around 4,000, down from a peak of about 21,000 in the peak of the last wave of the virus in mid-September. Hello, it is Martin Belam here in London. I imagine much of the UK morning media will be dominated by Cop26 in Glasgow rather than Covid, but I will bring you any lines that emerge from the early interviews. There may be some fallout from the resignation of Sir Jeremy Farrar from the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage), which emerged yesterday. John Glen, the economic secretary to the Treasury, is the government minister being put up for interviews today. Here is the latest UK Covid data. The Netherlands is bringing back coronavirus measures including a requirement for face masks in many public spaces to combat a surge in cases, prime minister Mark Rutte said on Tuesday. He said the government will be reintroducing social distancing rules, extending so-called Covid passes to places such as museums and restaurant terraces, AFP reports. People are also being advised to work from home for at least half the week and avoid rush-hour travel. The move – which makes the Netherlands one of the first in western Europe to bring back restrictions – comes less than two months after it drastically relaxed anti-Covid measures. Infections have since been rising for a month after most social distancing measures were scrapped in late September, “It won’t surprise anyone that we have a difficult message tonight. Infections and hospital admissions are rising quickly,” Rutte told a press conference. The Netherlands had some of Europe’s most lax restrictions early in the pandemic but drastically tightened up during a brutal second wave last year. Rutte said masks would be required again in shops and for professions including hairdressers and massage parlours. They were already still obligatory on public transport, although not in stations or on platforms. Sex workers in the Netherlands – where prostitution is legal – will continue to be excluded from the mask rule. Here’s a fun story out of New Zealand today. Seven gang leaders, representing four of the countries most well-known street gangs, joined forces in a video urging their communities to get vaccinated. The video was commissioned by the minister for Maori development, Willie Jackson, after a discussion with gang leaders, who then provided footage that was edited by Jackson’s son, Hikurangi, the Herald reported. In the four-minute video, Denis O’Reilly, who joined the Black Power gang aged 19, says he had “taken a few shots” in his time, including the two shots against Covid-19, and he is asking his community “to do the same”. Read the full story here. Hi and welcome back to our global Covid blog. I’m Samantha Lock and I’ll be reporting from Sydney, Australia, to bring you all the latest developments from around the world. Less than two months after drastically relaxing Covid restrictions, the Netherlands has become one of the first countries in western Europe to bring back them back again. Faced with sharply rising coronavirus cases, the prime minister Mark Rutte said the Dutch government would be reinstating an order to wear face masks in public places and mandating an extension for the use of Covid passes in light of rapidly increasing case counts. The country’s public health institute reported Tuesday that confirmed infections rose 39% compared to the week before and hospital admissions were up 31%. Tighter curbs are also expected in China after the National Health Commission reported Covid cases surged to a near 3-month high with 93 new local symptomatic cases recorded for Tuesday, up from 54 a day earlier. A key gathering of the highest-ranking members of the Communist Party in Beijing is expected to go ahead next week. Here’s a round-up of the Covid headlines you might have missed. Australia may soon welcome foreign workers back into the country. NSW premier has pushed for further border re-openings as the state grapples with skilled labour shortages after 18 months of closed borders. Australia also remains on track to reach 80% of the population over 16 being fully vaccinated against Covid-19 in a matter of days. The Dutch government has reintroduced face masks in an attempt to stop rising Covid-19 cases. Prime minister Mark Rutte said the use of Covid passports would also be broadened out to include museums, gyms and outdoor terraces. The advice comes amid a major surge in new cases in the Netherlands. The UK has had its highest number of daily Covid deaths reported since late February, as another 293 people have died within 28 days of a positive Covid-19 test. UK government is increasingly worried that hospitalisations and deaths among double-vaccinated people could rise due to waning immunity as an estimated 4.5 million people have failed to get their booster shots despite being eligible. The US Centres for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) unanimously voted in favour of the broad use of Pfizer and BioNTech jabs for children as young as 5. The shots could be administered as soon as Wednesday. China has urged its citizens to stockpile daily necessities, prompting panic-buying, amid surging vegetable prices linked to recent extreme weather, fears of supply shortages and an ongoing Covid outbreak. Romania broke its daily death toll record, after another 591 people died from Covid. It has lagged behind on vaccinations and is well below the average within the EU. Russia also set another daily record for Covid deaths reporting 1,178 on Tuesday. Greece announced new restrictions on non-vaccinated people and increased fines for non-compliance after reporting a daily record high of Covid-19 cases on Tuesday. Public health officials in Ireland say that its case numbers are at their highest point since January, as another 3,726 were registered – 70% higher than a week ago. A scientist has quit the UK government’s pandemic advisery body Sage, saying that the Covid crisis is “a long way from over”. Sir Jeremy Farrar, quit the body at the end of October. The UK government’s independent vaccine advisers recommended against Covid shots for healthy teenagers despite considering evidence that the jabs would reduce infections, hospitalisations and some deaths in the age group.In the biggest shake-up to Australia’s horticulture sector in decades, farmers will now be forced to pay a minimum wage to pickers after the Fair Work Commission ruled in favour of putting a floor in the award. The move effectively abolishes piece rates, which is when a worker is paid according to how much they pick, rather than an hourly rate. With piece rates, there has been no guarantee of workers making minimum wage, and the system has been linked to exploitation, with some workers claiming they have been paid as little as $3 an hour. Farmers have been vocal opponents of any changes to the award rate – with some arguing a floor in the minimum pay rate would be burdensome and result in an increase in prices for customers. The Australian Workers Union (AWU) lodged its claim with the FWC in December last year, arguing that every worker should be guaranteed a minimum rate of at least $25.41 an hour. In its finding, which was delivered late on Wednesday, the Fair Work Commission said the floor was essential to make sure pickers were paid a minimum wage. “The existing pieceworker provisions in the horticulture award are not fit for purpose,” it said. “They do not provide a fair and relevant minimum safety net. “The full bench was satisfied that the insertion of a minimum wage floor with consequential time recording provisions in the piecework clause is necessary to ensure that the horticulture award achieves the modern awards objective.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Piece rates were legally meant to enable the average picker to earn at least 15% more an hour than the minimum hourly rate, but the FWC found they were widely used to underpay workers. It found a “significant” proportion of pickers earned less than the national minimum wage. “The totality of the evidence presents a picture of significant underpayment of pieceworkers in the horticulture industry when compared to the minimum award hourly rate,” it said. The FWC also found that paying workers an hourly rate would actually make workers more productive. “It is inherently unlikely that introducing a minimum wage floor will ‘disincentivise’ pieceworkers currently earning more than the minimum award rate,” it said. AWU national secretary Daniel Walton said it was one of the most significant industrial decisions of modern times. “Fruit pickers in Australia have been routinely and systemically exploited and underpaid,” Walton said. “Too many farmers have been able to manipulate the piece rate system to establish pay and conditions far beneath Australian standards.” During the hearing, the union presented the commission with research published suggesting the average piecework picker was paid just $11.69 an hour. Walton said this decision would provide a needed safety net for fruit pickers. “Now it will be easy for workers – even if they don’t have good English language skills or Australian connections – to understand if they’re being ripped off,” Walton said. “From now on if you’re making less than $25 an hour fruit picking in Australia your boss is breaking the law and stealing from you.” The National Farmers Federation, which opposed the changes along with industry groups has not yet commented on the decision. NFF CEO Tony Mahar had previously defended piece rates, arguing they incentivised workers to pick more. “The risk of putting a minimum hourly wage floor price on piecework rates is that growers will see productivity and the pool of suitable workers drop in the midst of an already chronic labour shortage brought about by Covid border closures,” Mahar said. “Employment is the number one expense for many growers, at as much as 66% of their operating costs, and any significant increase to that could see businesses fail.”I am 15 years old, and like so many young people across the world, I came to climate activism through protest. I don’t know exactly how to write a policy; what exact words or grammar should be used. I am not a scientist. I am a year 9 student. But through joining the School Strike for Climate (SS4C) movement, I have learned the basic science and policies, and I am doing my best to make a change in this world. Earlier this year, I took to the streets of Milan to strike with Greta Thunberg, demanding climate justice. We were together at Youth4Climate, an event held in Milan preceding Cop26, the UN Climate Change Conference, that brought 400 young people from 200 countries together to draft a paper and present it to ministers from around the world. At the end of the conference, we compiled statements on what it would take to create a fully sustainable future without leaving vulnerable communities behind. It was then read out to environment ministers from more than 40 countries. Australia was not one of those countries. And once again Australia won’t be included in the vital conversations about legitimate and ambitious climate action, instead taking a policy that is weak and unacceptable to Cop26 as our country’s primary way of reducing emissions. This doesn’t give me any sense of hope. With Cop26 taking place in Glasgow, the world is watching. Our country is already being hit hard by the effects of climate change. We have all the resources to be a leading country taking action, but our government chooses to do nothing. Indigenous communities in the most vulnerable areas can’t wait any longer. Regional and rural communities hit hard by the 2019-20 bushfires, and those still suffering drought can’t wait any longer. Young people who can’t attend school due to extreme heat and weather can’t wait any longer. We all cannot wait any longer. When I talked to the other school strikers, they told me of their hopes for Cop26: to see our leaders negotiate and be held accountable to their promise to limit warming to well below 2°C and to pursue efforts to limit it to 1.5°C, recognising that warming beyond that limit is deadly for humanity, as in the Paris agreement. But we are also frustrated. We are sick of conference upon conference, as if that alone is the solution. The clock is ticking. Our movement is pushing for a target of 60% emissions reduction on 2005 levels by 2030. At a minimum, Australia needs to join the US in committing to halving emissions in this time. We also need to provide financial assistance to already impacted places, such as the Philippines and Torres Strait Islands, and to lay out plans now so that we reach net zero no later than 2050. Climate change is not just an environmental issue, it is an issue of justice – people’s human rights are at risk. Our actions will have, indeed already do have, irreversible impact on people and places around us. I have always been passionate about standing up for what is right, and caring for the environment is a major part of that. But it became more personal when my youth group camp was evacuated from regional Victoria in early January 2020 during Australia’s 2019-20 bushfires. These threats remain very real. So it is now, more than ever, that I feel empowered and inspired to take action. So as the world looks to Glasgow, join me and fight for climate justice, while there’s still time. • Ella Simons is a 15-year-old high school student and member of the School Strike for Climate movement. She is based in MelbourneThe Federal Reserve has announced it is winding down the massive stimulus program it put in place at the onset of the Covid-19 pandemic amid fears that the central bank may have to raise rates soon to control rising inflation. Fed officials have been debating for months over whether and when to taper the stimulus programs that it set up to head off the economic headwinds caused by the pandemic. They announced on Wednesday that they would begin cutting that stimulus by $15bn a month but left interest rates unchanged. Phil Murphy won re-election and kept his seat as New Jersey governor in a tight race that was widely viewed as a referendum on the Democrat’s leadership throughout the pandemic. The governor issued stringent health orders to slow the spread of Covid-19 and has earned high marks from constituents for his leadership during the pandemic. He was one of the first governors who required Covid-19 vaccinations for public school teachers. But his opponent Jack Ciattarelli, like many Republican politicians across the US, seized on growing backlash and frustrations over mask mandates, school closures and other pandemic restrictions. Democrat Terry McAuliffe formally conceded the race for the governorship of Virginia to his Republican rival Glenn Youngkin. The latter pulled off a stunning upset last night that is deemed by many as an ominous sign for the ultimate success of Joe Biden’s administration and presidency. House Speaker Nancy Pelosi put a paid family leave provision back into their $1.75 trillion social and environmental spending bill that’s the flagship of Biden’s Build Back Better legislative agenda. Democratic US Senator Joe “everyone’s a president” Manchin of West Virginia is opposed to that, which bodes ill in the upper chamber. Speaking to reporters in the bowels of the Capitol moments ago, he said the new proposal lacked detail and the Build Back Better agenda is already a “mammoth” rejigging of “the whole entire tax code”. In Buffalo, NY – the socialist rising star who appeared poised to take the mayor’s seat has conceded to an incumbent governor running a write-in campaign. India Walton, the democratic socialist who gained national attention when she defeated mayor Byron Brown in the primaries, was the only mayoral candidate printed on the ballot Tuesday. But Brown, who distributed more than 100,000 stamps bearing his name so that voters could press it onto their ballots, appears poised to win back his seat. Brown, who was supported by the progressive senators Bernie Sanders and Elizibeth Warren, and joined on the campaign trail by the representative Alexandria Ocasio Cortez, appears to have floundered due to a lack of support from the state’s Democratic establishment. Ahead of the election, Jay S Jacobs, the chair of the New York State Democratic Committee, declined to endorse her. He said in a Spectrum News interview: “Let’s take a scenario, very different, where David Duke — you remember him, the grand wizard of the KKK — he moves to New York, he becomes a Democrat, he runs for mayor in the city of Rochester ... I have to endorse David Duke? I don’t think so. Now, of course, India Walton is not in the same category.” Critics including Brown and his supporters characterized Walton, a registered nurse and political newcomer, as an inexperienced, radical choice, echoing Republican critiques of progressive Democrats. Today, Walton wrote on Twitter: “It seems unlikely that we will end up with enough votes to inaugurate a Walton administration in January.” “Every dirty trick in the book was tried against us,” she wrote. “We knew that would be the case. When you take on the corrupt and the powerful you can’t expect them to play fair.” My colleague Kari Paul reports on Facebook and the climate crisis: Misinformation about the climate crisis runs rampant on Facebook, a new study has found, and comes mostly from a handful of “super polluter” publishers. Ten publishers are responsible for 69% of digital climate change denial content on Facebook, a new study from the Center for Countering Digital Hate (CCDH) has found. The outlets, which the report labels the “toxic ten”, include several conservative websites in the US, as well as Russian state media. Breitbart, a far-right news site once run by former Trump strategist Steve Bannon Western Journal, a Conservative news site Newsmax, which has previously been sued for promoting election fraud conspiracies Townhall Media, founded by the Exxon-funded Heritage Foundation Media Research Center, a “thinktank” that received funding from Exxon Washington Times, founded by self-proclaimed messiah Sun Myung Moon The Federalist Papers, a site that has promoted Covid misinformation Daily Wire, a conservative news site that is of the most engaged-with publishers on Facebook Russian state media, pushing disinformation via RT.com and Sputnik News Patriot Post, a conservative site whose writers use pseudonyms The Center for Countering Digital Hate used NewsWhip, a social media analytics tool, to analyze 6,983 climate crisis denial articles that were featured in Facebook posts in the last year. The articles included condemnations of the “cult of ‘climate change’” whose “worship” risks people’s future or told readers not to “worry too much about CO2 baking the planet”. Together, the posts raked up 709,057 interactions. Facebook strongly rejected the study in a statement, with a spokesman saying the analysis from CCDH “uses a flawed methodology designed to mislead people about the scale of climate misinformation on Facebook”. He added that the 700,000 interactions mentioned in the report on climate denial represent 0.3% of the over 200m interactions on public English-language climate change content from pages and public groups over the same time period. Read more: And more on Cop26: Analysis: Glenn Youngkin’s victory comes as the president’s agenda has stalled and danger looms for the party in Congress. Joe Biden exuded confidence. “We’re going to win,” the US president told reporters before departing Cop26 in Glasgow. “I think we’re going to win in Virginia.” But as Biden returns to Washington, he faces questions about why his prediction was so wrong – and whether Democrats’ loss in the most important election of the year will send his presidency into a downward spiral. Republican Glenn Youngkin’s surprise victory over the Democrat Terry McAuliffe in the race for governor of Virginia is a brutal rebuke for Biden, who had personally invested in the race, twice making the short trip from Washington to campaign for McAuliffe at rallies. It will particularly sting because Donald Trump, whom he defeated in Virginia by 10 percentage points in last year’s presidential election, will doubtless seek to claim credit for the result and savor his revenge. But the truth is that this election was more about the current president than the spectre of the last one. Biden’s ambitious agenda has stalled in Congress. By his own admission, the inertia has sucked oxygen away from priorities such as a police reform and voting rights, disillusioning the activists who fuel Democratic turnout. Inflation and gasoline prices are up. Global supply chains are buckling. And Biden’s sunny predictions for post-withdrawal Afghanistan were as off the mark as his predictions for Virginia. The president’s sagging approval rating of 42% combined with historical headwinds to drag McAuliffe down. Nothing energizes a political movement like opposition: the president’s party has lost every election for governor of Virginia over almost half a century – the exception was McAuliffe himself in 2013. But this time McAuliffe failed to inspire. The chairman of Hillary Clinton’s 2008 presidential primary campaign had a distinct whiff of Clinton 2016: a career politician imbued with a sense of entitlement who constantly found himself on the defensive against an upstart candidate drawing bigger crowds. Read more: Murphy won reelection following a tight race that was widely viewed as a referendum on the Democrat’s leadership throughout the pandemic The governor issued stringent health orders to slow the spread of Covid-19 and has earned high marks from constituents for his leadership during the pandemic. He was one of the first governors who required Covid-19 vaccinations for public school teachers. But his opponent Jack Ciattarelli, like many Republican politicians across the US, has seized on growing backlash and frustrations over mask mandates, school closures and other pandemic restrictions. With his narrow victory, Murphy became the first Democratic governor to win reelection in New Jersey in 44 years. A former executive at Goldman Sachs and ambassador to Germany, Murphy has the advantage of Democrats’ 1.1m registered voters. That the race remained so close well into Wednesday evening is likely to be an encouraging sign for Republicans ahead of the midterms, especially taken with the party’s victory in Virginia’s gubernatorial election. Phil Murphy has won re-election and will be keeping his seat as New Jersey governor. The AP called the race just now. After Senate Republicans filibustered the John R Lewis Voting Rights Advancement Act, which would restore a key provision of the 1965 Voting Rights Act, Joe Biden issued a statement imploring: “Let there be a debate and let there be a vote.” The bill wasn’t expected to go far in the Senate, where Republicans have made clear they would block it. But Democrats put it forward anyway, as a way to pressure West Virginia moderate Joe Manchin. My colleague Sam Levine explains: There was never any serious prospect of the bill passing – only one Republican senator, Lisa Murkowski, supported it. The vote in the Senate was 50-49 in favor of advancing the bill (two-thirds of senators would have had to agree in order for the bill to go forward). But Wednesday’s vote was targeted towards Manchin, who supports the filibuster, showing him that passing voting rights legislation is not possible while the filibuster remains in place. Many Democrats hope it will be the final straw for Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema, an Arizona Democrat, who is also a staunch defender of the filibuster. Republicans have successfully filibustered voting rights bill three times already this year, including once just two weeks ago. Chuck Schumer, the Senate majority leader, said Wednesday’s filibuster was a “low, low point in the history of this body”. Read more: At least six candidates who won elections yesterday attended the “Stop the steal” rally on 6 January, the AP reports: At least 13 candidates on Tuesday’s ballots for state or local offices were in Washington, D.C., for the rally promoting the lie that the 2020 presidential election had been stolen from Trump, according to a list compiled by BuzzFeed News. None of them have been charged with any crimes in connection with the Jan. 6 riot or accused of entering the Capitol that day. Five of the 13 were running for seats in the Virginia House of Delegates, which Democrats and Republicans are battling to control. Three of the five, including two incumbent legislators, won their races on Tuesday. The House remained up for grabs Wednesday, with a handful of competitive races still too early to call. The list of losing candidates who attended the “Stop the Steal” rally included Oath Keepers member Edward Durfee Jr., who ran for the New Jersey General Assembly. He finished third behind two Democrats. Durfee worked a security detail for the Oath Keepers outside the Capitol on Jan. 6, Gothamist reported, but he isn’t accused of joining other members of the far-right paramilitary group in storming the building. The three rally attendees who won their Virginia House races were incumbents Del. Dave LaRock and Del. John McGuire and Marie March, who won an open seat. The two losers in Virginia were Philip Hamilton and Maureen Brody. BuzzFeed News reported that Hamilton and Brody were at the Capitol on Jan. 6. Elsewhere, “Stop the Steal” attendees winning local races included candidates for seats on the City Council in Nampa, Idaho, the Borough Council in Watchung, New Jersey, and the Board of Commissioners in Hunterdon County, New Jersey, according to published reports. Apparent losers included candidates for county executive in Pennsylvania and for the City Council in Mason, Ohio. Adam Gabbatt and agencies report: The supreme court appeared poised to ease gun control regulation, after several justices expressed scepticism on Wednesday over a New York law that places restrictions on who can carry concealed firearms. The case could lead to more guns on the streets of New York and California, and affect restrictions on carrying firearms in airports, bars, churches and schools. The case centers on a New York law that prohibits people from carrying a concealed handgun in public unless they can demonstrate a need to carry the weapon. Several members of the conservative-dominated court, including Samuel Alito and the three justices nominated by Donald Trump, appeared to question whether the law was constitutional. The case, which comes after a spate of mass shootings and a rise in gun violence, has been brought by two private citizens and the New York State Rifle and Pistol Association, an affiliate of the National Rifle Association. The NRA is a gun rights lobbying group that has received tens of millions of dollars in donations from the gun manufacturers. The NYSRPA argues that the New York law is too restrictive, and that the two citizens had their applications to carry handguns at all times unfairly denied. Should the court decide in the gun organization’s favor, it could dramatically increase the number of people eligible to carry concealed firearms as they go about their daily lives. Under the New York law, people applying for a license to carry firearms at all times must prove they have a “special or unique danger to their life”. Read more: Hello live blog readers, we’ll hand over to our colleague Maanvi Singh on the US west coast now, who’ll steer you through the next few hours of politics news. It’s been a very lively day with no sign of things letting up, so please stay tuned! Here’s where things stand: The US Federal Reserve has announced it is winding down the massive stimulus programme it put in place at the onset of the Covid-19 pandemic amid fears that the central bank may have to raise rates soon to control rising inflation. New Jersey’s governor’s race is close to fruition and, although it has not be called yet, Democrat Phil Murphy has inched ahead of his Republican rival. Democrat Terry McAuliffe formally conceded the race for the governorship of Virginia to his Republican rival Glenn Youngkin, who pulled off a stunning upset last night that is deemed by many an ominous sign for the ultimate success Joe Biden’s administration and presidency. House Speaker Nancy Pelosi led Democrats in the House in putting a paid family leave provision back into their $1.75 trillion social and environmental spending bill that’s the flagship of Joe Biden’s Build Back Better legislative agenda. Donald Trump this afternoon rejected an accusation he was deliberately trying to avoid being questioned under oath in a defamation lawsuit by a former contestant on TV’s “The Apprentice” who claimed he sexually assaulted her. Reuters reports: In a filing with a New York state court in Manhattan, Trump said a claim he used “delay tactics” to keep his accuser Summer Zervos from deposing him by a court-ordered Dec. 23 deadline “patently absurd, disingenuous, and entirely unfounded.” Lawyers for Zervos did not immediately respond to requests for comment. Zervos has accused Trump of harming her reputation by claiming she lied by accusing him during his 2016 presidential campaign of subjecting her to unwanted kissing and groping in 2007, two years after she was on his reality television show. The lawsuit seeks a retraction or apology, plus compensatory and punitive damages. Trump has denied Zervos’ claims and called her case politically motivated. On Oct. 18, Trump asked for court permission to countersue Zervos for wrongly interfering with his right to speak freely. The former president cited a 2020 New York state law, known as an “anti-SLAPP” law, meant to deter lawsuits designed to harass defendants for speaking out on public issues. Zervos, who sued Trump in January 2017, had said allowing the countersuit would delay Trump’s deposition, adding to delays that have already caused her “significant prejudice.” But Trump said Zervos knew on Sept. 30 of his planned countersuit, “which she has no legitimate basis to oppose,” and is herself “unnecessarily delaying” the case by objecting. The case is unresolved in part because Trump argued while in the White House that a sitting president could not be sued. That became moot after Joe Biden won the 2020 presidential election and Trump became a private citizen. New York’s highest court dismissed Trump’s latest appeal in March. The elections director in Georgia’s most populous county, which has been under intense scrutiny for its handling of elections, will step down at the end of the year, county officials said this afternoon. The Associated Press reports: Fulton County Registration &amp; Elections Director Rick Barron submitted his resignation, effective December 31, Fulton County Board of Commissioners Chair Robb Pitts said during a news conference. The announcement came a day after municipal elections that saw short lines and few problems. But the county, a Democratic stronghold that includes most of the city of Atlanta, has a history of electoral problems and has long been a target of Republicans, who have complained of sloppiness and mismanagement. It became a favorite target of Donald Trump, who blamed unproven allegations of fraud in the county for his narrow loss in Georgia last year. Barron said in his resignation letter: “Under the intense scrutiny of the last year, I believe our team has performed with grace and professionalism. Even in the midst of threats to our personal safety, we have continued to make the interests of Fulton County voters our highest priority.” Pitts and Fulton County Registration and Elections Board Chair Cathy Woolard sang Barron’s praises as they announced his departure. “Mr. Barron was not forced to resign,” Pitts said. “I want to make that crystal clear. It was voluntary.” Pitts said he and Woolard had breakfast with Barron a few days ago and talked about this with “mutual consent and agreement.” Barron’s continued presence would be “a distraction,” not because of any wrongdoing on his part but because of “naysayers” who continue to criticize the county no matter what it does, Pitts said. “That kind of pressure, that kind of scrutiny for that long would wear on anybody,” Pitts said. “You have the former president and his minions, the secretary of state and his minions, daily blasting you.” In addition to a torrent of insults from Trump, Georgia Secretary of State Brad Raffensperger has repeatedly called for a change in leadership for Fulton County elections. After a problem-plagued primary election in June 2020, when some Fulton County voters never received requested absentee ballots and others waited hours in line to vote, an independent monitor was appointed as part of an agreement with the State Election Board. The monitor, Carter Jones, observed the county’s elections operations from October 2020 through January. He reported that he saw “sloppy processes” and “systemic disorganization” but did not witness “any illegality, fraud or intentional malfeasance.” Amid a flood of criticism, the county election board voted in February to fire Barron, only to have its decision rejected by the Board of Commissioners. The Guardian’s Sam Levine reported very recently on the crushing pressure on elections officials in a febrile, partisan and at times dangerous atmosphere. Read his report here. Joe Biden is speaking now on the eligibility of Americans ages five to 11 to receive the Covid-19 vaccine. Young children could start receiving the vaccine today. “For parents all over this country, this is a day of relief and celebration,” he said. “After almost 18 months of anxious worrying every time a child had a sniffle or a cough, now you can protect them from this virus.” Biden said that the authorization of the vaccine for young children means that 28m more Americans can receive the vaccine now. He added that the country has enough vaccine supply for every child in the age range to receive the vaccine, which will be specially formulated to accommodate younger children. A report from a justice department watchdog said that the US drone strike that killed 10 civilians in August during the final days of the war in Afghanistan was not caused by misconduct or negligence, according to the Associated Press, which spoke to an anonymous senior defense official familiar with the report. Air force Lt Gen Sami Said, an inspector general of the Air force, authored a report that said that while there were breakdowns in communication during the identification and confirmation of targets during the air strike, there were measures to ensure civilian deaths were prevented. The report notes that the context of the air strike is important as US forces during that time were overwhelmed with information about civilians and troops trying to leave Afghanistan. After last night’s election, Republicans are warning Democrats that they could lose at least 60 seats during the midterm elections next year. House minority leader Kevin McCarthy said that Democrats should take the election as a warning “to abandon their extremist agenda.” In response to McCarthy’s prediction, chair of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee Sean Maloney said: “I’ll take that bet.” Jacob Frey, mayor of Minneapolis, just won a reelection campaign for his second term even after he came under criticism for his handling of protests after the killing of George Floyd in summer 2020. Frey won the vote within the city’s second round of ranked-choice voting, where Frey received 49% of the votes, according to the Minneapolis Star Tribune. The mayor’s challengers, including former Minnesota legislator Kate Knuth, encouraged voters not to rank Frey on their ballots for not implementing changes to policing in the city after the protests. The mayor has argued that police reform has been happening under his leadership and that he is looking to hold officers accountable rather than support movements to defund the police. “There was this push to defund the police,” Frey told supporters on Tuesday. “That movement has been roundly rejected, all of us now, can stop with the hashtags and the slogans and the simplicity and say, ‘Alright, let’s all unite around things that we all agree on.’” The Guardian’s voting rights reporter Sam Levine has a quick update on the voting rights bill that the Senate is considering right now: Senate Republicans officially have enough votes to filibuster a Democratic voting rights bill that would restore a critical provision of the Voting Rights Act. Democrats hope the filibuster, the fourth time Republicans have deployed the procedure to block voting rights legislation since the beginning of the year, will be the final straw that pushes Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema to favor changing the filibuster. A 97-year-old man was reelected as mayor of a New Jersey town last night. Vito Perillo is set to serve his second term as mayor of Tinton Falls, New Jersey, a town south of New York City. “They tell me I’m the oldest mayor in the country,” Perillo told NJ Advance Media“I’m feeling pretty good, and I think everybody in the borough feels good, too. They were all happy for me this morning.” Perillo is a veteran of World War II and has six great-grandchildren. He bested three opponents who were trying to oust him out of office. Perillo told NJ Advance Media that he feels “really good” and that his family physician told him he won’t have to come back for another two years. Here are some pictures of Perillo a few years ago with New Jersey governor Phil Murphy, who is currently in a close reelection race himself. The US Federal Reserve has announced it is winding down the massive stimulus programme it put in place at the onset of the Covid-19 pandemic amid fears that the central bank may have to raise rates soon to control rising inflation. Fed officials have been debating for months over whether and when to taper the stimulus programmes that it set up to head off the economic headwinds caused by the pandemic. They announced on Wednesday that they would begin cutting that stimulus by $15bn a month but left interest rates unchanged. “With progress on vaccinations and strong policy support, indicators of economic activity and employment have continued to strengthen,” the Fed wrote in a statement. “The sectors most adversely affected by the pandemic have improved in recent months, but the summer’s rise in Covid-19 cases has slowed their recovery. Inflation is elevated, largely reflecting factors that are expected to be transitory.” In March 2020 as the pandemic brought the global economy to a shuddering halt, the Fed moved to prop up the US economy by cutting interest rates to close to zero and started buying $120bn a month in Treasury- and mortgage-backed securities. The initiative appears to have helped the US bounce back from a potential economic catastrophe. The unemployment rate has dropped from a record high of 14.7% in April 2020 to 4.8% in September. But now the central bank is wrestling with concerns that its stimulus efforts, combined with cash injections from Washington, pent-up consumer demand and the unprecedented impact of the pandemic on the global supply chain, are driving up inflation. This is Lauren Aratani taking over for Joanna Walters. Last night was a big night for women in politics, with multiple historic wins around the country for women running for office. In Boston, Michelle Wu became the first woman and person of color elected to be mayor of the city. Elaine O’Neal was elected to be the first Black woman to serve as mayor of Durham, North Carolina. The majority of the members on the New York City council will be women for the first time in the history of the city council, which is the largest in the country. Winsome Sears, a Republican, is projected to be the first woman to serve as lieutenant governor of Virginia. Many of the candidates acknowledged their historic victories as signs of progress. It’s been an incredibly lively morning in US politics and the blog is bursting at the seams with news, so do stay with us. My colleague Lauren Aratani will take you through the next couple of hours and later the east coast team will hand over to our co-workers in California to report all the latest. Here’s where things stand so far: The New Jersey governor’s race is one step closer to fruition and, although it has not be called yet, Democrat Phil Murphy has inched ahead of his Republican rival. But in a disastrous result for Democrats in Virginia, and Joe Biden’s future prospects, Democrat Terry McAuliffe formally conceded he lost the race for the governorship of Virginia to his Republican rival Glenn Youngkin. House Speaker Nancy Pelosi today led Democrats in the House in putting a paid family leave provision back into their $1.75 trillion social and environmental spending bill that’s the flagship of Joe Biden’s Build Back Better legislative agenda. Oregon Democratic US Senator Jeff Merkley plans to oppose Joe Biden’s nomination of former Obama senior aide and Chicago mayor Rahm Emanuel to become the US representative to Japan. Conservative US supreme court justices appeared willing today to strike down New York state’s limits on carrying concealed handguns in public, in a major firearms rights case that could imperil certain restrictions nationally. The justices heard about two hours of arguments in an appeal by two gun owners and the New York affiliate of the National Rifle Association, the influential gun rights group closely aligned with Republicans, of a lower court ruling throwing out their challenge to the state’s law, enacted in 1913, Reuters writes. The news agency adds: Lower courts rejected the argument by the plaintiffs that the law violates the U.S. Constitution’s Second Amendment right to keep and bear arms. The lawsuit seeks an unrestricted right to carry concealed handguns in public. The Supreme Court’s 6-3 conservative majority is considered sympathetic to an expansive view of Second Amendment rights. New York’s law requires applicants to state a specific reason for needing a gun for self-defense. “Why isn’t it good enough to say ‘I live in a violent area and I want to defend myself?’” conservative Justice Brett Kavanaugh asked. Conservative Justice Samuel Alito wondered why only “celebrities, state judges and retired police officers” should be able to carry concealed guns as opposed to “ordinary, law-abiding” citizens. Conservative Chief Justice John Roberts raised doubts about New York’s practice of giving unrestricted licenses more freely in more rural areas compared to densely populated centers like Manhattan given that the Second Amendment has been found to protect the right to self-defense. “How many muggings take place in the forest?” Roberts asked New York Solicitor General Barbara Underwood, who was defending the law. Underwood highlighted the need to regulate concealed guns to promote public safety, noting that the prospect of proliferating firearms in the New York City subway system “terrifies” a lot of people. Conservative Justice Samuel Alito pushed back on her argument, contenting that there are people with illegal guns already on the subway and other public areas. “But ordinary hard-working people ... they can’t be armed,” Alito said. New York’s law requires a showing of “proper cause” for carrying concealed handguns. To carry such a weapon without restrictions, applicants must convince a state firearms licensing officer of an actual, rather than speculative, need for self-defense. A ruling striking down the New York law would lead to new legal questions in the future including how local governments can regulate firearms in sensitive places such as government buildings, public transit, sports stadiums, schools, universities, sites of protests and drinking establishments. Paul Clement, the lawyer for the challengers, said prohibitions at government buildings and schools probably would pass muster but others would have to be examined on a case-by-case basis. Some justices voiced concern about whether a ruling against New York might restrict states and localities from imposing prohibitions at sensitive locations. Conservative Justice Amy Coney Barrett wondered about New York City’s massive annual celebration in Times Square on New Year’s Eve. The court’s three liberals signaled concern about expanding gun rights. The New Jersey governor’s race is one step closer to fruition and, although it has not be called yet, Democrat Phil Murphy has inched ahead of his Republican rival and there is an air of expectation that he has squeaked a win... News agency Reuters currently has this headline: Republicans jolt Biden with Virginia win, fall just short in New Jersey. On screen, CNN is showing Murphy, the incumbent, at 49.9% and challenger Jack Ciattarelli at 49.3% with 86% of the vote tallied. And Reuters adds this situation has developed even though registered Democratic voters outnumber Republicans in New Jersey by more than a million. Both parties saw strong gains in the suburbs from independent voters who had been turned off by Donald Trump’s style of politics. The results in states that Biden won easily in 2020 (eg Virginia and New Jersey) suggest that Democrats’ razor-thin majorities in Congress are highly vulnerable in the 2022 mid-term elections. Terry McAuliffe just formally conceded he lost the race for the governorship of Virginia to his Republican rival Glenn Youngkin. The veteran Democrat has released a statement. Youngkin was projected as the winner late last night. McAuliffe said: While last night we came up short, I am proud that we spent this campaign fighting for the values we so deeply believe in. We must protect Virginia’s great public schools and invest in our students. We must protect affordable health care coverage, raise the minimum wage faster, and expand paid leave so working families have a fighting shot. We must protest voting rights, protect a woman’s right to choose and, above all else, we must protect our democracy. While there will be setbacks along thee way, I am confident that tghe long term path of Vifrginia is towards inclusion, openness and tolerance for all. He then goes on to congratulate Youngkin, thank his wife, family and campaign team and his supporters, and adds that previously serving as the governor of Virginia was the honor of his life. The Guardian’s David Smith has this blistering analysis of McAuliffe’s (and Biden’s) failure in this contest, here. Talking (again) of Joe Manchin, he just “felt the Bern”, whether he knew it or not. Here’s the independent Senator from Vermont and former presidential candidate, Bernie Sanders on the governor’s races in New Jersey and Virginia. Democrat Terry McAuliffe lost the gubernatorial contest in the early minutes of this morning to Republican Glenn Youngkin in Virginia, a state won by 10 points by Joe Biden in the presidential election exactly a year ago today. In New Jersey, Democrat Phil Murphy is on a knife-edge with his re-election bid. House Speaker Nancy Pelosi today led Democrats in the House in putting a paid family leave provision back into their $1.75 trillion social and environmental spending bill that’s the flagship of Joe Biden’s Build Back Better legislative agenda. Democratic US Senator Joe “everyone’s a president” Manchin of West Virginia is opposed to that, which bodes ill in the upper chamber. Speaking to reporters in the bowels of the Capitol moments ago, he said the new proposal lacked detail and the Build Back Better agenda is already a “mammoth” rejigging of “the whole entire tax code”. But Democratic US Senator Sheila Jackson Lee of Texas just told CNN that providing paid family and medical leave was part of a “a seismic change” for US laws, on a scale with FDR, that is “long overdue”. She said reinserting the measure in the bill by the House was “an important step forward” in getting the legislation passed and, in response to Manchin’s call for greater clarify, Jackson Lee said: “We will provide clarity.” The Associated Press adds: Democrats had reluctantly dropped a scaled-back leave program to meet budget constraints, but Rep. Richard Neal, the Democratic chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, announced that the committee had agreed on a compromise that fully pays for a “means-tested program.” “The Ways and Means Committee crafted a policy that will finally give workers and their families the peace of mind of knowing that when disaster strikes, they can rely on paid leave to avoid total crisis,” Neal said. The inclusion of paid family leave comes as Democrats attempt to craft a final package that can pass both chambers... Democrats are rushing to overcome party battles and finish a final draft of Biden’s plan. Pelosi had hoped to wrap up the draft and pave the way for voting as soon as Thursday on the overall package, according to her remarks at a closed-door caucus meeting. Fingers are pointing all around as negotiations over Biden’s ambitious package have dragged on, with Democrats unable to pass the bill. “I think what most people think: The situation is like, ‘Okay, we elected Democrats to have the majority in the House, the Senate and the presidency. They should be getting things done,”’ Democratic Rep. Elaine Luria, who represents a swing district in Virginia, told reporters at the Capitol... With Republicans staunchly opposed and no votes to spare, Democrats have been trying to unite progressive and centrist lawmakers around Biden’s vision. The $1.75 trillion package would provide large numbers of Americans with assistance to pay for health care, education, raising children and caring for elderly people in their homes. It also would provide some $555 billion in tax breaks encouraging cleaner energy and electrified vehicles, the nation’s largest commitment to tackling climate change. Much of its costs would be covered with higher taxes on people earning over $10 million annually and large corporations, which would now face a 15% minimum tax in efforts to stop big business from claiming so many deductions they end up paying zero in taxes. Some moderate Democrats in the House said they want to see the final assessment from the Congressional Budget Office on its entire budgetary costs, before taking the vote. Oregon Democratic US Senator Jeff Merkley plans to oppose Joe Biden’s nomination of former Obama senior aide and Chicago mayor Rahm Emanuel to become the US representative to Japan. Emanuel was rumored to be in the running previously for transportation secretary (with Pete Buttigieg ultimately anointed), which stirred controversy/outrage at the time about his record in Chicago and whether he should be joining a Biden cabinet. Here’s Merkley’s statement, which he put out on Twitter: “Black Lives Matter. Here in the halls of Congress, it is important that we not just speak and believe these words, but put them into action in the decisions we make. I have carefully considered Mayor Emanuel’s record—and the input of civil rights leaders, criminal justice experts, and local elected officials who have reached out to the Senate to weigh in—and I have reached the decision that I cannot support his nomination to serve as a U.S. Ambassador. While I respect Mayor Emanuel’s many years of service, and the points of view of my colleagues who have come to a different conclusion, I will be voting ‘no’ when his nomination comes before the committee.” He’s just been backed by AOC in his opposition, and at least one journalist thinks that’s curtains for Emanuel in this venture. Emanuel was expected to seek a further term as mayor of Chicago, but did not do so, ultimately, and he was succeeded by Lori Lightfoot. Our reporter Gloria Oladipo reported late last year that Emanuel was: a divisive figure who long ago upset liberals, most prominently in Washington, by discouraging Obama from pursuing what became his signature legislative achievement – healthcare reform via the Affordable Care Act – and then in myriad ways as mayor of Chicago from 2011 to 2019. Prominent progressives in Chicago and elsewhere were livid that Biden would even give his name an airing, accusing Emanuel of exacerbating the city’s entrenched, acute inequalities and, most dramatically, botching the handling of Black teenager Laquan McDonald’s killing by a white police officer in 2014. The long fight over the filibuster in the US senate is expected to finally reach a breaking point this afternoon. That’s when the senate will hold a vote on a voting rights bill that would restore a key provision of the 1965 Voting Rights Act - the John Lewis Voting Rights Advancement Act. The measure would set up a new formula to require certain states and other jurisdictions to get voting changes approved by the federal government before they go into effect if there is evidence they have discriminated against voters in recent years. Just one Republican, Lisa Murkowski of Alaska, supports the measure, all remaining GOP senators will likely vote against it. That will successfully block the measure from advancing using the filibuster, which requires 60 votes to advance legislation. It will be the fourth time Republicans have filibustered a voting rights bill this year. Democrats know that’s the likely outcome. But they’re hoping this will finally be enough to persuade Senators Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema, two Democrats who are the most reluctant to get rid of the filibuster, to support changing the rules. Expect Democrats to make a much louder push to explicitly change the rules of the filibuster following Wednesday’s vote. Joe Biden recently made headlines when he said he supported changing the rule to pass a voting rights bill, but he hasn’t explicitly said what changes he would support. We’ll likely be hearing a lot more about explicit changes soon. Reuters just added that senate minority leader Mitch McConnell predicted this morning that the senate would reject the latest effort by Democrats to open debate on voting rights legislation, in the procedural vote. Do the Democrats have it in New Jersey? Governor Phil Murphy has been on a knife edge all night in his bid for re-election over a Republican challenger. Some politics watchers now think Murphy is over the line: Good morning US live blog readers, Joe Biden arrived back in the US from the climate summit in Scotland and walked into a disastrous night for Democrats in Virginia as veteran party stalwart Terry McAuliffe lost the governor’s race to a Republican newcomer. There were lots of other interesting results and some hot stuff coming up on Capitol Hill later today, so please stay tuned. Democrats are reeling in Virginia after Glenn Youngkin won the gubernatorial election after a contest that pitted Democrats’ anti-Trump message against the Republicans’ provoking parents over school education. The New Jersey governor’s race is on a knife-edge this morning as Democrat Phil Murphy is on the brink. Boston has elected its first female mayor and person of color in the post after Michelle Wu pulled out a victory for Democrats, ending the city’s 200-year history of electing white men. In Washington DC, Senate Democrats are pushing for another vote on election reform this afternoon, on whether to advance to the debate step the John Lewis Voting Rights Advancement Act, which would replace part of the 1965 Voting Rights Act that the supreme court struck down in 2013.Less than a year after taking control of the White House and Congress, Democrats were reeling on Wednesday from a shocking defeat in Virginia and a tight governor’s race in New Jersey as Joe Biden’s popularity sinks and his domestic agenda hangs in the balance. In Virginia, a state that had shifted sharply left over the past decade and that Biden won by 10 points in 2020, Republican Glenn Youngkin, a political newcomer, defeated Democrat Terry McAuliffe, the state’s former governor. And in New Jersey, the Democratic governor, Phil Murphy, managed only a narrow victory over the Republican Jack Ciattarelli, an unexpected turn of events in a state that is even more reliably Democratic. “Together, we will change the trajectory of this commonwealth and, friends, we are going to start that transformation on day one. There is no time to waste,” Youngkin said, addressing jubilant supporters in the early hours of Wednesday. Republicans’ resurgence after five years of stinging defeats during the Donald Trump era offers a stark warning for Democrats already wary of next year’s midterm elections. The results have echoes of 2009, when Republican victories in Virginia and New Jersey presaged their stunning takeover of the House in the 2010 midterms. “In a cycle like this, no Democrat is safe,” said Tom Emmer, chairman of the National Republican Congressional Committee. On Wednesday, the group announced it was expanding its list of Democratic targets for the 2022 midterms following Youngkin’s victory. The final weeks of the governor’s race in Virginia were dominated by education, as Youngkin, a 54-year-old former business executive, sought to harness parents’ frustration over school closures, mask mandates and anti-racism curriculum. Exploiting the nation’s culture wars over race and education, Youngkin repeatedly promised to outlaw “critical race theory”, an academic concept about the effects of systemic racism that is not taught in Virginia schools but has nevertheless galvanized conservatives across the country. McAuliffe, 64, worked relentlessly to tie his opponent to Trump in an attempt to revive the backlash to Trump that powered Democratic gains in recent years. But the effort was in vain. Exit polls showed Biden was nearly as unpopular as Trump in Virginia, with Youngkin outperforming the former president in counties across the commonwealth. His success offered Republicans a strategy for mobilizing Trump’s most ardent supporters while appealing to moderate voters in the suburbs who felt alienated by the former president. Tuesday’s elections were the first major test of the national mood since Biden took office in January, and the results were deeply disappointing for the president and his party as they try to keep control of wafer-thin majorities in Congress. Democrats were not well served by Biden’s sagging poll numbers, which have slumped to near-historic lows after months of infighting among Democrats over his nearly $3tn legislative agenda on Capitol Hill, a devastating evacuation from Afghanistan and the ever-present threat of the coronavirus. “This election is a warning for all Democrats,” Guy Cecil, chair of the Democratic political group Priorities USA, said in a statement. “While DC Democrats spent weeks fighting each other, Republicans were focused on mobilizing their base and peeling away voters from the Biden coalition using deceptive, divisive tactics.” Biden, however, has pushed back against the idea that the results were a repudiation of his presidency or the Democrats infighting over a major infrastructure deal and $1.75tn social and climate package. Speaking at the White House on Wednesday, the president said that “people are upset and uncertain about a lot of things” including the pandemic, the job market and the price of a gallon of gasoline. Biden added that “the off year is always unpredictable” and that he had seen no evidence that whether “my agenda passed or not is going to have any real impact on winning or losing” the two governors’ races. It remains unclear whether the defeat in Virginia will spur Democratic lawmakers to action on a shrunken version of Biden’s agenda – or if it will cause them to retreat from the sweeping plans. On Wednesday, the House speaker, Nancy Pelosi, signalled that Democrats were prepared to charge ahead as planned. She announced that the rules committee would hold a hearing on the $1.75tn domestic policy and climate mitigation bill, paving the way for a vote on the legislation and a companion $1tn infrastructure measure. “Today is another momentous day in our historic effort to make the future better for the American people, for the children, to Build Back Better with women, to save the planet,” Pelosi wrote in a letter to Democrats on Wednesday. Arriving at the Capitol on Wednesday morning, Pelosi brushed off any suggestion that McAuliffe’s loss changed the outlook for their agenda. “No, no”, she told reporters. But in the wake of Tuesday’s elections, some Democrats expressed fresh doubt about the party’s resolve to enact both pieces of Biden’s agenda. Centrist lawmakers said the defeat was reason to swiftly pass the bipartisan infrastructure bill, regardless of what happens with the larger spending measure, amid concern that the effort would further alienate moderate and suburban voters who were critical to Biden’s victory in 2020 but shifted back toward Republicans in Virginia on Tuesday. But progressives argued that abandoning their ambitious policy proposals would only spell further doom for their party, in desperate need of an economic message. “The lesson going into 2022 is that Democrats need to use power to get big things done for working people and then run on those accomplishments. Period,” the Progressive Change Campaign Committee said in a statement. “Democrats won’t win simply by branding one opponent after another as a Trump clone, and then hoping to squeak out a razor-thin win. When Democrats fail to run on big ideas or fulfill bold campaign promises, we depress our base while allowing Republicans to use culture wars to hide their real agenda.” Democrats have only a five-vote margin in the House and are tied in the Senate, relying on the vice-president’s casting vote. Historically, the party in power in the White House almost always loses seats in Congress. Elsewhere across the US, it was a night of historic firsts for Asian American candidates, a sign of the growing political strength of the AAPI community amid a rise in anti-Asian hate. Michelle Wu became the first woman and person of color elected to be mayor of Boston in the city’s 200-year history. Wu, a progressive Democrat endorsed by her former Harvard law professor, the Massachusetts senator Elizabeth Warren, defeated fellow city councilor Annissa Essaibi George, who ran as a pragmatist with the backing of the city’s traditional power players. In Cincinnati, Aftab Pureval, the son of immigrants from Tibet and India, defeated the former Democratic congressman David Mann. In Dearborn, Michigan, voters elected Abdullah Hammoud, a state lawmaker, as its first Arab American mayor. In New York City, Democrat Eric Adams, a former NYPD police captain, was elected mayor of the nation’s largest city. He will be the second Black mayor in the city’s history. The Associated Press contributed reportingThe world No 1-ranked USA will play in Australia for the first time in 21 years in a two-match mini-series against the Matildas at the end of the month. Sydney’s Stadium Australia and McDonald Jones Stadium in Newcastle will host matches on 27 November and 30 November respectively, Football Australia announced on Thursday, giving Tony Gustavsson’s side another chance to prove their credentials against the two-time defending world champions. The two nations enjoy a long-standing rivalry and last met as recently as the Tokyo Olympic Games in August, when the US won 4-3 in the bronze medal match. The upcoming matches continue a push from FA to line up the best teams in the world with preparations for next year’s Asian Cup ramping up and with the 2023 World Cup on home soil looming. Gustavsson, who spent five years as assistant coach of the US, acknowledged the quality of the four-time World Cup winners and four-time Olympic champions, and said meeting his former team would provide his current players with another great challenge. “This is a vital and final opportunity to see the players against an extremely high-quality nation before we select the final squad for the AFC Women’s Asian Cup,” Gustavsson said. “Meeting the US women’s national team on home soil will mark the sixth unique opponent in the top 10 that this team would have faced in 2021. With each match, we are continuing to get one day better as a team, and at the same time providing invaluable experience to the younger players in the roster.” Covid-19 had prevented the Matildas from appearing on home soil for a 19-month period until they played Brazil twice in Sydney’s west earlier this month. The two games at CommBank Stadium drew crowds of 15,000 and 12,000 and, with restrictions further easing in New South Wales and stadium capacity limits lifted, FA is pushing to surpass the record of 33,000 for a Matildas game in Australia – set during the 2000 Olympics in Sydney – later this month. FA chief executive James Johnson said the interest in the Brazil series – which also rated well on TV – demonstrated the Matildas’ box office appeal. “It was a privilege to welcome back fans to international matches and we are now delighted to welcome one of the world’s best and most admired teams, as we continue to implement our strategy of playing more teams ranked in the top 10 in preparation for upcoming major international tournaments,” he said. The Matildas have been drawn alongside Indonesia, the Philippines and Thailand in Group B of next year’s Asian Cup, which takes place in India from 20 January to 6 February. “We can’t be more delighted with the support which has been provided in scheduling these tough, unique opponents to further the development of the playing squad ahead of major international tournaments,” Gustavsson said.A person with Covid-19 who was self-isolating alone in their Auckland home has been found dead and investigations are under way to determine if the virus was the cause. The 40-year-old man tested positive for Covid-19 on 24 October and had been isolating in Manukau, a south Auckland suburb. He was found by a family member who visited on Wednesday. It is the third death of a person with Covid-19 in the current Delta outbreak, and New Zealand’s 29th since the pandemic began. There are now 3,871 cases in the community outbreak, with 139 reported on Thursday. Of those, 136 were in Auckland, two in Waikato and one in Northland. The cause of the 40-year-old’s death was unknown and the coroner would determine whether it was due to the virus, the Ministry of Health said in a statement on Wednesday night. Speaking to RNZ on Thursday, the director general of health, Dr Ashley Bloomfield, said there was no indication at this stage the person had required any extra support, but that a formal investigation was under way. “At this stage we don’t have any more information but we do have a very formal investigation protocol that we initiated to look and see what might have happened from a health perspective and will work with police.” A daily check-in, usually via email, is standard procedure for those isolating at home, followed up with a phone call if there is no reply. Meanwhile, government ministers are at odds over how and when Aucklanders will be allowed to travel outside the city’s boundary during summer. The city, which is at the heart of New Zealand’s Delta outbreak and is in its third month of lockdown, is surrounded by a strict border. The government has signalled that the border will only reopen once every district health board in the country reaches a 90% vaccination rate for their region. And while Auckland is on track to reach that goal by Christmas, modelling shows that other areas may not get there until mid-January, if at all. Earlier in the week prime minister Jacinda Ardern indicated that the government was setting up a border control system that will allow vaccinated Aucklanders who test negative to the virus to leave the region for Christmas and summer. On Wednesday, the Covid-19 response minister, Chris Hipkins, told RNZ the government was considering giving Aucklanders an allocated time slot to leave the region over the summer holidays. Hipkins said the measure would reduce the risk of traffic queues at the boundary checkpoints, as vaccination certificates are checked. “We haven’t made that decision yet. It’s an option. We’re just working through what the practical options are to ensure that we don’t end up with people spending days sitting in their cars. “What I’m foreshadowing is that we are considering … whether there are practical ways of helping to manage it.” But deputy prime minister Grant Robertson on Thursday squashed that idea. “I can’t see that - it wouldn’t be very practical. But we do have to find a way through in the event that we still have a boundary there,” he told RNZ. “So we’ll work our way through it but what we’re saying to Aucklanders [is] get vaccinated, the rest of the country get vaccinated. That will make travel a lot easier because there won’t be boundaries in that environment.”A Georgia judge has acknowledged there appeared to be “intentional discrimination” after a nearly all-white jury was selected for the trial of three white men accused of murdering Ahmaud Arbery, but has seated the jury nonetheless. A jury comprising 11 white members and one Black member was seated on Wednesday after defense attorneys struck almost all Black jurors from the pool. Opening arguments in the high-profile case are set to begin on Friday. Arbery, a 25-year-old Black man, was killed while out jogging in the coastal town of Satilla Shores, Georgia. None of the men involved were charged until eyewitness footage was made public months later, shortly before the murder of George Floyd in Minneapolis, prompting widespread protests. Jury selection for the case has lasted for 11 days, and lawyers were initially given a pool of 48 potential jurors, 12 of whom were Black. But defense lawyers for the accused murderers, Gregory McMichael, 67, his 35-year-old son Travis McMichael and their neighbor William “Roddie” Bryan, 52, struck all but one of them from the final jury. Prosecutors had urged Judge Timothy Walmsley, who is overseeing the trial in south Georgia, to reverse the strikes of eight Black potential jurors, whom they said had been intentionally targeted over race. A landmark 1986 US supreme court decision in Batson v Kentucky ruled it unconstitutional for potential jurors to be struck solely based on race or ethnicity. But Walmsley, while acknowledging the apparent “intentional discrimination”, cited limitations spelled out in the supreme court precedent and pointed to defense lawyers’ justifications, which did not mention race or ethnicity. Glynn county, Georgia, where the trial is taking place and where Arbery was killed, is 26% Black and 69% white. Arbery was shot dead in February 2020 when the three men pursued him while he was out on a run, claiming they suspected his involvement in a series of burglaries in the neighborhood. Arbery had been recorded on surveillance footage entering and leaving a semi-constructed house in the town that day, but no evidence has linked him to any offense. The McMichaels, both carrying firearms, attempted to corner Arbery in a roadway using their pickup truck. Travis McMichael then fired three times with a shotgun. All three men have pleaded not guilty to murder and will argue they were acting in self-defense and were legally justified in pursuing Arbery due to a now defunct citizen’s arrest law. On Wednesday, representatives for the Arbery family expressed outrage at the racial makeup of the jury. “How did we get to this result?” said Barbara Arnwine, a spokeswoman for the Arbery family who was speaking outside the courthouse flanked by Marcus Arbery, Ahmaud’s father. “The one thing we know is that the Black jurors who showed up for service came hoping to serve if selected. They had the same concerns as the white jurors.” She continued: “It’s disappointing to hear the bases that were articulated by the defendants for striking the Black jurors because my mind kept going from white juror to white juror who met the precise parameters that they were describing for omitting Black jurors.” As well as the state criminal charges, the three accused men face federal hate crimes and attempted kidnap charges in a separate case brought by the US justice department. Their federal trial is due to start in February 2022.Leaves from a plant which can be found “in back yards across Samoa” could be as effective as ibuprofen in lowering inflammation and could even be used to treat illnesses such as Parkinson’s and cancer, a new study has found. For centuries, the leaves of the psychotria insularum plant, known locally in Samoa as matalafi, have been used in traditional medicine to treat inflammation associated with fever, body aches, swellings, elephantiasis, and respiratory infections. “I was sceptical at first, when researching” said Seeseei Molimau-Samasoni, the study’s author and the manager of the plants and postharvest technologies division at the Scientific Research Organisation of Samoa. “There was a lot of superstition around this plant particularly, even in traditional medicine, but I was keen to find out if I could provide scientific merit to the traditional medicines of the Samoan people,” she said. “We can now highlight not only its potential as an anti-inflammatory agent but also its potential as a treatment for cancer, neurodegenerative diseases, diabetes, cardiovascular diseases as well as Covid-19.” Molimau-Samasoni and her colleagues’ findings have been peer-reviewed and are due to be published in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. “The leaves are chopped up and the juice is squeezed out. Traditional healers use that juice as drink for their patients. Sometimes they also use the leaves to rub on a person who is unwell or apply it to a wound that needs healing,” said Molimau-Samasoni, adding that traditional medicine runs in her family. “I grew up with my maternal grandmother and she was a traditional healer,” she said. “When she passed away, she passed on her treatments to me so I’m now kind of a traditional healer myself.” Molimau-Samasoni acknowledged there was a lot of scepticism and hesitancy shown toward traditional medicine. “The challenge between modern medicine and traditional medicine is the instances where people focus on just one type of medicine before seeking the other, so a case where people seek anti-cancer treatments from traditional healers but then present to the hospital later on with stage four cancer, when it’s too late for modern medicine to do anything” she said. “And so I know many people think traditional medicine is just people mashing leaves together and that people are taking it just for the placebo effect, but you need to remember that traditional medicine has made significant contributions to the world of modern pharmaceuticals, examples of which include aspirin.” As for matalafi, Molimau-Samasoni said it would likely be years before it is available as an approved medicine but said she also believes it is just the beginning, not only for matalafi, but for broader research into how Samoa’s traditional medicines could be used today. “I believe we’ve just started to unravel the potential of matalafi. But there’s also honestly hundreds of other traditional medicines here in Samoa to research,” she said. “We now have a laboratory dedicated to anti-microbial benefits in traditional medicines, a laboratory looking into anti-diabetes activity in traditional medicines and a laboratory looking into anti-cancer activity in traditional medicines. We are only just getting started.”Parkrun Australia has cancelled its Victorian schedule indefinitely because of mandatory Covid vaccination requirements. Under Stage C of the state government’s roadmap, parkruns are classified as “physical recreation” in Victoria and require all attenders to be checked for their vaccination status prior to the event for it to go ahead. Parkrun Australia said the “logistics” of mandating its volunteers to confirm the vaccination status of all participants would “fundamentally break” its simple operating model. Parkruns are also on hold in New South Wales and ACT. “As is the case in NSW, we will seek to reopen parkrun events in Victoria as soon as vaccination status is not a contributing factor,” it confirmed in a statement. NSW premier Dominic Perrottet has delayed the reopening of the state to unvaccinated people until 15 December, or whenever 95% double dose targets are met. Marketing and communications coordinator, Scott Trickett, said he was “confident” the charity would be granted an exemption from the Victorian government to return soon. But Victoria has yet to release a date for when “vaccination passports” will no longer be required for the majority of public life, including physical recreation. More than 90% of eligible Victorians have received a first vaccination dose, while just over 80% are fully vaccinated. “We just want to come back, but we’re waiting for restrictions to ease based on vaccination,” Trickett said. “Parkruns have a simple operating model, all our 440 Australian events are delivered by volunteers. To keep that model, we can’t put the onus back on them to check the vaccination status of every participant. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “All our events are open, in open areas – we have no way of controlling it. It’s one of the appeals of parkrun, but one of the barriers too. “We could implement a program to ask everyone to show their vaccination certificate but there’s nothing to stop someone joining halfway through. And we don’t want to put volunteers in that position with people refusing to get vaccine.” Parkrun has been reclassified three times in Victoria throughout the pandemic from an event, to community sport, to physical recreation. “We’re struggling to find reasoning why we can’t reopen, we’re an outdoor activity, the risk of transmission is low,” Trickett said. “We’ve always been supportive of the government’s process but we’re desperate to get back for a physical and mental benefit – social isolation has been exacerbated enough throughout this lockdown.” Katie Johnson discovered running at the beginning of the pandemic, and quickly became a regular at Albert Park parkrun. Between lockdowns, Johnson attended the Albert Park parkrun every Saturday morning with friends, where “hundreds of people” would rock up weekly. “It’s feasible [she said of the mandatory vaccination requirement], but it would be hard to check. With vaccination certificates, they’re looking after one aspect of health but this is an important one as well. “It’s really disappointing they can’t bring it back, it’s such a positive activity for the community … and I’ve definitely run less since they cancelled it. Plus, if you go to Albert Park on any given Saturday there’s hundreds running anyway, nobody is checking certificates.” More than 90 parkruns operate across greater Melbourne and regional Victoria, usually attracting about 10,000 runners every weekend. In place of events that had been suspended in Victoria and NSW, parkrun Australia has been encouraging runners to upload their exercise times as part of virtual ‘[not] parkruns’ across usual run sites. More than 220 locations have logged virtual runs. A spokesperson from Victoria’s department of health said fun runs could only go ahead if all attenders, including volunteers and runners, were fully vaccinated. “Event organisers must check the vaccine status of participants. This could be done at the start line of the parkrun event,” they said. “Under Phase D of the roadmap [due to be released 24 November], restrictions will ease further … as Victoria gets closer to hitting 90% of people aged 12 years and over double dose vaccinated.”Two major dam projects in regional New South Wales have been indefinitely postponed because of massive cost blowouts, while the plan to raise the Warragamba dam wall west of Sydney is under review. The Wyangala and Mole River projects were pre-election commitments made at the height of the drought and announced with much fanfare by the then NSW Nationals leader John Barilaro. But they have been criticised as doing little to improve water security during drought conditions while having significant environmental impacts. A third project, the $484m Dungowan dam project, is still on the cards, despite the Productivity Commission criticising it as “flawed”. The project, which is designed to deliver more water to Tamworth, does not have a business case and was a “costly way” to deliver more water to the town, the commission found. Meanwhile, the review of the plan to raise the Warragamba dam wall by 14 metres comes after the costs of the project rose to $1.6bn – which does not include the cost of buying offsets to compensate for the damage it will do to world heritage listed areas of the Blue Mountains national park. The NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet told estimates on Thursday that he had an open mind on the project and would be prepared to look at other alternatives to better protect western Sydney from flooding. “It would be remiss of any government not to look at alternatives,” he said. A plan to raise the wall on the Wyangala dam by about 10m would have increased storage capacity in the Lachlan river valley in western NSW, but there was scepticism about how often the dam would fill, particularly in dry years. Sources said it was deferred but not officially dumped, pending further assessment. The project originally had a price tag of $600m. But as the Guardian reported in 2020, the estimates for building the dam had risen to as much as $1.5bn because of the soaring costs of biodiversity offsets. The Mole River dam project, in north-west NSW, also had real questions about its viability and was opposed by the community. The main beneficiary of the project would have been the cotton industry as there are no significant towns that would have benefited. It is believed to now be off the agenda. The projects had been strongly advocated by Barilaro, who has resigned along with former premier Gladys Berejiklian. The change of leadership in NSW appears to have prompted a rethink on several environmental issues. Last week, the environment minister and treasurer, Matt Kean, used an estimates hearing to announce the Perrottet government would look to reform environmental offset schemes on both a policy and an integrity level after an investigation by Guardian Australia revealed what he described as “appalling practices”. On Thursday, the deputy premier, Paul Toole, told another estimates hearing he would move to stop proposed coal exploration in two areas near the Wollemi national park. Toole said there were social and commercial problems associated with the project and he would be recommending cabinet rule it out. The Greens MP Cate Faehrmann, who has chaired an inquiry into the controversial dam projects, said the reversals on the dams were a huge win for the environment and for downstream communities who would have been affected. “These National party duds have been a terrible idea from the outset,” she said. “The government has been unable to bring a business case forward for either of these projects because they just don’t stack up. These dams were set to provide marginal if any increases in water security at an outrageous price. “While the likely scrapping of these two projects is great news, it is very concerning to hear that Dungowan dam is likely to proceed. These three projects were announced in the one breath, with no business case or rationale other than to secure National party electorates. Dungowan dam is as much a dud as the other two. “The water minister now needs to go back to the drawing board and consider non-infrastructure options like water recycling and efficiency projects,” she said.Queensland authorities surprised their Facebook followers with some “pleasurable” health advice on Thursday. On its official Facebook page, Queensland Health shared a post about masturbation, which was accompanied by brightly coloured infographics detailing its health benefits. “Give yourself a hand,” the post began, with a hand and winking emojis. “Masturbation is a normal and healthy part of a person’s sexual experience and a great way to discover what you are comfortable with. The best part is, it’s for everyone – and also offers a wealth of health and sexual health benefits!” “It’s important for us all to work towards normalising sex-positive messages about masturbation to reduce associated feelings of shame and fear, and improve overall sexual health and literacy.” Humorous comments in response to the post came thick and fast: “In these hard times we need to all pull together,” someone wrote. “Someone’s left the work experience kid by himself at Qld Health,” another comment read. “Gives the slogan ‘arm yourself’ a new meaning,” said another, a reference to the federal government’s “arm yourself against Covid-19” vaccination campaign. Another: “Just brilliant! I wonder when all the funny comments will reach a climax?” An article accompanying the Facebook post linked to peer-reviewed research that has found a correlation between masturbation and positive body image in women, and that orgasms may help reduce menstrual cramping. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning It also provided recommendations for how to broach the subject with young people. A Queensland Health spokesperson told Guardian Australia the aim of the post was to reduce the stigma associated with masturbation, communicate the health benefits, and share advice to parents on how to talk to their children. “Since masturbation is often considered a taboo subject and this is the first time we have spoken about it on social media, our team was prepared for the large public response and for people to be shocked.” “It’s been great to see that the majority of responses have been positive, and that it is generating healthy conversation,” the spokesperson said. “We also wanted to encourage healthy conversations between our younger followers because we know talking about masturbation naturally flows into conversations on sexual health, self-care and consent.” “Research shows the majority of young people get their sexual health information from online sources and feel shame and embarrassment when talking about masturbation and sex with friends and family. Unfortunately, many of these online sources are unreliable and aren’t reviewed or created by experts clinicians.” According to 2014 data from the Australian Study of Health and Relationships, conducted once a decade, 72% of men and 42% of women reported masturbating in the previous year. The study’s lead author, Prof Juliet Richters, said the sex differences in masturbation prevalence and frequency were consistent across many studies. The research found masturbation was relatively uncommon among younger women, a “disappointing” finding “as it is generally agreed to have benefits for women in learning about their own bodies and negotiating more rewarding sexual practice with partners.” Richters, an honorary professor in sexual health at the University of New South Wales, said: “The idea that masturbation is in some way wrong or bad for you – it’s decades since that has no longer been thought by anyone in health or medicine.”Adelaide United captain Stefan Mauk credited his club’s culture “re-set” for providing Josh Cavallo with a comfortable space to openly address his sexuality, as Liverpool manager Jürgen Klopp became the latest big name in the game to laud the player for coming out. A week after Cavallo publicly announced he was gay and said he knew there were other players “living in silence”, Klopp said he believed the world outside men’s professional football is more of an obstacle for players being open about their sexuality than inside dressing rooms. Liverpool were one of innumerable high-profile clubs and players around the globe to publicly express support for the Adelaide player, but Klopp hoped the game would a reach a point when such announcements are “not necessary”. “I think we all agree, it should not be like this,” Klopp said. “Obviously, Josh doing that and it being such a big story, that is the problem we have: that it’s not normal or that he has to make an announcement and that he’s not just living his private life, and nobody should be bothered by that.” Cavallo, in his announcement, lamented that “being a gay closeted footballer, I’ve had to learn to mask my feelings in order to fit the mould of a professional footballer”. Klopp believed that “mould” had more to do with external perceptions than the views of those inside the game. “What I can tell you with 30 years in the industry, I never had a dressing room where it would have been a problem at all,” he said. “The problem is not the inner circle, the problem is the wider thing. We all have to work on it. It’s very disappointing that we still have to work on it, but we have to work on it, that’s how it is. “This kind of news is not necessary, nobody has to make an announcement like that. I didn’t have to say that I’m hetero. These types of things should just be completely normal. “I saw his speech or announcement and he looks like a really strong, smart young man and I really wish him all the best. “I’m really thankful that he did it because now we talk again and I’m not sure when was the last time we talked about this subject and now we talk again and that’s always a good start for changes.” Adelaide United have already started that change ahead of the 2021-22 A-League Men’s season. “A big thing that the club has really tried to re-set in the last couple of years is the culture,” Mauk said on Thursday. “I’m not saying it wasn’t good, but how can we make it better? How can we make people feel comfortable off the field so that they can perform on it? It’s an easy thing to say and it’s a hard thing to do, and I think we have done that. “Josh is now hopefully going to be playing even better than what he was before because he’s feeling a lot freer and more comfortable within the group. And it’s a great message that he brought up, that it doesn’t matter about who you are as a person – football is for everyone.” This week, Matildas midfielder Katrina Gorry described being gay in football as “a really hard space, especially for male players”. “We can get caught up when it happens but forget to support them along the way,” Gorry told Mamamia. “There are still struggles, and I’m sure he’ll face some hard times through it all ... we’ve got to keep supporting him and make sure other players feel comfortable in doing exactly what he just did.”First Nations people and communities are the most legislated group within Australia. From the time the first fleet arrived, our mob has been controlled under the guise of protection. Australia was invaded and utilised as a penal colony, and we continue to be a penal colony to this day. Policies of “protection” were enacted across Australia which demanded complete government control over all aspects of the lives of Aboriginal people including the removal of First Peoples from their homelands and Country on to missions and reserves. While Indigenous people were being controlled under the facade of protection, our mob were not yet intimately acquainted with criminal systems. Police played a key role in enforcing protection legislation. The policies and practices of protection, assimilation and child removal were deeply rooted in racist beliefs and left a legacy of grief, loss and trauma that continues to impact on First Nations people, families and communities today. While the historical era of “protection” has dissipated, such controls have manifested in new forms through our legal systems. The racially driven and carceral nature of missions and reserves was gradually superseded by the institutional growth of the child protection, youth and adult “injustice” systems. Systems that continue to disproportionately inflict violence, disruption and devastation for First Nations people, families and communities. Currently, First Nations people are 17 times more likely to be under child protection supervision than non-Aboriginal families and the numbers of Aboriginal children in out of home care is projected to double in size by 2028. Not only are First Nations people arrested at unacceptably high rates, we are imprisoned at the highest rate in the world. Although First Nations adults consist of around 3% of the national population, our people constitute 27% of Australia’s national prison population. Disproportionate rates of imprisonment have continued to rise despite declining rates of crime. While the primary drivers for mass incarceration are often external to the criminal legal system, where extreme levels of poverty, disadvantage and trauma contribute to the elevated levels of justice system involvement for First Nations people and communities, the system is also to blame. Structural racism and bias is evident at every facet of the legal system and disproportionately affects First Nations people. Every single step taken by a First Nations person through the criminal legal system is unjust. Aboriginal people are much more likely to be questioned by police, more likely to come to the attention of police, more likely to be arrested rather than proceeded against by summons. If arrested, we are more likely to be remanded in custody than given bail and more likely to plead guilty than go to trial, and if we go to trial, we are more likely to be convicted. If convicted, we are more likely to be imprisoned, and at the end of the term of imprisonment we are less likely to get parole. Understanding and truth telling about the nexus between racism, structured segregation, government modes of control and regulation is critical to addressing the hyper incarceration of First Peoples of Australia in the current criminal legal system. The culmination of lived and professional experience of my husband Keenan Mundine and me, coupled with the ineffectiveness of the current colonial systems that are in place and the ongoing harm and violence experienced by our communities, inspired us to establish an organisation that addresses the effects of systemic racism, trauma, disadvantage, and poverty on the mass incarceration and over-representation of First Nations people in the justice and child protection systems. Deadly Connections was established to provide culturally safe advocacy, support, information, referrals and programs for First Nations people, families and communities. In Aboriginal English, “deadly” means excellent or really good. Deadly Connections focuses on promoting healing and justice by implementing alternative justice solutions that focus on transformative justice and community driven initiatives. Our work aims to positively disrupt the intergenerational disadvantage, grief, loss, and trauma of First Nations people by providing holistic and culturally responsive services. Being a part of the UNHEARD campaign and documentary series now on Amazon Prime Video is a critical step in highlighting the needs for organisations like Deadly Connections, addressing racism, inequity and social justice issues, into the wider domain for the public to see and understand. By engaging in an initiative like this we can amplify our voices and the voices of other mob, to raise awareness and support for much needed changes to the system/s that continue to harm, oppress, marginalise and disenfranchise our people, families and communities. • Carly Stanley is CEO and co-founder of Deadly Connections. She is a proud Wiradjuri Woman, born and raised on Gadigal landCity bin chickens could mutate – or they could save their dwindling country cousins, new research is suggesting. Global heating, increasing drought, water extraction and habitat degradation have driven the Australian white ibis out of inland river systems. But dumpster-diving ibis in cities thrive, meaning there are now tens of thousands of urban birds, while only about 3,000 inland. Macquarie University researchers wanted to see if genetic differences were emerging between the “beautiful, elegant white birds” inland on one side of the Great Dividing Range and “their grubby and cheeky city cousins” on the other. That work by conservation biologist associate professor Adam Stow, PhD student Skye Davis and University of New South Wales’s Dr Kate Brandis, has been published in the journal Conservation Genetics. Stow remembers a time when birdwatchers flocked to see the rare birds in Sydney. Over the past three decades their numbers have taken off. “Very quickly they’ve adapted to exploiting the urban environment,” he said. “They’ve done it well. Maybe too well.” Now the tip turkeys are considered pests, as they compete with other native species, spread disease, and fly into planes. “I think people find them intimidating,” Stow said. “I think it’s got something to do with its beady stare and its long curved beak. They strut around and gleam at you out of one eye, size up your sandwich while you’re eating.” So they are being culled, their nests destroyed, or their eggs “oiled” to kill the chicks inside, even while they are in “serious decline” in the Murray-Darling Basin, Stow said. The team decided to work out whether the declining inland population could be replenished by tree-changer urban birds, so they tested feather samples, compared the genetic material, and found out that they are still similar enough to be considered one population. If wetlands were regenerated and the city rubbish buffet reduced, the bin chickens could return to their natural home and boost the dwindling populations there. Stow says if the two bird gangs instead became more divided over time, they could mutate to become distinct groups, with different genetic variants in different regions. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “We were musing over whether they might,” Stow said. “For plenty of species that have moved into urban environments, the evidence is emerging that there are selective processes. It’ll probably happen to the Australian white ibis.” The much-maligned bin chickens could get even more “enormously beaky”, he joked. Despite the Australian version being despised by many (thousands of people registered for an International Glare at Ibises Day in Sydney in 2016), others are quite fond of the picnic pirate. The South Australian health department used it to highlight the need for social distancing. In the past, the Australian white ibis has performed strongly in the Guardian Australia/Birdlife Australia’s bird of the year awards. The Australian white ibis is a native species, and a relative of the Egyptian sacred ibis, which were revered as the living incarnation of the god Thoth, who laid the cosmic egg that holds all of creation.Uber drivers in Sydney and Melbourne have been temporarily suspended from the service for asking customers to wear face masks in their cars, a Senate committee has been told. Two Uber drivers, appearing before the Senate select committee on job security on Thursday, reported having their driver accounts deactivated by Uber after customers falsely reported them for abuse or violence for enforcing the mask rules. Lorna Berry, an Uber driver based in Melbourne, said the pandemic had “changed Uber massively”, with riders now required to wear masks, check in using QR codes, and Ubers can only take a maximum of three passengers due to social distancing requirements. These requirements had led to confrontations, Berry said. “When you’ve asked riders to do this, they can become quite aggressive and swear and carry on and all sorts of things,” she said. Berry said earlier this year she arrived at a job to pick up four women. When she informed them of the capacity limit and the mask requirement, she said they abused her. After she cancelled the trip, the next day she was notified through the Uber app her account had been deactivated after someone had reported her for being “violent”. “This, of course, was a false claim and I was horrified.” Once access to the app is withdrawn, Berry said it is difficult for drivers to directly contact Uber, with no phone line to contact the company, and having to deal with them over email. She said it took four or five days until her account was reactivated. “You’re left in this position now of going ‘is it safe to go back out there now?’” she said, adding it made her look for alternative work. “Melbourne’s opened up, [and] you’re always you have every right to ask somebody to wear a mask and of course when any of these incidents happen you’re not given any details because Uber want to protect the privacy [of] riders, so it’s really frustrating.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning A Sydney-based driver, who asked to remain anonymous due to fear of reprisal from Uber, told the committee he had “a constant issue” with getting riders to wear masks in his car, and had begun bringing a bag of masks with him to offer riders. He said he once had his account deactivated after he gave a mask to a young man in his car who complained “I can’t breathe” during the ride, with the man allegedly telling Uber the driver had sworn at him. “That was the only incident in the day – even though I didn’t know 100% – that was the only incident in the day that I could relate to as being a problem.” He said it took several emails before his account was restored, and said the mask mandate was also causing his customer rating to drop. “I used to be a highly rated driver until the mask mandate came in … my rating in Uber plummeted almost overnight,” he said. Berry said her rating had also dropped because of the mask rules. Both drivers said there was little recourse through the Uber app to contest claims made by customers, and no compensation from the company for the lost income while their accounts were deactivated over false claims. A spokesperson for Uber said the company had reintroduced phone support for drivers who have their accounts disabled in April this year, and said riders and drivers were both able to cancel trips when the other was not wearing a mask. Those who repeatedly refuse to wear masks can be blocked from the platform. The company was reviewing customer and driver ratings, but indicated there had been no average change in ratings since the mask mandate came into effect.Vladimir Putin wanted Russia to join Nato but did not want his country to have to go through the usual application process and stand in line “with a lot of countries that don’t matter”, according to a former secretary general of the transatlantic alliance. George Robertson, a former Labour defence secretary who led Nato between 1999 and 2003, said Putin made it clear at their first meeting that he wanted Russia to be part of western Europe. “They wanted to be part of that secure, stable prosperous west that Russia was out of at the time,” he said. The Labour peer recalled an early meeting with Putin, who became Russian president in 2000. “Putin said: ‘When are you going to invite us to join Nato?’ And [Robertson] said: ‘Well, we don’t invite people to join Nato, they apply to join Nato.’ And he said: ‘Well, we’re not standing in line with a lot of countries that don’t matter.’” The account chimes with what Putin told the late David Frost in a BBC interview shortly before he was first inaugurated as Russian president more than 21 years ago. Putin told Frost he would not rule out joining Nato “if and when Russia’s views are taken into account as those of an equal partner”. He told Frost it was hard for him to visualise Nato as an enemy. “Russia is part of the European culture. And I cannot imagine my own country in isolation from Europe and what we often call the civilised world.” Lord Robertson’s comments on the One Decision podcast, which is presented by Michelle Kosinski, a former CNN journalist, and Sir Richard Dearlove, a former head of M16, underscore how Putin’s worldview has evolved during his 21 years of unbroken rule of Russia. After the Orange Revolution street protests in Ukraine in 2004, Putin became increasingly suspicious of the west, which he blamed for funding pro-democracy NGOs. He was further angered by Nato’s continuing expansion into central and eastern Europe: Romania, Bulgaria, Slovakia, Slovenia, Latvia, Estonia and Lithuania chose to join the alliance in 2004; Croatia and Albania followed in 2009. Georgia and Ukraine were promised membership in 2008 but have remained outside. Robertson also recalled how he became the first and only Nato secretary general to invoke Nato’s collective defence clause, known as article five, in the wake of the 9/11 attacks. Invoking article five was “a gamble” and it was far from a foregone conclusion that Nato members would reach for it after a terrorist attack, he said, noting it was “designed for an attack by the Soviet Union across the Fulda Gap in Germany”. Some Nato allies were uneasy about invoking the collective defence clause to support the US, fearing it would give George W Bush’s administration a licence to invade Iraq. Robertson recalled one minister asking him: “‘Does this mean we’re giving them a blank check to invade Iraq?’ We said: ‘No, it’s not.’” The Scottish former minister also revealed how the historic decision to invoke article five nearly went awry. The day after the 11 September attacks, Robertson was due to attend a routine meeting of EU foreign ministers. Anxious not to upstage the EU by calling for article five, he asked a couple of friendly foreign ministers – Jack Straw of the UK and Louis Michel of Belgium – to ask a question that gave him an opening to discuss it. But neither minister asked the question. “So I left, and afterwards there was a bit of bad blood and they said I should have announced it. But I said: ‘Well, I was going to announce it, but nobody asked the question.’” After the 9/11 attacks, many Nato allies joined the US in invading Afghanistan, with Nato taking over the mission command in 2003. Robertson said he urged the late US defence secretary Donald Rumsfeld to keep US forces in Afghanistan alongside Nato allies after the Taliban’s military defeat. He warned Rumsfeld he would denounce any US withdrawal as unacceptable. “So he [Rumsfeld] got a bit upset at that point, and I said: ‘No, … you’re not going to say we did the cooking, you can clean up the dishes.’ I said: ‘That’s not it. We went in together, and we’re staying in together.’” He was critical of the US’s chaotic withdrawal two months ago, but contended that the 20-year long mission of western military forces made a difference, despite the return of the Taliban. “We’ve left a legacy there that these theological hoodlums are not going to be easily unravelling. And I think that Afghanistan in the future will be a very different place.”The high-profile federal criminal investigation of Rudy Giuliani in recent days has zeroed in on evidence that in the spring of 2019 three Ukrainian government prosecutors agreed to award contracts, valued in the hundreds of thousands of dollars, to Giuliani and two other American attorneys as a way to gain political and personal influence with the Trump administration. Federal investigators believe Giuliani and two attorneys who worked closely with him, Victoria Toensing and Joe DiGenova, probably violated federal transparency laws that require Americans working for foreign governments or interests to register as foreign agents with the US justice department and fully disclose details of each such action they undertook on behalf of the foreign interests. Federal prosecutors in the southern district in New York have compiled a list of more than two dozen specific acts by Giuliani, Toesning and DiGenova as to how to advance the personal and political interests of a group of Ukrainian prosecutors and political factions in Ukraine with which they were aligned, the Guardian has learned. Prosecutors consider each one of those acts to be crucial evidence of a potential violation of law, according to sources close to the investigation. In a previously undisclosed episode, the Guardian has learned that federal investigators have uncovered extensive, detailed plans devised by one Ukrainian prosecutor, Yuriy Lutsenko, and approved by Giuliani, by which they would announce and promote an investigation of Joe Biden and his son Hunter, in Ukraine, to help boost Trump’s chances of re-election. Investigators as early as last year obtained emails received and sent by Lutsenko describing various elements of the scheme, according to sources close to the investigation. Trump and conservative news outlets from 2019 until the present day have made baseless allegations, since thoroughly debunked, that Joe Biden as vice-president pressured Ukraine to fire its prosecutor general for investigating a Ukrainian energy company, Burisma, upon whose board Hunter Biden sat. Trump claimed, without evidence, that Biden sought the firing of the prosecutor so his son would escape scrutiny. Trump hoped to make the allegations a centerpiece of his 2020 re-election campaign. As part of that effort, Lutsenko, the then prosecutor general of Ukraine, analogous to the attorney general in the US, agreed to publicly announce a criminal investigation in Ukraine of Joe Biden and Hunter. Lutsenko simultaneously had been a driving force to award Giuliani, Toensing and DiGenova the hundreds of thousands of dollars in legal retainers and contracts, according to the same sources described above. Only the unexpected election of a new president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, with whom the plotting Ukrainian prosecutors had little or no influence, led them to abandon their plan – although only briefly. That’s because Trump was obsessed with getting it back on track as soon as possible. To that end, in July 2019, Trump made his now infamous “perfect” phone call to Zelenskiy – at the time he was withholding almost $400m in military aid to Ukraine – to pressure the new Ukrainian president to announce he was investigating the Bidens. The disclosure of Giuliani’s shadow diplomacy and Trump’s phone call with Zelenskiy led directly to Trump becoming only the third US president to face impeachment. Federal investigators have obtained documents and witness statements detailing how the three Ukrainian prosecutors would, at Giuliani’s behest, help Trump and Giuliani promote the Biden-Ukraine allegations, even if there was no truth in them, according to people close to the investigation. First, Lutsenko would publicly declare that he was reopening a long dormant investigation of Burisma, and that the Bidens were under investigation as part of the broader inquiry. A deputy of Lutsenko, Konstantin Kulyk, would take charge of the portion of the investigation that focused on the Bidens, and publicly verify any allegations of wrongdoing on their part. Finally, Viktor Shokin, a former prosecutor general of Ukraine, who had previously investigated Burisma, agreed to allege publicly that Biden had fired him to quash an investigation of Burisma he had conducted years earlier. Lutsenko and the others were so eager to gain influence in the Trump White House, through Giuliani, that they decided they could garner even greater access if they arranged for Giuliani’s personal enrichment. Even though Giuliani was engaged by then president Trump as his personal attorney, Trump did not pay him, a frustration that Giuliani expressed to the Ukrainians. Giuliani and Lutsenko reached a preliminary agreement in March 2019 between Giuliani and the Ukrainian ministry of justice and the Republic of Ukraine to assist Ukraine in recovering money in overseas bank accounts Lutsenko said was owed to his government. Various drafts of the contract called for Giuliani to receive either $300,000 or $500,000 for his work. Then, acting on Giuliani’s strong recommendation, Lutsenko, Kulyk and Shokin agreed to pay two lawyers close to Giuliani, Toensing and DiGenova, at least $250,000 to represent them as a means to publicize their various allegations about Hunter Biden and Burisma. The husband-wife legal team of Toensing and DiGenova are decades-long friends of Giuliani and ardent supporters of Trump. Like Giuliani and Trump, they have espoused various conspiracy theories that an amorphous and malign “deep state” had plotted against Trump to destroy him and his presidency. Along with Giuliani, Toensing and DiGenova are under federal criminal investigation by the United States attorney for the southern district of New York. On 12 April 2019, Toensing and DiGenova sent a draft retainer agreement to Lutsenko and Kulyk, agreeing to represent both men and to help uncover “evidence of illegal conduct in Ukraine regarding the United States” – an apparent reference to the allegations about the Bidens. The contract called on Lutsenko and Kulyk to pay a $125,000 retainer. Three days later, on 15 April, Toensing and DiGenova sent a similar retainer agreement to Shokin, agreeing to represent him “for the purpose of collecting evidence regarding his March 2016 firing as prosecutor general of Ukraine and the role of then vice-president Joe Biden in such firing, and presenting such evidence to US and foreign authorities”. That contract called for Shokin to pay the lawyers a $125,000 retainer. But a week later, their plans were suddenly upended: on 21 April, Ukraine overwhelmingly elected Zelenskiy as president. Lutsenko had been appointed prosecutor general by the outgoing Ukrainian president, Petro Poroshenko. It was unclear whether Lutsenko would remain as prosecutor general under Zelenskiy. Moreover, it was unlikely that a Zelenskiy regime would allow for a contract between Giuliani and the Ukrainian ministry of justice to move ahead. Giuliani has since claimed that he decided not to proceed with the contract because he began to have ethical qualms about representing Trump and the Ukrainians at the same time. In reality, Lutsenko probably did not have the influence or authority to award Giuliani the contracts. Meanwhile, Toensing and DiGenova had additional reservations about signing retainer agreements with the three Ukrainian prosecutors. Toensing and DiGenova feared that if they moved forward with their representation, they would have to abide by a federal transparency law known as the Foreign Agents Registration Act, or Fara, which requires Americans who provide legal, political or public relations advice to foreign governments or foreign political interests to register with the US justice department as foreign agents, and to disclose to the public in great detail everything they do on behalf of their foreign clients. The draft retainer agreements between Toensing and DiGenova and the Ukrainians demonstrate that compliance with Fara was clearly on their mind. The draft contracts for all three stated: “Client acknowledges that he has been advised that the firm’s services may entail services subject to the mandatory disclosure under United States law. In particular, the Foreign Agents Registration Act … requires the firm to register [as a foreign agent] and report some of its activities on behalf of particular political parties or entities.” Toensing and DiGenova did not want to register as foreign agents, investigators believe. After all, if the two high-powered attorneys officially acknowledged they were acting as agents of Ukrainian political interests, they would find it harder to appear on Fox News and other media venues, thereby making it more difficult to promote Trump’s various conspiracy theories regarding Ukraine. Federal investigators have also reviewed records and questioned witnesses regarding an instance in which Toensing had registered as a foreign agent: Toensing previously represented the Kurdistan Democratic party, the largest political party in Iraqi Kurdistan, and the party’s representatives in the United States and Canada. That 2017 representation might prove to be powerful evidence for prosecutors if they were to charge Toensing, because it demonstrates both her familiarity and experience with Fara. Toensing learned first-hand the downside of registering as a foreign agent while representing the Kurds. She circulated a column to several publications advocating that the Kurds should have their own homeland. But it was turned down repeatedly because she was a foreign agent. Her column was eventually published in the Hill, where it received little attention. Another incentive for Toensing, DiGenova and Giuliani to avoid registering as foreign agents was that their work required greater secrecy. Although Poroshenko, the outgoing president, was willing to go along with backing an investigation of the Bidens, the new Zelenskiy regime, knowing there was no factual basis which might serve as a foundation for such an investigation, was refusing to proceed. That’s when Trump and Giuliani engaged in their campaign to force Zelenskiy to announce such an investigation by withholding the $400m in military aid. Still wanting to aid Trump and Giuliani, but not wanting to have to publicly disclose details of their activities, Toensing and DiGenova moved forward with providing much the same services to the three Ukrainians, but now without a formal retainer letter and no longer seeking to be paid for their services, witnesses have told federal investigators. Tessa Capeloto, a Washington-based attorney who has counseled clients on Fara matters for more than a decade, says that providing services to a foreign client for free or not executing a formal contract does not excuse lawyers from registering as a foreign agent and disclosing their activities to the public, in almost all such instances. “Even if services are provided on a pro-bono basis, a Fara registration requirement can still result,” Capeloto said in an interview. “Nor is it the case that a formal contract or other formal relationship with a foreign principal is needed to satisfy agency under the statute.” Federal prosecutors have identified more than two dozen specific acts by Giuliani, Toensing and DiGenova, the non-disclosure of which they believe constitutes evidence of Fara violations. These include everything from attempting to obtain a visa for Shokin to visit the United States when it was being held up at the state department, to having Trump fire a US ambassador to Ukraine who the Ukrainian prosecutors considered an adversary, to DiGenova amplifying their story on Fox News. Giuliani, through his attorney, Bob Costello, declined to comment for this story. But Giuliani has previously said that he could not have violated the federal agents registration law because he was acting on behalf of Trump in his dealings with the Ukrainians, telling the New York Times: “It would be kind of ridiculous to say that I was doing [anything] on Lutsenko’s behalf when I was representing the president of the United States.” Underscoring the seriousness of the criminal investigation, during the early morning hours of 29 April, FBI agents executed search warrants at Giuliani’s Madison Avenue apartment and his Park Avenue office in Manhattan, confiscating his cellphones and other electronic devices. Almost simultaneously, FBI agents executed a second search warrant at Toensing’s suburban Washington home. Papers unsealed in federal court in the southern district of New York on 28 September shed further light on the investigation. They described materials federal prosecutors have sought, including “retainer agreements with any Ukrainian national including former prosecutor general Yuriy Lutsenko” and “evidence of knowledge of Fara laws”. A source who has seen the search warrant for Giuliani says it also listed some 12 people investigators were seeking information on. Those include all three of the Ukrainian prosecutors: Lutsenko, Shokin and Kulyk. The search warrant also sought any records in Giuliani’s possession relevant to his communications with Toensing and DiGenova.The Australian defence minister, Peter Dutton, has urged France to put aside any “hurt feelings” over the scrapping of the submarine contract in order to focus on the “great uncertainty with China in our region”. A day after the French ambassador described the Australian government’s release of a private text message as a new low, Dutton said the envoy was simply “reading from a script from Paris” and Emmanuel Macron’s government was “posturing” ahead of next year’s presidential election. With senior members of the Australian government defending the leak as necessary step to rebut the claim Scott Morrison was a liar, and with one backbencher labelling France a “spurned lover”, Labor went on the attack. Labor’s Senate leader, Penny Wong, said Morrison had shown he was someone “whose reflex is spin rather than sincerity” and “stubbornly refuses to say, yes, we could have handled this better”. “You don’t make a country more secure by demonstrating that you’re prepared to damage at any cost, damage partnerships and alliances,” Wong told the ABC. “We’ve seen a leader who did that – and that person was Donald Trump.” The extraordinary rift between Australia and France flows from the Morrison government’s decision to walk away from a $90bn French-backed project to deliver 12 conventional submarines, and instead get US and UK help to acquire at least eight nuclear-powered submarines. After Macron accused Morrison of lying to him over the matter, the Australian prime minister rejected the claim. In an attempt to counter the claim France was blindsided by the decision, a text was released to several Australian media outlets showing the French president asked Morrison two days before the Aukus announcement: “Should I expect good or bad news for our joint submarines ambitions?” Dutton said it was time to “move on” and “recognise that we’ve made a decision that is in our country’s best interests, and nobody from Scott Morrison down is going to apologise for that”. The defence minister argued the French “were going to be upset whenever they were told” about the decision. “It would have been the reaction had they been told, sooner or later in between – it wouldn’t have mattered,” Dutton told 2GB radio on Thursday. “If we had a contract cancelled on us, the Australian government would be upset at that lost revenue. And you know, the French have got an election coming up in April – you understand all of that posturing.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Dutton first linked the French reaction to the looming presidential election last week, when he said “politicians and elections make an interesting mix” – although the Morrison government is also due to face voters at an election by May. The French ambassador, Jean-Pierre Thébault, alluded to Dutton’s earlier comment on Wednesday, asking why Australia had jumped into “the total unknown, with so much spin, spectacular marketing, but no concrete answers”. “Maybe, as mentioned by a prominent and knowledgable Australian specialist, there were then elections looming,” the ambassador said, while also arguing the Australian government had intentionally deceived France. Dutton played down Thébault’s remarks, saying the ambassador was “reading from a script from Paris” after being recalled for consultations in September. Dutton said the ambassador had “a job to do” but it was important for France and Australia to work closely together because of strategic challenges in the Indo-Pacific. “The Communist party of China has taken a particular course and we need to all work together to make sure that we have peace and stability in our region,” Dutton said. “Any blip in relation to that, any concern, hurt feelings, frankly, needs to be put aside for us to concentrate on the bigger issue, which is making sure that we protect and defend our country.” Senior Australian ministers have defended the release of the Macron text – linking it to the French president’s own comment, “I don’t think, I know,” when asked whether he thought Morrison had lied to him. “The claim was pretty extraordinary and it needed to be refuted,” the treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, told the Nine Network. Morrison insists he “made very clear” to Macron over dinner in Paris in mid-June “that a conventional diesel-powered submarine was not going to meet Australia’s strategic requirements”. But Morrison also said he wasn’t at liberty at that stage to disclose to Macron that Australia was working with the US and the UK on a plan B, because it had not yet been finalised and was held “in confidence”. Aukus was a key focus of a call between Australia’s foreign minister, Marise Payne, and the US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, on Thursday morning. The pair discussed “the ways in which we will deepen our engagement with other key allies and partners in our collective efforts to uphold a free and open Indo-Pacific”, the US state department said. China has leapt on the diplomatic dispute to further its own criticism of Aukus. China’s foreign ministry spokesperson, Wang Wenbin, said: “Australia should not only give honest answers to its partner’s questioning, but also honestly face up to the international community’s concerns, earnestly fulfil its non-proliferation obligations, and stop such irresponsible behaviour as creating bloc confrontation and proliferation risks.”With a lollop and a flash of white tail, it was gone. This is the second brown hare I have seen in the last two weeks. The first was deep in a shadowy wood on the edge of East Anglia, where it was so dark that the animal appeared black. It sat up on its haunches watching me, long ears silhouetted against the dim light filtering through the trees. The Dorset hare was in a wind-blown meadow where rough strips of grass have been left uncut to provide cover. It drew my eye by bolting along the hedge, hind legs pistoning, jinking as it ran. Normally they are almost invisible, until they move, and spend most of the daylight hours crouching in small depressions in the grass, known as forms. Brown hares (Lepus europeaeus) came to Britain from across the North Sea during the iron age, more than 2,000 years ago. There is evidence that they were used for divinatory practices – most famously, the one that Boudicca kept in the folds of her cloak and released before battle as an augury. It was thought that the direction the hare ran indicated the course of victory. While hare numbers are in decline nationally, they have been slowly increasing here in the vale. Changes in land management practices have created better habitats, especially as several farms have abandoned intensive dairy production and the relentless spring silage cutting that entails. Disease is the main challenge now to these solitary nocturnal creatures. Hares across the UK have been dying from mysterious new viral illnesses, including a form of hepatitis more commonly found in rabbits. I saw the body of one victim last summer, hidden among tall, bitter clumps of artemisia, stretched out as if in full sprint. Professor Diana Bell at the University of East Anglia, based in the species’ regional stronghold, is currently investigating the causes of this mass die-off. I walk on, pondering the invisible lines of species connection running from Dorset in the west to the black hare in the east on the edge of Boudicca’s territory, home to the research project that might help them survive this latest fight. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryAdam Schiff, the US chair of the influential House intelligence committee, has called for the US to be less ambiguous about its defence plans for Taiwan, amid Pentagon warnings that China’s military has made stunning advances. Speaking at the Aspen Security Forum, Schiff, a leading Democrat, said the US and its international partners needed “to make it abundantly clear to China what a significant cost it would pay were it to use force to try to invade and take over Taiwan”. “We need to be much clearer about our obligation to defend Taiwan,” he said. Also speaking at the forum, the US chair of the joint chiefs of staff, General Mark Milley, said strategic ambiguity was the right policy, but warned China’s military was making stunning technological advances, citing the recent reported hypersonic missile test, but he didn’t expect any hostile action in the next two years. “Having said that, though, the Chinese are clearly and unambiguously building the capability to provide those options to the national leadership if they so choose at some point in the future,” he said. “We are witnessing one of the largest shifts in global geostrategic power that the world has witnessed.” The comments from Schiff and Milley come amid heightened concern over China’s plans for Taiwan, and speculation about an attack ranging from within a few years to decades away. In recent days, China’s military was forced to dispel rumours of an impending war. The US has for decades held a deterrent policy of strategic ambiguity, refusing to confirm or deny if it would come to Taiwan’s military defence in the event of an attack by China. But analysts and officials are increasingly questioning the continued merit of the policy, particularly given Beijing’s determination that it will take Taiwan, which it considers to be a rogue province, by force if necessary. Last month US president Joe Biden told a town hall that the US had a commitment to defend Taiwan. The comments were walked back by the White House but were widely seen as a sign of further US support. “I think probably less ambiguity is better than more ambiguity,” Schiff said on Wednesday, but added there was a “fine line” when talking about it. “We don’t want to make any pronouncement that will accelerate Chinese thinking or timetable in terms of using military force against Taiwan,” he said. Milley said that there was “no question” the US had the capability to defend Taiwan. In recent years China has ratcheted up its military drills and air force sorties into Taiwan’s air defence zone. On Thursday the latest US Pentagon assessment of China’s military said it was increasing its nuclear arsenal faster than previously thought. Despite the concerns, there has been no pronouncement from Beijing or indication of imminent action. On Wednesday, China’s military was forced to issue statements debunking fake text messages asking reservists to be prepared for drafting because tensions were so severe. A People’s Liberation Army-linked social media account said the texts, which told recipients to be “ready to fight”, were “malicious fabrications” and would be investigated. Panic was also fuelled by unsubstantiated claims that Taiwanese were stockpiling, and unrelated warnings from China’s commerce ministry that people should stockpile essentials because of extreme weather-related food shortages. “My mother was particularly worried today and said that China is going into a war with Taiwan,” said one Chinese Weibo user. “I told her don’t worry. Where did the rumour come from? I found out that my colleagues’ mothers had said the same thing. The source was TikTok.” Taiwan’s government maintains it is already a sovereign nation and has no wish for conflict or unification with China. It is gaining significant support from foreign governments and representatives. On Wednesday a delegation of European Union parliamentarians arrived in Taiwan, including members who had been sanctioned by China over the advocacy against rights abuses in Xinjiang. At an event on Thursday the delegation leader, Raphaël Glucksmann, told Taiwan’s president Tsai Ing-wen they came with a simple message: “You are not alone. Europe is standing with you, by you, in the defence of freedom, rule of law.”Nguyen Thi Phuong Thao began her business career as a sideline importing fax machines and latex rubber into the then Soviet Union while studying economic management at D Mendeleev University of Chemical Technology in Moscow. Before she had turned 21 – or graduated – she had made her first million. Phuong Thao, who is popularly known as Madam Thao, is now Vietnam’s first and only female billionaire with an estimated $2.7bn (£2bn) fortune made from VietJet, the airline she founded and runs, alongside a vast property empire that stretches from skyscrapers in Ho Chi Minh City to five star beach resorts across the country as well as offshore oil and gas exploration and fossil fuel financing. But her name may soon be well known in the UK as well as Vietnam after University of Oxford’s Linacre College agreed to rename itself Thao College after a £155m “transformative donation” from her holding company Sovico Group. “Education and research are the keys to the development and prosperity of mankind,” she said on announcing the deal. “I believe the long-term cooperation with Oxford University will bring new opportunities and good value to the community.” The 51-year-old, who signed the deal with Linacre College’s principal Prof Nick Brown in the presence of the Vietnamese prime minister, Phạm Minh Chính, in Edinburgh in the run-up to the Cop conference, is no stranger to Oxford’s spires. Her son, Tommy Nguyen, studied economic management at Oxford, where he followed in his mother’s footsteps by also setting up a sideline company. He founded the logistics firm Swift247, which transports documents from south-east Asia to the rest of the world, after he struggled to get his visa paperwork sent to the UK quickly enough to change schools. In the end his family sent a member of staff to personally courier the documents to him in London. In his application to study at Oxford, he is said to have written “my mother is a role model for me to strive to follow”. Phuong Thao has spoken of the difficulty of building her empire while raising her two children at the same time. “He [Tommy] kept insisting and begging [me] to take him to class,” she told the Vietnamese business website Cafebiz. “Strictly, I had a meeting at 8:30. [I told him] go alone, even though my heart wants to go with you.” She said she would prefer not to live life in the public eye. “But business leadership has turned me into a person of the collective, of the public. I must always be aware of the exemplary spirit of leadership, sharing among staff and I am forced to sacrifice my privacy and interests.” Nonetheless, Phuong Thao has a habit of courting controversy to boost sales. In 2012 Vietjet promoted a new flight with beauty pageant contestants walking the aisles in bikinis. The airline, which now flies to more than 120 destinations, was fined 20m dong (£600) for the Hawaiian-themed stunt that violated aviation regulations. Despite the fine, bikini-clad airline employees also welcomed home the national under-23 football team after they lost the final of the 2018 Asian Football Confederation Championship. The incident prompted customers to ask Phuong Thao: “Do you want to rename Vietjet ‘Vietsex’?” The airline was fined a further 40m dong by the Civil Aviation Authority of Vietnam (CAAV). Undeterred, Phuong Thao wants to expand Vietjet to become the “Emirates of Asia”. She has “always aimed big and done big deals”. “I have never done anything on a small scale,” she said of her university sideline. “When people were trading one container [of goods], I was already trading hundreds of containers.” The donation to Linacre, which was named after the Renaissance humanist, medical scientist Thomas Linacre whom the college has described as “one of the great scholars of his time”, is the largest donation given to Oxford in at least 500 years. Her £155m pips the previous modern-day record of £150m given by the US billionaire private equity tycoon Stephen Schwarzman in 2019 to fund a new humanities and performance space, to be called the Schwarzman Centre. It is not the first time Oxford buildings or colleges have been renamed after donors. Harris Manchester college changed its name from Manchester College in 1996 after a donation from businessman Lord Harris. The financier Wafic Saïd donated £70m in 1996, most of which went to the establishment of the Saïd Business School. Len Blavatnik, Ukraine-born billionaire and UK’s richest person, according to the Sunday Times, donated £75m to the university in 2015 for the construction of the Blavatnik School of Government. Linacre, which has already faced a barrage of criticism from academics for accepting the money and allowing the “commercialisation” of great seats of learning, said it was delighted to accept the donation as it has “long been one of the least well-endowed colleges at the university” with just £17.7m in the bank. Sovico’s role in various offshore oil and gas projects in the Vietnam basin has also angered the Oxford University Climate Justice Campaign, which said: “We are sad to hear what Linacre’s actions have told us: that Linacre values money more than people and the planet.” Phuong Thao and the college had anticipated that criticism. As part of the deal, Sovico has committed to reaching net zero emissions by the end of 2050 – and says it will draw on input from Oxford academics to achieve that goal.Inflation could be about to run out of control, spurring workers to demand higher wages to protect their living standards. A self-perpetuating spiral of higher wages leading to higher inflation is the fear that stalks all central banks. There is also a growing sense among some policymakers that the pandemic emergency is over, and so the emergency cut in interest rates from 0.75% in March 2020 should be reversed. Does a bout of inflation always need to be dealt with? The central bank’s monetary policy committee (MPC) has the task of keeping inflation at 2% over the medium term, which means the next two to three years. It can ride out a short burst of inflation, but more persistent price rises need to be tackled. The economy is almost back to the size it was before the pandemic and most businesses are operating with backlogs of work. Whether inflation will prove short lived remains unclear. Why is inflation rising? Shortages of raw materials, manufactured components and skilled staff in some industries have pushed up prices. From a rate of almost zero at the beginning of the year, the consumer prices index has risen to 3.2%, before falling back in September to 3.1%. The Bank’s chief economist, Huw Pill, says it is heading to 5% over the next few months. Until now the MPC has considered these trends to be transitory. It is possible the committee has changed its view and thinks inflation will persist. Is the pandemic emergency over? The government believes the emergency is over, which is why the furlough scheme has ended. But there are still plenty of measures in place to support businesses hit by the pandemic, indicating that Covid-19 is still dampening economic activity. Business investment is low, consumer confidence is declining and households are beginning to hoard savings again. Many people on middle and low incomes have suffered a financial shock from which they have not yet recovered. Some economists believe it would be a mistake that could even push the economy back into recession. How can the MPC act? The Bank’s main tool is to increase the cost of borrowing. A rise in interest rates dampens the amount of money people and businesses borrow. If less money is borrowed, there is less money to spend, bringing demand and supply more into equilibrium. What kind of increase is likely? Financial markets expect an increase of 0.15%, taking the base rate from 0.1% to 0.25%. Three members of the nine-member MPC are believed to be in favour of a rise and three firmly against. How the other three will vote, including the governor, Andrew Bailey, is not clear. Does it affect mortgage rates? Not always. Mortgage rates have been falling steadily through the pandemic. To win new business, lenders used the deposit savings built up by their customers to underwrite cheaper loans. That is likely to reverse if the bank base rate goes up, though possibly at a slower pace. What if the Bank leaves rates unchanged? Financial markets betting on a rate rise will be disappointed. Investors are likely to sell the pound, pushing down the value of the currency by as much as 10%. This will increase the cost of imports and could push up inflation next year when higher wholesale prices feed through to the shops.One of the supposed beauties of Netflix, and all other streamers with access to such vast resources, is that without the panicked need for box office success, there’s a certain freedom that’s then afforded. The risks that might be deemed too precarious in the global marketplace (Too original? Too adult? Too gay?) are no longer of such prioritised concern and thus big budgets can be allocated to biggish bets. It’s why Netflix was confident to take on Martin Scorsese’s $160m crime saga The Irishman after Paramount deemed it too expensive and why the streamer also spent $70m to kick off the Old Guard franchise with a diverse cast and a central, uncensored queer romance. Both paid off (the films rank among the streamer’s most-watched) and showed that a brave new world away from the safe repetition of homogeneous superheroes, remakes and superhero remakes might be possible. So with the arrival of Red Notice, a film that allegedly cost upwards of $200m, making it Netflix’s biggest budget to date, one might hope for something slightly out of the ordinary, a much-needed tweak on what a traditional studio might otherwise lazily offer. But what makes the film so maddening, along with many, many other reasons, is that it’s the most boringly indistinctive patchwork job we’ve seen for a long while, a beige piece of committee-approved product that slums from point A to point B to who cares. Like an increasing number of the streamer’s mass-market offerings, the overriding message appears to be: see, we can make films just as badly as everyone else! So much for the great disruptor … The script was at one point the centre of a heated auction with all the majors jostling for rights before Universal snapped them up but down the line, there was trepidation over the expense and Netflix stepped in to give the green light instead. It’s easy to see why as there’s inherently safe global appeal – Dwayne Johnson, Ryan Reynolds and Gal Gadot starring in an action comedy about global heists – elements that would make this worth the investment in or outside of the lower stakes world of streaming. But while the stage is set for a sleek James Bond meets Indiana Jones meets Ocean’s Eleven meets Dirty Rotten Scoundrels caper, writer-director Rawson Marshall Thurber stumbles on his way there, misfiring on every conceivable level, a film trying so hard to recall the fun of other films that it forgets to have any fun for itself. A red notice is a type of high-level international warrant afforded to an on-the-run-criminal, causing FBI agent John Hartley (Johnson) to track slippery art thief Nolan Booth (Reynolds) all the way to Rome. They’re forced into an uneasy partnership due to some guff about three golden eggs that Cleopatra used to own and that Booth is trying to steal. He almost manages to nab the first but Hartley intervenes and sends him to a remote Russian jail, a jail where he himself then ends up after he’s framed for stealing the egg by The Bishop (Gadot), another art thief eager to own them for herself. Hartley and Booth then decide to team up and take her down. The megabucks assembly of A-listers (each received a reported $20m for the film) might make sense in a boardroom – combined they have a reach of almost 400 million Instagram followers and their films have made over $20bn at the global box office – but there’s a vast, vibe-killing gap between what makes sense on paper and what works on screen. For a frippery such as this to fly, sky-high star power is as integral as bombastic set pieces but there’s a total lack of connective chemistry between the trio, each ill-suited to their role and the territory. It’s the worst, most removed algorithmic casting possible (even in Thurber’s ho-hum action comedy Central Intelligence, there was a spark between Johnson and co-star Kevin Hart) and watching the three on-screen makes for an overwhelmingly flat experience. Anything sexy is made asexual, anything charming is made charmless and so what should be a smooth ride is turned into a bumpy slog. The rat-a-tat back-and-forth between sworn enemies turned begrudging buddies Johnson and Reynolds is strikingly, embarrassingly unfunny and rapidly grating, thanks mostly to a spectacularly annoying turn from the latter, reheating his Deadpool and Free Guy shtick but with even less effective writing to play with. The dated pop culture references (Jurassic Park? Pulp Fiction? A Borat impression?) are as tiresome as the many schoolyard gay jokes and while one can understand the monetary appeal for them both, it feels like a career regression, remixing former glories rather than doing anything fresh. Gadot is not much help either, in a much smaller role, failing to bring any of the vampy fun required, sleepwalking through the motions, adept only when fighting. The nonsensically convoluted plot would perhaps be more forgivable if the stars were charismatic enough or the action were exciting enough but in a desperate search for something to squeeze enjoyment out of, it’s left to the locations to pick up the slack, the one good use of the film’s monstrous budget, whisking us around the world for some nice scenery while everything around it crumbles. There’s something so soulless and ineffectual about the aggressively unnecessary Red Notice that it almost plays like a pastiche of a Hollywood blockbuster, like a bot consumed the last 20 years of studio fare and spat out a facsimile as an experiment. No one expects films like this to change the game but, at the very least, they should be able to play it. Red Notice is out in selected cinemas from 5 November and on Netflix on 12 NovemberA 17th-century thatched cottage where William Blake wrote the words to Jerusalem, the hymn that has become a symbol of hope and patriotic pride, is at risk of being lost because of decay, Historic England has said. Blake and his wife, Catherine, lived in the brick and flint cottage in Felpham, West Sussex, from 1800 to 1803. His poem, referring to England’s “green and pleasant land” as well as its “dark satanic mills”, was later set to music by Charles Hubert Parry. The Grade II* listed house was bought by the Blake Cottage Trust for £500,000 in 2015 but needs urgent repairs to the thatch, roof structure and supporting masonry. The trust also hopes to build a new annexe for exhibitions about the poet and artist. The building was placed into trust for the nation in 2015, and a fundraising appeal has been launched. Historic England, the government heritage agency, has included the cottage among 130 places added to the 2021 Heritage at Risk register that are threatened by neglect, decay or inappropriate development. The 2021 register also includes 233 sites whose futures have been secured. Among those removed from the at-risk list is Battersea Power Station, which is due to reopen next year after extensive redevelopment. The site, on the south bank of the Thames, was derelict for decades but now incorporates retail, leisure, housing and office space. Plumpton Rocks, a Grade II* listed landscape designed in the mid-19th century in North Yorkshire that was twice painted by JMW Turner, has been restored and deemed no longer in danger. But another garden, Warley Place in Essex, has been added to the list. Created by Ellen Willmott, an influential female horticulturist and an early advocate of “wild gardening”, it became one of the most celebrated gardens in the country. Willmott, who died almost penniless in 1934, having devoted most of her money to the garden, had dozens of plants named after her or Warley Place. A protected shipwreck lying off the Kent coast is also deemed under threat. The Restoration, a 1055-ton British warship, sank in a storm at Goodwin Sands, near Deal, in 1703. A recent geographical survey showed that the mobile sandbank had almost completely moved, exposing the wooden remains of the hull and several iron cannon. The wreck is now at risk of erosion by wave action and attack from marine organisms. Historic England said that among the 4,985 places on its at-risk register are 1,459 buildings or structures, 2,001 non-structural archaeological locations, 923 places of worship, 104 parks and gardens, 491 conservation areas, three battlefields and four protected wreck sites. Duncan Wilson, chief executive of Historic England, said: “Looking after and investing in our historic places can bring communities together, contribute to the country’s economic recovery and help tackle climate change. Our historic places deserve attention, investment and a secure future.”Catch and Kill: The Podcast Tapes 9pm, Sky Documentaries “I’m not going to do anything – I swear on my children – please come in … ” Hearing Harvey Weinstein unwittingly provide the evidence that would eventually lead to his conviction is horrifying yet strangely satisfying. In episode one of Ronan Farrow’s deep dive into the case, Ambra Gutierrez recounts how she captured Weinstein’s chilling admission in a hotel room, then approached Farrow about an exposé after the authorities didn’t use the evidence to prosecute. Using never-before-seen footage and new insights, it paints the full, grim picture of one of Hollywood’s biggest scandals. Hollie Richardson Sort Your Life Out With Stacey Solomon 8pm, BBC One “I really need Stacey Solomon to sort my dreadful life out,” said no one, ever. Yet here we are. Of course, the woman has her limits – strictly decluttering only. This week, Solomon persuades the Paine family to let go of half of their possessions. It’s that simple, apparently. HR The Pride of Britain Awards 8pm, ITV Carol Vorderman and Ashley Banjo salute the nation’s many unsung heroes at an awards show that feels particularly poignant this year. Jordan Pickford, Sharon Stone, Ed Sheeran, Prince Charles, Westlife and Stephen Fry join in the ceremony at Grosvenor House, London. Tissues at the ready. HR Guilt 9pm, BBC Two The second season of Neil Forsyth’s dark drama concludes, starting with a classic bargaining-in-a-warehouse scene and developing into a series of showdowns where yet more smothered resentments escape and cause havoc. Phyllis Logan and Mark Bonnar tense every sinew of Forsyth’s precise script. Jack Seale Dalgliesh 9pm, Channel 5 A new series based on the bestselling detective novels by PD James. Tonight, DCI Adam Dalgliesh investigates the death of a student nurse, apparently poisoned during a training demonstration that goes horribly wrong. So dingily 1975 that you can virtually smell the Old Spice fumes. Continues tomorrow night. Ali Catterall Mock the Week 10pm, BBC Two Dara Ó Briain is back with reliable laughs and familiar faces, as the beloved topical panel show returns for its 600th series (or something like that). Joining the warm host are Maisie Adam, Alasdair Beckett-King, Ivo Graham, Rhys James, Ria Lina and Hugh Dennis. HRThree times Boris Johnson has been investigated by the Commons’ standards watchdog, which is more than any other UK MP in the last three years. And now the prime minister is facing a fourth possible inquiry by Kathryn Stone, the parliamentary standards commissioner, this time over the funding of his Downing Street flat refurbishment. With a decision on a fresh investigation due within a matter of weeks, some are raising eyebrows about the timing of Johnson’s move to undermine and overhaul the whole standards system. Others are saying that the system is ripe for reform but it it needs to be stricter or to outlaw lobbying by MPs altogether. Ostensibly, the Tory plan which emerged this week to introduce a new body for MPs to challenge decisions by the standards committee is to save Owen Paterson’s bacon. The veteran backbencher was facing 30 days suspension from parliament for lobbying government bodies on behalf of firms which paid him more than £100,000 – as revealed by the Guardian two years ago. No 10 argues that the plan is simply about trying to create a fair system which allows an MP the right of appeal. But one Tory MP believed the motivation for a shake-up was worry in Downing Street about further standards investigations coming down the track – particularly potential inquiries into lobbying over the award of Covid contracts, and into the prime minister’s loans from a Tory donor for the redecoration of his flat at No 11 Downing Street. For years there have been warnings that the government has been going in the wrong direction when it comes to tackling inappropriate lobbying and transparency standards, all issues associated with the whiff of corruption and “Tory sleaze”. As recently as Monday a report by the committee on standards in public life, led by the former spy chief Jonathan Evans, argued that sweeping changes to the system were needed, particularly when it came to oversight of ministers’ behaviour and lobbying by those formerly in power. The report did not make any recommendations on the standards system for MPs, which is widely seen as imperfect but relatively effective, even though some would like to see the rules tightened further to ban parliamentarians’ second jobs altogether. Paid advocacy by MPs has been banned in some form or other since 1695, according to Chris Bryant, chair of the standards committee. The ban on direct lobbying was formalised after the cash for questions scandals of the 1990s. The standards commissioner and the standards committee of MPs and independent members, have repeatedly enforced those rules when breaches, such as in the case of Paterson, have been brought to their attention. But even with the prohibition in place, MPs can legitimately have second jobs advising companies on politics and policy. As an example of the revolving door, Sajid Javid, now the health secretary, was paid £150,000 a year by the investment bank JP Morgan shortly after leaving office as chancellor of the exchequer. The list of Tories, in particular, with second jobs in areas of their policy expertise is long, with many former ministers now working in the sectors they used to govern. Some advise hotel chains, investment companies, property developers; one link is with a gambling firm. The fine print also allows some wriggle room. MPs can engage in lobbying if it is “six months after the reward or consideration was received”. They are not allowed to speak in the Commons, make approaches to ministers, vote, or initiate parliamentary proceedings, in return for direct payment in cash or kind. However, they are allowed to participate in parliamentary proceedings and conversations with ministers that would financially benefit their client as long as they did not start the interaction, the interest is declared and is not for the sole benefit of their client. Former ministers and public officials can also engage in lobbying just two years after leaving office, under the rules of the Advisory Committee on Business Appointments (Acoba). In practice, some are suspected of doing so under the radar before then, since the watchdog for enforcing lobbying prohibitions has no power to sanction them. The Greensill scandal, in which the former prime minister David Cameron pestered senior ministers for favours on behalf of his new employer, the supply chain financier Greensill Capital, shows the extent to which intensive lobbying is still permitted. An official parliamentary inquiry found Cameron showed a “significant lack of judgment” but did not breach lobbying rules. While scandals about lobbying and financial interests of politicians are nothing new, a number of experts, academics – and some MPs themselves – believe standards are being further eroded under the present government. Bryant warned that the public “will think we are the parliament that sanctioned cash for questions”. Robert Barrington, professor at the Centre for the Study of Corruption, at the University of Sussex and a former government adviser, said on Wednesday that the Paterson case only “illustrates the crisis of standards that is currently undermining democracy in the UK”. He concluded: “[It is] hard to avoid the conclusion that there is an effort to change the rules when it suits, with arguments based solely on party or tribal loyalty and not any basis of principles or standards. Perhaps that is the luxury of an 80-seat majority.” Daniel Bruce, chief executive of Transparency International, also said the “direction of travel” had to change in light of recent cases where the prime minister and government had overridden decisions by standards bodies. Bruce said: “Coming into this year we have a vacuum of oversight on the ministerial code after the Priti Patel [bullying] case when the independent adviser resigned. We’ve had the commission on the appointments to the upper house overruled by the prime minister when the commissioner took a view that a Conservative donor should not get a peerage. We’ve got this woefully inadequate picture of lobbying of the government. We’ve got a decade of decline in FoI [freedom of information] requests being granted in full. Those are four very concerning areas. “And yet what do we have this week? We now have government-backed attempts to dismantle a system of oversight set up in the height of 1990s sleaze and further strengthened after the MPs expenses saga of 2009 … The very obvious timing of this proposed review to suspend a suspension suggests this is very partisan.” Bruce said Transparency International had monitored suspected breaches of parliamentary conduct rules and the ministerial code, finding 30 breaches that were not investigated or where no action was taken in 2020. “The number of cases where questionable behaviour goes un-investigated has intensified in the last few years under this current administration,” he said. “That is the concern, and I await with keen interest the government’s full response to the committee on standards report because as far as I am concerned there is no turning away from that.”From walking tours in Bath to visiting the sweeping coastal scenery of Hartland Quay in Devon and stately Mapperton House in Dorset, hits from Bridgerton to the period film Rebecca are providing the south-west of England with a TV tourism and production boom. The region has emerged as a fertile location for a string of big-budget series and films by deep-pocketed US streaming companies such as Netflix and Amazon’s Prime Video, as well as domestic broadcasters including ITV. Netflix, which spends $1bn annually on UK-made productions, estimates that it has contributed £132m to the UK economy from making big-budget series and films such Bridgerton, Rebecca and David Attenborough: Our Planet across the region in the past two years. The spend covers investment related to the actual production and subsequent TV-inspired tourism. Bath has estimated it will benefit to the tune of £1.5m from fans visiting real world locations from Bridgerton, Netflix’s second biggest global hit after Squid Game. Visit Bath has even created walking tours to showcase locations such as the Assembly Rooms and Holburne Museum that helped create the series’ backdrop of Regency London. “We’ve definitely seen an increase in visitors after featuring in Bridgerton,” said Dr Amy Frost, the curator at No 1 Royal Crescent Museum in Bath, which served as the front of Featherington House in the period drama. “You hear people talking about Bridgerton in the street when you walk past some of the locations.” The film Rebecca has inspired fans to flock to Hartland Quay in Devon and Mapperton House in Dorset, home of the Earl and Countess of Sandwich, which was used as a location for Manderley, the mansion central to Daphne du Maurier’s 1938 novel. “It is a natural home for Netflix productions,” said Anna Mallett, Netflix’s vice-president of physical productions for Europe, the Middle East and Africa. “We’re committed to the south west for the long term and have created over 1,000 jobs while generating opportunities for local communities.” Netflix is not the only big player to provide a boost to the region with ITV’s production of Jane Austen’s Sanditon providing plenty of location draw cards for viewers. The main house at Dyrham Park featured as Sanditon House, while Brean beach in Somerset, at seven miles one of the longest stretches of sand beach in Europe, made for eye-catching TV. “It is good to see Netflix and other production companies investing in our fantastic region and bringing in highly skilled jobs,” said Dan Norris, the West of England mayor. “They truly help put our area on the map.”The racism that cricketer Azeem Rafiq suffered while playing for Yorkshire goes beyond the county to the very heart of the English game. It reflects the fact that, in stark contrast to football, cricket has for decades drawn a veil over racism and become less diverse, not more so. There is, of course, a very particular Yorkshire problem, which explains why Rafiq’s teammates, and his club itself, might have felt that calling him the P-word was acceptable dressing-room banter. That was not the only racist banter he was subjected to. Recently, while researching my book, The Impossible Dream, Rafiq told me how for about two years some of his Yorkshire teammates had called him “Rafa the kafir”. For Rafiq, a practising Muslim who has been to Mecca for hajj – the pilgrimage all Muslims are meant to do once in their lifetime – that meant he was an unbeliever and is a devastating charge. He was puzzled because none of the people calling him “kafir” were Muslims or knew anything about Islam. What he did not know was they were using the word “kaffir” – not the Islamic “kafir”, but the term used in apartheid-era South Africa to denigrate black and brown people. Rafiq only discovered this when Yorkshire later held an investigation into his allegations that he had suffered racism. His reaction was: “Wow. How was that allowed to be my nickname? These are not guys who have come from small towns. These are guys who played international cricket, travelling the world. They knew exactly what they were saying. I didn’t have a clue.” Things could have been different. Yorkshire, which prides itself on being “God’s own country”, could have set the standard in English cricket for being inclusive. For almost half a century since the 1950s, migrants from India, Pakistan and Bangladesh, as well as the Caribbean, had been making Yorkshire their home. They played cricket but none of them made the Yorkshire team. Throughout the 70s and 80s, on my visits to Yorkshire, I heard two contradictory stories. The white cricketers denied there was any racism and insisted that the reason the Yorkshire team was all-white was because people of colour did not play for the right clubs – the clubs that had traditionally formed the cricket pipeline for the county team. Asian cricketers told a story of denial and felt so aggrieved that they set up their own clubs and even their own tournament, the Quaid-e-Azam (named after the founder of Pakistan, Muhammad Ali Jinnah), which is still going. Ironically, this meant that a version of the racial segregation practised by the Raj in India was recreated in Yorkshire. While English colonials had taken cricket to the subcontinent as part of their civilising mission, they would not allow Indians into their teams: only people of pure European blood could play, though they would compete against other Indian teams. Eventually, a decade before the Raj ended, the English allowed a team to be formed which included people of mixed blood, Indian Christians and Jews. The team was called The Rest, which shows how the English in India saw this assorted all sorts team. Now, in the wake of the Rafiq scandal, almost identical stories of racial divide that I had heard 40 years ago have emerged. Asian cricketers speak of how they still play in teams that are completely Asian and are not voted into the county’s prestigious leagues, yet white cricketers still deny there is racism. John Brooke, the white 81-year-old president of Lightcliffe cricket club, responding to allegations of discrimination in Yorkshire league cricket, even said: “People can be abused inappropriately because they are fat, or bald. I’ve played in dressing rooms where there’s bullying but it may be to do with people’s characteristics.” That Brooke could not understand the generations-long impact of racism, or that a black or brown person cannot change their skin colour, shows that when it comes to colour there is still an enormous gulf between communities. It could be said that Yorkshire cricket has a particular race problem. It only fielded its first ethnic-minority player in 1992, decades after other counties had done so, and in the teeth of opposition from some of its greatest players, such as Fred Trueman, who thought it was “stupid”. And that cricketer was not Yorkshire-born but Sachin Tendulkar, one of India’s greatest cricketers – brought in after the original choice, the white Australian Craig McDermott, was injured. However, while other cricket counties may not have had Yorkshire’s rigid racial divide, the English game at the highest level has in recent years become more and more the preserve of the public school-educated players, and opportunities for people of colour have dramatically decreased. Whereas in the 1980s or 90s there were several black players in the England squad, now there is only Jofra Archer, who learned his cricket in the West Indies, and the number of black players in county cricket has dropped by 75% since 1990. And despite the fact that Asians play recreational cricket in large numbers, in the last decade the only significant one to have made the Test team has been Moeen Ali. The result is that, on the field of play, football – which was much more white in the 70s and 80s – is now far more representative of the country. The effect can be seen in the way footballers, both white and black, have joined the campaign against racism by taking the knee. In cricket such a bonding between black and white is impossible as there are so few people of colour in cricket dressing rooms. Against such a background, that a white Yorkshire cricketer calling his Asian teammate the P-word might be treated as banter is not surprising. • This article was amended on 4 November 2021. John Brooke is 81, not 85 as an earlier version said. Mihir Bose’s The Impossible Dream: Can We Ever Have a Non-Racial Sports World? is to be published by BirlinnSixty-nine years ago, a new type of cloud was the focus of scientific research: the mushroom cloud produced by cold war atomic tests. Ivy Mike, which took place on 1 November 1952, was the first full-scale test of a hydrogen bomb. Equivalent to more than 10m tons of TNT, it obliterated the small island of Elugelab. The rising fireball was accompanied by a spectacular display of lightning. This unusual “nuclear lightning” was a side-effect of the transient electromagnetic pulse from the nuclear blast. Shortly afterwards, three USAF F-84 Thunderjets with sampling equipment flew into the stem of the boiling mushroom cloud. The first made it through without difficulty, the other two hit severe turbulence caused by the tremendous updraught, and lost control. After recovering their planes, pilots Bob Hagan and Jimmy Robinson found their navigation instruments and radios had been disrupted by the electromagnetic pulse. They could not find their refuelling aircraft. The two pilots ran out of fuel heading back Enewetak airbase. Hagan glided to a safe landing, but Robinson ditched in the sea and apparently drowned in the lead-lined vest supposed to protect him from radiation. The US, UK and Soviet Union signed the partial test ban treaty in 1963, ending their above-ground tests and this type of hazardous meteorology.There’s a scene in Goodfellas in which gangster Tommy DeVito, played by Joe Pesci, shoots dead a young bartender called Spider who had unwisely told him to “go fuck yourself”. Pesci won an Oscar for the film – and while Spider the bartender was a small role for the then little-known Michael Imperioli, it was to be his big break. “I wanted that job at all costs,” Imperioli says. “It was Martin Scorsese – he’d made some of my favourite movies. I was all in.” During the shoot for the scene, Imperioli had to detonate tiny devices attached to his chest that spewed blood, then hurl himself backwards. But it didn’t go as planned and he smashed into a tray of drinks, badly cutting two of his fingers. He was rushed to hospital where doctors thought he really had been shot. “I’m trying to explain, I’m an actor in a movie with Robert De Niro! But they thought I was delirious, just out of my mind – until they cut my shirt open and saw all the wires.” He leans back in his chair, smiling. You can tell he’s told this tale a thousand times. But the symbolism gets him each time. To become a “‘made man” in the mafia, he explains, gangsters go through the ritual of having their finger pricked and the blood burned on a picture of a saint. “So there I am – my finger being cut in the presence of Scorsese, De Niro and Pesci! That’s me being made,” he says. He was probably right. After numerous successful roles, eight years later he auditioned to play Christopher Moltisanti in a TV show called The Sopranos – about a dysfunctional New Jersey crime family. Christopher was the hot-headed, drug addict gangster who aspired to be a Hollywood scriptwriter – heir apparent to mafia boss Tony Soprano. At the time, Imperioli remembers he wasn’t that excited about it. He knew nothing about David Chase – the series’ creator – and, based on the first script, he wasn’t sure if the show was any good: “Is this a comedy? Is this a spoof? What is this?” he thought. He left the audition convinced he’d blown it – “It didn’t seem like I was impressing him [Chase] at all – but I didn’t really care. It wasn’t like I was auditioning for Scorsese.” Chase offered him the job – and, after some deliberation, Imperioli accepted. The 55-year-old actor is speaking to me from his apartment on Manhattan’s Upper West Side where he lives with his wife, Victoria – “our youngest [of three] went off to college last year”, he says. It’s half an hour from where he grew up in Mount Vernon and only four blocks from where his Italian ancestors lived when they moved to the US in the 1890s – he knows this because he’s working on getting dual citizenship with Italy. “I’m proving that I’ve always been Italian,” he says. There have been reams written about The Sopranos, often rated as the greatest TV series of all time. It won Imperioli an Emmy in 2004, one of 21 the show picked up. After the late James Gandolfini – who played Tony Soprano – Imperioli is probably the show’s most recognisable character. Even though the show ended nearly 15 years ago, it’s more popular now than ever. HBO reported a 200% surge in viewers last year in the US. And on the back of that, Imperioli and fellow cast member Steve Schirripa (Bobby Baccalieri) have written a new book, Woke Up This Morning – named after the show’s theme song – which they are billing as the definitive oral history of The Sopranos. The two actors have teamed up, too, with the actor Vincent “Big Pussy” Pastore for a live stage show – In Conversation With the Sopranos – which goes on tour next year. Though Imperioli’s recent activities have included DJing on avant garde radio station NTS, and leading Buddhist meditation sessions on Instagram, he is at the centre of all three Soprano spin-offs – the book, the show, a podcast called Talking Sopranos – so I ask him if there’s life after the series or whether he thinks he’ll for ever be defined by it. He ponders for a moment. “I think I am defined by the Sopranos – but I don’t think it’s a detriment,” he says. He takes me back to his first day on set. The young Christopher was supposed to drive backwards down a pavement, all the while talking to his boss, Tony Soprano, in the passenger seat. Imperioli didn’t know how to drive. “But I thought, how hard could it be – you’re on a set, they’re gonna block off traffic.” He got away with it at first, he says, but then they asked him to do the scene again – this time at twice the speed and for double the distance. “Boom, right into one of the trees, airbags go off, Jim’s [Gandolfini’s] head snaps back, smoke everywhere. I’m thinking this guy is the star of the show, they’re gonna fire me.” He wrote off the $60,000 Lexus – but Gandolfini found the whole episode a hoot. It was the start of what was to become a close friendship. After long days of filming they’d go out carousing in New York, sometimes to Little Italy, “to have dinner and be around wise guys”, and sometimes to Imperioli’s own speakeasy, the Ciel Rouge in Chelsea. “If we wrapped at four in the morning we could always go and open the bar – I had the keys.” On one Friday night, they started drinking before filming had even started. It was an episode in which Christopher and Tony were disposing of a body – Ralph, a made man who Tony had strangled in the previous episode. “We had to throw his body off a cliff and it was out in the woods,” recalls Imperioli. “It took a long time to set up so we went back into the trailer and started drinking – and drank a lot.” In the end, the two men got so drunk the crew were worried they would fall off the cliff during the scene. “So they chained us to trees and covered the chains with leaves – that way we could go to the edge of the cliff and throw the body off.” He gives a big guttural laugh at the memory. Gandolfini didn’t enjoy the fame that came with The Sopranos, Imperioli says. He lived in New York – like most of the show’s actors – but he lost all his privacy. “You know, you’re on the street a lot, he didn’t blend into the background – he stood out, he was a big guy – it was Tony Soprano walking around town.” Imperioli had been with Gandolfini for a movie premiere just weeks before he died – and it seemed as if he had finally made some peace with the whole Tony Soprano hoopla, he says. He was calm and relaxed and happier than he’d ever seen him. “And then he was gone.” Gandolfini died in 2013, aged 51. The day Imperioli found out, called while walking down the street in Santa Barbara, California, he says, “was one of the worst days of my life”. Imperioli has watched all 86 episodes over the past year while working on the book. Some of his favourite scenes are when the characters are taken out of their comfort zones, “When they lose a little bit of that mojo.” There’s an episode when Christopher’s drug addiction is the target of an intervention from his friends and family, which rapidly goes downhill. “They’re gangsters, a completely dysfunctional group of people, and now they’re in this therapeutic modality of recovery, which none of them are suited for.” The ultimate fish out of water episode, he says, is Pine Barrens – when Christopher and Paulie “Walnuts” Gualtieri – played by Tony Sirico – get lost in freezing snow in the woods, chasing a Russian guy they thought they’d killed. Of all the actors in The Sopranos, Sirico is the most like the character he plays, Imperioli says. The two knew each other before The Sopranos – but Imperioli always felt a little intimidated – not least because Sirico had ties with the real mafia as a younger man and even did time in prison for sticking up nightclubs. “He could be very insulting and nasty – and when I heard I’d gotta do this series with him, I wasn’t looking forward to it,” he says. But then – as with Gandolfini – Sirico wound up becoming one of Imperioli’s best friends, and still is. It’s something about the unique chemistry of the show, he thinks. He suggests that’s why The Sopranos is better than everything else. “It’s like alchemy.” You can talk about the quality of the writing, the acting, the film-making – but it was also a group of people with similar backgrounds that were in the same place at the right time. “We just liked being together. It was family.” Woke up This Morning: The Definitive Oral History of The Sopranos by Michael Imperioli and Steve Shirripa is published on 11 November. The stage show In Conversation With the Sopranos goes on tour next year.When “retention” becomes a buzzword, you know something has shifted in the world of work. You hear a lot about retention – and its shiny cousin “incentivisation” – at the moment, often coupled with the word “talent”, as if Dave from accounts might issue a rider demanding baskets of newborn spaniels and bowls of blue tropical Skittles before he deigns to tackle this month’s payroll. I like it. It’s always interesting when the balance of power shifts in a relationship – and it feels as if that is the case now. We are probably too close to the “great resignation” – the term coined by the US academic Anthony Klotz for the wave of pandemic “quits” – to understand it properly, but it shows signs of being more than a blip. In August, 4.3 million Americans resigned, beating the previous record, set in April. In the UK, the interminable carnival of Brexit gave us a summer of incredulous headlines like “HGV drivers paid more than CEOs”. (If only they were; it seems obvious that people who sleep in laybys, relying on baby wipes for personal hygiene and ruining their health to keep us fed, should earn more than anyone whose day involves nothing more arduous than some blue-sky thinking conducted from an ergonomic desk chair.) But the UK staffing crisis is deepening: more than a quarter of firms surveyed last month said a lack of staff was affecting their ability to operate. This new economic landscape, for all its real horrors, offers scope to do things differently. Employers need us; although we still require food, shelter, wifi and Netflix (the 2021 pyramid of needs), we seem to have entered a period of existential reckoning about the role of work in our lives. Tǎng píng (“lying flat”), the Chinese protest movement against a frenetic working culture that treats employees as expendable, profit-maximising units, is becoming a reasoned philosophy and gathering momentum. Of course, the thing about not caring quite so much is that it is the perfect negotiating position. For once, we have an opportunity to exercise our bargaining power, so what do we want? Justice, yes, but here are some more specific suggestions. The basics Unless and until all employers are prepared to pay workers a living wage, ensure working conditions are safe and healthy and hours are humane, there is no point in forming focus groups to discuss whether employees would prefer subsidised sandwiches or meditation classes. Newsflash: they would prefer work to provide them with enough money, and enough free time, to live. This applies across the employment spectrum. A Goldman Sachs internal survey from February painted a damning picture of analysts working absurd hours to the detriment of their physical and mental health. Be flexible (don’t just say you are) A survey by the Trades Union Congress revealed last month that 50% of mothers who had requested flexible working had been at least partly refused. That is half of those asking for the ability to meet their caring responsibilities being told it isn’t possible. No amount of wellbeing seminars or gong bath sessions can make up for that. This is entry-level stuff: if you don’t let people look after their loved ones, they will not want – indeed, will not be able – to work for you. Old-school perks We got wise to the tendency of 90s and 00s employers to dress up facilitating never leaving the office – showers, chair massage, nap pods – as corporate largesse. But let’s not dismiss all traditional perks. Food is still good. I know of no more reliable workplace mood booster than the appearance of employer-funded cake. In my City lawyer days, we traced the firm’s fortunes by the baked goods it provided. Still-warm lemon drizzle: the managing partner is considering a yacht. Three pack of bourbons: P45s incoming. New-generation perks When will employers realise that what we all want is someone to track down the best deal on home insurance, find a cheap emergency plumber or spend 53 minutes on hold to the council to request a new bin. A work concierge service that takes away tedious life admin would have me racing back to full-time on-site employment faster than a ferret can get up a trouser leg. An ‘always be recruiting’ mindset Employers should treat existing employees with the kind of seductive, assiduous attention they bring to hiring new staff. Yes, it’s a bit like those corny relationship therapists who tell you to treat your long-term life partner as if you are still “courting” when you have harvested enough of their plughole hair over the years to knit a thoroughly unpleasant jumper. But it would be nice to see more employers commit to bringing us flowers (by which I mean cake, extra money and more annual leave) year after year, rather than having their heads turned by some flighty young LinkedIn profile. Human connection Microsoft announced this week it will be joining (or fighting) Mark Zuckerberg in his dreadful “metaverse” with its Mesh service, offering AI-enabled immersive meetings with 3D avatars. So, not only do I have to do my job, but I have to look like a Sims character while I am doing it? This is a resigning matter. No one wants another awkward away day, but unless your job has intrinsic value (none of mine have fallen under this heading), human connection is the real draw to work. Can I roll my eyes at a workmate in the metaverse? Would I be summoned to a meeting with Paula from HR’s avatar? My happiest office memories are the moments of collective hysteria, gossip and daftness; shared rants behind my superiors’ backs. Employers with the confidence to give us space and time to bond by complaining about them are the ones that deserve our “talent”. Pets Dog ownership soared in lockdown, making bringing your pet to work one of this year’s “hot perks”. I would, however, suggest that employers keen to retain staff extend this policy to any animal an employee wants to bring in. Snakes, yes. Goats, absolutely. A pony, sure. Imagine the recruitment video potential: big corporates could lure us in with something that looks like one of those heartwarming animal friendship videos your aunt shares on Facebook. Given the choice between lying flat and petting my co-worker’s chinchilla, I know what I would choose. Emma Beddington is a Guardian columnist. Adrian Chiles is awayOff the Caribbean coast of Colombia, rare manatee calves have been spotted in the canals and rivers of Cispatá Bay’s mangrove forests. The once-critically endangered American crocodile is now seen more frequently. Birds and lizards nest in the branches, fish and shrimps use the roots as nurseries. These 11,000 protected hectares (27,000 acres) of mangroves are a biodiversity hotspot. But the Cispatá conservation project, a collaboration between Colombia’s Marine and Coastal Research Institute (Invemar), Conservation International (CI) and Apple, is not just of interest to birdwatchers and ecologists. It has attracted the attention of marine scientists, researchers and corporations, as it is among the first to measure and sell a new type of credit to fund conservation: “blue carbon”. Mangroves, like other coastal wetlands, are powerful carbon sinks. That is, they suck up carbon dioxide from the air to store in their roots and branches, as well as the sediment that collects around them. They do this so well that they can store up to 10 times more carbon than forests. And unlike “green carbon” rainforests, which store carbon in biomass, and therefore release it when the trees die, mangroves store most of the carbon in their soil and sediment. If undisturbed, it stays there for millennia. This superpower means “blue carbon” (the sequestration and storage of carbon by ocean ecosystems) is gaining attention in the race towards net zero. And the “big three” stores of blue carbon – mangroves, salt marshes and seagrass – are suddenly urgent new areas of conservation. As much as a fifth of the emissions cuts we need to limit the global temperature rise to 1.5C will need to come from the ocean, according to the High Level Panel for a Sustainable Ocean Economy. Protecting and restoring seagrass, mangrove and salt marsh ecosystems – which account for more than 50% of all carbon storage in ocean sediments – could help absorb the equivalent of as much as 1.4bn tons of emissions a year by 2050, it says. These ecosystems are some of the most threatened in the world by coastal development – damaged by farming, harmful fishing practices and pollution – so protecting and restoring them is expensive. Enter the carbon-offset market. Some conservation groups are selling carbon credits to fund their work. For example, Verra, a non-profit organisation based in the US that administers the world’s leading carbon-credit standard, estimates that the carbon emissions mitigated by Cispatá to be almost 1m tonnes over three decades – the equivalent of greenhouse gas emissions from the annual mileage of 214,000 cars. María Claudia Diazgranados, a marine biologist and CI’s blue carbon director in Colombia, said: “We have been looking for a way to fund this ecosystem for years. Some 50% of mangroves have been lost from the Caribbean coast over the past three decades, due to cattle ranching, roads and tourism.” The money from selling blue carbon credits will go directly to communities to fund the Cispatá mangrove restoration. CI, which is also working with local partners and communities, hopes the credits will cover half of the project’s $600,000 (£440,000) operating costs. “The carbon market is not the goal, it’s the cherry on top,” says Diazgranados. The carbon-offset market remains controversial. Not all schemes are reliable. A Guardian investigation earlier this year found several carbon schemes paid for by logging firms were selling carbon credits based on keeping forests standing, thereby allowing other logging to continue. However, for ocean scientists alarmed at the rate these ecosystems are disappearing, blue carbon could be used as leverage – to restore and conserve parts of the ocean that might not otherwise get much attention. Seagrass meadows, for example, which can store carbon in the seabed far more quickly than tropical forests – a remarkable 35 times faster and storing it for millennia rather than decades – are disappearing at a rate of 7% a year. The UK alone has lost 39% of its seagrass meadows since the 1980s. Meanwhile, more than 3,360 sq km of mangrove forests were lost between 2000 and 2016. At Cispatá, communities are involved in both “avoiding deforestation”, the more controversial element of the carbon-offset market, and restoration. The first stage – conserving mangroves – has already paid off: CI has persuaded farmers not to allow their water buffaloes to graze and damage the forests. The restoration stage will begin in a few months. “It’s easier to prove sequestration of carbon if you plant mangroves than to prove avoiding deforestation if the project didn’t exist,” Diazgranados admits. “One thing we have learned is that if you want to do conservation you need to work with local communities. We have a day-to-day presence there, a strict monitoring project, site visits and satellite-image analysis to prove the mangrove area stays the same.” Dr Emily Pidgeon, vice-president for ocean science at CI, says Cispatá has avoided the pitfalls of other carbon-offset schemes. “We’ve learned a lot of lessons from what we have seen from terrestrial projects,” Pidgeon says, insisting that the Cispatá project has strict checks and balances, including a verified methodology to calculate the benefits to carbon emissions, communities and biodiversity. This includes regular site visits and techniques such as remote sensing. “About 10 years ago we became aware of carbon stored in coastal wetlands and how, if you restore them, the carbon stores increase,” she says. “Back then, it was considered a harebrained scheme. But Cispatá is the first blue carbon project to be verified by Verra and we have just sold our first blue carbon credits.” CI is already in talks with the Colombian government to expand its mangrove protection efforts to three other locations. Dan Crockett, a blue carbon specialist at the Blue Marine Foundation, an ocean conservation charity, says the demand for blue carbon investment has taken off over the past year. “We’ve been approached by giant Norwegian shipping companies, renewable energy companies and finance companies looking for the opportunity to invest in blue carbon.” Two reasons lie behind the demand, he says: “First, there is a global trend towards the need for nature-based solutions to the climate crisis. Second, there have been many breakthroughs in our understanding of oceans and the way they sequester and store carbon.” Blue carbon mangrove projects are in development or under way in Kenya, Senegal, Madagascar, Vietnam and the Sunderbans in India. Each aims to reduce emissions by hundreds of thousands of tonnes of CO2 a year. By far the largest mangrove restoration project so far – nearly 25 times bigger than Cispatá – is the Indus delta project, on the Arabian Sea in Pakistan. The Sindh regional government, working with the developer Indus Delta Capital, is planning to protect and restore mangroves over about 350,000 hectares. Steve Crooks, of Silvestrum Climate Associates, a coastal geomorphologist who developed the methodology for the blue carbon finance scheme, says the Indus project aims to absorb the equivalent of 2m tonnes of CO2 every year and to sell 1m credits in 2021, increasing to 30m credits over the next 10 years. Blue carbon is a triple win, he says. “They are a hot commodity right now, mostly to big industry. It’s a very promising time – for conservation financing, for restoration of these important ecosystems and to help these countries who are missing important targets.” Tomorrow – Part 2: the problem with blue carbonThroughout the pandemic, Anna has worked for the NHS. She has seen the effects of Covid-19 first-hand and, although she worked remotely because she was in a vulnerable group, other colleagues – she is a physiotherapist – were deployed to Covid wards at the height of hospital admissions. “At the trust I work for, they’re setting up a long-Covid service,” she says. She comes home and her son Sam, 16, listens to her talk about it – and yet he is adamant that the coronavirus isn’t happening or that, if it is, it’s not serious. “You know: ‘Covid is a load of rubbish – it’s all about control’,” she says. “It’s all very conspiracy theory, a lot of his stuff.” He was adamant from the start that he wouldn’t be having the vaccine if and when it became available for his age group, and he has stuck to it. “He is very resistant,” says Anna. “He is pretty determined not to conform anyway. Part of it, I think, is him being a teenager, and the other bit of it is conspiracy theory: ‘It’s all a big con.’” His main source of information since the start of the pandemic has been social media, says Anna. “He watches a lot of YouTube.” Just over a month ago, YouTube announced it would remove videos that spread misinformation about all vaccines, and would ban the accounts of anti-vax activists; it had already banned content with false claims about Covid vaccines last year. Facebook did the same in February this year, though a quick search reveals misinformation is still easy to find (one post I found within minutes claimed 80% of vaccinated women had miscarriages). On TikTok, “unvaxxed” content racks up hundreds of thousands of views. Last month, NewsGuard, an organisation that rates the credibility of news organisations and monitors misinformation, found Covid conspiracy theories were being viewed by millions on TikTok, and, in its research, children under 13 – the lower age limit – were able to access the app. Even if children have avoided anti-vaccine misinformation on social media, they may have come across it at the school gate. There have been demonstrations outside schools across the UK; some protesters have loudhailers, and give alarming leaflets to children, or point them in the direction of websites with misinformation. At least one school was targeted by protesters showing images of what appeared to be dead children, falsely claiming they had been killed by the vaccine, which unsurprisingly distressed children. The Association of School and College Leaders union found nearly 80% of British schools had been targeted in some way – mainly emails threatening legal action – and 13% had reported seeing anti-vax demonstrators directly outside the school gates; 18 schools said protesters had actually got inside. In September, the UK’s chief medical officers recommended children between the ages of 12 and 15 be offered a single dose of a Covid vaccine, to join the 16- and 17-year-olds, who have been offered a jab since August. So far about 21% of 12- to 15-year-olds in England have had the vaccine; for the older age group, 56% have come forward. There are many reasons for the relatively low uptake – and it was always expected to be lower for children than much older people – such as issues with the rollout. In Scotland – where children are largely vaccinated in drop-in centres, rather than schools – take-up is about 53% in the 12- to 15-year-old age group. But there is also hesitancy. In a survey of nearly 28,000 pupils in England, published at the end of September, researchers found 51% of 13-year-olds were willing to have the vaccine, compared with 78% of 17-year-olds. For nine-year-olds, the figure drops to 36% (while no vaccine has been approved for under-12s in the UK, last week, regulators in the US last week approved Pfizer’s vaccine for children over the age of five). When Lily, 13, had her vaccine at school, she was one of only about five from her class of 30 to have it. None of her close friends did. “We had conversations about it, when we were trying to make up our minds about what we would do,” she says. “They would tell me their reasons about why they didn’t want to have it, like they’d seen online about people having seizures when you get it. And also there was stuff about the vaccine making you infertile, and just making you very ill as well, apparently.” They showed her videos they had seen on social media, mostly on TikTok. “There’s definitely a kind of feeling of: ‘Oh, maybe it’s not a good idea then. Why am I the only one who thinks it’s a good idea to get it?’” she says. “I made, like, 10 different decisions. The night before, I decided I wasn’t going to get it. I ended up changing my mind because I researched it.” Lily had spoken to her parents about having the vaccine, and although she says they didn’t put any pressure on her either way, “they did point out some reasons why it would be a good idea to get it. I think the main reason I actually changed my mind and got the vaccine was because most of the reasons that my friends had for not getting the vaccine were because of themselves. But my parents’ point was that the main reason I should get it is because of my grandparents and people like that.” Hesitancy doesn’t mean teenagers are anti-vaxxers, says Russell Viner, a paediatrician and professor of adolescent health at the UCL Institute of Child Health, and one of the authors of the study of English pupils. “There’s an element to which to hesitate and think is entirely appropriate, rather than just rushing in,” he says. “I think the research shows that much of the hesitancy is about a lack of information, certainly at the time [they did the survey].” He has a 15-year-old, “and so we’re going through all of these issues. Young people are saying: ‘Do I really need it? How much will it benefit me?’ I think we absolutely have to be transparent and honest in our response, which is that the chief medical officers have looked at this, and the balance of risks is in favour of vaccination but it isn’t an overwhelming balance. So a level of thinking about it is appropriate in teenagers. That’s the transparent, we-need-to-be-honest-about-the-science side of things. “On the other hand, at a population level, we want our teenagers to be vaccinated and get the vaccination levels as high as we can. I think the right thing to do is probably what the government has largely been doing, which is not making it compulsory, and being transparent about the benefits and the very unlikely and very rare risks.” On balance, he says, “it’s the right thing to do to vaccinate teenagers. But it’s not an absolute no-brainer and that’s why Britain didn’t rush to it, unlike vaccinating over-80s. It’s a much more finely balanced position.” This is how Clare and her 13-year-old son Jamie felt about it. Most of her family has been vaccinated (Clare wasn’t because of underlying conditions), but Jamie is sure that he won’t have the vaccine, and Clare supports his decision. “What influenced it was the JCVI report that didn’t recommend the vaccines for healthy children,” she says. Initially, the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation advised there were insufficient medical grounds to vaccinate healthy children between the ages of 12 and 15. And then “there was a swift turnaround from the government to suddenly say: ‘Children under 16 will be vaccinated.’” The chief medical officers’ decision took into account the benefits beyond the low individual health benefits, such as children losing fewer school days, and reducing transmission to older family members. “We’d already started the conversation with our son and he was very clear that he didn’t want the vaccine,” says Clare. Jamie was concerned about the (very small) risk of heart inflammation, and particularly because it was found to be higher in boys – about 162 cases per million after two doses of a vaccine, compared with 13 per million in girls. “That scared him. He said: ‘What if that happens?’ And I said: ‘It’s treatable.’ But he was adamant that he didn’t want it. He wanted to know more about it, he wanted there to be a longer time of knowing what the vaccine might do – those were his words. That isn’t to say we can’t change our minds.” She is sure he hasn’t been influenced by social media, as he has tight restrictions on his phone, and since he is home-educated, in preparation for taking up a place at a specialist school, she doesn’t think he has been exposed to much, if any, anti-vax misinformation. “We’ve talked about what anti-vax is,” says Clare. “In the home education community, I suppose it won’t surprise you, there’s lots of anti-vaxxers, but they’re not our tribe. Politically, we wouldn’t be in that group.” Viner is concerned about online anti-vax messages, and says he is “appalled” at the school protests. “It’s irresponsible to target young people coming out of schools when they’re not with their parents; they’re being given information that they may not seek, that’s being pushed at them. I think that’s reprehensible behaviour by anybody.” Social media, he points out, has given voice to an anti-vax agenda in general, not just Covid vaccines. “I think what we’ve seen is very strategic use of social media by those opposed to vaccination, and young people are part of that. Because they’re high consumers of social media, you could argue that they’re more vulnerable. However, I think, most young people, because they’re high consumers of social media, are pretty savvy about what they read. There is a worry, but I think we should also be reassured that young people frequently show relatively high ability to recognise when unsupported ‘facts’ are being pushed. But that’s not always true.” This, says Anna, is what she believes her son has been exposed to online. Incorrect information, she says, is “a huge concern. Teenagers are really impressionable, despite the fact that he’d argue that he wasn’t.” Does she challenge him about it? “Yes. I say: ‘How can you argue against something that’s blatantly happening?’ We have open dialogue, and I just say that this is what I know, and what I understand. But he says the research is rubbish.” She knows the risk to him from a Covid infection is very low, but the concern is there. “I’d be frightened if he got it in case he was one of the unlucky ones that became seriously unwell.” We should be thinking about the way to reach young people with good information, says Viner. “They absolutely respond to trusted advisers, such as the chief medical officers, but they also respond to peers. There are some extraordinarily powerful voices in the younger generation who are hugely respected by young people, and using those kinds of mechanisms to reach young people would also be helpful.” Again, he stresses that he doesn’t believe young people are particularly hardline anti-vaxxers. “The hesitancy [in the research] was mostly ‘don’t knows’, rather than teenagers who were strongly anti. And I think the message from young people was: ‘Convince us. Give us the information.’ My son said to me: ‘I’ll have the vaccine if you tell me it’s the right thing to do and it helps my life go back to normal.’” For Anna and Sam, their exchanges are largely good-natured, she says, although he can become “a bit loud and more defiant” when she asks about his sources for his “conspiracy theories”. “I’ve said: ‘You’ve had all your vaccinations.’ I’ve talked about polio and MMR and all the vaccinations that he’s had to keep him healthy, and that this really is no different to that. And it’s about stopping other people from becoming unwell. I will keep chipping away, but I do pick my moments.” For now, Sam is ignoring his invitation. “I still feel optimistic,” says his mother, “that at some point that he will take it up.” Names of parents and children have been changed.Top story: ‘Call this out for what it is’ Good morning on a Thursday. Warren Murray here to show you the way. Boris Johnson has torn up the independent system for combating sleaze in parliament, throwing the government’s weight behind protecting a Conservative MP who was found to have repeatedly breached lobbying rules. The Labour leader, Sir Keir Starmer, wrote: “I am sick of people skirting around calling this out for what it is: corruption.” The MP involved, Owen Paterson, was found to have repeatedly approached ministers and officials on behalf of two companies that were paying him more than £100,000. But Johnson whipped his MPs to halt Paterson’s parliamentary suspension and demand a review of the entire standards process to allow for appeals. Johnson is himself facing what would be a fourth inquiry by Kathryn Stone – the parliamentary standards commissioner – this time over refurbishments to Johnson’s Downing Street flat that were initially paid for by a Tory donor. Westminster MPs voted by 250 to 232 to support a government-backed amendment to set aside the ruling against Paterson and overhaul the independent disciplinary system on Wednesday, which the prime minister claimed was a matter of “natural justice”. The government’s majority was reduced from 79 to just 18, underlining the unhappiness of many Conservatives. The vote result was met with cries of “shame” from opposition MPs. Thirteen Conservative MPs voted against the government. At least a dozen frontbenchers abstained. * * * Brexit-linked unrest in Belfast – Two boys aged 12 and 15 years have been arrested and bailed following disorder in Belfast linked to a rally against the Brexit protocol. Police came under attack with missiles and fireworks close to a peace line on Wednesday evening. The disorder came on Lanark Way in the loyalist Shankill Road area; there was also disorder on the nationalist Springfield Road side of the peace wall. Opposition to the arrangements that have created trade barriers between Northern Ireland and the rest of the UK has contributed to unrest and rioting. * * * ‘Reality check’ – Global carbon emissions are shooting back to the record level seen before the coronavirus pandemic, new analysis has shown. Scientists said the finding was a “reality check” for the world’s nations gathered at the Cop26 climate summit. In Glasgow, more than 40 countries have agreed to phase out their use of coal-fired power, the dirtiest fuel source, through the 2030s and 2040s. But some of the world’s biggest coal-dependent economies including Australia, China, India and the US are missing from the deal. Emissions pledges on the table at Cop26 would limit global temperature rises to below 2C, the first time the world has been on such a trajectory, according to other research. Plans by India, the world’s third-biggest emitter, have made a sizeable difference, research by the University of Melbourne has found. * * * Blake cottage in decay – The 17th-century thatched cottage where William Blake wrote the words to the hymn Jerusalem is at risk of being lost because of decay, Historic England has said. The Grade II listed house needs urgent repairs to the thatch, roof structure and supporting masonry. Fundraising is under way. Historic England, the government heritage agency, has included the cottage among 130 places added to the 2021 Heritage at Risk register that are threatened by neglect, decay or inappropriate development. The 2021 register also includes 233 sites whose futures have been secured, including Battersea Power Station, which is due to reopen next year after extensive redevelopment. * * * Putin wanted Nato entreé – Vladimir Putin wanted Russia to join Nato but didn’t want to make an application alongside “a lot of countries that don’t matter”, according to George Robertson, a former Labour defence secretary who led Nato between 1999 and 2004. “They wanted to be part of that secure, stable prosperous west that Russia was out of at the time,” Robertson has told the One Decision podcast, which examines how Putin’s worldview has evolved during his 21 years of unbroken rule of Russia. After the Orange Revolution street protests in Ukraine in 2004, Putin became increasingly suspicious of the west and angered by Nato’s expansion into countries including Romania, Bulgaria, Slovakia, Slovenia, Latvia, Estonia, Lithuania, Croatia and Albania. * * * ‘Transformative’ – Nguyen Thi Phuong Thao, popularly known as Madam Thao, is Vietnam’s first and only female billionaire with an estimated $2.7bn (£2bn) fortune made from VietJet, the airline she founded and runs, alongside a vast property empire that stretches from skyscrapers in Ho Chi Minh City to five-star beach resorts across the country as well as offshore oil and gas exploration and fossil fuel financing. Her name may soon be well known in the UK as well, after University of Oxford’s Linacre College agreed to rename itself Thao College after a £155m “transformative donation” from her holding company Sovico Group. Her son studied at Oxford. Phuong Thao’s airline has attracted notoriety for having flight attendants dress in bikinis. She wants to expand Vietjet to become the “Emirates of Asia”. Today in Focus podcast: Meta or worse Mark Zuckerberg changed Facebook’s name to Meta last week – and launched a vision for his company that he claims will transform the way we interact with the internet and each other. So what exactly is the metaverse? And will it ever leave the realm of science fiction? Lunchtime read: ‘Adamant he didn’t want it’ Among under-18s, vaccine uptake is low, and there is a growing issue with misinformation spread on social media and at school. Is there anything a concerned caregiver can do? Sport Gary Ballance, the former England batsman, has admitted using racist and offensive language to his teammate Azeem Rafiq in a controversy that has engulfed Yorkshire County Cricket Club and the sport as a whole. One of the world’s leading track and field coaches is to be investigated by the US Center for SafeSport after multiple complaints of sexual misconduct were made against him, the Guardian can reveal. Two goals in the first 21 minutes and Felipe’s sending off smoothed Liverpool’s path into the knockout stage of the Champions League in a 2-0 win over Atlético Madrid at Anfield. Goals from Phil Foden, Riyad Mahrez, Raheem Sterling and Gabriel Jesus fired Manchester City to a 4-1 victory against Club Brugge, while Ajax came from behind to beat 10-man Borussia Dortmund 3-1. In an interview with the Guardian, Anita Asante, the Aston Villa defender, has talked about speaking up for others, being kicked by boys in cage football and why the US was an eye-opener. Tymal Mills has been ruled out of the remainder of the T20 World Cup after scans confirmed a significant thigh strain and has been replaced in the England squad by Surrey’s Reece Topley. India finally got going in their third match of the tournament in Dubai, crushing Afghanistan in a 66-run victory, while Martin Guptill struggled badly with the heat but helped New Zealand to a 16-run win that eliminated Scotland. Cameron Norrie kept himself in contention to win a spot at the ATP Finals as he coolly navigated a second round match at the Paris Masters, beating Reilly Opelka of the US 6-3, 6-4. And Scottie Pippen has reiterated his dissatisfaction with Michael Jordan’s outsized influence on The Last Dance, the wildly popular ESPN/Netflix docuseries on the Chicago Bulls’ glory years of the 1990s. Business The Bank of England could raise interest rates today for the first time since the onset of the coronavirus pandemic, against a backdrop of rising inflationary pressures and a rebound in economic growth. Financial markets expect an increase of 0.15%, taking the base rate from 0.1% to 0.25%. It comes after the US Federal Reserve said last night it was winding down its huge stimulus programme amid fears that the central bank may also have to raise rates soon. The FTSE100 is set to open up 0.4%, while the pound is down at $1.365 and €1.178. The papers “PM accused of corruption as rules on sleaze torn up” – the lead story in our Guardian print edition today. Also previewed on the front: “Spyware firm barred by US”. NSO Group has been placed on a US blacklist by the Biden administration after it determined the Israeli spyware maker has acted “contrary to the foreign policy and national security interests of the US”. NSO’s signature spyware – known as Pegasus – is alleged to have been deployed by foreign governments against dissidents, journalists, diplomats and members of the clergy, with several alleged victims in the UK. Most of the papers rail against what happened in the Commons yesterday. “Tories rip up Britain’s anti-sleaze rules to save guilty MP” says the i while the Metro calls it “The sleazy way out”. “Shameless MPs sink back into sleaze” says the Daily Mail. The Express has something about Covid: “Warning: let’s be cautious and save Christmas”, quoting Dr Van Tam. A puff pointing to page 7 is sympathetic with Owen Paterson, saying: “After 2 years of hell, I can now clear my name”. “Tories rebel over vote to block MP’s suspension” – the Times reports remarks that Boris Johnson has made a “colossal misjudgment”. The Telegraph’s front runs the Paterson story down its right-hand column while its splash is “NHS staff won’t have to be jabbed this winter” – there will be no compulsion until next April. The Mirror has “PM’s flying shame”, that few-days-old story about Johnson flying back from Cop26, with the added detail that he jetted in to have dinner with a “climate sceptic pal”, that being Charles (Lord) Moore, former Telegraph editor. And the lead in the Financial Times is “Fed triggers winding down of $120bn stimulus program”, which you can read about here. Sign up The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekendThe Lesotho government’s plans to implement a Covid passport system this week are being undermined by widespread fraud involving certificates being sold to unvaccinated people. Covid-19 vaccination certificates are being sold for less than £20 by unscrupulous health workers to the largely vaccine-averse population in Lesotho, where there has been little positive campaigning around the jabs. The prime minister, Moeketsi Majoro, announced in October that from this week, restaurants, bars, nightclubs, gyms and sporting facilities would only admit people who had a Covid-19 vaccination certificate. It led to an immediate increase in the numbers presenting for vaccination, with queues at health centres, but has also sparked a burgeoning hidden market in fraudulent certificates. In October the UK removed Lesotho from its “red list”, and announced that Lesotho’s vaccination certificates would be recognised in Britain, making travel between the two countries easier. “Very pleased that from 1 November Lesotho’s vaccination certificates will be recognised in the UK. Travellers from Lesotho will be able to visit without needing to self-isolate on arrival as long as you meet the vaccine requirements,” said the British high commissioner to Lesotho, Anne Macro, on Twitter. The latest scam follows a reported jabs-for-cash scandal involving health workers from Motebang hospital in Leribe, about 50 miles north-east of the capital, Maseru. The health workers allegedly sold Covid-19 jabs to ineligible people, among them expatriates, for about £19, during a period when the government was still vaccinating frontline workers and vulnerable people. The national Covid-19 secretariat deputy CEO, Thabo Ntoi, said the government was now considering introducing digitised Covid-19 passports, but it would probably be December before these were available. Health professionals are critical of the government’s lack of promotion of the vaccination campaign, a doctor in Maseru told the Guardian. “The reasons people are not being vaccinated are so varied. Some just hate needles, some are scared of the rumoured side-effects, while others are citing their religious beliefs which do not support vaccinations. “However, it all boils down to the lack of knowledge. Little is being done to promote vaccination by the government.” The government should employ the same mechanisms it uses to encourage people to get tested for HIV or tuberculosis, he said. The Lesotho authorities began a vaccination programme in March this year and have so far double vaccinated 340,000 people, 16% of the population, surpassing the World Health Organization benchmark for all countries to vaccinate at least 10% of their populations by the end of September 2021. However, the statistics have been thrown into doubt because of the scam. Health workers say a proportion of those purporting to be vaccinated are fraudulent certificate holders. It has raised fears that under these circumstances, Lesotho’s Covid-19 passport could become worthless. Ntoi said those purchasing certificates are putting people’s lives at risk. “Covid-19 is a deadly virus and some of these people who paid for their certificates without actually being jabbed will be freely moving around and mixing with those who have been vaccinated. “These selfish people are endangering other people’s lives. “Not only that, they are also endangering their own lives because if they get infected, they will not be able to fight off the worst symptoms of the disease without being vaccinated. They could fall critically ill or even die,” Ntoi said.Ryan Custer was a freshman basketball player at Wright State University in Dayton, Ohio, when, in April 2017, he jumped into a pool at a house party and shattered his C5 vertebra. Paralyzed from the chest down, Custer entered a clinical trial in Chicago for an experimental stem cell therapy that could restore limited nerve function one centimeter – shoulder shrug, bicep motion, tricep use – at a time. Cheryl Wiers, a mother in her 40s, saw her aggressive non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma return twice, with a vengeance. Chemotherapy wasn’t working, but a clinical trial for a transplant of stem cells at City of Hope medical center in Duarte, California, offered hope. In San Francisco, Andrew Caldwell, who is HIV-positive, underwent an experimental therapy which transfused his own genetically modified stem cells back into his body; if the modified cells produced enough HIV-resistant fighter cells, known as T-cells, to suppress the virus, the treatment could functionally cure HIV. All three are vanguards on the slowly unfolding horizon of stem cell therapies, which could offer reprieve from diseases such as certain types of cancers, Type 1 diabetes, lupus and other auto-immune disorders. And all three, along with several others, offer up their emotional, idiosyncratic, and casually radical stories in the film Ending Disease, a collection of intimate portraits of experimental medicine under the culturally fraught, politically vulnerable, and extremely promising umbrella of stem cell research. Such research has long been a game of potentials – treatments that could cure a host of incurable diseases or conditions, from HIV to certain causes of blindness to quadriplegia; research whose funding could get kneecapped by the whims of political power, treatments that could become available to the masses but are limited to select clinical trial groups. Ending Disease, which followed several trial participants between 2016 and 2019, takes its name from the farthest reaches of said potential: “we are on the cusp of a tremendous number of cures,” said director Joe Gantz. For each of the case studies in Ending Disease, stem cell treatments hold potential that is vague and unpredictable yet incalculably significant. For Rosie Barrero, who became legally blind from retinitis pigmentosa in her 20s, it’s the chance to see a little more clearly, to depend on her family less. For Custer, the reclamation of any movement below the neck. For Erica Billy, the opportunity to have her toddler daughter, Ava, who was born without a functional immune system, escape isolation, go to school, and avoid the harrowing treatments – chemotherapy rounds, a bone marrow transplant – that defined her infancy. The 138-minute documentary sketches the broad outline of what stem cells are – basically, blueprint cells that could become any other type of cell in the body – and a surface-level explainer of how therapies work on a scientific level. But the portraits are hyper-specific, mundane and visceral, a clear window into the time-sensitive stakes of decades of research routinely jeopardized by political headwinds. “It’s not critical that people understand exactly how stem cells work, or exactly how CAR-T cells work,” said Gantz. Instead, the film highlights how “this is such an important moment and to follow these patients and the scientists and the doctors”, many of whom have been working on treatments for very specific diseases for decades. As with The Race to Save the World, another Gantz film released this year, which embeds with the personal lives of several climate activists instead of macro-level arguments for change, Ending Disease captures “the tremendous emotion that these families are dealing with, hoping for a cure for their loved ones” rather than the technical explanations of how, exactly, stem cell therapies function. There are appointments, tentative conversations with doctors about scans, needle injections and families crowded around a hospital bed, a playful fight between Custer and his father over a disappointing college grade, a nurse playing with immuno-compromised Ava in a full bodysuit, Caldwell’s mother recalling his coming out, a conversation between Wiers and her husband, both Catholics, over their initial reluctance and eventual support of therapies involving embryonic stem cells. In between, experts such as Irving Weissman, the director of the Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine at Stanford University, offer some academic context to the individual stories. Weismann, a pioneer of stem cell research for cancer treatments, attests to the heated cultural wars that have stilted scientific progress. The term “stem cell research” will likely conjure, for many, the debates of the early 2000s, when the administration of George W Bush outright banned the use of fetal tissue, such as embryonic stem cells, in scientific research. In 2004, California voters took matters into their own hands and passed state funding for its own stem cell research at the California Institute for Regenerative Medicine (CIRM). “Since that time, we have been able to develop purified blood-forming stem cells to rescue people from high-dose chemotherapy with their own stem cells,” Weissman said. Scientists have, for years, demonstrated that such treatment is possible, but to carry it forward to actual treatments takes years of FDA-approved clinical trials, and additional years of research, that can be jeopardized by political loyalties to anti-abortion groups opposed to the use of fetal tissue, sometimes obtained from abortions and not used in all stem cell therapies, for scientific research. In June 2019, Donald Trump stalled federal funding for research involving fetal tissue with a shock executive order, a move that pleased the anti-abortion groups his administration sought to appease. The order, reportedly on the whims of an obscure but dogged West Wing staffer named Joe Grogan, halted trials of breakthrough treatments for HIV and forced some labs to lay off staff and abandon projects. (It also delayed efforts to investigate possible Covid-19 treatments in March 2020.) “It would be great if we could get rid of that political and religious aspect to looking at science, and let science at least make its case and be adjudicated by the other bodies,” said Weissman, “rather than have a ban that precludes any of this scientific and medical development.” The major obstacles to the advancement and, crucially, accessibility of stem-cell treatments remains “short-term politics, not understanding what pharmaceuticals do and can do and how they must operate” from a profit motive. And, furthermore, the “valley of death” gap between discovery and actual therapy – a gap that is “our responsibility to look at, find out what the gap is, and fill the gap so that we can advance medicine for people”, said Weissman. For the patients in Ending Disease, the gap is tangible, a tentative and real lifeline. Not all the trials were a success – the film is dedicated to Steven Sharpling, who died in 2018 after stem cell injections could not fully eradicate the brain cancer known as anaplastic astrocytoma. But even small wins are consequential for everyday life. Within months, Custer regained the ability to move his arms, and even passed a driving test using a modified car. Wiers’s treatment, which retrained her own white blood cells to recognize and destroy cancer cells, rescued her from essentially a death sentence; she’s now cancer free. Caldwell’s T-cell levels cleared a level high enough to take him off anti-viral HIV medications. Ava George’s stem cell therapy retrained her immune system enough that she can go to school with other kids. These are visions of the future; not so much silver bullets as pathways out of pure incurability – should we choose to support them. Ending Disease is available digitally in the US and UK on 5 NovemberA “giant, windowless prison”, “Dormzilla”, a “torture experiment”: the internet has been weighing in on the construction plan for a student dormitory at the University of California, Santa Barbara, since last Thursday, when an architect’s resignation letter went viral. The proposed building has become perhaps the world’s most controversial architectural project – pitting a monomaniacal, nearly 100-year-old billionaire against a potential student revolt, and sparking a fierce debate about what human beings should, or can, endure in the name of efficiency. The billionaire funding the project, Charlie Munger, believes it is a cutting-edge student residence that will maximize use of space and encourage social interaction. In contrast, the architect who resigned in protest, Dennis McFadden, calls it an unprecedented “social and psychological experiment” on students, “unsupportable” from his “perspective as an architect, a parent, and a human being”. Munger is the vice-chairman of the investment fund Berkshire Hathaway, where he serves as fellow billionaire Warren Buffett’s right-hand man. A self-taught architecture enthusiast, Munger endowed $200m to the housing-strapped University of California campus on the unusual – some might say Faustian – condition that the university use a housing plan that he designed himself. The proposed dormitory will be the world’s densest, a feat achieved by packing 4,500 students into a 11-story building whose bedrooms and common areas are mostly devoid of windows. Projected to cost $1.5bn in total, the planned building is something like an ant farm without the glass: 94% of residents will have no windows in their small, single-occupancy rooms, according to McFadden. Instead of windows, rooms will have glowing screens that mimic sunlight – an idea inspired, Munger says, by the virtual portholes on Disney cruise ships. He also argues that small bedrooms will encourage residents to spend time together in common areas. The public seems to disagree. Internet commenters are lambasting the proposed dorm as “barbaric”, arguing that it will incubate Covid-19, and comparing it to the panopticon, a notorious 18-century concept for a penitentiary whose inmates are so constantly surveilled that they eventually guard themselves. The story, which had previously flown under the radar, exploded after McFadden’s resignation letter leaked to the press. In his letter, McFadden, a respected architect who had served on UC Santa Barbara’s design review committee for 15 years, contrasted the proposed Munger Hall with Bancroft Hall at the US Naval Academy, which is believed to be the world’s largest dormitory. Housing about 4,000 students, Bancroft “is composed of multiple wings wrapped around multiple courtyards with over 25 entrances”, he wrote. “Munger Hall, in comparison, is a single block housing 4,500 students with two entrances.” (UC Santa Barbara told the Guardian that while it has two “main” entrances, there will be “fourteen additional entrances/exits into and out of the building”.) Munger Hall would have a population density equivalent to 221,000 people per square mile, McFadden argued – making it the eighth densest neighborhood in the world, narrowly trailing a district in Dhaka, Bangladesh. He also pointed out that the dorm seems to have been designed with no regard for its surrounding geography: although UC Santa Barbara is located in a “spectacular coastal setting”, the students who live inside won’t be able to see it. Research suggests that human beings are adversely affected by lack of sunlight and fresh air. Rooms without windows disrupt our sleeping patterns and make us depressed and anxious, and dormitory residents’ mental health has been linked to their ability to see green space. Lack of windows also makes it harder to escape fires and can cause mold or carbon monoxide to build up. In many US jurisdictions, including New York City, it is illegal to advertise a windowless room as a bedroom. In his letter, McFadden said that the university seems cowed by its donor and determined to ram through the project. “It was clear the [design review committee] was a mere formality,” he wrote. “The design was described as 100% complete, approval was not requested, no vote was taken and no further submittals are intended or required.” When I reached McFadden by phone, he said that the letter had not been intended for public consumption and that he has nothing to add to what he wrote. So far UC Santa Barbara is not backing down. “We are delighted to be moving forward with this transformational project that directly addresses the campus’s great need for more student housing,” the university administration said in a statement to the Washington Post. In a separate email to the Guardian, the administration added: “Every room that does not have an operable window (and even all bedrooms that do) is provided with continuous fresh air supply at approximately twice the rate of building and mechanical code minimums. One could argue that this may be an improvement in air quality as it does not require a student to open the window for fresh air.” One could indeed argue that, but only if one didn’t know that windows open. Opponents of the project face two very powerful forces – a land-grant university with more than 26,000 students and a man worth an estimated $2.2bn. Unlike his mentor Buffett, who is known for eating $3.17 McDonald’s meals and living in the same house since 1958, Munger enjoys splashing his money on ambitious pet projects. I was unable to reach him for comment; in an interview with the Wall Street Journal in 2019, however, Munger, who is 97 and partly blind, blasted architects. He cited the long lines at women’s public restrooms as an example of the failings of conventional architecture: “What kind of idiot would make the men’s bathroom and the women’s bathroom the same size?” he said. “The answer is, a normal architect!” Yet the warren-like floor plans for Munger Hall show that there will be just two single-occupancy bathrooms – each with one toilet and one shower – for every cluster of eight bedrooms. Although Munger has some experience as a housing developer, he has never formally studied architecture nor, he told the Journal with seeming relish, ever read a book on it. He acknowledged that he may die before the project is completed, but said that he was confident that “it will be widely regarded as the best in the world”. This is not the first time that Munger has funded architectural projects of his own design. The proposed Munger Hall is a far larger and more extreme version of the Munger graduate housing, a 630-student dormitory that Munger unveiled at the University of Michigan in 2015. Munger views the earlier project as proof of concept – a position which some students who have lived there reject. “It was terrible,” one person recently wrote on an online forum for University of Michigan students. “Too many roommates [meant] no cohesion or standards. The lack of windows was depressing. Munger is about as out of touch as billionaires come.” The “lack of windows messed up one of my roommates really badly with school and mental health and well-being”, another student wrote. There was “no sense of time if you’re just in your room with no natural light”. “Honestly, the only two things about living in Munger that I hated were the lack of windows and the fact that you just couldn’t get moisture out of the bathrooms,” another said, “but those were things I hated enough to leave. Also unfortunately the floor plans for the rooms at UCSB look far worse than what we have here.” Several thousand people have signed a petition to cancel the UC Santa Barbara project. The controversy occurs at the same time that Howard University, a historically black college in Washington DC, has been racked by student protests over housing which students say is uninhabitable and filled with mold and insects. There is a long history of dormitories being sites of social engineering. Some earlier US dormitories were explicitly designed to enforce racial or class segregation; others, motivated by a progressive ethos, were designed to erase them. The US behavioral researcher John B Calhoun spent decades studying how populations of rats and mice react to constrained environments. For his most famous experiment, he created a 101-square-inch enclosure, with abundant food and water but finite space, and introduced four breeding pairs of mice. In less than a year, the colony had reached a population of more than 600. As the cage became overpopulated, his mouse utopia began to resemble something closer to a dystopia. The mice became listless, stopped breeding and engaged in cannibalism. Some, which Calhoun named “the beautiful ones”, ceased to interact with other mice and instead spent all their time sleeping or obsessively grooming. When the population reached 2,200, it slid into extinction.When she returned from a trek across Greenland last year, Preet Chandi had a mild case of frostbite on her nose. “I remember somebody saying to me they’ve never seen an injury like that on somebody of my colour skin before,” she said. “I am an Asian woman, I’m not the image that people expect to see out there.” Later this month Chandi, a 32-year-old army physiotherapist, hopes to become the first woman of colour to complete a solo unsupported trek across Antarctica to the south pole. During the 700-mile journey, which should take about 45 days, she will face wind chill of -50C and snowstorms while dragging a sled weighing about 95kg when she sets off. Chandi – or Polar Preet – admits it’s a daunting expedition but says she feels well prepared after training for years. She has completed ultra-marathons, including the gruelling Marathon des Sables across the Sahara desert, and faced extreme weather conditions on a 27-day expedition on the ice cap in Greenland. In recent weeks she has been dragging tyres around the streets near her home just outside Derby, to prepare for pulling her sled – a 2 metre-long pulk containing all her food and equipment – across the slopes of Antarctic, and she has received a number of curious questions from passersby. “People say the outdoors is for everyone and yes, it is. But if you come from a community that is not involved in it at all, or you don’t know anybody that does outdoorsy things, or you don’t see anybody that looks like you doing it, it can be really hard,” she said, adding that a number of people thought she said she was going to Southall, in west London, not to the south pole. “It’s just so out of the norm for them.” “A lot of us come from different communities with different barriers and boundaries. A lot of the time you’re encouraged to stay in lane and become a dentist, doctor or a lawyer, which are the key things in the Asian community, I would say,” said Chandi, who hopes her expedition will inspire more women of colour to set off on their own adventures. “But I get that people have barriers all over the place and I hope that I can inspire people for lots of different reasons. It doesn’t matter that you are not the image that society expects to see, you can do it regardless.” As well as the physical training and the stress of getting sponsors onboard, she has also been preparing for the mental challenge of doing a solo trek. “During a white-out it’s almost like travelling in a marshmallow, you really can’t see what’s in front of you for days, and it can be quite mentally draining.” Her partner has left messages inside her tent, while friends have recorded voice notes for her to listen to on the journey. “My pulk is named after my niece Simran and my skis are named after my one-month-old nephew, so they’ll be waiting for me every day to get me through,” she said. She flies to Chile on 7 November and, weather permitting, hopes to set off on her trek on 21 November. When she returns she plans to set up an adventure grant to help more women fund unique expeditions, and she said she was pleased to see change in what has typically been a male-dominated area. “There are more and more female adventurers out there. And there’s more diverse groups, which is absolutely brilliant. It’s really inspiring to see.” Ultimately, she hopes that by seeing someone like herself pushing boundaries, more young people will consider large-scale expeditions as something to aim towards. “Don’t get me wrong: Shackleton, Amundsen, Scott, they’re huge polar names and they’re incredible people. But they’re not names that I was familiar with, it wasn’t something that I could personally relate to,” she said. “I am excited to add some diversity to that, and Preet is actually quite a common Indian name. I’ve had people say to me, ‘oh my daughter’s name is Preet and they’re so excited to have the same name as you’, and that is very powerful.”A month ago, Reshmin was busy organising protests against Taliban rule in online groups of hundreds of fellow women’s rights activists. Now the 26-year-old economics graduate must operate clandestinely, dressing in disguise and only demonstrating with a select few. “If things continue like this, there will be no future for women in Afghanistan. It’s better if the future never arrives,” says Reshmin, who spoke to the Guardian using only her first name, which means “silk” in Farsi, out of security concerns. “Each time we go out, we say farewell because we might not make it back alive.” Since the Taliban’s lightning takeover of the country in August, Reshmin and her younger sister have attended a flurry of protests in Kabul, part of nationwide demonstrations where Afghan women have hoisted signs demanding the right to education and work, and chanted slogans such as “Freedom!” and “Eliminating women means eliminating human beings!” They belong to a cohort of Afghan women’s rights defenders who chose not to flee this summer but stayed to tackle the Taliban’s clampdown on their freedoms. Buoyed up by the past 20 years of international support and encouragement, they have staged pockets of protest across Afghanistan, from quiet parks to urban thoroughfares. The Taliban have responded with violence, beating women with electric batons and detaining and torturing the reporters who covered the protests. “The next generation will be brainwashed by the Taliban’s ideology, then it will spread like the Covid-19 virus. The world needs to pay attention for its own sake,” Reshmin says. But international pressure to hold the Taliban accountable over the rights of women and girls is being ignored. A slew of foreign delegations, aid agencies and donors, including from the UK, have consisted of all-male teams and only “legitimises the Taliban’s patriarchal view of the world”, Heather Barr, of Human Rights Watch, warned this week. Now, two months into Taliban rule, the activists say they are being hunted down. In recent weeks the Taliban have accelerated their crackdown on women’s groups by infiltrating and intimidating them. Activists described how on several occasions members of the Taliban appeared at a private address that was only discussed on closed chat groups on social media. Ahead of a recent protest in Kabul, Taliban police called a group of women on their phones just before they set out to put up posters, Reshmin says. “The only tool they know is to silence people through creating fear,” says Mina, a university professor and activist, who asked that a pseudonym be used for fear of retribution from the Taliban. Zahra, another organiser in Kabul, describes methods ranging from having women pose as journalists to obtain personal information from protesters to spreading rumours among activists that their number had been shared with members of the Taliban. “The Taliban know if they lash us on the street they’ll look bad and get criticised,” says Zahra, “but it’s easy to try to dismantle women’s groups online.” Zahra, who obtained her master’s degree in urban design last year, was supervising the building of a women-only outdoor market when the Taliban swept to power. The European-funded project has been abandoned and she now pours all her energy into activism. Last month the Taliban banned all demonstrations that do not have official approval, adding the requirement that slogans at the protests also be approved by the group first. Mina says this is a tactic designed to expose them. “They are trying to identify some of the active members of the women’s movement. This is how they force them to submit,” she says. Reshmin, who was protesting on Kabul’s streets last week, says she will not ask the Taliban for permission because “that would mean we have accepted their regime”. Since the Taliban captured Kabul just over two months ago, there has been a cascade of miserable news for Afghan women and barely a day passes without their rights shrinking further as they are dismissed from jobs in state media, banned from most other work and secondary school, barred from sport and blocked from a now-obsolete system designed to protect women from violence. “We believed that Afghan women would not go back in time. We believed that our war against the Taliban would be won,” says Roya Dadras, spokeswoman of the now-defunct women’s affairs ministry, which the Taliban took over as the headquarters of its draconian morality police. She spoke to the Guardian from Australia, where she sought refuge in early October after spending a month in hiding in Kabul. Compounding this is the country’s dire economic situation: the notoriously bitter Afghan winter is approaching, and with the foreign aid that powered the economy still largely suspended, 95% of Afghans are not getting enough to eat, the UN has warned. The number of female activists on the streets is decreasing, and the strain of trying to put on a brave face amid their troubles is taking a toll on their health. Taliban members badly beat Reshmin’s sister at a protest, leaving her right hand unusable for a month, and her skin now suffers from painful flare-ups. Reshmin’s mother and three sisters started taking antidepressants several weeks ago. Mina’s teenage daughter, whose education stopped with the Taliban’s ban on girls attending secondary school, became so stressed that she started to lose her hair. Mina shared a photo of the back of her daughter’s head where large areas of skin are exposed. In Nangarhar province in the country’s east, where there is less international media attention than the Afghan capital, women’s rights protests have been violently broken up by Taliban members, says Rahmani, an activist and former prosecutor. Several female protesters were also detained and tortured, she adds. Fearful for her life, Rahmani has moved between relatives’ homes in recent weeks, bringing with her only a few items of clothing each time. “Activists cannot sleep soundly,” she says. After spending the past month in hiding with her husband and three children, terrified that the Taliban would harm them, Mina and her family are trying to flee to a neighbouring country. She hopes to provide support to those still protesting. “I am trying to help the women and girls who are scared, depressed and anxious. Some are thinking about suicide.” Zahra Joya contributed to the reporting“From this pile of logs onwards, we need to be completely silent,” says Georg Messerer, our guide through Romania’s southern Carpathians. His head cocks 45 degrees as a bird starts chirping. “Nuthatch,” he whispers, reaching for his binoculars. “And two red deer.” Georg directs our gaze to a row of apple trees, where sure enough, two deer are grazing. Georg is an environmental encyclopedia. Give him a fresh footprint or dropping and he can tell you what the animal was and when it was there. Born in Germany, but with extensive guiding experience in Southern Africa, Georg has been guiding here, in the remote hills of Rusca in the Țarcu Mountains, near the villages of Armeniș, for more than five years – ever since the reintroduction of free-roaming bison to the area began. The European bison (longer legged and slightly larger than their American cousins) became extinct in the wild in 1927 due to hunting and habitat loss – and had been absent in Romania for nearly 200 years. A keystone species, vital for creating a mosaic of habitats by grazing on fast-growing dominant tree species, their movement opens up undergrowth and creates fertile soil – and they distribute seeds on their fur and in faeces. They are “landscape architects”; nature’s chainsaw – which is why WWF Romania and Rewilding Europe have been working hard to bring them back. It’s part of on-going efforts to restore nature and wild ecosystems and in doing so help fight the impact of the climate crisis. Since the initial release of 17 bison onto Magura Zimbrilor (Bison Hillock) near Armeniș in 2014, the number has grown to 100 (with newborns and new arrivals from elsewhere) – providing excellent ecotourism and tracking opportunities. The project is one part of a remarkable conservation success story, supported by the European Union’s LIFE programme. Now there are about 7,000 bison across the continent, up from 2,500 just 10 years ago. I’m on a trip to track bison, spending three days hiking through forests and mountains, staying in cabins, renovated farmhouses and safari tents. The focus is on slow, mindful movement rather than clocking up miles – though we’re on our feet for six hours a day or more. The southern Carpathians are also home to large carnivores like brown bears, wild boar and wolves, as well as chamois, lynx, golden jackals and wildcats. It is a place that still feels wild. As we walk, the smell of mint rises through the warm air, and densely forested mountains layer into the distance. A rare ural owl perches on an ash tree nearby, long-tailed tits flit around and join blackbirds, robins and finches in song, falling silent only when a sparrowhawk – a killer of small birds – glides overhead. We stop just before reaching a wetland and Georg turns to us with widened eyes. “Bison,” he mouths. Binoculars out, we watch two huge, muscular animals grazing while a third bison goes 12 rounds with a tree (they can weigh up to 1,000kg). They soon realise they’re being watched, and we see a full herd stampede up a steep hill nearby, leaving the ground shaking in the process. Camera traps have shown bison co-existing happily enough with wild boar and bears. More surprising to local conservationists were the birds that started using bison fur as insulation for their nests, and how water-filled bison footprints have become highways for small toads. We reach our campsite in time for lunch – balmaş, a traditional meal made with cheese from a nearby farm, melted in a cauldron with oil, water and cornflour – cooked by Bibi, a local hunter. Matei Miculescu, a WWF bison ranger, joins us. His work has been imperative in helping the project develop within the community. Armeniș was ideal for bison because of the vast mixture of grasslands and forest, but the bison were accepted because the mayor at the time, Petru Vela, believed they would also bring jobs, he tells us. “From the beginning we saw the need to work with and invest in locals,” says Miculescu. “We started from scratch with tourism here. Before the bison, we didn’t have even one accommodation option. We helped one family to renovate a guesthouse. Now in the summer season it’s almost fully booked out. That’s a good income that they didn’t have before.” Locals are hired to cook and transport people from villages to camps and airports. You can buy local schnapps, and a souvenir shop is in the works. WWF works closely with hunters, to prevent poaching and show the income wildlife can bring. A local organisation, WeWilder, has also been set up as a social enterprise arm of WWF to work with the community and compensate anyone who loses crops to bison, which may stray into the village looking for food in their first year, while still not fully wild. “They can damage an orchard or eat haystacks,” says Matei. “Unfortunately, the government system which should pay for the damages is not properly in place, so it’s difficult to get the money back.” Still, the bison have been overwhelmingly well received. “It’s important because in the long term, it will be the locals who have to take care of the bison and the habitat,” says Matei. “The idea isn’t just to focus on the bison, it’s to develop small businesses so that families can benefit.” After an evening walk and a comfy night in safari tents we move on the next day to Sat Bătrân, a village near Armeniș, to meet Oana Mondoc of WeWilder, who has overseen the production of the tourist infrastructure in the area. We visit MuMa, the tiny house built by WeWilder in lockdown, nominated for a EUmise architecture award for helping a “local community take steps towards sustainable relationships with nature and new pathways to prosper from its wilderness.” The 15 square metre one room-space, on raised wooden legs with huge window overlooking the orchard it’s in, is completely sustainable – even the oil used to cook our food is recycled into candles. “If you have a blank slate, you have to be really careful with the way you set things up,” Mondoc says. “We’re trying to set an example in terms of no impact architecture.” While two of our group will spend the night there, the rest of us stay in a luxurious, stone farmhouse close by, with natural soaps and even plant-based toothpaste provided. That afternoon we all meet up to explore a chamois trail with Petru, a local tracker who has built wildlife hides in the forests. We learn to tell bison tracks from cattle, and go on a night walk beneath star-speckled skies, spotting wildcats and foxes. On our last day we wander again meeting local shepherds whose sheep dogs protect their livestock from wolves, and pick plums as we climb to a wildlife observatory looking out over the Bison Hillock, with 2,192-metre Vârful Țarcu behind us. Somewhere in the vast hills below, bison are grazing, and the ecosystem around them thrives. The trip was provided by Much Better Adventures who are partnered with the European Safari Company, the tourism arm of Rewilding Europe. The four-night trip costs £649; June, July, August, Sept, 2022To paraphrase Mrs Merton: what first attracted director Chloé Zhao to the idea of directing something in the colossally lucrative Marvel franchise? Or, to paraphrase Nigel Planer’s fictional actor Nicholas Craig: were they offering Zhao a staggering amount of scope to develop the project? At all events, it was an interesting idea to hire the brilliant Oscar-winning film-maker Zhao, known for social-realist docudramas such as Nomadland and The Rider. But the very few authorial touches that she manages to bring to Eternals – some Terrence Malick-ish “golden hour” sunset scenes – only go to show how dominant the formula actually is. Perhaps there is the question of tone; I had the uncomfortable feeling that the all-important brash humour, DayGlo energy and operatic craziness of superheroism were being downplayed in favour of something more serious – the addictive inspiration of fast food being replaced by vegan cordon bleu. There are some nice touches and an attractive new diversity worn lightly, but this is an underpowered and uncertain film. The Eternals of the title are an order of divinities with various silly powers and familiar-sounding god-names who have lived incognito among humans for millennia; they include Thena (Angelina Jolie), Sersi (Gemma Chan), Ikaris (Richard Madden), Kingo (Kumail Nanjiani), Sprite (Lia McHugh), Phastos (Brian Tyree Henry), Makkari (Lauren Ridloff), Druig (Barry Keoghan), Gilgamesh (Don Lee) and Ajak (Salma Hayek). They are commanded to protect Earthlings from periodic incursions by alien beings called “Deviants” but must otherwise refrain from getting involved in any of humanity’s wars, although Phastos bitterly regrets introducing us to his super-engineering skills, which apparently led to the atomic bomb. There’s a misjudged scene, treated as a mere passing episode, in which an anguish-filled Phastos stands solemnly in the wreckage of Hiroshima. (Could someone at least have pointed out that it affected Nagasaki as well?) A new Deviant attack in London brings the Eternals together for a fightback, but then it becomes horribly clear that the Eternals have been misled and now they must choose between their loyalty to celestial orders laid down from on high, and planet Earth’s humankind, which they have grown to love. This leads to some very protracted set-piece spectaculars, and admittedly amusing scenes for Nanjiani’s character Kingo, who in civilian mode is a Bollywood superstar but is prickly and defensive when it comes to his stalled career as a director (“I have directed some internet content …” he snaps, when pressed for details). But his status as the comic turn only underscores the heavy and unsatisfying seriousness of everything else. • Eternals is released on 5 November in cinemas.My 91-year-old father has advanced dementia and had to move to a care home. He signed a lasting power of attorney (LPA) years ago and we, as nominated attorneys, began the process of activating it with his bank, NatWest, more than five weeks ago. We urgently needed to set up a standing order to pay the fees for his care home, and have already had to take out a loan to cover the first five weeks. With world-beating incompetence, NatWest now tells me that 80% of the paperwork we submitted has been mislaid. It relies on snail mail and claims it has no access to telephones so I can actually speak to someone. It tells me the only way I can get any further information is to go through the online complaints process. I feel as though I’ve been transported back to the 19th century. NT, London Two days after I contacted NatWest, it miraculously discovered the lost paperwork and activated the LPA, but that burst of energy was followed by further delays and confusion. It took the best part of two months to reply to my inquiries. I’m none the wiser (although I can have a good guess) as to why its departments apparently have yet to discover telephones, or why such barriers were placed in your way. You are now able to pay your father’s bills, however, and have accepted £150 compensation for the “inconvenience”. Email your.problems@observer.co.uk. Include an address and phone number. Submission and publication are subject to our terms and conditionsThroughout the 2021 United Nations climate change conference, the Guardian will be publishing the stories of the people whose lives have been upended – sometimes devastated – by the climate breakdown. Amie Ferrier, United States Here in the Sierra Nevada foothills in California, our community is quickly becoming far more fire-wise out of necessity. The changes that our home and lifestyle have undergone are numerous, from the serious and scary to the small habits that are starting to feel routine. Homeowners’ insurance is becoming extremely hard to have and keep, for example, and the prices are skyrocketing. Our emergency go bag now remains packed year-round, and when wind events are especially severe or we’re under a red flag warning, we take the extra step of leaving our boots, headlamps and coats right next to the door in case we have to evacuate quickly overnight. We seldom leave town any more during the months of August, September and October – we prefer being at home to run irrigation, defend the house and help our friends when fires strike, and the anxiety of leaving can outweigh the pleasure of vacationing. We also try to never let the gas tanks fall below 50% full during fire season. I recently heard a neighbour say “half a tank is an empty tank”, and a lot of us who witnessed the harrowing bottlenecks of traffic in other large California fires learned how critical it is to leave early and have plenty of fuel in the tank. We have a homemade list on our fridge with three columns: no time, 10 minutes, and 30 minutes. Whenever we have to evacuate, we run and grab the list. It’s infinitely helpful to refer to in stressful moments. Each column has a list of what must be done to safely leave the house, including shutting off the propane tank, turning on all yard irrigation, checking on elderly neighbours and moving any cars out of the driveway so that fire engines can pull through. My husband and I feel grateful that all we have really lost so far are unpaid days of cancelled work, as well as weeks shut into our house when the air quality index was at hazardous levels in the high hundreds. There is also the heavy grief that many of us in affected regions feel when special and sacred places burn, friends and strangers are displaced, animals perish and the sun is an eerie blood red in the sky. It’s jarring and sad watching precious things being lost in real-time. The upshots, though, are true testaments to our community: neighbours checking on neighbours, friends rushing to help evacuate livestock or chainsaw and rake, and pack trucks, strangers opening up their homes and guest bedrooms, and people showing up to help without ever being asked.As we limp towards the end of 2021, I don’t think I’ve ever needed a holiday so much, and Forza Horizon 5 is here to provide one. It is a scenic, colourful escape to a sterile and faultlessly beautiful version of Mexico, with astonishing vistas and shiny cars to drive in a seemingly endless series of races, from cross-country desert circuits to street scrambles and stunt challenges. Like any great holiday, there is nothing to think about here except which fun thing to do next. Despite the change of setting from idealised Britain to idealised Mexico, it feels almost identical to 2018’s Forza Horizon 4, and has the same overwhelming maximalist tendencies – the map is a forest of icons, an abundance of potential excitement, and you are constantly showered with rewards, perks and bonuses that quickly feel meaningless. But it also captures some of the same magic: the escapist fantasy of the open road, the freedom of driving, that gut-level satisfaction of revving a perfectly modelled supercar and feeling the controller shake in your hands. These vehicles, hundreds of them, all respond instantly to the slightest touch of the analogue stick or feathering of the brake. There is no more fun way to drive virtual cars than this. Well – I say that, but actually Forza Horizon 4 was exactly as gratifying, three years ago. It is mildly disappointing not to see developer Playground Games pare the experience back a little, as it’s hard to focus when there are always so many challenges, multiplayer events and seasonal races vying for your attention. What I actually wanted to do was get lost in the scenery, happening upon beautiful places and things to do or zoning out on long drives, and that’s difficult when you’re constantly being pulled in so many different directions. Horizon 5 organises its showpiece moments – think driving away from erupting volcanoes, racing against planes, supercar competitions along the coast, that kinda thing – into a storyline of sorts that follows your superstar driver through the world’s greatest driving event, but even that is spread across many different festival sites. Over a few hours’ play, unredeemed rewards and unspent currencies and trading cards and slot-machine-style wheelspins stack up in the menus like unread emails. The one thing I never felt I had enough of was cars. Almost every one is a joy to drive, and I only say almost because I find the supercars obnoxious. Give me a filthy rally car and a jungle trail, and I’m much happier. You can tune and customise every imaginable aspect of these machines if you know what you’re doing, but I was happy just driving them around, buying houses, ignoring all the other players online, accumulating more fame and kudos to soothe my ego, and shuffling through the least annoying radio stations. This soundtrack is definitely not cool, but it’s great to drive around to – though I found it puzzling that there wasn’t any music from the region in which the game is set. The voice cast is different, a mix of inoffensive British, American and Latin American characters who anchor each different aspect of Horizon’s personality, from street racing to hunting down abandoned classic cars. You could spend months in Forza Horizon 5 on a coast-to-coast trip, or dip in for a few days to see the sights and admire the sunsets. The vast array of joy on offer means that whatever you do, wherever you end up, you’ll have a very good time. Forza Horizon 5 is out 9 November, £54.99.Farmer groups have split over the Coalition’s rejection of Joe Biden’s global methane pledge, with the National Farmers Federation backing the government’s stance while Farmers for Climate Action has urged Australia to commit to cut methane. Biden was pushing for an alliance at the Glasgow summit to limit global methane emissions by 30% from 2020 levels by the end of the decade, but the Australian government refused to sign on. The Nationals had insisted there should be no methane cuts as part of the party’s negotiations with the Liberals to land a 2050 net zero target. Joyce said the only way to reduce methane by 30% by 2030 would be “to go grab a rifle (and) go out and start shooting your cattle”. But the Farmers for Climate Action chief executive, Fiona Davis, said the methane pledge was not about “agriculture or cows” but about protecting the gas industry. “This is about the government defending gas,” she told the Rural Network’s Facebook Live event. Davis said the red meat industry had been working hard to reduce emissions and called for deeper emissions cuts in the current decade to 2030. Major livestock industries have set more ambitious targets than government since 2017. The Australian pork industry is aiming for carbon neutrality by 2025 while the red meat industry aims to be carbon neutral by 2030. “So we are on that path,” Davis said. “We fully support at Farmers for Climate Action [the government] signing that pledge and committing to it.” Sign up to receive Guardian Australia’s fortnightly Rural Network email newsletter But the National Farmers Federation has backed in the Coalition for not signing the pledge, with president Fiona Simson saying the methane commitment could be a “really blunt instrument”. Simson said while she understood the pledge was more about fugitive emissions targeting gas extraction, “we feel like the bunny in the spotlight right now”. “The high-level pledge just says you are going to cut methane by 2030 so there is … room for an animal activist [to] come in and create all sorts of strange outcomes targeting agriculture.” Simson said that livestock growers had already cut emissions by 57% in the decade between 2005 and 2015 but countries which had supported the pledge “still have to go home and get it to work”. Yet she acknowledged Australian farmers were increasingly exposed to an “erratic and wild climate”. “Many farmers have come out of what is the worst drought in living memory, we have experienced the worst bushfires, even now in Armidale there has been wild hailstorms and tornadoes, and farmers are looking at how they can best prepare their farms to withstand those sorts of climatic shocks,” Simson said. Both farm leaders gave the Coalition credit for landing the 2050 net zero pledge and creating programs such as the carbon and biodiversity pilot to pay farmers for improving environmental measures on their landscapes. Farmer groups are increasingly signing on to commit to more ambitious targets. On Thursday, the NSW Irrigators Council, which only recently signed up to net zero 2050, confirmed it had landed an “aspirational” target to be carbon neutral by 2030. The NSWIC CEO, Claire Miller, said the irrigation sector was on the frontline of climate change, both environmentally and economically. “The economy of the very near future will demand and expect nations to demonstrate their commitment to reducing emissions. To remain globally competitive, our leaders must demonstrate Australia is doing our bit. “It’s only a matter of time. We are already seeing the shift, with the EU recently warning Australia may face carbon tariffs if it does not commit to strong 2030 targets.” Farmer Andrew Young runs Redgold, a salad growing farm in Mildura, producing 3,000-4,000 tonnes of salad a year for supermarkets and fast food companies. He said the unknowns related to the threat of a warming climate dominated his worries. “We are in the Mallee, we are drying and we are more storm-prone. We are also more internationally focused. I think it is poor of Australia, as wealthy as we are, not to stand up and look after less-privileged neighbours.” While he is not a livestock producer, he said he would still face costs of transition to a low carbon economy but he was prepared to wear it and fully supported signing on to the global methane pledge. “If it means we have a bit less cattle, well sorry, this problem is bigger than individuals. Let’s not forget what the big goal is. I have lots of freight and lots of plastic, but we need to get on top of climate so if i am a bit of collateral damage, so be it.” Davis said farmers wanted to be part of the solution to climate change but they also needed to know the rest of the economy was “moving alongside them”. “We can’t eat coal. We need to protect Australia’s agricultural industries to make sure we can continue to feed and clothe Australians and ... the world,” Davis said. Sign up for the Rural Network email newsletter Join the Rural Network group on Facebook to be part of the communityThe New South Wales electoral commissioner has warned funding constraints may delay a host of byelections to replace outgoing MPs, including former premier Gladys Berejiklian, until mid-February, setting up a potential clash with the federal election campaign. In an extraordinary budget estimates hearing on Thursday, John Schmidt, head of the NSW electoral commission, launched a blistering attack on the government’s “piecemeal funding” of the authority, claiming it can’t meet cybersecurity standards for elections in the state. Schmidt also said the commission would not be able to hold the five byelections triggered by the resignation of Berejiklian until next year, which means they may clash with a federal vote which is due by May. “My advice at the moment is it wouldn’t be possible or sensible to try and aim earlier than the middle of February,” Schmidt told the hearing. “My systems can’t handle a full local government election and state byelections at the same time, that’s just a statement of fact. That shouldn’t be the case [but] it’s because they are legacy systems … some of the systems are more than 10 years old.” In the days following the former premier’s decision to step down due to an Icac investigation, former deputy premier John Barilaro and three other MPs also announced plans to leave state parliament. While the timing of the state election is up to NSW premier Dominic Perrottet, Schmidt’s warning about the commission’s capacity to host the byelections before the new year could complicate plans for a federal election. “There are considerations of course, there’s the federal election coming up,” Schmidt said. The electoral commissioner’s comments on Thursday came during the first appearance before budget estimates by Perrottet as premier, and as the two sat side-by-side, the commissioner did not hold back in his criticisms of the government’s funding of his agency. In scathing comments he cast doubt on the authority’s capacity to deal with the threat of cyber-attacks and expressed concern the government had only provided him with a series of emergency grants to deal with security issues. “Has this ever happened before?” Perrottet quipped during the exchange. Describing the authority’s funding as “like having a house with really crap foundations and then building on top of it”, Schmidt warned the NSW Electoral Commission would not be able to run the upcoming local government elections and five state byelections at the same time due to funding constraints. Schmidt paraphrased a quote from a banking executive talking about cybersecurity risks in the industry, saying dealing with “legacy systems” was “like having a house with really crap foundations and then building on top of it”. “There are all these problems that it creates, both at a functional level and a security level,” he said. Schmidt was particularly blunt about the commission’s capacity to deal with potential cyber-attacks, telling the hearing he did not believe the authority was able to adequately address the risk posed by hackers. “Have I done all that I can with the resources I’ve got to address cyber risks? Yes. Do I believe I should be able to do more? Yes. Would I have been able to do more if I had received the funding I’ve sought for the last four budget cycles? Absolutely,” he said. Asked by Greens MP David Shoebridge whether the electoral commission could meet the government’s own cybersecurity standards with the resources it had, he replied: “No.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Funding concerns have been repeatedly raised by independent agencies in NSW for several years. The state’s anti-corruption watchdog has continuously warned its funding is not adequate as has the police oversight body the Law Enforcement Conduct Commission. In October 2020, the NSW auditor general also criticised the funding arrangements for bodies such as Icac, writing in a landmark report that its independence could be threatened by the fact that politicians sign off on its funding. On Thursday, Perrottet committed to meeting with the heads of those bodies, saying he was looking at their funding arrangements “with fresh eyes”, but he stopped short of addressing the specific funding concerns by Schmidt. The exchange largely overshadowed Perrottet’s first appearance before estimates as premier. Coming a day after he announced that he had ordered a review of grants funding in the state, Perrottet was grilled on the government’s $252m Stronger Communities Fund, which a parliamentary inquiry previously found was overwhelmingly spent in Coalition-held seats. In one case, Hornsby council, in the seat of new treasurer Matt Kean, was awarded $90m despite not making an application for the grant. The inquiry found that during the grant process, funding guidelines were changed without applicants being given notice. Perrottet told the inquiry he was not familiar with the specifics of the fund but said: “I don’t believe it was a fair outcome.” If guidelines change they should be clearly communicated so councils such as Inner West council know funds are available, Perrottet agreed on Thursday. The premier also doubled down on his commitment to replace stamp duty with a land tax when he appeared at budget estimates. “Stamp duty is an inherently terrible tax,” Perrottet said. “It’s by far the most inefficient tax that we have in our state.” Replacing it with an annual tax, similar to council rates, would help more people buy a home and would drive growth in productivity, the Liberal leader said. With Australian Associated PressCharlotte Raven got to her mid-30s without knowing that her family carried the Huntington’s gene. This cruellest of neurodegenerative diseases, which takes years to kill but ekes out the indignity by causing you to choke on your food or become aggressive with those you love, is passed down through the generations. Each child born to a parent who has the gene has a 50% chance of inheriting it. There is no cure and treatment remains essentially palliative – an increasingly heavy cocktail of drugs to baffle the body and dull the terrified brain. In this unsparing memoir, Raven tells the story of how she came to learn that her father had Huntington’s and, in time, that she too had inherited it. Unusually, “Murph”, as they called him, did not develop symptoms until his 60s, 25 years after the first signs of clumsiness and bad temper typically appear. There had always been vague talk of a “schizophrenic” grandmother, but Raven had never made the connection, and Murph was a man who relied on cheerful vagueness to repel direct questions. With Raven’s beloved mother, Susan, already dead from a heart condition, there was no one to help untangle the full story. If Patient 1 were simply an illness memoir it would still be powerful. Huntington’s is rare – only 6,000 people have it in the UK – and there have not been many accounts from the front line. So there is a certain astringent benefit in being educated about this awful condition, the way it sends even the saintliest people into a maelstrom of self-absorption, wild rages and depressive slumps. “Patient 1” refers to Raven’s anonymised listing on a research trial, a traumatic protocol of spinal fluid taps and blood tests designed to see if a new drug will stall the progression of the disease. The deflating news arrives at the end of the book that the interim results are not good enough for the trial to continue. A brief afterword written by Raven’s doctor, Professor Edward Wild, tells the story of his own sadness and frustration at the way that a cure seems as far off as ever. But Raven does much more than write an illness memoir. Part of her purpose in this book is to investigate the continuities between her early self and what is left now that Huntington’s has hollowed her out. Born in 1969, she grew up by her own account a monstrous narcissist. A combination of permissive parents, a certain native talent and the coked-up swagger of the 1990s media scene meant that she enjoyed early infamy. Except she didn’t really enjoy it. She confirms here that she regarded roughing people up in print, including in her Guardian column, as a career move. The Modern Review, the magazine of high-low culture on which she first cut her teeth, was positively toxic behind the scenes. Her money went on cocaine and clothes, and she treated friends, lovers and relatives as props in the continuing drama of her unruly self. Even later, and now married to a husband who sounds like a saint, Raven sulked and huffed that nothing about lovely Tom was good enough. As a last taboo, her babies bored her. This inability to empathise with others, combined with a sense of entitlement, can be features of Huntington’s. Raven isn’t suggesting that she was suffering from symptoms as a young woman, but she is struck by the irony of close friends and even her children not knowing where old Charlotte ends and new Charlotte begins. There is a certain grim resonance, too, in Raven discovering through Huntington’s a measure of self-acceptance and serenity that was lacking during her earlier years. Patient 1 is not an easy book to read. Not just because of the subject matter, which is harrowing, but because Raven’s cognitive decline means that past and present are increasingly indistinct. Instead there is only an unspooling present, which can sometimes make it hard for the reader to grasp the order in which things are happening. But after a while this approach starts to make a deeper kind of sense: Raven explains in her introduction that Huntington’s is not a linear disease but is experienced rather as a series of traumatic, random-seeming assaults. And it is that formless inevitability, so tricky for someone who made a career out of being always in control, that Raven enacts so powerfully here. • Patient 1: Forgetting and Finding Myself by Charlotte Raven, is published by Jonathan Cape (£14). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.And with that, we will wrap up the blog for today. Here is what went down: Western Australia premier Mark McGowan said Cleo Smith is a “delightful little girl” and was adjusting well, after meeting her earlier today, and presenting her with some gifts. Western Australia Police have still not charged Carnarvon man but likely will “later today”. Labor spent the day attacking prime minister Scott Morrison, with shadow foreign affairs minister Penny Wong saying the tiff with the French president had revealed Scott Morrison’s character to world leaders. Albanese and Shorten also joined in the fray. Defence minister, Peter Dutton, has urged France to “put aside” any “hurt feelings,” and said France would’ve reacted the same if told earlier about Aukus. NSW recorded 308 new locally acquired Covid cases and four deaths. Victoria recorded 1,247 new cases and nine deaths. The ACT recorded 13 new cases. Queensland recorded three new locally acquired cases in the regional town of Goondiwindi. Queensland town Moree was also be declared a restricted border zone area. Sky News Australia presenter Alan Jones will leave the network, after declining an offer to return for 2022. Fruit pickers will be guaranteed a minimum wage, with the Fair Work Commission finding the industry’s piecework arrangements not fit for purpose. The federal government pledged $239m to fund 248 medical research projects, including looking into the long term effects of Covid-19 on the brain. After recording three cases earlier today, Queensland town Moree will be declared a restricted border zone area. Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk released a statement announcing the change, which will mean residents will no longer have access across the Queensland border as part of the border bubble, except in exceptional circumstances. It follows an outbreak that has so far spread to 33 cases in NSW. This is in addition to three cases that were reported in Queensland today. There will also be a change to border directions, so that unvaccinated people in the New South Wales border zone, won’t be able to come to Queensland to places and services that are available only to vaccinated people in New South Wales. Farmer groups are divided over the government’s decision to reject US president Joe Biden’s global methane pledge, with the National Farmers Federation backing the government’s stance while Farmers for Climate Action has urged Australia to commit to cut methane. You can read their takes on the pledge in the report from Gabrielle Chan below: NSW health minister Brad Hazzard fronted a budget estimates inquiry today, and said the state was “awash” with Covid vaccines, and indicated some are at risk of expiring. But despite the excess vaccines, there are still 2,100 health staff that are yet to be vaccinated, with the double-dose deadline set at 30 November. 215 employees have so far resigned because of the vaccine mandate. We’re in the process of working with each of those individuals, directly, one on one, trying to understand the context and circumstances. Hazzard said booster shots will continue to be available at vaccine hubs, but will shift to be being solely available from GPs and pharmacists “sometime next year.” The Qudos Bank Arena vaccination hub will close on 7 November, after administering 365,000 doses since 9 August. The foreign minister, Marise Payne, says the government “will need to work very hard” to heal the rift with France. In an interview with Sky News, Payne defended proceeding with the first ever “2+2” meeting of the foreign and defence ministers of France just two weeks before the Aukus partnership was unveiled. The joint statement agreed between Australia and France underlined the importance of the future submarine program (that was cancelled two weeks later). But Payne suggested the final decision had not been made at the time at which she and Peter Dutton spoke with their counterparts at the end of August. “I don’t think removing oneself from a meeting of that nature while no decisions had been made was an appropriate thing to do. And indeed, reviewing all of the issues that go across the full breadth of the relationship was a very important part of that discussion.” Payne said she understood “the deep disappointment that France feels given the decision we have had to make in relation to the future submarine program, and we will need to work very hard … in moving forward and past this point in our relationship with France”. She said Australia and France had “a great deal of history behind us, a great deal of future ahead of us, notwithstanding this very significant difficulty”. Payne was asked whether the Australian government’s release of a private text message sent by Emmanuel Macron to Scott Morrison was diplomatic mistake. She replied: “I’m not going to comment on a text message of which I have no particular knowledge - but claims were made and claims were refuted.” So in somewhat irrelevant (matters how you see it) news, it appears city bin chickens (officially, the white ibis), are mutating. Global heating, increasing drought, water extraction and habitat degradation have driven the Australian white ibis out of inland river systems. But dumpster-diving ibis in cities thrive, meaning there are now tens of thousands of urban birds, while only about 3,000 inland. Macquarie University researchers wanted to see if genetic differences were emerging between the “beautiful, elegant white birds” inland on one side of the Great Dividing Range and “their grubby and cheeky city cousins” on the other. You can read the report from Tory Shepherd at the link below: As with every day this week, South Australia has once again recorded zero new locally acquired cases. The state has hit 68.6% double vaccinated. Sticking with Shorten for a moment, he was asked by Afternoon Briefing host Patricia Karvelas what Australia gained, if anything, from the prime minister’s trip to the Glasgow climate summit: I think he had to go but it’s a bit like a kid going to a show and tell session with nothing to show and tell that I don’t think there is a lot to show for Australia’s reputation but really, we need to move beyond the climate change wars. I shake my head at the three years we have lost under the current government. They have appropriated a few of the policies we took to the last election. At the last election you had Mr Morrison running around the bush saying that encouraging the take-up of electric vehicles by 2030 meant the death of the weekend. Maybe that’s what you need to do to become prime minister, show no shame at all and this bloke seems to think Australians have the memories of goldfish and I don’t think they do and we have wasted a lot of time arguing about a scare campaign on climate when in fact, it’s the climate change which is scary as a phenomena. Karvelas then asked why Labor is not supporting a decision to cut 30% of methane emissions this decade: Anthony spelt out Labor’s policies and I won’t second guess it. You’ll find that when Labor unveils its policies, we have got a much more solid basis for real action on climate than the government. The problem is you have a bloke who says he is a born-again climate conviction politician. When he spent his adult career in parliament bargaining taking action on climate change. If you expect that now the two major parties are saying climate change is important, the question for voters to ask is who do you trust to take real action on climate? The party who has been consistent, Labor, or the party who is sort of recently arrived at the party and says they want to do things even though they spend most of their time opposing it? Ex-federal Labor leader Bill Shorten is on the ABC this afternoon, discussing Scott Morrison’s diplomacy, and typically sought to maintain his party’s onslaught. He was initially asked what he makes of the claim made Morrison had to leak private texts with the French president, in light of being accused of being a liar: Once you are in a fight, every side has a point of view. We shouldn’t have got to this position, that’s the truth of the matter. I can understand the French wanted to have a $90bn contract and they believed Mr Morrison’s act was in poor faith. For me, the issue is the French will say what they want to say and as far as I’m concerned, a lot of Australians worked out that Mr Morrison is perpetually caught out. Shorten was pushed on how the government should seek to rebuild relations with France, in light of the tiff: Maybe they should stop looking at what they did wrong and admitting it. I’ve got no problem with us getting our nuclear technology for our submarines but, I mean, why is it that the government looks so shocked and stunned that the French are outraged? I want to hear explain to Australia how long we will have to extend the class submarines? How much will the deal cost? I accept the technology we are moving to seems to be the superior technology for submarines. I want them to explain why for eight years they have taken us up one path and then another path and then all of a sudden they discovered another way to go and in the meantime our defence has been let down? What this does is not only leave Mr Morrison and his reputation in tatters but I think it leaves the defence credentials in tatters. Victorian opposition leader Matthew Guy has indicated the Liberal party may reject Tim Smith’s nomination for preselection, as the stoush over Smith’s future continues. Speaking to reporters earlier today, Guy stood by his comments earlier this week, where he urged Smith to retire at the next election. One of the things I did say to him was to reflect on his future, and it’s fair to say, as he said yesterday, he is doing that. Guy said he has yet to speak with anyone in the state parliamentary party who disagreed with his position. The party can refuse to accept anyone’s nomination, whether it’s an MP or a candidate or a layperson party member. As I’ve said, I don’t think he should stand. That’s what I said the other day and I stand by it. A co-owner of the Melbourne Cup winning horse Verry Elleegant, Brae Sokolski, has been fined $10,000 for breaches of Covid rules at Flemington racecourse. Sokolski, who partly owns the winning mare, pleaded guilty after an investigation by Racing Victoria (RV). He had jumped a fence and went into the mounting yard, which was deemed a “yellow zone” under the rules at Flemington Racecourse. Sokolski was not allowed into any yellow zone. He also admitted to not wearing a mask in the yellow zone, which was outlined by RV in a statement: Stewards heard submissions on penalty from Mr Sokolski and after doing so took into consideration his guilty plea, his candid evidence, his unblemished record over a long period of time and that he expressed remorse. The Stewards also took into consideration the nature of the offending, the potential ramifications that could flow from a breach of Racing Victoria’s COVID-19 Protocols, and that the penalty must be sufficient enough to deter others from breaching the COVID-19 Protocols. Labor senator Tony Sheldon has slammed Amazon Australia over pay for delivery drivers, following the company’s appearance at the Senate committee on job security he chairs. The committee heard on Thursday that Amazon Flex delivery drivers are paid a minimum $108 per four-hour block, or $27 per hour, before costs and superannuation, while the average pay for drivers in October was $125 per four-hour block. Labor senator Karen Grogan took Amazon Australia’s head of government affairs Michael Cooley to task over how this was significantly lower than the total hourly rate for courier owner drivers in Victoria at $40.71. “We meet or exceed all relevant legal rights for our Amazon Flex delivery partners,” Cooley replied. “The evidence we have does not support that,” Grogan said. “That evidence would be incorrect,” Cooley replied. Cooley said he had not had a chance to review the documents handed to him before the hearing on the Victorian rates of pay, but said the company complied with the law. Sheldon said Amazon was “distorting the market” for delivery drivers and said Amazon’s rate of pay was being used to undermine job security at other delivery companies such as Star Track and FedEx “in order to compete” with Amazon. “We don’t accept that,” Cooley replied. WA police have released audio of the moment officers found four-year-old Cleo Smith, and her now iconic first words to officers: “My name is Cleo.” Officers in the clip can be heard saying “I’ve got you bubby” and “what’s your name, sweetheart?” before Cleo responds. The Australian Medical Association (AMA) has told a federal Senate inquiry of the need to provide support for GPs and related primary health services, specifically in outer metropolitan, rural and regional Australia. AMA vice president Dr Chris Moy and AMA Council of Rural Doctors representative Dr Peter Maguire fronted the inquiry, saying GPs “desperately need help now”. Dr Moy said the pandemic had made clear the central role of GP clinics in the health system but had also “shone a light on the significant challenges faced by GPs” as successive governments had failed to address resourcing. Investment has not matched the increase in costs and demands. There’s a desperate need to make changes now. Dr Moy emphasised that renumeration and support for doctors and their families in regional and rural settings was imperative to retaining and attracting GPs. Dr Maguire told the Senate inquiry there was a “crisis” in rural Australia, and he said older GPs in regional and rural areas were finding it difficult to retire because of GP shortages. He said three out of the four GPs in his small town in Western Australia were older but there was “a struggle to recruit young doctors”. The situation was dire, he said, “with no quick fixes, no single solution”. So just going back on that presser – WA premier Mark McGowan mentioned that there will be announcement on the roadmap out of Covid restrictions for the state. McGowan said he would make the announcements tomorrow, before giving a small hint: We will make further announcements and changes tomorrow. We will have some significant detail in there. As you all know, as you go down the Covid-19 road, nothing is certain. We do our best to provide detail, but everything is unfortunately always subject to change. Blaine has wrapped up his presser by asking local residents to provide any CCTV footage they may have: We obviously have offices here for a little bit of time. The previous appeals that we’ve made to the public around CCTV has been around that particular time the Friday 15 (October), Saturday 16. We have knowledge of a suspect. I’m asking businesses and people within Carnarvon ... to provide the investigative team any CCTV that they might have between Friday the 15 October and Tuesday the 2 November, that would be great assistance. Blaine has continued to give some details, saying Cleo was found with the lights on, and playing with toys: The lights were on, and that she was playing with toys, but all about I will say. This is a go before the courts and the aspects of what we saw that our wannabe evidence and I don’t want anything is going prejudice anything. He goes on to discuss the plans leading up to the raid to rescue Cleo: When we left left for the day, on a Tuesday I think, as we started to settle in for the night, it was going to happen. We had some plans around what could happen, one of them was that the suspect that we were observing would be mobile and would leave the premises so in terms of decisions, it was not harder because we said, we talk about all the different scenarios so what happened was one of the scenarios and it was clear mind what had to occur and that’s just how it went down. He also confirmed there were four officers involved in the arrest of the suspect, who was in a car at the time. Det Sgt Cameron Blaine has stepped up and has spoken about Cleo’s condition, and was happy to see her interacting with her family: I saw ... the family yesterday morning, early in the morning, and it was a first time to sit down in a more relaxed format and have a conversation with them and really see Cleo Smith in a home environment. And it was really heartwarming to see her interact and playing in the backyard and just being herself and around her parents. I’m sure that it has had an impact but ... just behaving naturally like a four-year-old girl should do and just enjoying being in the presence of her little sister and a family. So it was good and nice. I don’t know, I’m not that sure. She is a very sweet girl. Wilde says Cleo was “awake and alert” when she was found, and confirmed that she has checked out of hospital and is physically OK. It was amazing ... Very grateful for that and the outcome. Wilde also confirmed the man that is being held in custody was taken to hospital for an injury: I can confirm the man was taken to hospital for treatment and returned back to the police station. Wilde has continued to discuss the investigation, and although he has not provided much details, he said the man will likely face a magistrate in Carnavon. He also confirmed that police believe the man acted alone. Like I’ve said, there is a lot of information we received and a lot of instigation. All the statements we talk from all the people, over 100 people at the campsite, thousand calls to Crime Stoppers, all the data that we were able to seize with CCTV, other things, looking through phones and other means. It is just getting all that information together, us understanding what has taken place ... it’s a painstaking process. There are thousands if not hundreds of thousands of pieces of information, it’s really joining the dots. WA Police’s Det Supt Rod Wilde is now giving an update on the investigation, and began by saying the man in custody has still not been charged. I can give you an update on the investigation, at present, we have a man in custody and those investigations are continuing. No charges laid. I will take questions. It will probably be later today. There is some work being undertaken. I expect later today it will occur. McGowan has gone on to discuss Cleo’s reaction to receiving the two teddy bears he flashed when he was arriving at Carnavon: We did a few high fives. I tried on one of her shoes and broke one of them ... I gave her the police teddy bears, named Cameron and Rod. Cameron and Rod didn’t seem to like it, didn’t think that was appropriate. I’m not sure those names will stick. Cleo didn’t seem too enamoured of those names. It was a lovely experience to me that girl. She is bubbly, playing, friendly and sweet, she was eating an icy pole, she told me it was very sticky to eat, she was just delightful. WA premier Mark McGowan is giving an update from Carnavon after having met Cleo Smith and her family, and hearing from WA police on the investigation. He said it was overwhelming to see how many “threads” were involved in the investigation, saying efforts by police in narrowing it down to one person were “extraordinary”. He also talked about meeting Cleo, saying she was very well adjusted: I met little Cleo, and I met Isla [and it] was a very nice experience. They are a very humble family, well adjusted. Cleo was a delightful little girl. Playing in the backyard. She had two teddy bears ... It was a lovely experience to meet her. She was, I felt very well adjusted, considerate and the family were very appreciative of everything that had been done for them. Fundamentally decent, honest human beings, they were lovely people and it was great to meet them and acknowledge what they have been through. We have a way to go from here, but they are on the right pathway. Thank you very much everyone and can I thank everybody involved who brought this to a successful conclusion. One of the questions around compulsory vaccination for health workers is the impact the mandate will have on staff numbers, as those who choose not to get vaccinated or refuse to provide proof of vaccination resign or are fired. While data is still coming through, it is clear the overwhelming majority of health workers are choosing vaccination, so there has been little disruption to the workforce. In NSW, the data on the departure of health workers due to the mandate is being compiled by NSW Health. Last week a NSW Health spokesperson told me the data was still being gathered, but they now have enough data to provide some detail. To date, at least 97% of NSW Health’s workforce have received at least one dose of the vaccine and 94% have received two doses of the vaccine. The spokesperson said of its entire workforce of more than 140,000 people, just 0.1% (215 people) had resigned due to their vaccination position as of 25 October. “While any resignation is obviously disappointing, Local Health Districts have management plans in place to limit potential disruptions to service delivery due to staff not being vaccinated,” the spokesperson said. “All vacancies in the NSW Health workforce are prioritised for recruitment, including any positions arising from staff members refusing a Covid- 19 vaccination.” A spokesman for Victoria’s department of health told me data on health workforce resignations due to the mandate was not being monitored or collected by the department. I was told I would need to contact every hospital in the state individually for the figures. Of the hospitals I contacted, only one provided data – the Royal Melbourne hospital. The hospital is down 51 staff who are refusing to be vaccinated against Covid, a requirement to work in Victorian healthcare facilities. This represents just 0.45% of the hospital’s 11,000-strong workforce. NSW health minister Brad Hazzard has faced some questions on the government’s recent decision to delay the easing of restrictions for unvaccinated people. Earlier this week, premier Dominic Perrottet announced that unvaccinated people would need to wait until 15 December to see restrictions ease, pushed out from the initial 1 December date. Hazzard said the decision was made “primarily” due to concerns for public health. He said health authorities approved the move, saying it was about maintaining a “balancing act”. The extra couple of weeks were something they were quite supportive of. Public health would always like longer – because that’s their focus, getting everyone vaccinated. Asked if the date would change again, Hazzard said it was unlikely. At the moment I would say that it’s very solid. We’re expecting WA premier Mark McGowan to step up for a press conference at the Carnarvon police station in a moment after Cleo Smith was rescued yesterday. As part of the NSW Health Covid update, NSW deputy chief health officer Marianne Gale has urged people in Moree to get vaccinated, noting that there had been an increase in cases there. I particularly encourage anyone who lives in the area of Moree to be particularly vigilant. If you have even the mildest of symptoms, please get tested. And we particularly want to see even high vaccination rates in the Moree area. So if you live in Moree and you haven’t yet got vaccinated — either your first dose or second dose — please, now is the time. I’d like to particularly encourage members of the Aboriginal communities living in and around Moree because we are seeing some cases among Aboriginal people in those areas. So, please, for the Aboriginal community in that area, please be extra vigilant for symptoms and please come forward for vaccination. Good afternoon all, and a thanks for the always brilliant Matilda Boseley. Mostafa Rachwani here to take you through the afternoon’s headlines. With that, I shall leave you with the always fantastic Mostafa Rachwani. See you all tomorrow! Thirteen new locally acquired cases of Covid-19 have been recorded in the ACT as more schools in the national capital become impacted by the virus, reports AAP’s Andrew Brown. The latest health figures show there are six Covid patients in ACT hospitals, with two of those being treated in intensive care and on a ventilator. Meanwhile, the full vaccination rate for Canberra has climbed to 94% of those aged 12 and over. The new virus figures come in the wake of three more schools in Canberra being visited by a positive case in recent days. Health authorities announced on Wednesday a cluster of 17 cases had been detected at a separate campus in the city’s south. All year groups had been able to return to classrooms from this week, following a staggered return to in-person learning after lockdown. There are now 144 active cases in the community in the ACT. Oh, just in case you were wondering if former prime minister Kevin Rudd had found a way to make Alan Jones being let go from Sky News about him, don’t worry, he has. Interestingly it looks like Daniel Andrews and Dominic Perrottet will join forces to push for children under 12 to be vaccinated and booster shots to be rolled out ASAP at the upcoming national cabinet meeting on Friday. The Victorian premier held a press conference this morning and said this: The premier of NSW and I will be putting forward a number of very important things to the PM. By the end of the meeting, if not before, he will be in no doubt about what Victoria and NSW need. We are in very similar circumstances... There are some things we can work together on, Dominic and I, and that’s exactly what we have been doing. New Zealand has recorded 139 new cases of Covid-19 in the community, spread across three different regions. There are now 3,871 cases in the community outbreak. Of Thursday’s cases, 136 are in Auckland, two are in Waikato and one is in Northland. Of the day’s cases, 72 have not been epidemiologically linked, bringing the total number yet to be linked to 452 in the past fortnight. There are 64 people in hospital, with five of those in intensive care. On Wednesday, the country reported the death of a 40-year-old man, who had tested positive for Covid-19. The man was isolating alone at home when a family member found him. The cause of his death has not yet been confirmed and has been referred to the coroner. It is the third death of a person with Covid-19 in the current Delta outbreak, and the country’s 29th since the pandemic began. Roughly 85.5% of the population over 12 years old has had at least one dose of the vaccine, while 73% of the eligible population is fully vaccinated. Economic figures out today from the Australian Bureau of Statistics provide a bit more reason why the Reserve Bank of Australia told us earlier this week they won’t be rushing to push up interest rates soon. Retail sales picked up 1.3% in September from August, the ABS says, but for the September quarter they were off 4.4%. On a quarterly basis, that is the biggest dive in almost four decades of data. Blame the lockdowns, of course. NSW saw retail volume plunge 11.6% for the quarter, with the ACT down 13.9%. Victoria was off a more modest 4.5% perhaps because the locals had got used to the delights of Covid curbs. Ben James, director of ABS’s quarterly economy-wide statistics, said: Similar to previous lockdown periods, sales volumes fell in most of the discretionary spending industries with cafes restaurants and takeaway food services (down 18.7%), clothing, footwear and personal accessory retailing (off 25.1%), department stores (-19.5%) and household goods retailing (-4.3 %) significantly down in volume terms. Not surprisingly, online retail sales have continued to scale fresh peaks (unlike those locked down), with turnover for September up 3.4%, or $143m, to a monthly record of $4.34bn. The Greens leader is having fun on Twitter today. Honestly, I would rather be called a liar any day than endure this extraordinarily awkward hug. Love to see Cleo’s sister Isla getting some love! The defence minister, Peter Dutton, has urged France to “put aside” any “hurt feelings” over Australia’s scrapping of the submarine contract in order to focus on the “great uncertainty with China in our region”. Dutton was interviewed on 2GB a short time ago. The French government has acknowledged Australia had a sovereign right to make national security decisions but said the way it handled communications with France was not befitting a close friend and partner. Dutton played down the idea that informing Paris sooner would have made any difference to the reaction: The fact is, the French were going to be upset whenever they were told in any circumstance. We’ve seen the reaction now. It would have been the reaction had they been told sooner or later in between – it wouldn’t have mattered. And you can understand that. As we said before, if we had a contract cancelled on us, the Australian government would be upset at that lost revenue. And you know, the French have got an election coming up in April, you understand all of that posturing. (A small reminder an election is due in Australia by May.) Dutton added: I think now we move on from it and recognise that we’ve made a decision that is in our country’s best interests, and nobody from Scott Morrison down is going to apologise for that. The French ambassador, Jean-Pierre Thébault, yesterday denounced the Australian government’s release of a private text message from Emmanuel Macron as “an unprecedented new low”, arguing other world leaders would now worry their words might be “weaponised” against them. Dutton played down the ambassador’s comments: The ambassador made some comments yesterday, he’s reading from a script from Paris – he has just returned from there, I understand that. He’s got a job to do. But we move on. And it’s important for us to be allies, because they understand as we do that there is great uncertainty with China in our region. The Communist party of China has taken a particular course and we need to all work together to make sure that we have peace and stability in our region. Any blip in relation to that, any concern, hurt feelings, frankly, needs to be put aside for us to concentrate on the bigger issue, which is making sure that we protect and defend our country. Not just now ... but into the decades to come. And that’s exactly what we’re doing. We’ve seen the tweets - now here is the official readout from the American side of the call between US secretary of state Antony Blinken and Australian foreign minister Marise Payne. A spokesperson for the US state department, Ned Price, said the two spoke “to continue our ongoing efforts to ensure a peaceful and prosperous Indo-Pacific following September’s Australia-United States Ministerial (AUSMIN) meetings in Washington”. They discussed the Australia-UK-U.S. (AUKUS) trilateral security partnership and the ways in which we will deepen our engagement with other key allies and partners in our collective efforts to uphold a free and open Indo-Pacific. They also recommitted to our collective work in the region to build back better from COVID-19. The readout doesn’t mention France or the pushback from some south-east Asian countries – but the fallout was likely discussed. Last week Joe Biden sought to repair the relationship with Emmanuel Macron by saying aspects of the unveiling of Aukus were “clumsy”. The changes to the Fair Work Act passed earlier this year – which the government has trumpeted as allowing casual employees to convert to permanent staff – are “practically useless”, the Australian Council of Trade Unions has said. The legislation, passed with the support of One Nation, changed the definition of casual, ACTU president Michele O’Neil told the Senate select committee on job security, so that employers decide whether an employee is casual, regardless of the hours worked. She said the casual conversion clause, which allows employees to request to be made permanent after 12 months, had proven to be useless. When you look at the reality of that, it is a very, very false promise. They said that a casual employee might be able to convert to permanent employment after 12 months, but the catch is that it’s only if their employer feels like it. Employers can refuse to convert a casual to permanent on so-called ‘reasonable grounds’ – a loophole that is so big as to make the right practically useless. O’Neil pointed to the NSW Tafe system, which reviewed all 7,700 eligible casual staff and refused to give them any permanent work. Liberal senator Ben Small argued the Australian Bureau of Statistics data had yet to show an increase in casualisation in the workforce since the changes were passed, but O’Neil said the impact of the legislation was only just starting to take effect. Goondiwindi will not enter lockdown despite the town recording three new local cases. This is due to high vaccination rates in the area. The Australian Capital Territory has recorded 13 new Covid-19 cases overnight. And 94% of the territory’s population aged 12 and over are now fully vaccinated. NSW has released further details on the four people infected with Covid-19 who died in the last reporting period. Sadly, NSW Health is reporting the deaths of four people – three men and one woman. One person was in their 30s, one person was in their 70s, and two people were in their 80s. Two people were from south western Sydney, one person was from western Sydney and one person was from the Shellharbour area. Two people were not vaccinated and two people – both in their 80s and with underlying health conditions – had received two doses of a Covid-19 vaccine. A 38-year-old woman from western Sydney died at Royal Prince Alfred Hospital. She was not vaccinated and had underlying health conditions. A man in his 80s died at Royal Prince Alfred Hospital. He was a resident of the Greek Orthodox Community Home for the Aged in Earlwood, where he acquired his infection. NSW Health expresses its sincere condolences to their loved ones. There have been 530 Covid-19 related deaths in NSW since 16 June 2021 and 586 in total since the start of the pandemic. Palaszczuk: Now the good news about Goondiwindi is this – 93.1% of the residents living [here] have had one dose and 83.5% have had two doses. This is a highly vaccinated community. Two of these locally acquired cases were unvaccinated, and the third case of the woman in her 30s had just received one dose of the vaccine. So my message is very clear – and I have said this – if you are unvaccinated and the virus [is in] your community, the virus will hunt you out. It is really important in Goondiwindi if anyone has any symptoms to please be tested so there will be testing facilities set up outside Goondiwindi hospital and we are looking at transferring the people to Brisbane later on today when convenient. Queensland premier Annastacia Palaszczuk is speaking now about the three new Covid-19 cases the state recorded today, all in the regional town of Goondiwindi. Case one is a contact of a known cluster and we are not concerned about that person. Case two has been in the community for five days and all household contacts have tested negative. Case three is a woman in her 30s who has been in the community for four days and has had one dose of AstraZeneca. Religious groups have warned the Morrison government to retain a clause allowing discrimination against staff who don’t share their faith in the Coalition’s religious freedom bill, as Liberal MPs reserve their right to cross the floor over the draft legislation. The attorney general, Michaelia Cash, is preparing to introduce the religious discrimination legislation to parliament in the final sitting fortnight starting on 22 November and is attempting to navigate deep divisions within the party. The bill is now in its third iteration. Greg Bondar, a spokesperson for conservative Christian lobby group FamilyVoice Australia, said opponents of “religious freedom” legislation incorrectly claimed organisations couldn’t hold religious views. Bondar cited Qantas’s support for the sacking of Israel Folau and banks’ decisions on climate change-related lending as evidence institutions are allowed to act on “religious and political views”. You can read the full report by Paul Karp and Sarah Martin below: I like that the photo has been labelled with flags, you know, just in case anyone was confused. With rapid antigen Covid-19 tests now available to buy in Australian retail stores including pharmacies and supermarkets like Coles and Woolworths, I got a lesson in using an at-home test. Nurse practitioner Del Hayden told me: ‘The actual testing process is designed to be simple, it’s easy to follow and it is painless.” Check out how to do it right, below: Fruit pickers will be guaranteed a minimum wage, with the Fair Work Commission finding the industry’s piecework arrangements not fit for purpose, reports Georgie Moore from AAP. The Australian Workers’ Union said the decision to set a minimum hourly casual pay of $25.41 was a victory for underpaid and exploited workers. The Fair Work Commission rejected industry arguments, including from the National Farmers’ Federation, that paying workers based on the amount of fruit picked or vegetables harvested incentivised productivity. In its decision the commission said: The existing pieceworker provisions in the horticulture award are not fit for purpose; they do not provide a fair and relevant minimum safety net as required. It amended the award to set a minimum floor for piecework pay arrangements and require employers to keep records of pickers’ hours to ensure monitoring and enforcement. The commission found widespread non-compliance with the award and a majority temporary migrant workforce vulnerable to exploitation. It said piecework rates were usually presented on a “take it or leave it” basis rather than being the product of genuine negotiation with the worker. There was often no written pay agreement. The AWU labelled the industrial decision one of the most significant in modern times, with national secretary Daniel Walton saying: Fruit pickers in Australia have been routinely and systemically exploited and underpaid Labor spokesman Tony Burke said some fruit pickers had earned as little as $3 an hour. This exploitation should now become a thing of the past. Alan Jones, who was hired last year to host a flagship After Dark show on Sky News Australia, has been dumped after failing to attract a significant audience. The ratings for his 8pm show have been falling since he launched last year and are regularly behind those of Andrew Bolt and Peta Credlin, despite a big marketing campaign that accompanied his hiring. Jones has been a lightning rod for Sky News management with his controversial statements about Covid-19, which contributed to a YouTube ban for a week, and a series of errors and apologies. The ending of his contract with Sky comes months after the Daily Telegraph ended his regular column amid controversy about his Covid-19 commentary, including calling the NSW chief health officer, Kerry Chant, a village idiot on his Sky News program. You can read the full report below: Yes! Team Pelican has another high profile supporter! US secretary of state Antony Blinken has discussed Indo-Pacific security (read “the threat of China”) with the Australian foreign minister Marise Payne. He tweeted about the country’s share “mateship” this morning: I was glad to speak with Australian foreign minister Marise Payne today about our easy #mateship, our shared commitment to a peaceful, secure Indo-Pacific, and our efforts to support Covid-19 economic recovery and resilience. Alan Jones has published a lengthy Facebook post following the news that Sky News Australia would not be renewing his contract for 2022. Here is an expert on what the commentator has to say: I write in my regular Thursday column to advise you that the management at Sky News have indicated to me that they will not renew my contract, which ends on November 30. It is, of course, the prerogative of any employer to make such a decision; but, given this is the case, I feel an obligation to my viewers to make some observations to avoid certain misconstructions. In all my broadcasting life, the ratings performances have been scrutinised. I have no problem with that. It may seem immodest to point out that the meeting I had with management on Friday, October 29, occurred the day after our program won the ratings in the 8pm slot. The Victorian premier is talking about trains again. Nature is healing. Fans without blades, a wasteful composter and a sugar-laden children’s snack are among products named by the consumer advocacy group Choice in its annual Shonky award. The chief executive of Choice, Alan Kirkland, said he was amazed the organisation had to keep giving out the awards, now in their 16th year. “Healthy toddler food should actually be healthy. An expensive compost bin shouldn’t generate more waste … a smart fan should cool you down.” A bladeless fan sold under a number of different brand names and put through its paces by Choice expert tester Adrian Lini was assessed as performing seven times worse than the average tower fan, and 70 times worse than the best fan. You can read the full report below: Western Australia police deputy commissioner Col Blanch told Melbourne radio station, 3aw, that the 36-year-old arrested in relation to the alleged abduction of four-year-old Cleo Smith has returned to hospital this morning for a second time since entering police custody. He says the man was not injured during his arrest. We’ve got to look after his welfare and make sure he’s fed, rested, medically and mentally sound before we can interview him properly, otherwise the integrity of that interview won’t stand up in court. Sky News Australia presenter Alan Jones will leave the network, after declining an offer to return for 2022. The conservative commentator made the announcement this morning and will and will farewell viewers on his show tonight. Regional and remote Aboriginal housing is not able to withstand climate change and will be unsuitable for future living, forcing people to consider migrating away from their traditional lands if nothing is done, research says. Even the best-kept housing will not be enough to protect people from the worst impacts of climate change, according to the Australian Housing and Urban Research Institute. The researchers also warned that even if existing housing is improved to deal with the heat, widespread over-crowding in Aboriginal communities would cancel out the benefits. You can read the full report below: The NSW numbers are also out, with the state recording 308 new infections in the last reporting period. Sadly four people have died. Victoria has broken its streak of sub-1000 Covid days, recording 1,247 new cases overnight. Sadly nine people infected with Covid-19 lost their lives in the last reporting period. The federal government has this morning pledged $239m to fund 248 medical research projects, including looking into the long term effects of Covid-19 on the brain. Health minister Greg Hunt wants Australia to be at the forefront of long Covid research. We do know that many people experience after-effects of Covid and the world is still learning, but we want to be right at the front of the research into the long-term impacts. Many people recover and then move forward from Covid, but there is a proportion that have what is known as long Covid and that can take different forms, but the fog of the brain that you are talking about is a real phenomenon. And so the University of Queensland ... they are looking at the brain. How do you do block the impacts on the brain, and then more generally how to block the impacts of Covid? So really important research. The number of people in NSW jails has dropped by almost 10% in the past two years due to the impact of Covid-19, reports AAP. In September, there were 12,254 adults in NSW jails – a drop of 1268 from 13,522 in the pre-pandemic period of September 2019 – according new figures from the NSW Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research. During that period, the number of male prisoners fell by 8.6% and the number of women prisoners dropped by nearly 20%. The number of Indigenous male prisoners fell 2.3% and the number of women Indigenous female prisoners fell 9.2%. Bocsar executive director Jackie Fitzgerald said in a statement on Thursday: We saw a sharp drop in prisoner numbers during both the 2020 and the 2021 NSW lockdowns. This is an abrupt change from pre-pandemic patterns during which prisoner volumes increased steadily for many years. The suspension of court operations and concern for prisoner welfare in relation to Covid-19 means fewer people have been incarcerated. The prison population was now at its lowest level since 2015, Ms Fitzgerald said. As offending levels and the criminal justice system return to normal, BOCSAR anticipates the adult prison population will return to pre-Covid-19 levels during the next 12 months. Unfortunately, the Covid-related fall in the prison population has been less significant for Aboriginal men and women. This means that the problem of Aboriginal over-representation remains very concerning. Western Australia police minister Paul Papalia says four-year-old Cleo Smith is in good spirits after being rescued 18 days after disappearing from her family’s campsite. I haven’t seen her today at all. It’s very early in the morning. But the police commissioner confirmed, as has everyone who’s met little Cleo, that she’s an extraordinary little girl, full of energy and love, and the family are all back together again, which is a wonderful thing. Look, it wasn’t a random tip or a clairvoyant or any of the sort of things ... that you might hear. It was just hard police grind. There were a huge number of officers involved in this taskforce, more than 140. They sifted through all manner of information and some analysts in Perth, in particular, brought together a few different elements of their investigation and ended up with this result where they rescued Cleo from the house and also, at about the same time, arrested the individual concerned. I couldn’t be more proud. Everyone in Western Australia is. And everyone around the country should be. I wonder if Yvette D’ath will mention this at the Queensland Covid update today? OK, but can we talk about Queensland Health’s message to residents of the sunshine state this morning? The department is encouraging people to “give [themselves] a hand” by promoting the mental and physical health benefits of masturbation. Millar: The French ambassador is sending a message to other countries, saying, ‘Beware. Beware of how they deal with Australia.’ That’s not entirely diplomatic either, is it? Albanese: No, it’s not at all. But that’s why you don’t leak a private text message from the president of another nation to your private phone. You don’t do that. And that’s why you need to, I think, engage in a diplomatic way. And that hasn’t occurred here. And it is a real concern. I’ve expressed my concern about the briefing-out that occurred from the prime minister’s office on the day that I received a national security briefing about the submarines issue. I travelled to Canberra for a national security briefing with the heads of all the agencies and with Scott Morrison. And I didn’t detail any of what occurred in that room. I kept it there and didn’t even tell anyone, of course, that that was happening. That was appropriate. But the prime minister’s office briefed out that we had been briefed and been informed about a major announcement at 7am the next day. And that put us in a position then of being asked was that true and refusing to comment on any of those matters. We didn’t breach the confidence that was given. And you’ve gotta engage in a fair dinkum way with people. When it comes to national security, you can’t play short-term politics. And I’m sure that that’s what Penny Wong’s comments went to. That’s why Penny Wong will make an outstanding foreign minister for Australia if we’re successful after the next election. Albanese has been asked about his frontbencher, Penny Wong’s, comments comparing Scott Morrison to former US President Donald Trump. Well, Scott Morrison, of course, went to the US and went to a Donald Trump campaign rally. And part of the problem, I think, with politics and the alienation that people feel is that you can say anything based upon a 24-hour timeframe and not be accountable for what you’ve said. And there is a pattern with Scott Morrison of firstly denying that there’s a problem, then eventually, when it’s acknowledged, blaming someone else, then changing positions, and then pretending that he never held the counterposition previously for a long period of time. ABC news breakfast host Lisa Millar: What would you be doing right now? What needs to be done to get this relationship back on track? Albanese: Well, I wouldn’t be leaking private text messages, for a start. Millar: Barnaby Joyce says that’s not as bad as calling a leader a liar? Albanese: Well, Barnaby Joyce, I wouldn’t be taking any lessons from on diplomacy, frankly. Barnaby Joyce, as acting prime minister, is something that should concern most Australians, frankly. And he probably still is in that position at the moment. What we need is diplomatic arrangements between countries, and leaking private text messages don’t come into that. I can’t recall something like that occurring ever between an Australian leader and the leader of another major country. And here is the opposition leader, Anthony Albanese, joining the condemnation of Scott Morrison, speaking now to ABC News Breakfast. Well, [the Australian and French relationship] needs some repair done, quite clearly. It’s quite extraordinary for the leader of a major nation, like France, to say the Australian prime minister lied to them. And it’s quite extraordinary for them, in response, for the Australian prime minister to release a private text message that doesn’t really show much. But it’s an extraordinary breach of protocol for that to occur. As is the dispute over whether the United States was properly informed about what had occurred between Australia and France, and president Biden’s comments are also, I think, pretty serious. As is the then leaking of the security information and details and timeline from the United States. I think that the prime minister really needs to engage in a more diplomatic way with our friends and allies. And the United States and France have been great friends of Australia for a long period of time. Wong has labelled Scott Morrison’s response to French president Emmanuel Macron “vandalism”. Now ultimately, this is the decision [to exit the French submarine deal to pursue nuclear options with the US and UK] that the government took and we [Labor] backed in the national interest, that is to move to the down the path of nuclear-propelled submarines. That’s a big decision and, for the French, it was always going to be difficult to manage, but the job of the leader of the country is not to behave in this way ... it’s to deal with the inevitable negative response of the change in a mature and responsible way. I mean, this is, it’s vandalism. It is vandalism, the way in which this has been dealt with by the government. It is a wanton disregard for our international reputation. Deaths from flu and other respiratory infections in Australia have dropped significantly during the Covid-19 pandemic, according to new data. The latest release of Australian Bureau of Statistics mortality data shows that two people died of influenza in July – the first deaths from the viral infection in Australia for an entire year. The figures come as research by Doherty institute scientists suggests one of the four main kinds of influenza virus that cause seasonal epidemics may have become extinct due to Covid-19 health measures. As of 10 October, there have only been 550 cases of laboratory-confirmed influenza recorded by the National Notifiable Diseases Surveillance System this year, with the federal health department noting that “activity in the community remains at historically low levels in 2021”. You can read the full report below: More Morrison criticism to come, no doubt, with the opposition leader Anthony Albanese to appear on ABC News Breakfast just after 8am. Wong has compared Scott Morrison’s actions this week to former US president Donald Trump, while speaking to ABC radio, saying the Australian prime minister is “prepared to damage relationships” and “doesn’t want to acknowledge that he’s done anything wrong”. The problem is this man’s character, which Malcolm Turnbull, I think has witheringly assessed from his own experience, is on display internationally. And that is a problem because it’s undermining the country’s reputation. You don’t make a country more secure by demonstrating that you’re prepared to damage, at any cost, partnerships and alliances. We’ve seen another leader who followed that trend, and that person was Donald Trump. Host Fran Kelly: You’re comparing Scott Morrison’s behaviour to Donald Trump? Wong: I am simply saying that we have seen in recent articles, a leader who was prepared to damage alliances and partnerships, and that was Donald Trump and we are seeing Mr Morrison being prepared to damage relationships in the way I’ve described by the provision of private information ... he doesn’t want to acknowledge that he’s done anything wrong. Shadow foreign affairs minister Penny Wong says the ongoing spat with French president Emmanuel Macron has revealed Scott Morrison’s character to world leaders. French government officials have expressed their fury over the leaking of private text messages between the two leaders, which appear to show Macron did have some awareness that the future of the countries’ submarine deal was in some doubt. Wong says this has done serious damage to Morrison’s international reputation. Morrison’s character has been on the show, and we’re seeing the consequences to Australia’s interests and international standing as a consequence. His character is one of somebody, frankly, who’s dishonest, and someone whose reflex is spin rather than sincerity and always reaches for background and leaking, and someone who stubbornly refuses to say, ‘Yes, we could have handled this better’. And there are really two things that stand out this week, and that goes by relationships. First for the United States and secondly, our relationship with France. We saw president Biden’s public comments undermined or sought to be undermined by someone providing an American National Security Council document to a journalist. An extraordinary act against an ally. And secondly, a text message between two leaders. Now if I had done that to you, I’d leaked a personal text message, you wouldn’t trust me again, and neither would anyone who knew that I’ve done that. And the problem is by ... refusing to take responsibility, or refusing to acknowledge he could have done better – Mr Morrison has not only made himself ... untrustworthy, he’s putting Australia in a very bad position, in a dire position. All because he doesn’t want to take responsibility for his behaviour. The company contracted by the federal government to run the controversial cashless debit card claimed $2m in jobkeeper payments before increasing its revenues during the pandemic. Payments firm Indue, which was handed a $26m, two-year extension to its contract to keep running the scheme late last year, received about $2.1m in jobkeeper wage subsidies in total. That comprised $632,700 in June 2020 and $1.49m between July and September 2020, according to its annual report. The company’s revenue increased in 2019-20 and 2020-21, leading to profit of $2.1m and $2.5m, the report shows. Under the jobkeeper program, businesses were required to estimate whether their turnover would decrease by 30%-50% when compared to the previous year, depending on their size. There is no suggestion Indue did not qualify for the payments under the rules of the scheme. You can read the full report below: Frydenberg has been asked how federal tax cuts are expected to affect the Australian economy and the budget’s bottom line. They are a significant contributor to the overall economic health of our country. More than 11 million people getting more than $10bn of that in the September quarter... It is part of our broader plan to cut this whole tax bracket out of the equation, the $0.37 to the dollar out of the tax bracket and as a result we will see the majority of taxpayers pay less on the dollar. The country is still rejoicing today after the discovery of four-year-old Cleo Smith, alive and well, after going missing 18 days earlier. Treasurer Josh Frydenberg, who is speaking on Sunrise now, has been asked to recount the moment he heard the news. When I came out of the building and was told by federal police that she had been found, I had goosebumps up my arms and I think the country just had a massive collective of sigh of relief yesterday because as the search had gone on and on, people fear the worst. Our smiles were all a bit brighter yesterday and my wife is telling me about how all of our friends are crying over the course of the day as everyone felt a personal connection to this, not only as a dad but a member of the community. I’m sure there are lots of grandparents out there and sisters and brothers [who] felt the raw emotion of this most beautiful little girl who has been found. Good morning everyone, it’s Matilda Boseley here and let’s jump straight into Thursday. The big news the morning, NSW premier Dominic Perrottet will establish an inquiry into a series of brutal gay and transgender hate crimes committed in Sydney between 1970 and 2010. This inquiry follows the recommendation of a parliamentary committee report tabled in May. This committee heard months of testimony from victims, their families and legal representatives about suspected hate crimes against 88 men. Some 23 of the cases remain unsolved. Perrottet said this morning: These crimes represent one of the darkest times in our recent history... They were callous, brutal and cowardly. He said members of the LGBTQI community suffered grave injustices which “were not acceptable in the past and they are not acceptable now”. This is the first step to address them. The inquiry’s final report found the NSW police force had historically failed in its responsibility to properly investigate cases. But the committee stopped short of recommending NSW police issue a public apology, although it noted acknowledgement by those who failed to protect and deliver justice for LGBTQI people was necessary for healing. The report recommended the inquiry be run by a judge and have the power to investigate unsolved cases. OK, with that, why don’t we jump right into the day.How did we get here with Stacey Solomon? When the ash finally settles, we might find that the true legacy of The X Factor is actually the TV presenters it generated along the way, not the “musicians”: Stacey Solomon, Olly Murs, the national treasure that is Rylan. I would argue that staring into a camera and quickly saying “coMING UP!” in a slick way is a rarer skill set than having a good singing voice and just enough charisma to get on stage. This is why we give Ant and Dec a TV award every single year, because they are two of about six people in the country capable of doing it. Any idiot can spend too long singing the opening line of Feeling Good. About 20 people on the planet can keep your attention long enough to get through the terms and conditions of a phone-in competition. Anyway, here’s Sort Your Life Out With Stacey Solomon, which is – and I do not say this lightly – perfect television. Look at the title again: perfection. Look at the fact that it’s on BBC One: perfection (on Channel 4, a show like Sort Your Life Out would be dogged with “recapification” due to the ad breaks, and would suffer directly. On the BBC it is one clean run through, 58 minutes of uninterrupted TV). Look at the host, and realise she was born for this role. Look at the concept. Perfect, perfect, perfect. If you missed April’s pilot, it’s fairly straightforward: Solomon drives to your home along with three (perfect) helpers, and sorts your life out. They take all of your possessions from your house and lay them out in a warehouse. They make you spend two days confronting your past, your present and your hoarding compulsions, and put things in the “RECYCLE” pile if they can be recycled. They clean your bathroom with hard work and vinegar, and fit some new handy, MDF-style cupboards to that weird little alcove you don’t know what to do with. They make you sell your belongings at a car boot sale for a surprising amount of money. We are all now familiar with Marie Kondo’s philosophy of organisation – only keep things if they spark joy, and also, if you actually fold them you can get more T-shirts in a drawer. Solomon presents a similar but identifiably British version: get a label-maker, only keep your kids’ revision books if your youngest might need them one day and, yeah, absolutely keep your wedding photos. Where Netflix presents us with newly organised families in white linen marvelling at their cleared out homes as a soft wind ripples their steamed-clean curtains, Solomon makes them slog two days in a warehouse in hoodies and leggings, sobbing over old Stickle Bricks. You keep expecting Mrs Hinch to come in and threaten them with a kneecapping if they don’t clear that freezer out, now. It doesn’t make sense that this show is as good as it is. One reason is there is not an ounce of fat on the thing: while Solomon makes the families confront just how many bottles of nail polish they have, helpers Iwan (cleaner, but not in a “clean freak” way), Dilly (organiser, but not in an “organiser freak” way), and Rob (lightning-brained carpenter) are feverishly making over the home. Where other shows might dwell too long and too patronisingly on cleaning tips, Iwan takes about three seconds to explain what he’s doing to that oven tray with a dishwasher tablet. Rob’s putting some storage in under the bath, and before you ask – yep, there’s an on-screen tip telling you what MDF to buy so it doesn’t warp when exposed to steam. And here’s Dilly, look, decanting rice into a jar and labelling the instructions on the back. Actually that is smart, isn’t it? Perhaps … perhaps I should sort my life out. But it’s Solomon who makes this: she’s just so palpably, overwhelmingly likable. In the first episode, each helper arrives at the house separately and they all greet her with a genuine, beaming hug. This week’s family seem besotted with her, and I am convinced they all stay in touch on WhatsApp still, months after the event. She does an astonishing amount of to-camera pieces from the front seat of her car, avoiding drizzle, and looks genuinely flustered while putting a fleece throw over an old sofa. She teases Rob for carpentering too slowly and playfully explains to a teenager how her new peg wall makeup display works ([Stacey Solomon gentle voice] “The mirror has a little light on it” [Stacey Solomon cartoon dog voice] “GREAT FOR SELFIES!”). Yes, The X Factor gave us Little Mix, Bad Boys by Alexandra Burke and the Harry Styles Vogue cover. But Sort Your Life Out might be the best of the lot. Sort Your Life Out With Stacey Solomon is on at 8pm on 4 November on BBC OneA couple of hundred years ago Britain was not a lot different from many poor countries today. Life expectancy was low, infant mortality was high, living standards barely rose from year to year, water-borne diseases were rife. People worked long hours and life for the struggling was, as Thomas Hobbes put it, “nasty, brutish and short”. Then the Industrial Revolution came along and Britain, followed by other countries in the world’s temperate zones, discovered the elixir of economic growth. After pretty much flatlining for more than a thousand years, incomes per head started to rise much more quickly. Growth has resulted in shorter working weeks, longer lives and fewer people living in absolute poverty. More money has been spent on health, education and sanitation – all of it much needed. But – and there was always going to be a but – it has come at a cost. Two centuries of using fossil fuels to power economic activity with no regard for the consequences has led to global heating, which has now reached potentially catastrophic levels. The good news from the early days of the Cop26 conference in Glasgow is that everybody admits there is a problem. The US president, Joe Biden, gets it, as does the British chancellor, Rishi Sunak. President Xi Jinping of China, although he has given the talks a miss, is as cognisant of the threat as France’s Emmanuel Macron or Germany’s Angela Merkel. The big beasts of global finance know they have to pledge obeisance to carbon net zero targets even while continuing to bankroll the fossil fuel sector. It has taken a while to get everybody on the same page – much too long, in fact – but minds are now focused in a way they weren’t 10 years ago. Climate change deniers fought a long rearguard action against the scientists but have now been seen off. That’s welcome, as is the recognition that the challenges presented by the need to restrict temperature rises to 1.5C require a different form of economics. Even so, there’s a real risk that Cop26 will end in failure, and that the search for a collective approach to tackling climate crisis will end in mutual recriminations and a blame game. The reason for that is simple: rich countries want poorer countries to set more stringent targets for reducing greenhouse gas emissions; poor countries say they will do so only if the plans are consistent with poverty reduction and a narrowing of the prosperity gap with the west. Poor countries point out that the current mess is largely the result of the long-term heating of the planet by rich countries. Global heating is a problem that has developed over time. China is responsible for 28% of new global emissions; but of the stock of greenhouse gases, countries in Europe have contributed a third and the US just under a quarter. Rich countries are suffering much less from climate breakdown than poor countries, but it is the former that have the resources to reverse it. Beijing is not going to be made the fall guy if negotiations collapse, and says it is up to the west – with its abundant wealth – to make the running. To meet the Paris goal of 1.5C, big amounts of CO2 are going to have to be eliminated each and every year between now and 2050. That will come at a cost. The US investment bank Morgan Stanley has put a price tag of $50tn (£37tn) on five key areas of technology – including $20tn for the development of hydrogen power, $14tn for solar, wind and hydro power, and $11tn for electric vehicles. Despite plenty of promises, financial assistance has been slow in coming. Developing countries have every right to be cynical about the $130tn of financial firepower to tackle the climate crisis allegedly being marshalled by the world’s biggest financial companies, when past pledges of a $100bn a year from rich countries have yet to be met. As the UN’s trade and development arm, Unctad, noted last week, adaptation costs for developing countries have doubled in the past decade as a result of inaction. “These will only rise further as temperatures increase, reaching $300bn in 2030 and $500bn in 2050,” it said. It’s not hard to come up with suggestions for what should happen. Western countries could meet their financial obligations without delay. They could provide deeper debt relief for the growing number of countries in distress. Trade deals could be structured to prevent countries that take action against fossil fuel companies from being sued. One idea from the economist Avinash Persaud is that countries that have contributed most to the stock of greenhouse gases should allow investors in climate crisis projects anywhere in the world to borrow from them at the ultra-low interest rates available in the west. This cheap finance would be rolled over for as long as the project showed some minimum rate of reduction in greenhouse gases. Persaud estimates that $500bn a year from this source could stimulate $50tn in private investment within 15 years. Rich countries are insisting that money is tight in the aftermath of the global pandemic, but these are the sort of sums that will be needed for the west to be taken seriously in the developing world. Telling people with next to nothing that they are not going to be able to have what we take for granted is not going to cut it. Larry Elliott is the Guardian’s economics editor1) One of the highlights of the racing season is upon us with the Breeders’ Cup. Still arguably one of the greatest races of all time, Tiznow’s win by a nose over Sakhee in 2001 is not a bad place to start. If that was close then there was literally no separating High Chaparral and Johar in the 2003 Cup Turf, not even a flared nostril. Winners rarely come at much longer odds than Arcangues’ 133-1 but Lester Piggott coming out of retirement in 1990 aged 54 to win on Royal Academy in the Mile is arguably the best story in Breeders’ Cup history. Not many will fondly remember the now-defunct Marathon but what about some jockey-on-jockey action? 2) Danny Ings returns to Southampton on Friday with Aston Villa and you would not bet against him finding the net. The Winchester lad is unlikely to celebrate if he scores, but here’s some who were more than happy to stick it to their former clubs. Carlos Tevez enjoyed his double when Manchester City hosted United in the January after the Argentinian crossed the divide. Zlatan Ibrahimovic let the Internazionale fans know when he beat Júlio César from the spot against his former club in the first derby since his return to Milan. If a Panenka penalty was not enough salt rubbed into the wound, Sergio Ramos made sure Sevilla fans were clear who their tormentor was in 2017. While these are all strong entries, nothing tops Emmanuel Adebayor running the length of the pitch to knee slide in front of a jilted ex. 3) The buildup to Canelo Álvarez and Caleb Plant’s super middleweight title fight has been spicy. The bookies are not giving the American much of a shot against Álvarez and it is easy to understand why, not only does the Mexican hit hard but he is fabulous in defence. Still, Plant is pretty slippery himself. 4) Runners – it’s cross-country season! Here’s an epic finish in a 2016 NCAA women’s race, 16-year-old Holland Reynolds with a gut-wrenching crawl to the line to give her school a state championship title in 2010; a substantial pileup after a tumble near the start line in Alaska, two ways of embracing the mud, trying to retrieve a lost shoe embedded in a mud-bank … and – ouch – victorious Jimmy Gressier fluffing his finish-line knee slide. 5) AFC Sudbury of the Isthmian League Division One North are the lowest-ranked team in the FA Cup first round proper. The eighth-tier club have come through the preliminary round, the first qualifying round, a second qualifying round replay, the third qualifying round and the fourth qualifying round to earn a tie with their League Two neighbours Colchester. 6) Putting together the ultras of Besiktas, Fenerbahce and Galatasaray is a recipe for disaster but in 2013 they were united by a common cause. Copa 90’s Istanbul United documentary tells that story wonderfully. 7) Some more forgotten goals: Trevor Brooking for England v Hungary in 1981; Cyrille Regis for West Brom v Norwich in 1982; Brian McClair for Manchester United v Chelsea in 1987; Roy Wegerle for QPR v Leeds in 1990; Rod Wallace for Leeds v Spurs in 1994; and Niclas Jensen for Manchester City v Leeds in 2003. Our favourites from below the line last week 1) The kind of showdown that would sadly never happen these days, but here’s 1979’s World’s Fastest Bowler Competition. 2) Ten reasons why MotoGP is not for the faint of heart. 3) DK Metcalf and Marshon Lattimore are not good friends. 4) Anyone for a counterattack? Spotters’ badges: whobroughtoranges, robinbarwick, germit Guardian YouTube football channel Do subscribe, if you fancy. Guardian YouTube sport channel Likewise. Any suggestions for next week? Add your links in the comments belowFidel Strub was three when the inside of his cheek started to itch. After a few days, it felt like it was burning, then it began to smell as if it was rotting. A splitting headache came next before his whole body started to feel uncomfortably hot. “I remember darkness came,” he says. “I had a hammering headache and a burning body. When I opened my eyes, any light stung them and it burned like hell. It was easier to close my eyes for less pain. I could do nothing but lie on the floor.” Strub was living with his family in a mud hut on the outskirts of Ouagadougou, the capital of Burkina Faso. He was one of 12 children and severely malnourished because there was little money for food. His father took him to various doctors but no one knew what the mystery disease was, or how to help. Meanwhile, it began to ravage his face. Then his grandmother chanced on an announcement on the radio saying that anyone with a child with a hole in their face should go to a hospital in Ouahigouya in the north of Burkina Faso. She took Strub by bus, and there they met one of the only doctors in the country who knew what the disease was, and how to treat it. Noma starts as a sore on the gums and progresses rapidly, destroying the soft tissues, bones, hard tissues and skin of the face. Without treatment, noma is fatal in 90% of cases, according to the World Health Organization. Children aged two to six living in extreme poverty with weakened immune systems from malnutrition are most at risk and can die within weeks of the first sore appearing. If they make it to a health facility and survive, they can be left with severe facial disfigurements that hinder eating, drinking and speaking. Where noma is detected early it can be simply treated with antibiotics. Noma is entirely preventable. When a child has enough food and clean water, the disease is unable to thrive, and is therefore often called “the face of poverty”. That it exists at all is a sign of how society has failed, says Dr David Shaye, of Massachusetts Eye and Ear, who has operated on hundreds of noma survivors in Nigeria. He says: “Noma is a canary in the coalmine indicator of where there are systemic problems with society. It’s a disease of poverty.” It is a largely forgotten and hidden disease. A search online for “noma” brings up page after page on the Michelin-starred restaurant in Copenhagen but no immediate reference to disfiguring disease. Dr Bukola Oluyide, deputy medical coordinator Nigeria for Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF), says: “It is assumed to be no longer in existence. Where we see it is where we have poverty and no health centres. It’s only when children are almost on their deathbed with another illness that they [are taken] to a healthcare facility … People do not know they can receive care in the early stages.” Healthcare professionals often miss it completely, she adds. Strub believes noma remains little known because it affects the most marginalised children in the world and kills quickly. MSF, with others, is campaigning for the disease to be added to the WHO’s list of neglected tropical diseases. This recognition will lead to noma becoming better known and will make it easier to attract funding to fight the disease, says Oluyide. The ambition is to eradicate the disease by 2030. Noma is mostly prevalent in sub-Saharan Africa, though cases have been detected in the US, south-east Asia and South America. It has been recognised for more than 1,000 years and emerged in Europe in concentration camps during the second world war. Research and data are so scarce that it is impossible to know how many cases there are worldwide, but some estimates put it at 30,000 to 40,000 a year. The WHO estimated in 1998 that there may be up to 140,000 cases a year, and 770,000 survivors of the disease. Strub is now 30, and feels lucky to be alive. When he arrived at hospital with his grandmother, he was close to death. “The first time my doctor saw me he thought I was dead because there was nothing left on me,” he says. “There was no muscle. I was skin and bones. He fought for two weeks to get me to a stable situation.” Once he was well enough, Sentinelles, a health NGO , paid for him to have surgery in Geneva. The first operation lasted about 13 hours. In total, he has undergone 27 operations to repair some of the facial damage. Other survivors reach adulthood before realising that noma is behind their facial disfigurements and the resultant stigma. Mulikat Okanlawon, 37, from Lagos, Nigeria, doesn’t remember much about having noma, but she knows about the aftereffects. “When I looked at my younger siblings, their faces were different to mine and I knew something was wrong,” she says. “I could only eat [using one side of my mouth], I only had teeth on one side. When I spoke, you had to listen very carefully to get it. I couldn’t look in the mirror because when I did, I cried.” When she was 14, she was approached by a doctor in the street who told her that she would be able to receive specialist help in northern Nigeria. Okanlawon had had surgery in Lagos that hadn’t worked but travelled with her father to Sokoto where she underwent surgery as one of the first patients of the Noma Children [sic] hospital that opened there in 1999. Now there are plans for a new clinic in Kano, also in northern Nigeria, next year. The hospital helps children in the acute stages of noma, and provides surgery for adult survivors. It also does outreach to educate people on how to avoid it in communities where the risk is high. Since it opened, more than 5,000 children with noma have passed through its doors, says Dr Isah Shafi’u, the hospital’s medical director. Staff have treated more than 50 new cases of noma this year alone. “With the emergence of insecurity and other issues in the country, we have been recording a large number of patients with the disease,” he says. “If a child is displaced, nutrition, a balanced diet and oral hygiene are not there. All of that can lead to a child getting noma.” Shafi’u wants more help from the international community. “There is a lot to do,” he says. “Noma still exists. We really need help. We want it to be recognised.” Okanlawon has dedicated her life to helping people with noma. She works at the hospital, supporting patients about to have surgery. “Now I can go anywhere and talk to anyone,” she says. “Where there is life, there is hope. Noma doesn’t have to limit people.” Strub is also passionate about fighting noma. Adopted by one of the doctors who treated him as a child, he now lives in Switzerland and is president of Noma-Aid-Switzerland, which works to eradicate the disease. He’s come a long way since noma ravaged his face 27 years ago, but the impact is still there. He has experienced mental health issues, particularly as a teenager. “Everybody’s looking for a good face,” he says. “I really had to accept how I am and learn not to hate myself. Noma is not just a disease, it’s a lifelong battle with yourself.” Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:A former police officer who claimed he was in too much pain to work has been jailed for fraud after a covert surveillance team caught him playing sport and an app on his phone showed he was taking 10,000 steps a day. For more than two years, PC Matthew Littlefair claimed full pay and other benefits while pretending his back was so badly hurt in a minor car crash that he could not even lift a kettle. The surveillance operation was launched by his force after colleagues became suspicious and he was seen out playing football with his children, walking his dog, running and riding bikes. When investigators examined his phone they found he had repeatedly been recorded taking 10,000 steps a day. Jailing 36-year-old Littlefair for two years and three months, Judge Robert Pawson said the case had come “during one of the worst years in recent policing history”. He added: “This year there has been a police officer dealt with for kidnap, rape and murder … two others this week were dealt with for taking photographs of a dead body and now this case – it’s of a far less offence – but it will affect public confidence in the police service.” Littlefair, who arrived at Salisbury crown court, Wiltshire, in a wheelchair, admitted fraud by false representation. Robin Leach, prosecuting, said Littlefair had been a police officer since 2008 and while off duty in October 2017, he was involved in a minor collision. He went to hospital complaining of pain and whiplash and reported that he was sick and unfit for duty. When Dorset police offered him reduced hours and the chance to work from home, Littlefair refused, complaining his pain was too severe. He was eventually offered an “ill-health award” in September 2019, which would have allowed him to step away with his status reviewed after five years but he appealed against this, saying he would never be able to work again, and continued to receive full pay. Leach said: “He complained of lasting injuries, chronic pain in most parts of his body and constant right knee pain so bad his knee could give way on him at any moment.” While on sick leave he fraudulently claimed about £150,000 in wages, tax contributions and pension costs, the court heard. Suspicions were raised, and in April and May 2020 a covert investigation was launched by the force’s counter-corruption unit, supervised by the Independent Office for Police Conduct. Surveillance officers caught Littlefair playing energetically with his children at their home. Leach said: “He was seen on one occasion pushing his children on a rope swing and playing football with them. A health application on his phone showed how many steps he had taken over 36 days … his phone recorded over 10,000 steps a day, the equivalent of five miles a day.” He attended a Bath rugby game and swung an axe in his back garden. A surveillance team spotted him on several occasions driving to remote locations to walk his dog or go running. The court heard doctors had diagnosed him with depression and a condition called functional neurological disorder, which is why he now requires a wheelchair. Littlefair was jailed for two years and three months and a proceeds of crime hearing will deal with repayments of the fraudulently obtained £149,764. After the sentencing on Wednesday, Dorset police said Littlefair had resigned but would now face disciplinary proceedings.When the letter arrived with the logo of a noted university in the corner, Veronica Reyes Ibarra expected good news. She called her boyfriend, her mom and her sisters over: “You guys, look what I got, I think it’s a scholarship.” But as she scanned the page, she suddenly wasn’t sure she had the courage to read it out to them. “Using a research diagnostic blood test,” the letter read, “we have determined that you may have been infected with a parasite.” The letter advised Reyes Ibarra to seek medical treatment. Fifteen other residents of the tiny Texas community where Reyes Ibarra lives received the same test result, after dozens gave blood and stool samples for an academic study. They ranged from a woman who was pregnant to a two-year-old child. The intestinal parasite is known by its scientific name, Strongyloides (pronounced stron-ji-LOY-dees). It inhabits the guts of humans and other animals, and its larvae are excreted during defecation. If the larvae are able to contaminate soil – for instance, because of a sewage leak – they can survive for up to three weeks. In one common infection pathway, they can burrow through the skin of a person walking barefoot, entering the bloodstream, then the lungs, and ascend the windpipe, where they are coughed up and then swallowed. Strongyloides can survive undetected in humans for decades, producing generation after generation. But at certain moments – such as when the host is taking steroids – they can become deadly. After the letters went out, a scientific paper was published about Reyes Ibarra’s neighborhood as part of the same research project. But the parasite infections in her area have stayed under the radar, in part because the researchers preserved the town’s anonymity, identifying it as “Community A”. Now Reyes Ibarra and her sister, Monica, are sharing their story, as are other of their neighbors. They say no one with the ability to help is paying attention to their plight, and there has been no systematic attempt to eliminate the Strongyloides. The researchers argue that this cluster is linked to one crucial, but often overlooked, aspect of intense US poverty: despite their best efforts, residents are subject to terrible sanitary system failures. “I feel like everyone has passed the buck on this neighborhood because it’s low-income, it’s primarily Hispanic, immigrants,” said Monica. If the parasites had been found “in any other neighborhood, even just across the county line where there are people of other races, there would be an uproar: ‘how dare you keep us living in these conditions, how are children potentially exposed to harmful parasites that are only found in other developing countries.’ That would be unheard of. And it’s normal here. No one cares, basically. Their community is named Rancho Vista, located less than an hour from the Texas capitol in Austin. It comprises about 400 homes on a small number of streets, and many of its inhabitants are Mexican Americans or immigrants from Mexico. Often they work in lower-paying fields like construction or groundskeeping, juggling multiple jobs, and have built their lives from the ground up in Rancho Vista, sometimes literally. Yet residents say that despite the taxes they pay, they struggle with packs of stray dogs, which may themselves play a role in the parasite life cycle, and windblown swirls of trash. Sometimes the smell of sewage wafts in the breeze. “It feels like we’re screaming into a void and no one is listening,” Monica said. An oasis that wasn’t The sisters were born in Aguascalientes, Mexico, but moved with their parents to Rancho Vista when they were little. They went to school in a nearby town and were bullied for living somewhere so downtrodden. Walking to the school bus on dark roads lacking streetlights, she and her friends made sure to carry sticks or rocks in case a stray dog became aggressive, Veronica recalled. Today Veronica, 25, is studying for a master’s in public administration. Monica, 28, recently passed the bar exam. But the conditions in Rancho Vista are the same ones the sisters have seen their whole lives. Veronica added: “This is literally the reality we live … it’s crazy.” Rancho Vista emerged in the mid-1980s, when a developer parcelled the land. A few residents described buying a half-acre for just over $10,000, and they lived in mobile or modular homes, or built structures with their own hands. It was “a little oasis for immigrant families”, said Monica. Early on, coyotes could be heard howling at night, and it still has a verdant, peaceful feel. Yet for some it is a rural poverty trap. On one hand, because it is located outside any particular city – it is, in official terms, “unincorporated” – there are fewer regulations, and residents are freer to do renovations without inspections, for instance. On the other hand, they also lack services that most Americans take for granted. There is no official garbage collection, nor are there sidewalks. And there are no sewer lines. Instead, the homes have ageing individual sewer systems in which effluent from toilets, sinks, showers and appliances is pumped into an underground tank next to the home. After some biodegradation in the tank, liquid is allowed to percolate into the ground as a kind of rudimentary sewage treatment. More than 20% of Americans have these septic systems, as they are known, including the very richest, such as those who live in the Hamptons area of Long Island. In lower-income areas they can present a challenge: they occasionally need to be pumped out, and otherwise maintained, shifting the burden for an essential service on to a financially stretched resident. The soil in Rancho Vista is mostly not considered compatible with septic systems in the first place, because it is not permeable enough and can cause the systems to clog. Ask people in Rancho Vista about their problems, and many will tell you about the sewage. “I am embarrassed when people come because it smells and stinks,” said one resident, who asked only to be identified by her last name, Perez. She tries to avoid using too much water to prevent sewage overflows. Another inhabitant, Aide Barrera, 59, said her toilet sometimes does not flush, and to relieve herself, she has to go to a friend’s house or a restaurant. To prevent overburdening the temperamental septic system, the water from her shower, kitchen sink and washing machine are simply piped straight out to her back lawn. Not having a functional toilet was particularly difficult when Barrera was raising her kids. “Thank God they understood they had to study to leave this place.” She could get the system fixed, but has been told it will cost $17,000. And “$17,000 is what I make in a year.” ‘Who do we talk to?’ The scientist whom some residents came to know as the “parasite lady”, and who led the Strongyloides study, arrived in 2017. Rachael Singer was a doctoral student at the University of Texas at Austin who had previously performed parasite surveys in Nicaragua. She learned of Rancho Vista and its sewage problems through colleagues and decided to investigate. Along with a team, she canvassed door to door, winning residents’ trust and obtaining dozens of blood and stool samples. “Knowing America has a history of [parasitic] infections”, Singer said, it seemed quite plausible that parasites would be found in a “region with failing sanitation infrastructure”. Intestinal parasites were once presumed to be established across the US south. In the early 20th century, rates of hookworm, which is transmitted through the soil like Strongyloides, were higher than 75% in Alabama and almost two-thirds in Georgia. Widespread surveillance and eradication programs, and the spread of proper sanitation systems, were thought to have wiped them out. Surveillance largely ceased, even though a recent paper showed that nearly half a million US households lack indoor plumbing. Yet in recent years, more than one-third of residents in an Alabama community with sanitation breakdowns tested positive for hookworm. In an ongoing study, Rojelio Mejia, the prominent parasitologist who co-authored the Rancho Vista paper, has discovered high rates of Toxocara, which is spread in dog and cat feces, in soil and wastewater samples from poor communities across five southern states. Strongyloides is considered one of the more neglected of the soil-transmitted parasites. Doctors with no training in tropical medicine might fail to recognize it, and are not mandated to report its discovery to state authorities. Yet more than half a billion people around the world are estimated to be infected, and in the US it has been detected in places as varied as Appalachia and Los Angeles county, and in organ transplant candidates, patients with mental disabilities and Vietnam veterans decades after they served. Although it can be symptomless, Strongyloides is the deadliest of soil-transmitted parasites. If an infected person takes immune-suppressing drugs such as steroids or chemotherapeutics, or has a lowered immune system because of a disease like leukemia, the worm can rapidly multiply throughout the body and cause death. In Rancho Vista, the 16 positive blood tests from a group of 97 residents is the highest percentage of positive blood samples found in a non-refugee population in the US, according to Singer, though the sample is relatively small. (A positive blood test can also occur in someone who was previously infected but no longer is.) Singer believes that Strongyloides is being transmitted locally in Rancho Vista, via the soil on which the community is built. In support of this she cites the fact that an infant who has never traveled elsewhere was diagnosed. Singer also hypothesizes that the stray dogs may be part of the transmission loop if their own infected waste is polluting the environment. The possibility remains that residents who tested positive acquired the parasite outside Rancho Vista, only to be tested while living in the same place. Outside experts say Singer’s conclusions are plausible – but not all are as certain as she is. The results indicate that some residents “probably acquired the infection in their community”, said Thomas Nutman, chief of the laboratory of parasitic diseases at the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, who was not involved with the original research. “And I think the important piece is the only likely way that this could happen is for fecal contamination of the environment.” Another Strongyloides expert expressed caution because the Rancho Vista researchers do not have lifelong travel histories for all the residents who were tested, and so do not know if they previously visited a place where Strongyloides is prevalent. “Overall it’s suggestive there could be locally acquired infection in Texas, but not quite as strong as I’d like to see in order to make that conclusion,” said Curtis Croker, an epidemiologist with the acute communicable disease control program at the Los Angeles county department of public health. Singer advised residents to take the letters apprising them of their test results to their doctors. But she heard from several residents that they were never prescribed the treatment: a single dose of the drug ivermectin. Veronica received the medicine. She and Monica believe that the best solution for their community is to be hooked up to a municipal sewer system, possibly in the city of San Marcos, whose nearest lines are a mile away. This would prevent Strongyloides larvae, if they are present, from reaching the soil. Fixing the existing septic tanks would merely be a temporary remedy, they say, because sewage leaks could still occur. Yet according to San Marcos mayor Jane Hughson, “there’s no legal responsibility because [Rancho Vista] is just an entity outside the city.” Rancho Vista can’t even apply to become part of San Marcos because their boundaries are not contiguous, she said. “They’re kind of in a no man’s land out there. It’s not good and it’s sad – but the city can’t fix anything.” The Guadalupe county official representing Rancho Vista did not respond to a list of questions from the Guardian about the situation or how to resolve it. The Reyes Ibarra sisters feel that many of their efforts have to come to nothing, and they occasionally feel hopeless. “Who do we talk to?” Monica wondered out loud, as she sat with Veronica recently in their kitchen in Rancho Vista. “It’s a little frustrating and a little embarrassing because I’m like, we should know who to talk to,” she said. “Then I think: unlike some of our neighbors, we can speak English, we have some contacts, we have more schooling than a lot of people in our neighborhood, and if we can’t figure it out, nothing is ever going to be done if we stop.” Their father, Antonio Reyes, 53, says that one of his greatest joys in Rancho Vista has been to watch his girls grow up – they now live in a handsome home that he helped to build himself in the community. He says that although he was aware of the sewage contamination, he had sought to keep them safe from it. In Rancho Vista, “it’s like living in another country as opposed to the United States,” he said. The Guardian is partnering with Catherine Coleman Flowers, the award-winning sanitation researcher, to investigate sanitation shortfalls in the US. We’d like to hear from you if you face sanitation issues.The Women’s Super League record goalscorer, Vivianne Miedema, and her partner, the Scotland international Lisa Evans, have become the latest members of Common Goal by committing 1% of their salaries to supporting community organisations working with young people in situations of violence and conflict around the world. Arsenal’s Miedema, who is also the record goalscorer for the Netherlands, and Evans, a winger on loan from the Gunners at West Ham, have joined more than 200 professional players and managers who have pledged a percentage of their salaries to supporting football-focused charities. The couple were inspired by their Arsenal clubmate Lotte Wubben-Moy to join the movement, launched when Manchester United’s Juan Mata became the first player to make the commitment in 2017. Wubben-Moy signed up in May. They join individuals such as the Chelsea forward Pernille Harder, the US World Cup winner Alex Morgan, the Liverpool manager, Jürgen Klopp, Juventus’s Paulo Dybala and Casey Stoney, the former Manchester United Women manager. Forty-five per cent of the players who have backed Common Goal are women. Miedema, a longstanding supporter of the charity War Child, said: “I’m lucky to be living my dream and I feel the responsibility to help others live theirs too. I’m excited to join Common Goal and to be able to really scale the impact I can have off the field. I urge other colleagues, male and female, from club and country, to join Common Goal. The time for action is now and it’s by working as team that we can make real change.” Evans, who has won league titles in Scotland, Germany and England and is the 10th Scottish player to join Common Goal, said: “Both Viv and I want to be the best players we can be, but we also want to be happy and constructive human beings off the pitch. Common Goal is the perfect platform to create change through football in a collective, sustainable way.” Common Goal’s CEO and co-founder, Jürgen Griesbeck, said: “According to last year’s Top 100 player list by the Guardian, the top two female players in the world, Pernille Harder and now Vivianne Miedema, are both members of Common Goal. In fact, 10% of the women on that list have joined the movement. “The understanding of the need for teamwork, the motivation to use the platform that football provides, and the willingness to pledge 1% of salary from so many top female players, despite the huge inequality that exists between salaries in men’s football, is testament to their vision and commitment to take action.”Alison Moore’s debut novel, The Lighthouse, was published in 2012 by the valiant small press Salt and made it on to the Booker shortlist. Now, with her fifth novel, she returns to the isolated places by the sea that have so often inspired her work. In this new book, a would-be painter called Sandra joins an artists’ retreat on an island called Leiloh where “contentment is assured”. In a parallel story, Carol, an aspiring writer, travels to a deserted island so that she can finish her novel. Although the worlds of these characters are contemporary and largely realistic, this is a story laced with the tropes of fairytale and myth. Emblematic and intentionally flimsy, Sandra and Carol are often described in terms of adverts, plays and books. The atmosphere of the islands is eerie and unsettling, the writing imbued with a deliberate simplicity and distance. The references to legends and fairytales come thick and fast – Angela Carter, Bluebeard, Alice in Wonderland, Sleeping Beauty, the Pied Piper, the Wizard of Oz. There are also mentions of other “island” books and writers, including the Moomins, Virginia Woolf, Agatha Christie, HG Wells and William Golding. Yet Moore assures us that this is not a survival scenario. There may be no mobile phone signal, “but it’s not like this is a shooting trip; someone may suffer a paper cut, or a twisted ankle, that’s about it”. So what, then, is this novel about? The strongest parts arise from the secondary characters who are attending Sandra’s retreat. From the outset, they exclude Sandra and soon are openly bullying her. One of her paintings is ruined by a boot mark, her evening dress is mysteriously ripped, the vegetarian lasagne she cooks is not welcomed. Perhaps both community and retreat do not promote female creativity in the ways we might expect? The tension rises when a second woman called Sandra appears. The original Sandra is distracted by the new arrival’s mirrored sunglasses, “in which she can see herself reflected back, squinting”. The new Sandra’s meaty lasagne is a great success and her creative work is greeted with enthusiasm. Yet how much value can the reader attach to this creativity? The owner of the island may well be right when he describes the group as “half a dozen amateurs come here to fanny about with their second-rate pictures and poems”. There is an insistence throughout on announcing possible meanings and then brutally undercutting them; like the islands, the novel is foggy and mysterious, and the reader is constantly wrongfooted. Just as Moore retreats from the themes of her novel, so Sandra is soon seeking to withdraw to even greater solitude. But we already know from Carol that life on a deserted island is not the blessing she expected. She can write her novel, but the island itself is “creepy”. Windows slam shut, the smell of garlic is everywhere, pictures fall from walls, phone cables mysteriously come unplugged. Perhaps it is not the island that is haunted, but the creative life itself? Again, this tantalising idea remains unexplored and we do not fully discover how these two stories (which do briefly coincide) end. Of course, the point of literary fiction is that the reader collaborates in the building of the book. Here we do not get quite enough tools with which to work, yet we can still admire Moore’s commitment to uncertainty, difficulty, that which cannot be grasped. • The Retreat is published by Salt (£9.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.What would have been Princess Diana’s 60th birthday came and went this summer, marked by a solemn new statue in the Sunken Garden at Kensington Palace in London, showing her with three generically grateful children; this statue effectively superseded the one of Diana with Dodi Fayed in Harrods department store, which was taken down in 2018. But maybe that new bronze image will itself be superseded by the arthouse-bizarro Diana promoted in Spencer, an entertaining, if overwrought, overpraised and slightly obtuse movie, an ironised fantasy opera without music. It is about Diana having a “crack-up” over one stifling Windsor Christmas at Sandringham in 1991, with which screenwriter Steven Knight appears to have transcribed a dream he once had after eating his bodyweight in brie. The director is the Chilean film-maker Pablo Larraín, and it features an intrusive score by Jonny Greenwood, deafeningly cranking up the dysfunction. Diana is cleverly impersonated by Kristen Stewart, who is particularly good at shoulder-shrugging convulsions of misery and protest – although this big-screen awards-season performance is not as good as Emma Corrin’s relaxed and sympathetic portrayal in TV’s The Crown. However, Stewart does get the biggest laugh of the year when Diana irritably dismisses a maid to be alone: “I want to masturbate …” As in Larraín’s 2016 film, Jackie, about Jackie Kennedy’s trauma after the JFK assassination, this features quite a bit of Diana wandering stricken through corridors, although Jackie had just been showered in her dead husband’s blood. To approximate something like that motivation, this film conspicuously exaggerates Diana’s first-world problems with black-comic stylings, fictional flourishes and some beautiful images. The nightmarish absurdity of what Diana had to endure and her consequent unhappiness create something that looks as if it has been co-directed by former Sun editor Kelvin MacKenzie and Dario Argento. The film maybe concedes a little drama-queen-of-hearts entitlement on Diana’s part, but of course we are supposed to be absolutely on her side, with flinch-making scenes of self-harm and bulimia. Diana has showed up to Sandringham alone, casually driving herself in her open-topped sports car, committing an unpardonable error of taste in arriving after the Queen (Stella Gonet). She is already semi-estranged from Charles (Jack Farthing), who snaps meanly at her over one of the interminable meals, and Diana is, moreover, menaced by a fictional glowering flunkey, Major Gregory (Timothy Spall). But there are friendly faces about: her boys William (Jack Nielen) and Harry (Freddie Spry), with whom Stewart has a sweet scene, playing at soldiers on parade. The fictional cook Darren (Sean Harris) is her confidant and mate, and she has her devoted fictional dresser Maggie (Sally Hawkins). What is most intolerable for Diana is having to wear the clothes picked out for her, and again Knight gives Stewart some great lines. Holding up a gown, she says to her sour-faced maid: “It doesn’t fit.” – “Have you tried it on?” – “With my mood.” Driven mad by depression and by the Firm’s callous indifference and emotional stagnancy, Diana roams the grounds at night, to the horror of the local police, and tries breaking in to her nearby childhood home. But the film ultimately implies that her problems are down to the ghastly Windsors: away from them, driving around in her car with the boys, listening to Mike and the Mechanics on the tape-deck and having an unpretentious KFC, she could relax and be herself, a Spencer. But you could argue that the Spencers were terribly grand and messed-up as well. Another type of film, without all the Halloween gothic naivety, might have challenged this view; it might have dramatised her relationship with her mother, say, or with the boys’ nanny, “Tiggy” Legge-Bourke. This an enjoyably strange spectacle, perhaps best appreciated by taking it less seriously than its creators intended. • Spencer is in cinemas from 5 November.As her childhood home was used to plot one of the 20th century’s most storied revolutions, Zoilamérica Ortega Murillo told playmates she was Guatemalan – lest the neighbours detect the very Nicaraguan conspiracy unfolding next door. “The little friends I used to play ball with came in to drink water once and wandered into the room where the guns were kept,” said the 54-year-old sociologist as she stood outside the peach-coloured villa where she lived as a nine-year-old girl. Ortega Murillo’s time at the Sandinista safe house in Costa Rica’s capital, San José, came to an abrupt end in July 1979 when the revolutionaries who were raising her – her mother, Rosario Murillo, and her guerrilla boyfriend Daniel Ortega – returned triumphantly to Nicaragua after helping overthrow the Somoza dictatorship. Two days after rebels seized Nicaragua’s capital, Ortega Murillo flew back to her grandmother’s house in Managua on a military plane. “We were certain that once Somoza was gone everything would be different,” she said. But four decades later, things are disturbingly similar and Ortega Murillo is back in exile – one of thousands of Nicaraguans who have sought shelter in Costa Rica from another authoritarian regime, this time led by none other than her mother and adoptive father. “This is a criminal dictatorship,” she said of Nicaragua’s president and vice-president who will seek another five years in power this Sunday in an election the opposition and much of the world has called a sham. The result of Sunday’s vote is beyond doubt given the stunning political crackdown that has played out in recent months under Ortega, a one-time revolutionary hero who has governed continuously since being elected in 2006 and quelled a 2018 student-led uprising with deadly force. Security forces have jailed virtually every opposition figure who might have challenged the couple and driven dozens of activists, journalists, business people – and even elderly former Sandinista allies – from the Central American country. “Every person who is in prison is paying for having challenged them in some way,” said Ortega Murillo, who split with her mother and stepfather in 1998 after accusing Ortega of sexually abusing her as a child. The couple’s estranged daughter suspected her powerful and, many say, vindictive mother was the driving force behind the repression. “She doesn’t forgive,” she said. “She doesn’t forget.” Carlos Fernando Chamorro, a prominent journalist who has four relatives currently languishing in prison or house arrest, said the pre-election clampdown was unprecedented, even in Nicaragua’s turbulent history. “The [opposition] leadership has been completely decapitated,” said Chamorro, whose sister, Cristiana, was a leading presidential contender and is now confined to her home. Chamorro fled to San José in June to avoid a similar fate, joining a historic exodus across Nicaragua’s southern and northern borders. The number of Nicaraguans caught trying to cross the US-Mexico border soared to more than 50,000 this year, compared with just a couple of thousand in 2020, while more than 35,000 have applied for asylum in Costa Rica. San José’s fast-growing diaspora, which has unsettling echoes of the exile community that formed there during the Somoza family’s violent and corrupt four-decade reign, includes Nicaraguans from all walks of life. Jesús Tefel, a political activist and former adventure travel entrepreneur who supported the failed 2018 rebellion, stole over the border with his pregnant partner in early July after five weeks hiding in a Managua safe house. “It’s at times like this … that you really feel first-hand what repression is for: it’s about sowing terror,” said the 35-year-old, recalling their march to safety under the cover of darkness. Yadira Córdoba, a 48-year-old cleaner, said she had taken flight so she could continue to demand justice for her 15-year-old son, Orlando, one of more than 300 protesters killed during 2018’s revolt – apparently by regime gunmen and paramilitaries. “I didn’t come to Costa Rica to make money. I came so I had the freedom to … ensure my son’s memory is not forgotten,” Córdoba said during an interview in the dank shack she rents in downtown San José. “They wanted to silence him but they didn’t realize he had a mother who would take up his cry.” Córdoba, who sleeps beside a shrine to her dead child, called Sunday’s election a mockery and a circus in which she would refuse to take part even were she in Nicaragua. “Ortega’s no president – he’s a crook and a murderer. How could I step into a polling station when the first thing I’d see on the ballot would be a photo of my son’s killer?” she asked. Former Sandinistas, including the guerrilla commanders Luis Carrión and Mónica Baltodano, have also bolted, fearful of joining old comrades such as Dora María Téllez and Hugo Torres behind bars. Another exiled former rebel, who asked not to be named, said they feared Nicaragua could be witnessing the start of a hereditary dictatorship that would see Ortega, now 75, try to hand control of the country to his wife and their children. “It’s so very sad,” the disillusioned former revolutionary said over coffee in an upmarket San José hotel. “We gave everything to defeat Somoza – and 42 years later a similar dictatorship appears to be forming.” Zoilamérica Ortega Murillo, whose allegations Ortega and Murillo reject, said she doubted that would happen, despite all her criticism of their “criminal, authoritarian and repressive” acts. “The dynasty still starts and ends with Daniel Ortega,” she predicted, pointing to a lack of support for her mother and siblings. “This dictatorship won’t last as long as the Somoza dictatorship did.” Tefel was also bullish, despite the desolate mood that has engulfed Nicaraguan exiles. “The wave of repression was designed to bury the opposition – but the good thing is they failed,” he insisted. “Lots of people managed to escape and are now here or in the US, reorganizing and regrouping.” On Sunday, members of Nicaragua’s pulverized opposition will hold what they hope will be a huge march through Costa Rica’s mountain-ringed capital in an effort to project unity. “We have lived through so much that there is great mistrust between us,” admitted one of the organizers, Ana Quirós, a veteran feminist activist and former Sandinista who was stripped of her Nicaraguan nationality and deported for backing the 2018 protests. “But I’ve always thought that if there’s one thing that we agree on, let’s focus on that. Everything else we can deal with along the way.” Ortega Murillo urged Nicaraguans to avoid fatalism over their country’s future. “Three years ago [during the uprising] we said it was the beginning of the end – and I think that’s right. Only I think we’re no longer at the beginning, but in the middle,” she claimed. As a rainstorm hammered San José’s eastern suburbs, she stared through the brown metal gates of her childhood home, which she was visiting for the first time since being uprooted by the 1979 revolution. “For me it’s a crime scene,” she said of the house where she claims a 12-year campaign of abuse began. “I can feel my stomach churn.” Ortega Murillo hoped her personal quest for justice could inspire Nicaraguans hoping to free themselves of her alleged abuser. In 1998 many doubted her abuse claims just as many Nicaraguans still idolized Ortega when he returned to power in 2006. Now, Ortega Murillo sensed people were waking up to the fact that “Daniel Ortega was a lie” just as many skeptics had come to believe her accusations against him. Whatever happened on Sunday, Ortega Murillo believed the repression suggested the couple’s time in power was running out. “This dictatorship’s foundations are eroding themselves.” Additional reporting Cindy RegidorA modest diet in our flying habits would be enough to level off the global heating caused by the aviation industry. That’s the surprising conclusion from a study, which also warns that if the aviation industry continues to grow at current rates then it will be responsible for around nearly 0.1C of heating by 2050. Taking a flight adds to global heating in two ways. The first is from the direct effect of burning jet fuel and producing carbon dioxide, which remains in the atmosphere. The second is from indirect effects caused by tailpipe emissions in the upper atmosphere, resulting in cirrus clouds that trap additional heat and complex chemical reactions that alter the balance of greenhouse gases such as ozone and methane. Working out how much global heating aircraft cause is complicated because carbon dioxide hangs around for thousands of years (meaning a flight taken in 1950 is still contributing to global heating today), while the indirect effects (clouds, contrails and the like) are much shorter lived – usually less than a year. Milan Kloewer, from the University of Oxford, and colleagues from Manchester Metropoliton University took both the direct and indirect heating effects of aircraft into account to model the aviation industry’s contribution to global heating up to the year 2050. They found that to date aircraft are responsible for 0.04C of global heating: about 4% of the 1.2C temperature increase humans have caused since the Industrial Revolution. If aviation continues to grow at about 3% a year then it will have caused 0.09C of heating by 2050. But their results, which are published in Environmental Research Letters, also show that if we were to reduce air traffic by just 2.5% each year (resulting in about 50% less air traffic by 2050 compared with 2019) then the aviation industry’s contribution to global warming would remain about 0.04C, resulting in a relatively insignificant amount of additional heating between now and 2050. This is because more than half the warming caused by aircraft comes from the indirect effects – contrails, clouds and chemistry. And the fall in these indirect effects would balance out the warming caused by the continued rise in carbon dioxide. “Any growth in aviation emissions has a disproportionate impact, causing lots of warming,” said Prof Myles Allen at the University of Oxford, a co-author of the study. “But any decline also has a disproportionate impact in the other direction. So the good news is that we don’t actually need to all stop flying immediately to stop aviation from causing further global warming – but we do clearly need a fundamental change in direction now, and radical innovation in the future.”For a documentary created with the Washington Post, a newspaper owned by a company controlled by Jeff Bezos, the new Discovery+ special Space Titans has an impressive amount of Elon Musk in it. Maybe the algorithm doesn’t dictate everything quite yet. Or maybe it’s an oversight that is even now causing heads to roll in the corridors of Nash Holdings LLC before they are boxed up and sent by Prime to the homes of their former loved ones. We will never know, I suppose, unless Bezos chooses to tell us. Space Titans tells the story of the three billionaires – Bezos, Musk and, uh, Richard Branson – competing to see who has the biggest penis (I’m sorry: competing to see who can be the first to make space travel for ordinary citizens and colonisation of other planets a reality). We are told – repeatedly – that we are at an inflection point in space exploration. Billionaires are going to boldly go where no one has gone before. Because they have all the money now. Not that you will hear the latter sentiment expressed in this wildly hagiographic 90 minutes. It dwells not for a moment on the implications of the next space age now being largely in the hands of a couple of individuals most often associated with egomania so powerful as to be indistinguishable from clinical narcissism. (There is more than a couple if you humour Branson – I don’t, and evidently neither do the programme-makers, who, after giving Virgin Galactic its due for beating Bezos and ejaculating into suborbital space first, gently drop our toothy lizardman out of the picture.) What was once collective national endeavour that evoked a sense of striving for something greater than ourselves is now the preserve of profit, rampant individualism and, for the foreseeable future, the rich. But never mind all that! We have a mishmash of facts and stats to get through, assembled in as fragmentary, non-linear and repetitive a way as possible. Most of the running time is chaos, but it doesn’t disguise the fact that what we’re really doing here is measuring from base to tip and coming to conclusions. Hardening Branson’s claim to greatness is the fact that Virgin Galactic, as previously noted, gets there first. His rocket plane, VSS Unity, makes a flight that lasts 59 minutes from start to finish and reaches 53 miles in altitude, just far enough to qualify as space, giving its crew, including Branson himself, five minutes of weightlessness before all are returned safely to Earth. But, of course, the key words here are “rocket plane”. With typical English no-can-do spirit, our lad didn’t develop a proper vertical-launching rocket. His was taken much of the way up by a bigger plane instead of doing a 3-2-1 blast off! We laugh at the eunuch and move on. Bezos has done the thing almost too properly. His rocket looks so exactly like a penis that you wonder no one at the massage parlour – I mean manufacturing plant – took him aside before full tumescence was reached and quietly whispered: “Jeff, dude, you’re saying the quiet part out loud.” But Blue Origin launches successfully just nine days after Branson and goes, like, into real suborbital space above the Kármán Line, even if it’s not clear who kept it up longer. What, then, of Musk’s attempt to thrust himself into the record books? Well, he turns out to be more of a foreplay guy. He may not have unveiled the Falcon 9 until two months later, but he has built the groundwork better than the other two, with more Nasa funding than they managed to secure, a track record in delivering the space agency’s astronauts safely to the International Space Station and contriving an air of cool the other nerds never managed, you know? And when the moment does arrive, on 15 September, Musk shoots an impressive load. The Inspiration4 expedition launches the first all-private-citizen crew on a rocket-rocket and into full orbit. They circle the Earth for three days and return triumphant. Many missions accomplished. Space Titans lauds Musk and Bezos for their innovation and accepts with barely a flinch their claims of helping solve world problems by enabling a move to Mars and the moon. It wants us to thrill to the news that the space tourism market is expected to be worth $8bn by 2030 as previous generations thrilled to the news of Neil Armstrong setting foot on the moon, as if this were another giant leap for mankind instead of just for a handful of men and their shareholders.What is the best tribute to a dead playwright? For their work to be regularly revived. On that score, admirers of Terence Rattigan have few grounds for complaint: his wartime comedy While the Sun Shines packed out the Orange Tree in 2019 and returns this month for the Christmas season. But Rattigan devotees are shocked that the family memorial in Kensal Green cemetery, west London, is in an appalling state and that, even though it is where the dramatist’s ashes are buried, there is no record there of his name: a situation they are desperate to remedy by means of the Terence Rattigan Memorial Fundraising Project. The case of Rattigan is a peculiarly fascinating one. After the success of French Without Tears in 1936, he became one of the most popular postwar playwrights, only to find himself ruthlessly marginalised after the Royal Court revolution of 1956. When I recently spoke at the annual dinner of the Terence Rattigan Society, I noticed that the critic Kenneth Tynan was widely seen as the villain of the piece. I tried to suggest that it wasn’t just Tynan’s reviews that led to Rattigan’s fall from grace: his emotional reticence was at odds with the scorching candour of the rising generation and his formal elegance was viewed with hostility at a time when “the well-made play” was a common pejorative. Typically, the radical theatre magazine Encore linked his name in the 1960s with Agatha Christie as symbols of the despised West End. The whirligig of time, however, brings in its revenges and Rattigan’s best plays are now revived for a variety of reasons. For a start, they are more ambivalent than they first appear. The Browning Version (1948) has always been seen as a study of the way a seemingly desiccated teacher, Crocker-Harris, defies public school orthodoxy by making a farewell speech and breaks off a loveless marriage: David Hare, whose South Downs in 2011 played in tandem with Rattigan’s play, has argued that Crocker-Harris is really a closeted gay man who cleverly, and maybe not for the first time, enlists the emotional sympathy of his wife’s lover. I’m not saying I agree with Hare, but his reading lends the play an added complexity. The Deep Blue Sea (1952) is Rattigan’s most perfect play and a classic study of an upper-middle-class woman who has an unsatisfied physical and emotional passion worthy of a Racine protagonist. But I remember how Karel Reisz’s 1993 production at London’s Almeida persuaded me that this is also a state-of-the-nation play. Everyone in the piece, from the flying ace with no place in the postwar world to the struck-off emigre doctor to the stuffily conventional young marrieds, adds to a rich portrait of 1950s Britain. If you want proof that Rattigan was often ahead of his time, rather than simply pandering to popular taste, you have only to look at Table Number Seven, which constitutes the second half of Separate Tables (1954). In that piece, the residents of a genteel hotel defy one of their bigoted number by rallying to the support of a bogus major accused of importuning: it is clear as day that his offence is more homosexual than heterosexual. Coming one year after Lord Montagu and Peter Wildeblood had been imprisoned on similar grounds and three years before the Wolfenden report advocated the decriminalisation of consensual sex between men, Rattigan’s play struck a heartening blow for liberal reform. Rattigan had his failures: I doubt I shall ever see again a musical version of French Without Tears misleadingly entitled Joie de Vivre. But he was a great playwright who understood better than most the inequality of passion and the fear of emotional expression that haunts our national psyche. He deserves a decent memorial and, for the sake of a few thousand pounds, a grave that can be respected.There are plenty of theories why the John Lewis Christmas ad no longer hits as hard as it once did. You could look at the fortunes of John Lewis itself, which has spent the last couple of years locked in a nightmare of plunging revenues and store closures. You could look at how aggressively every other retailer has attempted to rip off the tear-jerky John Lewis Christmas ad formula, to the extent that sitting through an ITV commercial break in November or December is now exactly the same as suffering through the first 10 minutes of Up on a neverending loop in an abandoned corn silo full of crying children. But judging by this year’s offering, you might also suggest that John Lewis has run out of ideas. Because this year’s ad is such a straight-down-the-line John Lewis Christmas advert that you can only imagine it was assembled by tombola. Sweet children? Check. Bittersweet ending? Check. Maudlin cover version of a song you once liked? Check, in this case a version of Together in Electric Dreams that sounds like it was performed by someone who has tumbled down a well and just realised nobody is coming to rescue her. Such a total lack of John Lewis products that, if you showed the advert to someone who didn’t know what John Lewis was, they would be forced to assume it was some sort of spaceship repair company? Check. It is, plain and simple, a Christmas ad by numbers. The story it tells, however, is a dark warning about the fragility of life itself. It begins with a boy watching a spaceship burst through the clouds as it plummets to Earth. Now, anyone with half a brain would know exactly what this is. It’s Peter Parker seeing the Titan craft at the start of Avengers: Infinity War. It’s the opening scene of A Quiet Place 2. What the boy is watching is nothing less than a clear and present threat to the future of humanity. This is an invasion. Now, if you or I saw a spaceship plummeting to Earth, we would ultimately have two choices. We would either retreat to a basement and hope the authorities have the right level of firepower to neutralise the alien threat, or we would grab a shotgun, race to the crash site and blow a giant hole in the invader’s head before it could colonise the planet for its own foul means. This is just logic. Don’t question it. Not this boy, though. This boy, this gawpy threat to global safety, actually decides to visit the alien so he can teach her about Christmas. He shows her a light-up jumper. He feeds her mince pies. He teaches her how to hurl projectiles at unwitting strangers, which seems especially shortsighted. After a few days of this, the alien decides it’s time to return to her home planet. She kisses the boy on the cheek. Then she flies away, back to her laboratory so that she can weaponise the human DNA she extracted from him into a synthetic alien virus expressly designed to wage war on humanity as we know it. That’s right, the John Lewis Christmas ad is a Coronavirus origin story. Don’t argue with me. It is. It makes perfect sense. Oh, sure, you might read the advert differently. You might think it’s a reminder to help strangers wherever you find them, or a message about the importance of sharing tradition. You might, if you’re feeling especially brokenhearted, see the alien’s departure as a reminder that happiness is only fleeting and everything is destined to end. But that’s not what it’s about. No, the John Lewis Christmas advert this year is definitely about an alien crashing in the woods in December 2019 and lulling a boy into a false sense of security so she can extract his DNA, turn it into Covid then spread it around the world upon her return the following month. The moral of the story is that you should definitely kill all aliens with guns as soon as you see them. Merry Christmas everyone.JD Sports has been ordered to sell Footasylum, the trainer retailing rival it bought in 2019, after the competition regulator once more found that the takeover had reduced competition for high street shoppers. The retailer reacted with fury, saying that the Competition and Markets Authority (CMA) was in a “minority of one” and that the decision was “inexplicable” and “defies logic”. The CMA will oversee the sale of Footasylum, which has been fully integrated into JD Sports, and must approve the new purchaser to ensure it will be run as a true competitor – unless JD Sports successfully appeals. The decision comes after a long battle over the £90m takeover, which was first announced in March 2019. The regulator raised concerns in September 2019, but its initial judgment was sent back by the competition appeal tribunal in November 2020, which said it had failed to consider the impact of the pandemic. The CMA confirmed that its latest review had once more found the merger “has resulted or may be expected to result in a substantial lessening of competition” in the supply of trainers and casual clothing. JD Sports said it would consider its options. JD Sports’s argument that the purchase would not reduce competition hinged on the rapid growth of direct-to-consumer (DTC) websites from trainer brands such as Nike and Adidas. Both trainer companies have invested heavily in online retail, undercutting high-street shops that previously acted as middlemen. Kip Meek, chair of the CMA inquiry group, said: “The UK boasts a thriving sports fashion market and today’s decision reflects our commitment to keeping it that way. We strongly believe shoppers could suffer if Footasylum stopped having to compete with JD Sports. It is likely they would pay more for less choice, worse service and lower quality.” The two retailers had close links even before the merger. John Wardle and David Makin founded the first JD Sports shop together in Mossley, Lancashire, in 1981, eventually leaving in 2005. Makin then started Footasylum, where he was joined by Wardle again in 2008 until his departure in 2018. Peter Cowgill, JD Sports’ executive chairman, said the regulator’s decision was “inexplicable” in the context of the pandemic, when temporary store closures during lockdowns have prompted more shoppers to make the move to online shopping. “It is deeply troubling at a time when the UK high street has been seriously damaged already and is vulnerable to further closures,” he said. “The CMA rightly concludes that, following the acquisition of Footasylum, JD would have no incentive to raise prices or worsen its offer as its most important competitors are the DTC operations of the international brands themselves. “However, the CMA has then somehow concluded that the competitive threat from DTC does not extend to Footasylum and that JD would have an incentive to worsen the offer in Footasylum to the detriment of both consumers and suppliers. We would suggest that the CMA is in a minority of one in reaching this conclusion.”Two boys aged 12 and 15 have been arrested on suspicion of riotous behaviour after police came under attack after a protest against the Northern Ireland Brexit protocol in Belfast. Police described the scenes on Wednesday as “disgraceful”, with officers subjected to a volley of missiles and fireworks close to the site of previous violence in April. Three police vehicles were damaged. The PSNI district commander, Darrin Jones, told BBC Good Morning Ulster no officers had been injured but said they believed the protest had been organised by “older people” who would have known the site of the protest was “a very volatile area”. He said: “It was very serious as at one stage there were up to 100 people on both sides of the interface attacking police officers. “I know everyone has a right to protest and we have a positive obligation to facilitate protests. But there’s a time and there’s a place: the organisers must have reasonably expected what happened when the protest was there.” Officers were deployed from about 5pm after a small protest, involving about 30 people, was staged near Lanark Way on the loyalist side of the peace wall. Disorder broke out involving both sides of the community and continued for several hours, with wheelie bins being burned on the roads and bottles, masonry and fireworks being thrown. No police officers were hurt but three vehicles were damaged, Jones said. Calm was restored to the area by about 10.30pm, he said. Ch Insp Darren Fox described the scenes as “totally unacceptable” and said the “disgraceful scenes of disorder seen this evening put members of the public and the responding police officers in real danger and must be condemned by all”. Pat Sheehan, the Sinn Féin member of the legislative assembly for west Belfast, condemned those who organised the anti-protocol protest, saying there was “absolutely no place” for “this needless violence”. He said the protest was a “dangerous and irresponsible stunt” that was “deliberately organised at this interface with the sole intention of heightening tensions and causing trouble”. The violence comes days after a bus was hijacked and burned by two masked and armed men in Newtownards, a town east of Belfast. Loyalists claimed the attack was to mark the deadline the Democratic Unionist party (DUP) leader, Sir Jeffrey Donaldson, had given for the Northern Ireland protocol to be radically changed or dumped. On Wednesday night the SDLP West Belfast representative, Paul Doherty, called for a permanent end to disorder at interface areas in the community and appealed to young people not to engage in antisocial or dangerous behaviour. “The young people taking part in these incidents are likely to end up with a criminal record or worse and I would urge them to think twice before they act. The violence on the streets of west Belfast this evening has little to do with Brexit. It’s about communities that have been abandoned and led astray by their politicians. “Our young people are frustrated because of the high levels of poverty, unemployment and educational underachievement in these areas and this is what we need to be focusing on tackling,” he said.More than 1,000 universities and 50 academies of science across Europe have called on the EU to “immediately” finalise the UK’s membership of its flagship £80bn research programme and end the 10-month delay to the ratification process. In a letter to the European Commission president, Ursula von der Leyen, they say the lengthy delay is “endangering current and future plans for collaboration” and any further delay will “result in a major weakening of our collective research strength”. The letter comes amid fears that the seven-year Horizon Europe programme is collateral damage in a wider political dispute between the UK and the EU over fishing and the Northern Ireland Brexit protocol. The UK was due to contribute about £2bn a year to stay in the programme with funds returned in the form of leading-edge research projects to British universities and research institutes on everything from vaccines to climate change technologies. Now scientists say the painstaking job of putting project teams and proposals together, which can often take a year to complete, are being jeopardised because of the uncertainty over the UK’s status in potential research consortiums. They urge Von der Leyen to put politics aside and press the green button on the UK’s associate membership. “Horizon Europe’s success will hinge on its commitment to excellence and global outlook. The only way to move forward from the Covid pandemic is as a global community working together to drive research and innovation through collaboration,” they say in their letter. The UK was one of the leading countries in the EU research programme before Brexit, responsible for just under 15% of all funds awarded. A spokesman for the Russell Group of universities said the UK was the second biggest beneficiary of the Horizon 2020 programme after Germany, winning £7.8bn in funds for 10,000 projects over the past seven years. But it has now been caught up in the crosshairs of double battles between the UK and the EU over fishing and Northern Ireland. The Brexit minister, David Frost, last week said the EU was close to breaching its commitment in the trade deal and wanted swift action, particularly after other non-EU countries including Norway had already had their membership ratified. Signatories to the letter include the heads of major research representative bodies including the All European Academies, the European Universities Association, CESAER, the Belgian science group and German U15, an association of 15 of the leading medical universities in Germany.A new generation of Double O agents has been authorised by the estate of Ian Fleming, with Bond aficionado and novelist Kim Sherwood set to pen a new series of “audacious, pacey, sexy” spy stories. Sherwood, who says that James Bond has been “one of the enduring loves of my life since I first watched Pierce Brosnan dive from the dam in GoldenEye”, has struck a deal with HarperCollins to write three contemporary thrillers set in the world of James Bond but where the original 007 is missing, presumed captured or even killed. “As a teenager, I chose Fleming when my English teacher asked us to write about an author we admired – I still have the school report. Since then, I’ve dreamed of writing James Bond,” said Sherwood, who won the 2016 Bath novel award for her debut novel Testament, and was shortlisted for the Sunday Times young writer of the year in 2019. “It’s rare that dreams come true, and I am grateful to the Fleming family for this incredible opportunity. I feel honoured to be the first novelist to expand the Bond universe through the Double 0-sector, bringing new life to old favourites and fresh characters to the canon.” Corinne Turner, the managing director of Ian Fleming Publications, said Sherwood was the right author to take on the series, which is set to launch in September 2022. . Previous authors to continue Fleming’s spy series, which ran to 14 original novels, have included Kingsley Amis, Sebastian Faulks and Anthony Horowitz, although their books all featured Bond himself. Sherwood, 32, will become the first woman to write a novel for the franchise. The lecturer at the University of Edinburgh might not have the starry status of these previous Bond writers, but she is certainly passionate about continuing the franchise. “James Bond is one of the enduring loves of my life”, she said in a tweet, adding that she “can’t wait” for readers to meet her new characters. In Sherwood’s world, even Bond’s contemporaries are gone, and a “new raft of Double-0 agents for the 21st century” have been recruited to battle a global threat. Meanwhile, M and Moneypenny are looking for a mole in MI6. “In her first novel, Testament, Kim showed a rare gift for characterisation, time and place. She drew readers into a journey that unfolded in unexpected ways,” said Turner. “These talents, and her near lifelong passion for Fleming and Bond, make her the perfect choice for this exciting new extension of the 007 universe. I can’t wait for readers to see what she’s created.” Sebastian Faulks’s Bond novel, which was published in 2008 to mark Fleming’s centenary, got mixed reviews from critics. A faithful continuation of the original books, Devil May Care even had “Sebastian Faulks, writing as Ian Fleming” on its cover. But Euan Ferguson in his Observer review argued that “Fleming was Bond”, so after his death “the link was broken”, and it is impossible for new writers to fully capture the character. The decision to commission a series that doesn’t include the famous protagonist should avoid this problem, and will allow Sherwood space to be creative and modernise the franchise. Kathryn Cheshire at HarperCollins described the new trilogy as “fresh, contemporary and thrill-a-minute, with a new generation of spies everyone will love.” David Highfill, who is publishing the trilogy in the US, said that Sherwood had “pulled off the seemingly impossible task of writing a new Bond novel that’s both respectful of Fleming’s original genius and yet refreshingly modern”. “The book is audacious, pacey, sexy and just irresistibly entertaining,” he added. Literary agent Johnny Geller, who represents Ian Fleming Publications, said: “We struck gold with this latest collaboration with Kim Sherwood as not only is she a fine novelist but a Fleming aficionado of the highest order. Her re-imagining of some of our favourite characters and world building will delight any fan of James Bond and Ian Fleming.”Young people know that our generation already disproportionately feels the effects of the climate crisis. Almost all of the intense heatwaves that have hit Europe since 1950 occurred during my lifetime. It’s likely they will only get worse. Unfortunately, Poland, where I live, has clung to an energy model driven by burning fossil fuels for too long. This irreversible destruction violates our right to life, health, property and values of the natural world. That is why at 17 years old, I decided to take the Polish government to court in June 2021 over its failure to act on the climate crisis. The grim stakes for my generation are undeniable. It has been more than five years since world leaders pledged to limit global warming to 1.5C. Since then, emissions have continued to rise, and according to the International Energy Agency emissions will hit a record high by 2023 if green recovery fails. The newest report published by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change states that human-caused emissions have already contributed to irreversible changes in our climate system, and are rapidly moving us toward an uninhabitable planet. What we really need as world leaders gather for the Cop26 climate summit in Glasgow is a global system change. A world built on business as usual is clearly falling apart – it has already for the most vulnerable. The world economy is reliant on constant growth and human exploitation in order to create profits. That’s why it is no surprise to see that a country’s rise in emissions correlates with its growth in GDP, energy consumption and pollution. But the capitalist growth model is incompatible with a zero-carbon world. By popularizing concepts such as “green growth” or “green capitalism”, world leaders sentence humanity to a life of dystopia. Ultimately, these proposals are the same concepts that brought us into this crisis in the first place, but in disguise. Activists call it greenwashing for a reason. When high-income nations transition their economies toward “green” solutions, what happens to low-income nations? Will the global north continue to exploit other countries in order to deliver on their climate pledges while also growing their economies? And what about climate reparations for the most affected communities? While leaders of the global north continue to perpetuate the status quo built on the exploitation of others, they deepen the harsh socio-economic conditions in countries that bring them profits. In other words, high-income nations use “growth” as a justification for the torture caused in other territories. Low-income nations are robbed of their ability to address the climate crisis when more immediate issues become a necessary priority, such as feeding their people, securing access to electricity, quality healthcare and education or ending conflict. Climate change worsens these “more pressing” issues, perpetuating the downward cycle even more. The climate crisis may center on the term “climate”, but it may be one of the biggest social crises humanity has ever faced. Hence, climate justice cannot be achieved without addressing and prioritizing social justice in all parts of the globe. I think about the climate crisis and its intersectional connections every single day. I started my activism journey more than two years ago and have called myself a full-time activist since summer 2020. While activism may take a toll on my physical and mental wellbeing, I find it’s the best antidote for climate depression. Utopia quite literally means achieving a perfect imaginary world that doesn’t exist (from Greek ou-topos – no place, nowhere). However, striving toward a near-utopian state is the only chance we have today to save humanity. In today’s world, limiting the global average temperature to 1.5C and achieving climate justice may seem out of reach due to the fundamentals on which the global north has built its societies. However, the miracle happens when one realizes that this system is not inherently this way – it was created. The utopia we dream of is within our reach if we address the colonial, racist and oppressive roots of our current planetary crisis. Communities fighting on the frontlines have already been transforming their radical imagination of a fully liberated world into a reality. Everything has to change, especially our understanding of the impossible.Evan Faber’s 78-year-old father, Michael, has for the last three years had difficulty walking around his home in Colorado Springs, Colorado. The Fabers hope that a spinal surgery scheduled for late December at a local hospital will help restore his balance and motor function. But now they are worried that the hospital will have to postpone the operation. That’s because a recent surge in Covid-19 cases around the state has increased the number of unvaccinated patients needing care and prompted concerns that hospitals may have to ration services for other issues. “If you have been waiting for an elective procedure for the last 18 months and are finally scheduled – you’re vaccinated, you don’t have Covid – your procedure might still get canceled if a hospital is totally full,” said Dr Anuj Mehta, a pulmonologist with Denver Health who serves on the governor’s expert emergency epidemic response committee. “While this is a pandemic of the unvaccinated at this point – and the surges in the hospital are entirely being driven by unvaccinated folks – it is having a massive bleed-over effect on to the entire population.” There are about 1,300 patients hospitalized with Covid-19 in Colorado, according to the New York Times data; that’s the highest number since December 2020, when more than 1,900 patients were hospitalized. That number has increased by 15% over the last two weeks, the third largest increase in the country, and at a time when the national picture for the US is of a Delta variant surge that is firmly on the way down. The trend in Colorado can be attributed in part to the almost 40% of the state population that has not been vaccinated and people again gathering indoors without masks. It also shows that, despite the national downward trends of infections, regional spikes can still happen that can cause havoc in state healthcare systems. “We clearly have events taking place in Colorado, as elsewhere, that are spreading infection,” said Dr Jon Samet, an epidemiologist who directs Covid-19 modeling for the state. “I know everyone would like for it to be 2019 all over again, but that’s not the case.” The state had also not had surges on the scale of other states, said Dr Michelle Barron, senior medical director of infection prevention and control for UCHealth. Other states “had flames from the get-go, whereas we have been smoldering along this whole time, and we are finally hitting that peak of saturation and seeing flames finally,” said Barron. Thirty per cent of Colorado hospitals are anticipating a shortage in the number of intensive care unit beds and 37% are anticipating staffing shortages within the next week, according to data from the Colorado department of public health and environment. “Staffing is becoming increasingly a problem, which is true everywhere throughout the country. We are seeing healthcare workers really burned out from everything the last two years,” said Mehta. “It just raises concerns that we are pushing the limits of how many patients we can take care of. We are still taking great care of everybody” at Denver Health, “but we are filling up fast.” In response to the surge, Governor Jared Polis, a Democrat, on Sunday issued a pair of executive orders that allow the state to direct healthcare facilities to redirect patients to other centers and for the implementation of a protocol for healthcare workers to decide in an emergency who should be treated first. Mehta would also like to see the governor issue a statewide indoor mask mandate, something Polis has declined to do. “If we were to continue masking indoors, I think we would see a significant drop in transmission and hospitalization, and that would free us up to do the routine medical stuff that we do all the time,” Mehta said. Even though people who have been vaccinated against Covid face a very low risk of hospitalization, they still, of course, face other risks. The UCHealth system is seeing record number of patients with non-Covid issues, according to a spokesperson. “A year ago, most schools and businesses were virtual, and there were capacity limits on restaurants and other businesses,” Dan Weaver vice-president of communications for UCHealth stated in an email. “Now, with few people staying at home, we are seeing large numbers of traumas, other injuries, and non-Covid healthcare needs.” Even among healthy Colorado residents, the pandemic continues to affect their lives. Stephanie Danielson, a Boulder resident, had 60 children in her son and daughter’s Cub Scouts pack a year ago; there are now 10, in part because of ongoing concerns about the virus. The pack gathered for a hike in September for the first time in more than a year – and afterwards learned that a parent had tested positive for Covid. “As a leader, it felt defeating because we are trying so hard to bring back some normalcy to each other’s lives, and our very first time, we had this happen,” said Danielson, who works at Moxie Sozo, a branding agency in Boulder. Faber, the 40-year-old CEO of the company, just got a vaccine booster and said his life has not changed much because of the surge. But he continues to worry about his father, a retired restaurant owner. “Everything is so volatile, it’s a waiting game to see if [the surgery] will still happen,” said Faber. “It’s the circle of people just outside of the direct impact from Covid that are dealing” with the surge, “and I know there are more severe examples than this”.Half a million dollars and nearly four years into his Los Angeles-based cannabis venture, Donnie Anderson had no shop, no prospects and a mountain of debt. With financial help from family and friends, Anderson rented a $6,000-a-month space in January 2018 for his new cannabis retail shop. He kept paying the rent as the city’s permitting process dragged on. He bought cabinets and other equipment as he waited. And waited. Sick of waiting, he’s selling all that equipment and giving up his lease. Inaction by the city is forcing him to give up his dream, he says. “It’s killing business owners,” Anderson says. “All the air has been let out of me.” In November 2016, Californians voted to legalize recreational cannabis. But nearly five years later, the state and many of its cities and counties are still figuring out how exactly to regulate the industry. The challenge has been particularly frustrating for Black entrepreneurs like Anderson, who were promised a leg-up getting started, but have seen little movement in that regard. Following regulation, several cities and counties in California created social equity programs to help entrepreneurs in communities most harmed by the war on drugs. Black people have borne the brunt of marijuana criminalization in the US over the past 20 years. They’re nearly four times as likely as white people to be arrested for pot violations, according to the American Civil Liberties Union, even though the two groups use marijuana at roughly the same rate. The equity programs were supposed to help people of color and those formerly incarcerated for cannabis crimes get licensed to run all types of cannabis businesses: cultivation, manufacturing, delivery, retail. The programs created big expectations, but implementation has been much trickier. “Many people got totally burnt,” said Christine De La Rosa, co-founder and CEO of cannabis company The People’s Ecosystem, who planned to apply for a social equity license in Los Angeles but didn’t win the city’s lottery for a chance. “I can’t think of one [program] that has been good for women or for people of color. It has been a failure.” The main problem, De La Rosa said, is that social equity programs don’t help enough with the financial side of business ownership. Without federal cannabis legalization, big banks won’t provide loans, and people of color have more trouble getting venture capital, she said. “This has been the farce of social equity”, she said. “You tell a bunch of formerly incarcerated people of color, ‘we’re going to give you a license.’ So now you have the license but you don’t have the money.” The lack of capital has doomed many Black cannabis entrepreneurs, said Virgil Grant, who opened his first dispensary in Compton in 2004 and owns three in the Los Angeles area. He helped design the Los Angeles social equity program, but admits red tape and financial challenges have made it nearly impossible for Black owners to open cannabis businesses. Black owners face obstacles other entrepreneurs don’t understand, Grant said. “You have a bunch of white guys who fall into money”, he said. “They turn a corner and money is there, waiting for them. We have to bleed working for it.” Without deep pockets to fall back on, Black entrepreneurs are less likely to weather other challenges the budding legal industry has faced. Legalization took effect in 2018, but businesses are competing with a fierce black market. The vast majority of California’s cannabis business is still unregulated due in part to the local jurisdictions, two-thirds of which don’t allow cannabis companies. Three-quarters of marijuana commerce is illegal, agricultural economist Daniel Sumner estimates. Licensed businesses face taxes as high as 40% and have complained about unscrupulous landlords who triple rents or demand a share of a tenant’s business. Some cities had already hit their limit for cannabis businesses by the time their social equity programs took effect, leaving owners to either wait years for approval or rely on unlicensed sales. All of that inflates prices for legal cannabis, which in turn drives consumers to the black market. State and local officials have had trouble figuring out how to shut down unlicensed businesses. They know the black market hurts legal business owners, but they have few resources to deal with the overwhelming problem and fines are woefully inadequate, they said. “We certainly are aware of the underground market,” said Davina Smith, who leads Sacramento’s cannabis program. “It’s a tough nut to crack. The penalties aren’t there. There’s not much of an incentive for pursuing them.” Meanwhile, funding and worker shortages have slowed down the licensing process. Many jurisdictions have been inundated with applications, but outdated computer systems have prevented progress, said city officials up and down the state. In Los Angeles, for instance, slowdowns caused by complicated cannabis regulations have been compounded by environmental reviews required of all new businesses, said Cat Packer, executive director of the city’s cannabis regulation department. And several cities cited funding shortfalls as the reason they haven’t been able to make more progress. The pandemic hasn’t helped, said Roz McCarthy, founder and CEO of Minorities for Medical Marijuana, a nonprofit advocacy and education organization. Every city’s bureaucracy has slowed to a crawl as offices have shut down and in-person work has fallen behind, she said. Seven cities and counties have equity programs: Oakland, Los Angeles, San Francisco, Sacramento, Long Beach, Humboldt county and Mendocino county. Nine other California jurisdictions are developing them. Oakland and San Francisco have found some success with theirs – Oakland provides grants and no-interest loans to equity applicants, while San Francisco has streamlined the permit process, allowing shops to open across the city, rather than be limited to just a handful of neighborhoods. In Oakland, 240 equity applicants have been fully permitted, while 400 others are being processed. But anecdotal evidence suggests several cannabis businesses there either never opened or quickly shut down. “Most of the people who started with the first round of social equity licensing no longer exist,” said De La Rosa of The People’s Ecosystem. “They couldn’t get access to the capital.” The city of Oakland does not track whether licensees are still operational but is researching ways to help businesses survive, said Gregory Minor, who directs the equity program. “We said from the beginning it’s difficult to come up with something new and get it right out of the gate,” he said. “We’ve tried to make adjustments all along, but we’re also looking at coming up with a package of recommendations for the city council.” In Los Angeles, just one of every 10 social equity license applicants has been approved, all of them in the past few months, said Packer. In Long Beach and Sacramento, limits on the number of dispensaries have prevented the cities from issuing new equity licenses since the first round of openings immediately after legalization. Similar programs outside California have faced issues as well, and none have been especially effective, said Morgan Fox, a spokesman for the National Cannabis Industry Association. Programs nationwide often don’t have enough resources and pit equity applicants against each other, he said. Bureaucratic delays in issuing licenses allow non-equity businesses to snap up prime real estate and funding. Minority-owned cannabis businesses will need to find innovative ways to find funding, said McCarthy of Minorities for Medical Marijuana. Among the solutions she thinks could help: co-ops of owners with different types of licenses, such as retail, cultivation and delivery; crowdfunding to build capital; and incubators where established businesses help new owners build their companies. California officials have said they would like to see more of a commitment from local regulators. “They really embrace the concept of equity but need to do more to put their money where their mouth is,” said Nicole Elliott, director of California’s cannabis department. “Thinking a little more thoughtfully about how to resource the effort from the get-go is hopefully something local jurisdictions are working on.” But Donnie Anderson, who kept his empty storefront ready for four years, is out of patience. “I’m giving up the lease right now,” he said. “I’m just ready to sue.”Frogs hopping around his sheep field were a sure sign to Prof David Reay that the land wanted to be boggy. It had been grazed for centuries and keeping a particular area dry had been a constant battle. “The frogs were still coming back, as if to say, ‘where’s my pond?’ So what I want to do as part of this is give them back some of their pond,” says Reay, who is creating what he hopes to be a pioneering carbon farm on the Mull of Kintyre, a remote peninsula on the west coast of Scotland. Reay, a professor of carbon management, bought his farm three years ago. It lies in the village of Glenbarr, on the west side of the peninsula, which is best known for inspiring the Paul McCartney song of the same name. Reay’s dream was to buy some land that could enable him to remove his and his wife’s lifetime’s carbon footprint from the atmosphere. His outcrop of land is sandwiched between stormy seas and low-hanging clouds. The farm is already embracing its rebellious streak – bouquets of rushes are appearing between scruffy grasses, and gullies are stuffed with bracken, thistles and gorse, despite sheep grazing them last winter. It has more than half a mile of beaches and coves, complete with a family of otters. Reay is using core samples of the soil to meticulously measure how much carbon can be stuffed into this land, just as scientists do in the Arctic. He is a self-proclaimed “carbon nut”: he hasn’t flown for 17 years, drives an electric car, has solar panels, efficient loft insulation and when the time comes wants to have a green burial instead of being cremated. “It just makes sense in terms of carbon,” he says. “With cremation you’re losing a lot of good stuff into the air that you could be putting into the trees and soil.” Reay will be turning the sheep farm into a mixed-leaf wooded area with large wet bogs and wildflower-rich grassland. At the moment, there are 100 sheep, and parts of the farm have already been fenced off. Reay will be phasing out the sheep over five to 10 years, and eventually the farm will be livestock-free. Sequestering carbon in the land is one of humanity’s greatest challenges, and although there has been an increase in “nature-based solutions” and tree-planting programmes, there is still a lot we don’t know. There are a few carbon farms in Australia and although lots of regenerative farmers and rewilders in the UK are probably increasing carbon in the land, Reay doesn’t know of any others whose primary focus is to measure it. After the oceans, the soil is the largest active store of carbon, but a third of the planet’s land is severely degraded, according to a UN-backed study, a situation driven largely by intensive agriculture. The point is to work out how carbon farming can operate on a very small scale, which might have larger implications. “It’s quite nice to be robust,” says Reay. ‘Like a Swiss cheese’ Reay’s plans mean the 30-hectare (74-acre) farm should suck an average of 90 tonnes of carbon dioxide out of the atmosphere every year for the next 50 to 100 years. The average person in the UK emits about five tonnes of carbon a year, so over a lifetime that’s about 400 tonnes. The biggest part of the carbon stock on Reay’s farm is in the soil, and the way to measure this is by digging a lot of it up. “It was like a Swiss cheese by the time I finished,” he says. Reay set up a grid and took nine cores in a number of places, digging 30cm into the soil with a tube and sucking out the sample, which was then taken to a lab where researchers worked out the percentage of carbon in the soil at specific depths. Once you work out the “bulk density” of the soil – essentially how much soil there is in each cubic centimetre – then you can calculate how many grams of carbon it contains. In the top 10cm of soil in the field we are standing in, there is now about 5% carbon; in the woods this is a bit higher, between 15 and 20%, because there is more carbon-rich organic matter, such as dead leaves, being incorporated into the soil. The deeper you go into the earth, the less carbon there is. The last sampling cycle took six months, and Reay will repeat the process every five years. He hopes that eventually carbon levels will increase to about 15 to 20% in the top 10cm of soil all over the farm. “Only a small change of a few per cent of carbon over the whole farm is an awful lot of extra carbon taken out of the atmosphere and kept in the soil,” he says. As the sheep leave the farm, he will block up the drains that have removed boggy areas and ponds from the land. Already, irises are taking over the wetter patches, creating more diverse, interesting habitats that will also contain more carbon. The soil will remain the biggest carbon stock but most of the increases in the next 50 years will be above ground, because of the trees. ‘It has to be resilient’ The land in this part of Scotland probably lost most of its trees during the Highland clearances, which began in the 18th century when crofters were forced out to make way for larger, more profitable landholdings. Reay is aiming for 50,000 mixed native trees, some through natural regeneration, some through planting. He has already put in 500 and was meticulous about their location. “They got the deluxe treatment,” he says. “They’re kind of local league players compared to the Premier League in terms of yield classes, but what they are is, in my view, more sustainable,” he says. Up on the hill near Reay’s house are the rigid blocks of a non-native sitka spruce plantation, a common feature in the Scottish landscape. There will be no sitka on Reay’s farm, because despite its fantastic carbon-sequestration potential, it has few other benefits. “We need to achieve the Paris goals. But if we do them at the cost of biodiversity, and at the cost of people’s livelihoods – like the sheep farmer that we work with – and we do it at the cost of everything else, like food production, then it’s completely unsustainable, it’s not worth it. I’d rather fail on net zero than take that route. Even as a carbon geek with carbon blinkers on, it has to be sustainable, it has to be resilient,” says Reay. Reay is probably enthusiastic about a lot of things, but his affection for this bit of land is clear. “It’s one of those things where I almost want to live for ever just to see it, because I’ll never get to see it in its maturity,” he says. “A lot of the trees we’re planting won’t be mature until I’ll be the equivalent of 130 or something. So I’m gutted I won’t see it.” He wants to persuade university students to visit and learn about what he’s doing with the promise of beer and pizza. Currently, the farm has no house, so Reay camps on one of the beaches with Ginny, his black labrador. He wants to build an eco home in a little dip in the land, hidden from the rest of the world, with a view out over the Atlantic. He is able to visit from his home near Linlithgow, not far from Edinburgh, a few times a month, but in the next few years he hopes to move here permanently. “I love it. Carbon is my thing and being here in Kintyre, it’s the best job in the world.” When I ask Reay what lessons he’s learned, he immediately says it was “sobering” to discover that it will take 12 years to absorb all his and his wife’s emissions. “In the big scheme of things, this isn’t the answer … I really hoped it would be. I thought maybe someone had missed a great trick for sequestering carbon in soils. “When you do the numbers there’s no way you can do this for everyone in Scotland or the world. There’s just not enough land. So it’s going to help. But it really brought home to me that actually, nature – nature-based solutions, tree-planting and soils – is definitely part of the solution but there’s no way it can do the whole job.” Find more age of extinction coverage here, and follow biodiversity reporters Phoebe Weston and Patrick Greenfield on Twitter for all the latest news and featuresI’ve always gotten by fine without owning a smartphone – until now. Covid has made my already obsolete 90s-designed Nokia flip-phone nearly useless. I’m suddenly surrounded by QR codes. There are now Airbnb doors I can’t open, cars I can’t start, menus I can’t read. Paper menus have vanished; ordering food has become an ordeal. At a recent dinner with friends, after some initial chatting, everyone stared at menus on their phones. I sat there for a minute looking around the table and then whispered to my neighbor, discreetly asking to look on. When I eat out alone, I show my flip-phone to the waiter and ask for a proper menu. After an eye-roll, they’ll either bring out a paper menu from some vault in the back or hand me their own phone to use. It’s awkward when I ask a stranger for directions and they pull out their smart phone, looking at me as if to say, “where’s your phone?” My brother says I’m like a smoker who won’t buy her own pack, but smokes everyone else’s. I never wanted to start smoking at all, but the world is conspiring to make me bum one. If I bought my own, I know I’d be smoking a pack a day. Americans check their smartphones an average of 96 times a day, which works out to once every 15 minutes. Two-thirds of Americans check their phones 160 times every day. Social media companies admit they exploit our dopamine receptors, designing products to hook us, such as irregularly timed rewards. Can I tolerate a little slot machine in my pocket, or would I be lured in? Would that tiny thrill of social affirmation turn me into a compulsive checker? Tracking screen-time, turning off notifications, setting monochrome colors, taking “digital-detox” retreats or “internet sabbaths” – none of this seems to make a lasting dent. We are being manipulated – and we clearly have a problem. We all know it’s wrong, but we reach for it anyway. It’s not like I work on a typewriter. I have a computer that I use for work, online shopping, time-sucking web-surfing and movie-watching. But, when I’m not at home, I don’t have access to any of it. My flip-phone doesn’t play music or take photos. I have a clunky camera which mostly sits in the closet. My phone can get a text, but emojis appear as plain squares, so I don’t know the emotion being conveyed without accompanying words. One friend texts me: “big heart big heart big heart emojis.” My Nokia cost $70 and I’ve dropped it dozens of times and it’s never cracked. It’s also a very snazzy yellow. But that’s the limit of its seductive features. There’s nothing addictive about a flip-phone. Everywhere I go, I see people staring into their screens. On sidewalks, I walk hoping people look up in time to avoid a collision. I see couples in restaurants each staring lovingly into their hand-held device. When I eat out with friends, their phone sits face-up on the table like a third wheel, pinging and flashing until attention is inevitably turned in its direction. Apologies are made and there’s always an urgency for one response, one minute. I want to take a walk with only the city or woods taking my attention. I look up at buildings. I people-watch. Usually people are on their phones, so there’s no eye contact. The clock on my flip-phone tells me if I’ve walked for an hour. I don’t need to know how many steps I’ve walked. I have an alarm clock on my night table. I hail taxis; there’s no Uber or Lyft in my little, shrinking world. I lug whatever book I’m reading in my purse – my excuse for never reading War and Peace. I’m all about the old model; everything being replaced by innovation is what I still rely on. My phone plan works only in Europe, so I didn’t pack my Nokia on a recent week-long trip to New York. Before I left Spain, I told my New York friends to meet me at this place and time, like in the old days. We’re all over 40, we remember pay phones and how making plans used to work. It still works: a friend picked me up at the airport and, throughout the week, everyone showed up as planned, one friend even commenting that the novelty of meeting up this way is “kind of fun and quirky”. I felt pretty good about surviving for a week without a phone. Until Newark. Getting back home to Spain required a Covid form with a QR code. The airline employee at the Newark check-in counter seemed baffled by my not having a smartphone and told me in a conclusive tone that the QR-coded form is required, despite my proof of vaccination. I started to panic and said, “So, everyone needs to buy one product in order to fly now?” He said, “I don’t make the rules” – an Orwellian response if ever there was one. I had to get this coded form, so I begged to borrow the closest stranger’s smartphone. I called a friend who went on the website (“but it’s all in Spanish”) and emailed the QR-coded form to the surly employees at the help desk. The stranger whose phone I borrowed was frantically waving at me that he had to go. I quickly thanked my friend and she said, “Jen, just get a normal phone.” I feel self-conscious when I pull out my phone or tell someone that I can’t connect through social media because I’m not on any of it. I know I come across as smug and virtue-signaling, like I’m too good for what everyone else has. You’re probably thinking right now how obnoxious I am. I know. There’s a fanaticism that comes with everyone being a consumer of the same product. Any dissent is reflexively attacked or, at best, dismissed. “How can you live without one?” “What are you trying to prove?” Other than this anomaly, I live a normal consumer life. I shop on Amazon (with quiet shame). I’m hooked on innumerable companies and products that I find morally offensive. This is my typical response – but it’s hard to hear me from way up on my high horse. I appear judgmental just by virtue of not owning a smartphone. I am broadcasting that I couldn’t fully disconnect if I carried the world (wide web) around in my pocket. And that you and I both know you can’t either. I’m determined to hold out for as long as I can. My 17-year-old daughter can’t imagine life without her smartphone. She has Instagram and Snapchat and texts constantly. I rarely hear her speak on her phone. I wonder about the strength of connection developing between her and her texting friends. What havoc her phone is wreaking on her attention span. But I’m complaining about the horseless carriage. There is no winding back the clock. Clocks aren’t wound any more. Jen Wasserstein is an immigration lawyer based in SpainThis year, Diwali, the festival of lights, takes place on 4 November. Hindu, Sikh and Jain communities in the UK are expecting the experience to be different this year, now that Covid restrictions are more relaxed. We’d like to hear from people in the UK about how they are observing Diwali this year. Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.Jaha Dukureh was a young mother of three with little campaigning experience when she started a movement in the Gambia to end female genital mutilation, backed by the Guardian. In the seven years that followed she advised Barack Obama in the US, where she was then living, helped have FGM banned in her home country, was nominated for a Nobel peace prize and became a UN ambassador. Now 31, she wants to defy expectations again, standing for president in the west African nation on 4 December, despite being a relative unknown on the political scene. “I’ve always known that I wanted to serve, but in what capacity I wasn’t sure,” she says, via an intermittent internet call from the Gambia. “I’m a very passionate and emotional person [and] people always told me if you’re a leader, people can’t see emotions. But the older I get, the more I realise that that’s what makes me human, that’s how people connect with me. “I am facing a lot of ageism, and a lot of sexism,” she says. “But for me, the fact that I even dare to say that I want to be president in the Gambia is statement enough – it is what girls need right now. It’s an answer to everyone that has ever questioned our ability to lead not only in Africa, but across the world.” A newcomer to Gambian politics, Dukureh joined the People’s Democratic Organisation for Independence and Socialism (PDOIS) in March. The party was part of Coalition 2016 in the 2016 presidential election. Its candidate, Adama Barrow, defeated strongman Yahya Jammeh, who finally stepped down and left the country after 22 years of rule in 2016. “The Barrow government has failed Gambia on multiple fronts,” says Dukureh. “We’ve had a regime change, but now we need a system change.” Dukureh argues that support for healthcare, education and agriculture – alongside the hard-hit tourism industry – is desperately needed. “When you look at the migration crisis, it’s all because of unemployment and poverty,” she says. “Africa is not a poor continent. We are rich in resources and human capital – it’s just bad leadership holding us back. So when we talk about system change, we are talking about making those changes for every single person and not just certain people within the population that get to benefit while everyone else suffers.” Disquiet is growing in the Gambia, after Barrow’s National People’s Party (NPP) announced an alliance with Jammeh’s Alliance for Patriotic Reorientation and Construction (APRC), founded by army officers who staged a coup in 1994 and put him in power. Jammeh has said he does not support the alliance, but activists continue to fear that the former leader – accused of human rights violations and killings of political opponents during his 22-year reign – could return from Equatorial Guinea where he has lived in exile since 2017. The Barrow government has said the former president stole at least $50m (£37m) from the country while in office but he has refused to cooperate with the ongoing Truth, Reconciliation and Reparations Commission (TRRC) set up by his successor. Dukureh knows she faces an uphill battle and lacks political allies, but says the negotiations between parties opposing the NPP/ARPC alliance, which could create an opposition coalition, would be an opportunity for the Gambia. “Women are the majority of registered voters in the Gambia and 72% of Gambia’s population is under the age of 35. That’s my demographic,” she says. “My generation has inherited a lot of burden from past generations, and we have a moral duty to ensure that our children don’t face the same reality that we have faced growing up and where we are right now in our country’s history.” She will also draw on her own powerful backstory. An FGM survivor, she moved to the US aged 15 and was married off to a much older man. She left the marriage and put herself through college before marrying again and having three children. She is a US citizen, but is willing to renounce her citizenship having lived in the Gambia since 2016. She points to her achievements of being at the vanguard of the Gambia’s anti-FGM movement, saying the campaigning helped her find her voice. During Covid she set up a programme providing food and cash to more than 2,000 female-led households, through her NGO Safe Hands for Girls. “My work speaks for itself,” she says. “I don’t do anything I don’t believe in. The same people who doubted that Gambia would pass a law against FGM are probably the same people who are doubting that I can become the next president of this country.” If she fails to become the presidential candidate for a new opposition coalition, she will back whoever is chosen as leader – and make another bid in five years’ time.If you are anything like me, you think of the climate emergency a lot. Possibly every waking hour. Perhaps you experience the psychological tension caused by feeling trapped between the truth of climate and ecological destruction on the one hand and inaction from world leaders on the other. I feel this tension myself, and as a parent and climate activist, I see it affecting young people especially hard. We are in a growing epidemic of serious climate depression among young people. This is a crisis that cannot be solved by “positive messaging” any more than climate breakdown itself. Ultimately, the only thing that will help the mental and physical safety of every age group, including the young, is meaningful action from world leaders. Global heating is a vise tightening on nearly every aspect of our planet, our society, and our minds, driven by the production of fossil fuels. Each gram of fossil fuel burned intensifies every manifestation of climate and ecological breakdown; there is no negotiating with physics. Without emergency-mode climate action, things will break. Lots of things. Big things. Eventually, everything. The climate mental health crisis is already hitting those who have lost everything in worsening climate infernos. It’s already hitting farmers in Australia, India and elsewhere who face serious and sometimes insurmountable challenges growing food in a rapidly changing climate (which, incidentally, should be a climate wake-up call for anyone who eats). It’s hitting Indigenous and vulnerable communities, for whom climate breakdown is the culmination of centuries of colonial and social oppression. It’s hitting parents, who feel unable to protect their children; I sometimes cry while talking about climate breakdown when I think about my kids. And of course, it’s hitting young people. A recent survey by a team of psychologists probed the climate anxiety felt by 10,000 young people aged 16-25 from countries in the global south and north. In the survey, 77% said “the future is frightening”, 68% feel sad, and 63% feel anxious. 39% feel “hesitant to have children”. This distress correlates with a belief that climate action from governments is inadequate. Additionally, mental distress increases with hotter temperatures, with 9,000 to 40,000 additional suicides projected by 2050 in the US and Mexico under a worst-case climate scenario due to excess heat alone. Therapy can help people struggling with climate anxiety and depression; but since climate emotions are driven by real, intensifying, physical processes on Earth, therapy only treats the symptom. Something that helps me is being part of a vibrant community of activists. I could not handle the weight of this knowledge if I had to do so alone. However, as everything gets worse – and unfortunately it will get worse – we’re all going to need more than friends, as important as they are. We’re also going to need a sense that, collectively, society is finally heading in the right direction, with emergency speed. Since climate breakdown is caused by fossil fuel production, meaningful action must include ending the fossil fuel industry rapidly, with binding, annual goals for industry contraction, and therefore emissions reduction. One path would be to seize assets and nationalize the fossil fuel industry to ensure equitable distribution during the ramp-down; forge a fossil-fuel non-proliferation treaty for international coordination; enhance social safety nets to ensure stability during a period of rapid change; and implement a Green New Deal to create transition infrastructure as well as a deep sense of solidarity. Young people and teens must be included in climate decision-making. Voting ages should be lowered. The Greek word neo means “young, new”. We can thus coin a word, neocide, meaning “the deliberate killing of young people and future generations”. The fossil fuel industry and the US government have known for half a century that fossil fuels would lead to catastrophic global heating that would be especially destructive to young people and future generations. After decades of lying and misleading the public, political and corporate leaders continue to delay action, leading to vast, irreversible, and accelerating losses throughout Earth’s ecosystems and life support systems. Of course this creates mental anguish for young people! It is psychologically devastating to feel climate and ecological catastrophe closing in every day while watching those in power not only failing to act, but actively making things worse by expanding the fossil fuel industry. Instead of more empty words and distractions, humanity desperately needs real action. World leaders must orchestrate a rapid end to the fossil fuel industry, for the sake of us all – but especially for the sake of young people. Peter Kalmus is a climate scientist and author of Being the Change: Live Well and Spark a Climate Revolution In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is at 800-273-8255 and online chat is also available. You can also text HOME to 741741 to connect with a crisis text line counselor. In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.orgThursday seems to come around earlier every week, especially if you’ve set yourself an immovable deadline for writing 15 questions about general knowledge and topical news stories. All your favourites are here: Kate Bush, Ron from Sparks, the Olly Murs face masks, and the unexpected anagram round. It is just for fun, there are no prizes, but there are bonus points to be had in the comments for making the quiz master laugh or spotting the hidden Doctor Who reference in this week’s questions. Let us know how you get on! The Thursday quiz, No 28 If you do think there has been an egregious error in one of the questions or answers, please feel free to email martin.belam@theguardian.com but remember, the quiz master’s word is always final, especially about the respective merits of various Star Trek series.Winning tip: Glamping on a dairy farm, west Devon Hole up in one of two cosy, wooden glamping pods, on Alistair’s beef and sheep farm in the tranquil Devon countryside not far from Launceston, Cornwall. Despite a relentless late-October downpour, we stayed warm, snug and smug inside the pod thanks to a heater and clever insulation. Having an en suite shower room spared us the usual torch-lit scramble across a field, and the heated towel rail felt indulgent. The firepit was a hit on dry nights, as we enjoyed the warmth as well as a visit from Alistair’s flock of rare-breed sheep. From £65 a night for up to four Clare Lawrence Cosy cabins, Whitstable, Kent These converted fishermen’s huts on the Whitstable seafront were once inhabited by cockle farmers, but now serve as cosy cabins for tourists looking for a bit of fresh sea air all year round. Just metres from the beach and the famous Whitstable Oyster Company restaurant, these sea-view cabins are the perfect base for exploring the England Coast Path or cycling the Crab and Winkle Way. Huts from £85 per night Jay Gee Woodland cabins, near Shrewsbury My husband, two sons and I loved Riverside Cabins just outside Shrewsbury for its peaceful location and woodland surroundings. There are only a few cabins and lodges and our cabin deck (and hot tub) overlooked the river, which was the perfect place to unwind and watch out for wildlife. Our stylish cabin interior was finished to a really high standard and was beautifully cosy and well equipped. We all loved the huge firepit in the sandstone quarry (marshmallow toasting under the stars!). It was a great base for exploring Shropshire’s areas of outstanding natural beauty. Cabins from £90 a night Tanya American school bus, Beachy Head, East Sussex There is no better place to clear winter’s fug than atop the white cliffs of Beachy Head. As the wind whips across a churning sea, tearing chunks of the crumbling cliff face, I feel wild and free, at one with the elements. Inside, ruddy-cheeked, I am protected by the safe, dependable walls of another icon. An American yellow school bus, converted into a tiny, quirky home that gently rocks in the wind. It’s as if it wants to remind me that it, too, came to shake off past lives, to feel alive. Prices from £155 a night based on two sharing Ruth Chapman A hut on high, Lake District Dubs Hut is slate-built with a stone floor and a slate roof. It is free to stay in. Start at the top of Honister Pass (Grid ref: NY 225 135) where there is a National Trust pay-and-display car park. From there, walk alongside the road passing the slate factory on your left. Enter the quarry yard, go up a few steps and pick up a path signed “Great Gable and Haystacks”, which starts to climb immediately, leading you onto on to the old abandoned quarry tramway. This is Moses Rigg. There is a 150-metre ascent before you descend again, reaching Dubs Quarry. As you approach the hut, you have a panorama of Haystacks and the whole of the High Stile range. No charge, but you are advised to take a tent in popular areas, in case the bothy is already occupied when you arrive. It is crucial to check the weather forecast for adverse conditions before attempting to reach a remote bothy Yvonne Meeks Bikepacking bothy, Cairngorms Recently renovated with a composting toilet and two woodburning stoves, Ruigh Aiteachain bothy, in Glen Feshie in the Cairngorms, provides the perfect overnight stay between Blair Atholl and Aviemore for a two-day bikepacking trip. The first day up through Glen Tilt and Glen Feshie provides magnificent Scots pinewoods and bellows of stags reverberating through the glens. The second day reveals another magical journey as you continue northwards along the River Feshie and the Spey, up to Aviemore for a well-earned refreshment. Fording two rivers, you’ll need to check first if they’re in spate, but otherwise it just adds to the adventure. No charge, but you are advised to take a tent if you intend to use a bothy in a popular area. It is crucial to check the weather forecast for adverse conditions before attempting to reach a remote bothy Douglas One-room cottage, Isle of Skye Struanlea self-catering cottage in Lower Breakish, in the south-east of the Isle of Skye, is a secret hideaway, perfect for two. Just off the main road from Kyle of Lochalsh, it has everything you need for a break from daily life, yet it is easily accessible, only a short walk from the beach and minutes from the local community facilities. It’s cosy and welcoming, and you can imagine you are in a secluded corner of Skye. From £230 a week Pauline Caravans and Morecambe Bay views, Cumbria We stayed at a lovely caravan site named Meathop Fell, with our mini-caravan and massive awning. It is a very quiet place close to the Lake District at Grange-over-Sands, Morecambe Bay. Our awning flooded, but we made a cup of tea and survived! The site is open all year around. You don’t need to be a member of the Caravan Club to enjoy this lovely place. Touring pitch from £11.15 Vera Wills Fit for a hobbit, Ceredigion Ty Barcud luxury glamping pod at Devil’s Bridge in Ceredigion (near Aberystwyth in mid-Wales) is in an amazing location. It sits in two acres of meadow and woodland. The pod is a curved, cedar-clad, fully insulated cabin with a round entrance door that looks as if it waiting for two Hobbits to arrive! It is en suite, with wifi, and has a gorgeous deck area. £255 for a Friday-Monday winter stay for two Elizabeth Turvey Shepherd’s hut, Berkshire Little Fleece at Folly Farm in West Ilsley is a cosy shepherd’s hut in beautiful countryside by the Ridgeway in Berkshire. The wood stove, electric central heating and fire pit make it cosy in winter, and it has an electric shower and wood-fired outdoor bath for romantic evenings under the stars. The sheep and pheasants are great company on frosty walks across the farmland. I can’t wait to return. From £310 for two nights for up to two people Catherine WestThe premise of JJ Bola’s second novel is an arresting one. Michael Kabongo, a young British-Congolese teacher in London, sets off to travel around the United States with his life savings of $9,021, having decided that when his funds run out, he will leave behind “the growing weight of burdens accumulating in [his] life” and kill himself. From this explosive opening, Bola traces two interwoven narrative strands. One is preoccupied with the familial, social and personal pressures that have led Michael to the despairing conclusion that he “doesn’t belong anywhere”. We are introduced to his troubled and deeply vulnerable students; Michael feels a noble sense of responsibility, yet finds connecting with them and keeping them out of harm’s way almost impossible. We also glimpse Michael’s trying domestic situation – he lives at home with his religious mother, and conflict arises from his own ambivalence towards faith. We meet his close friend Jalil, whose banter moves between post-colonial discourse and the absurdities of contemporary dating. The second strand follows Michael on his fateful American sojourn, from California to Dallas and Chicago and finally to New York. Here, Bola’s filmic snapshots – of strip clubs, frat parties, brushes with the law and romantic trysts – are a vivid counterpoint to the mournful protagonist’s journey towards fulfilling his dark “pact”. The novel’s conceptual concern with the limited routes available for black people to find meaningful release from systemic racism is, without question, important and emotive. (These ideas were recently approached with freshness and force in Natasha Brown’s Assembly.) Additionally, the novel’s intensity and earnestness are engrossing, and the reader is drawn along by a grim curiosity about whether Michael will see his plan through. However, the book struggles in some respects. Mental health challenges for black men are worthy terrain for the contemporary novelist, as Brandon Taylor and Caleb Azumah Nelson are showing us. But this novel, however heartfelt, rarely offers new, insightful or affecting investigation into the turmoil of suicidal ideation. Largely, this is a result of stylistic choices. Though there are moving passages in which Michael’s distress is laid bare in powerfully raw terms – especially towards the end of the novel, where he almost confides in a colleague – this directness and sensitivity is mostly absent. More often, there is a somewhat grandiose, ponderous and ultimately distancing tone to scenes in which Bola gives Michael “the language of melancholia” to voice inner demons. In this mode, Michael repeatedly wonders: “Is there no way out? No way out of the mind? Out of this prison, this hell, this purgatory – this wasteland of nothing? Where nothing lives, where nothing breathes […] I want to walk into the oblivion of my being, the disintegration of my existence from this world.” Equally, Michael’s unexpected and seemingly revelatory relationship with an exotic dancer, Belle, in New York is presented in overblown phrases. Belle’s “smell [is] like a field of unnamed flowers, her touch like a shaman healing an afflicted soul”. Elsewhere, Michael wishes he could capture Belle’s smile in a jar “and take it with him wherever he goes; maybe multiply that smile by the thousands and release it into prisons, into drug-infested street corners, into places of conflict and war, into abusive homes, and other places in need of hope […] her heart is a lighthouse and he is a lost ship in the ocean”. This novel’s great potential to reveal new truths about the intersectional minefields that black men negotiate is compromised by a brand of lyricism that distracts rather than illuminates. • The Selfless Act of Breathing is published by Dialogue (£14.99). To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply. In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or by emailing jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at befrienders.org.The chair of the Committee on Standards in Public Life has launched a full-frontal attack on the government’s decision to tear up the independent system for combating sleaze in parliament, describing it as “a very serious and damaging moment for parliament and public standards in this country”. Jonathan Evans, a crossbench peer and former director general of the Security Service, said on Thursday that the vote in parliament to replace the system of scrutiny with a new committee led by a Tory MP and with a Tory majority was an “extraordinary proposal … deeply at odds with the best traditions of British democracy” and described it as “as an attack on standards”. “The political system in this country does not belong to one party or even to one government,” he said. “It is a common good that we have all inherited from our forebears and that we all have a responsibility to preserve and to improve.” He was speaking at the same time as the government announced in parliament that it was reversing its proposal and would ditch immediate plans to overhaul the standards system. Lord Evans also accused the government of failing to uphold the principles of public life, espoused by governments over 25 years, that include the requirement for ministers and MPs to show leadership in upholding ethical standards in public life. “I find it hard to see how yesterday’s actions in any way meet that test,” said Evans in a speech to the Institute for Government conference on ethical standards in government. He said: “We could slip into being a corrupt country and that’s why we need to be vigilant around these issues. It is also quite possible that we could slip in terms of international perceptions of us.” Conservative MPs were whipped to vote for the new system after Owen Paterson was found to have repeatedly breached lobbying rules by the independent parliamentary commissioner for standards after he was paid by two companies, Randox and Lynn’s Country Foods, which employed him as a consultant. The breaches were considered “egregious” by the commissioner, who is employed by parliament rather than the government. She ordered him to complete a 30-day suspension from parliament. Evans’ unequivocal comments will fuel the growing backlash against Downing Street’s strategy, which was described as a “complete and utter sham” by the Labour leader, Keir Starmer. “Their plan is to permanently weaken the structures that hold MPs to high standards,” Starmer wrote in the Guardian. “They’ve appointed their own man to oversee the process – a Tory MP who not long ago was the prime minister’s wife’s boss – and gifted themselves a majority on a committee to set the new rules. It would be laughable if it wasn’t so serious.” Evans has chaired the Committee on Standards in Public Life since October 2018. It is a non-departmental public body sponsored by the Cabinet Office that advises the prime minister on arrangements for upholding ethical standards of conduct across public life in England, but is not a regulator and does not investigate individual complaints. Evans told the conference: “It cannot be right that MPs should reject after one short debate the conclusions of the independent commissioner for standards and the House of Commons committee on standards – conclusions that arose from an investigation lasting two years. “It cannot be right to propose an overhaul of the entire regulatory system in order to postpone or prevent sanctions in a very serious case of paid lobbying by an MP. It cannot be right that this was accompanied by repeated attempts to question the integrity of the commissioner of standards herself who is working within the system the House of Commons agreed in 2010. “And it cannot be right to propose that the standards system of the House of Commons should be reviewed by a select committee chaired by a member of the ruling party and with the majority of members from that same party.” He concluded: “This extraordinary proposal is deeply at odds with the best traditions of British democracy. The political system in this country does not belong to one party or even to one government. It is a common good that we have all inherited from our forebears and that we all have a responsibility to preserve and to improve.” On Monday, Evans’ committee published an annual report that said: “Transparency around lobbying is poor and requires better coordination and more frequent publication by the Cabinet Office.” It called for a “programme of reform to restore public confidence in the regulation of ethical standards in government” and urged greater independence in the regulation of the ministerial code, which Evans said lagged behind arrangements for MPs, peers and civil servants. He also called for reforms to the powers of the commissioner for public appointments, who oversees the recruitment of chairs to major public bodies such as the BBC and Ofcom, to provide a better guarantee of the independence of assessment panels.Russia has expelled a Dutch reporter, his newspaper has said, as Moscow continues its crackdown on domestic and foreign journalists in the country. De Volkskrant journalist Tom Vennink said his visa was revoked and he was given three days to leave the country after difficulties renewing his journalist accreditation. The expulsion is the second of a foreign journalist in recent months, following Russia’s decision in August to ban the BBC reporter Sarah Rainsford from the country as a “security threat”. Formally, Vennink was targeted by Russia’s interior ministry for two minor administrative violations, including a failure to register his temporary address, dating back to 2019. But an increasingly bitter relationship between Moscow and Amsterdam appears to have played a role in the decision. Vennink, a respected foreign correspondent who has reported from Russia since 2015, said the expulsion came as a surprise. “Russian journalists face serious obstacles in their work, but as a foreign correspondent I was able to report relatively freely on Russia and the Russians for the past six years,” he said. He is now back in the Netherlands. In an article published by de Volkskrant, the editor-in-chief, Pieter Klok, called the timing of the expulsion a “mystery”. The forced departure of the journalist was unprecedented for the newspaper, which has had a correspondent in Moscow since 1988. In an interview, Klok described Russia’s decision-making process as opaque. “That’s also the problem to do something about it,” he said. “Because you don’t know where to start.” Klok said that there was a growing concern in the days leading up to Vennink’s expulsion as his accreditation had been renewed only for a short period. That coincided with a period of heightened tensions between Moscow and The Hague that has put Dutch journalists in Russia on edge. “The feeling is among all Dutch correspondents that there is a danger that they can be expelled from the country,” said Klok. Court hearings are ongoing at The Hague over the 2014 shooting down of the MH17 passenger jet over Ukraine that left nearly 200 Dutch citizens dead. European governments have said the missile that shot down the plane came from Russia, although Moscow denies this. Russia also protested against a recent Dutch appeal court decision not to give it control of a trove of Scythian gold that was on loan from Crimean museums when Russia annexed the peninsula in 2014. The Dutch supreme court is set on Friday to decide on a $50bn arbitration award that Russia has been ordered to pay to former shareholders of the defunct oil producer Yukos. Klok said it was possible that the court cases had played a role in the decision but added: “It’s all speculation and we just don’t know.” The outgoing Dutch foreign minister, Ben Knapen, told de Volkskrant: “It is not acceptable for the Netherlands if a journalist has to leave a country against his will.” Russia has cracked down on press freedoms in the last year, targeting dozens of local journalists as “foreign agents” and “undesirable organisations” after a series of high-profile leaks about prominent allies of Vladimir Putin and Russia’s intelligence services. But foreign journalists were rarely targeted for expulsion until Rainsford was told her visa would not be extended. Moscow said the reason was a UK refusal in 2019 to accredit a reporter from the Russian state news agency Tass. Yet Rainsford said she was told by border guards she would not be allowed back into Russia because she was classified as a national security threat. She left the country at the end of August. Luke Harding, a former Moscow correspondent for the Guardian, was expelled in 2011. He was denied entry at the border and told by an airport security official working for the federal border service: “For you Russia is closed.” Russia barred the US journalist David Satter in 2014, and a Polish correspondent for the Gazeta Wyborcza daily was ordered to leave in 2015.The NHS vaccination programme to prevent cervical cancer has so far stopped tens of thousands of women from developing the disease and experiencing pre-cancerous changes to cells, a study has found. A study found that cervical cancer rates in women offered the vaccine between the ages of 12 and 13 (now in their 20s) were 87% lower than in an unvaccinated population. We’re interested to hear how people feel about cervical cancer possibly becoming a rare disease due to the success of the HPV jab in combination with screening. Whether you’re a cancer survivor yourself, the friend or relative of someone affected by cervical cancer, a young woman who has had the HPV jab, or a parent of children who have had the jab, we’d like to hear from you. Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.“A chronicle of everything that’s happened to me over the last 18 months,” is how Ahir Shah introduces his new show, Dress. It begins with the two-time Edinburgh comedy award nominee on top of the world in January 2020, and traces his journey – an in-demand comic suddenly out of a job, a singleton newly under house arrest with his new girlfriend – through the coronavirus era. It’s one of the first shows I’ve seen to make the lockdown experience its focus, and comes with Shah’s usual mix of philosophy, soul searching and bleak laughter in the face of a cruel world. If it doesn’t pack as big a punch as 2019’s Dots, it’s because the thinking is less deep and less integrated into the show. There is a succession of eye-catching social-satirical observations – such as the one about wanting to be rich enough to have really left-wing kids – but they’re unmoored from the wider narrative. The lessons Shah derives from living through Covid-19 are commonplace by comparison – a danger he identifies at the top of the show. There’s also an uncertainty of tone here – an occupational hazard for a comic who packs so much into his work. His voice feels overamplified, but it doesn’t help that Shah is pushing so hard against the material. References to his depression (the subject of previous shows) are dropped in a little awkwardly. An anecdote about meeting his father under lockdown works its way to a strikingly tender conclusion – which is then undermined with a cynical and unnecessary punchline. Far better when he lets the emotional honesty speak for itself, as with a closing section that looks at new love through the lens of the Bhagavad Gita. There’s a lovely running joke, too, about his delight in his newfound role as a househusband, making soup while the plague rages out of doors. On parallel tracks to this domestic narrative, combative setpieces take down woke capitalism and – a standout, this one – make hay with the sensitivities around Covid-19’s contested origin story. There’s some smashing material here, in the process of coalescing, I suspect, into an effective show. At Soho theatre, London, until 13 November. Then touring.Good morning. A high-profile federal criminal investigation into Rudy Giuliani has zeroed in on evidence that in spring 2019 three Ukrainian government prosecutors agreed to award contracts valued in the hundreds of thousands of dollars to the former New York mayor and two other US attorneys as a way to gain political and personal influence with the Trump administration. Investigators believe Giuliani, Victoria Toensing and Joe DiGenova probably violated federal transparency laws that require Americans working for foreign governments to register as foreign agents with the US justice department. What evidence do the prosecutors have? They have compiled a list of more than two dozen specific acts by Giuliani, Toesning and DiGenova as to how to advance the personal and political interests of a group of Ukrainian prosecutors. How does this relate to the campaign against Joe Biden’s son Hunter? They have also uncovered extensive, detailed plans devised by one Ukrainian prosecutor, Yuriy Lutsenko, and approved by Giuliani, to promote an investigation into Hunter in Ukraine in order to help boost Donald Trump’s chances of re-election. Body blow for Biden as voters in Virginia and New Jersey desert Democrats Less than a year after taking control of the White House and Congress, Democrats were reeling on Wednesday from a shocking defeat in Virginia and a tight race for governor in New Jersey as Joe Biden’s popularity sinks and his domestic agenda hangs in the balance. In Virginia, a state that had shifted sharply left over the past decade and that Biden won by 10 points in 2020, the Republican Glenn Youngkin, a political newcomer, defeated the Democrat Terry McAuliffe, a former governor of the state. And in New Jersey the Democratic governor, Phil Murphy, managed only a narrow victory over the Republican Jack Ciattarelli, an unexpected turn of events in a state that is even more reliably Democratic. Tuesday’s elections were the first major test of the national mood since Biden took office in January, and the results were deeply disappointing for the president and his party as they try to keep control of wafer-thin majorities in Congress. How unpopular is Biden at the moment? Biden’s poll numbers have slumped to near-historic lows. In mid-August, voters approved of the president by a margin of 50 to 43.8%. Today they disapprove of him by a margin of 51.1 to 43.2%. Why is this? Months of infighting among Democrats over his nearly $3tn legislative agenda on Capitol Hill, a devastating evacuation from Afghanistan and the ever-present threat of coronavirus are all thought to have contributed to his lack of popularity. US strike that killed 10 Afghan civilians was legal, says Pentagon A US drone strike in Kabul in August that killed 10 Afghan civilians was a tragic mistake but did not violate any laws, a Pentagon inspector general has said after an investigation. Three adults, including a man who worked for a US aid group, and seven children were killed in the 29 August operation. The target is believed to have been a home and a vehicle occupied by Islamic State militants. “The investigation found no violation of law, including the law of war. Execution errors combined with confirmation bias and communication breakdowns led to regrettable civilian casualties,” Lt Gen Sami Said, the inspector general for the US air force, said in a report. What else did Said say? He told reporters the attack was “an honest mistake” and not criminal conduct, random conduct or negligence. Why did those responsible carry out the strike? The people directly involved in the strike genuinely believed “that they were targeting an imminent strike”, Said said. Climate misinformation on Facebook ‘increasing substantially’, study says The scale of climate misinformation on Facebook is “staggering” and “increasing quite substantially”, an analysis of hundreds of thousands of posts has found. A report released on Thursday by the Real Facebook Oversight Board, an independent watchdog group, and the environmental nonprofit Stop Funding Heat, analyzed a dataset of more than 195 Facebook pages and groups. Researchers found an estimated 818,000 posts downplaying or denying the climate crisis, which received a combined 1.36m views a day. The study’s release coincides with the Cop26 climate summit in Glasgow. The report urges governments to seriously consider the role of climate misinformation on social media in derailing the battle to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. Researchers said: “Facebook is among the world’s biggest purveyors of climate disinformation.” What did Facebook say about the findings? Facebook did not immediately respond to a request for comment. It has previously said it continues to counteract the spread of misinformation by flagging climate information and referring users to its Climate Change Science Center. In other news … Californians are rushing to see a rare “corpse plant” that blooms for just 48 hours. The bloom of the Sumatran flower – nicknamed for its smell like a dead body – is drawing huge crowds to a southern California botanical garden. A lawyer for the armorer who oversaw weapons used on the Rust movie set has suggested sabotage. The attorney for Hannah Gutierrez said someone could have deliberately put a live round into the gun used by Alec Baldwin when he accidentally shot dead a cinematographer. A Georgia judge has acknowledged there appeared to be “intentional discrimination” after a nearly all-white jury was selected for the trial of three white men accused of murdering Ahmaud Arbery, but has seated the jury nonetheless. The Biden administration has placed NSO Group on a US blacklist after it determined that the Israeli spyware maker had acted contrary national security interests of the US. The decision against the company at heart of the Pegasus project reflects deep concern about the impact of spyware on US national security interests. Stat of the day: proposed student dormitory would be eighth-densest neighborhood in the world A “giant windowless prison”, “Dormzilla”, a “torture experiment”: the internet has been weighing in on the construction plan for a student dormitory at the University of California, Santa Barbara, since an architect’s resignation letter went viral. The project has sparked fierce debate about what people should, or can, endure in the name of efficiency. The proposed dormitory would be the world’s densest, a feat achieved by packing 4,500 students into a 11-story building whose bedrooms are mostly devoid of windows. Don’t miss this: Sopranos star Michael Imperioli remembers the time he almost killed the leading man There have been reams written about The Sopranos, often rated as the greatest TV series of all time. It won Michael Imperioli an Emmy in 2004, one of 21 the show picked up. After the late James Gandolfini – who played Tony Soprano – Imperioli is probably the show’s most recognisable star. Even though the show ended nearly 15 years ago, it’s more popular now than ever. HBO reported a 200% surge in viewers last year in the US. And on the back of that, Imperioli and his fellow cast member Steve Schirripa have written a book, which they are billing as the definitive oral history of The Sopranos. Climate check: The dark secrets behind big oil’s climate pledges JPMorgan Chase won glowing headlines last year when it announced a commitment to counter the climate crisis. The bank waited months to detail its plans, and in May it said it would not press oil companies to lower their emissions. Instead, it would encourage them to become more efficient, focusing on their “carbon intensity”. That metric has become a favorite of banks, oil companies and other big businesses. But “carbon intensity” pledges have given companies a framework to keep investing in dirty fuels. Want more environmental stories delivered to your inbox? Sign up to our new newsletter Down to Earth (formerly Green Light) to get original and essential reporting on the climate crisis every week. Last Thing: female California condors can reproduce without males The California condor is the largest flying bird in North America, with a 10ft wingspan that enables it to soar up to 15,000ft – nearly half the height of a commercial airplane. Now the birds can claim another superlative feat: scientists have discovered that females can reproduce without a male partner, in a rare phenomenon known as parthenogenesis. Oliver Ryder, the director of conservation genetics for the San Diego Zoo Wildlife Alliance, has called the recent findings a “eureka moment”. “Many scientists have experiences like this when they see the world in a way they haven’t seen before,” said Ryder, who co-wrote a paper detailing the discovery. Sign up First Thing is delivered to thousands of inboxes every weekday. If you’re not already signed up, subscribe now. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.comExtreme weather driven by climate breakdown is hitting the world “with a new ferocity”, the UN has said, but countries have so far failed to prepare for the widespread damage that is now inevitable even if greenhouse gas emissions are reduced. Developing countries are particularly at risk, but they are unable to muster the cash needed to defend people and resources from flooding, droughts and sea level rises. They are likely to need between $140bn and $300bn a year by the end of this decade to cope with the impacts, but in 2019 received only $80bn in climate finance, which included cash to cut greenhouse gas emissions. The UN Environment Programme (Unep) said on Thursday at the Cop26 conference in Glasgow that without much greater focus on adapting to the impact of the climate crisis, millions more lives and livelihoods could be at risk. In its sixth Adaptation Gap report, Unep called on donor countries to focus more international aid on climate adaptation and find ways to involve private-sector finance, and it called for all countries to use more of the trillions they are pouring into economic recovery from the Covid-19 pandemic to help protect against the impacts of climate breakdown. Such efforts could create jobs and prosperity as well as protecting people, experts said. Inger Andersen, the executive director of Unep, said that although efforts to cut greenhouse gas emissions and limit global temperature rises must continue, countries meeting at Cop26 must also put more effort into preparing for the impacts of the climate crisis that are now inevitable even if the world fulfils the Paris agreement and limits temperature rises to 1.5C above pre-industrial levels. She said: “[This year] was the year in which climate impacts hit developed and developing countries with a new ferocity. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, meanwhile, warned we have at best a 50% chance of limiting global warming to a 1.5C temperature rise this century. So, even as we look to step up efforts to cut greenhouse gas emissions – efforts that are still not anywhere strong enough – we must dramatically up our game to adapt.” Smaller developing countries face the hardest task, as much of their infrastructure already tends to be in poor shape, and people have few spare resources to cope with the impact of sudden extreme weather such as floods or storms, or to withstand longer-duration impacts such as droughts. In the past two years, Covid-19 has further depleted their already scant resources, leaving them even more vulnerable. Hannah Cloke, a professor of hydrology at the University of Reading, said: “This latest report from the UN shows that the world is not doing enough to prepare for extreme climate events such as floods, droughts and wildfires that cause severe disruption to people’s lives. Even if Cop26 finished with a plan to phase out fossil fuels and cut emissions to zero, we would still have to live with the impact of the warming we have already caused, which we know has made many types of extreme weather events much more likely. Adapting to climate risk means taking a proactive response, by investing in better buildings, infrastructure and early-warning systems.” Funding projects that make developing countries more resilient to these impacts is hard, however. While building a windfarm or installing solar panels yields a quick and tangible return and is attractive to investors, projects such as managing agricultural land for drought, installing early-warning systems in case of flood, building shelters and other means of preparing people for extreme weather do not produce a clear profit. Although the funds for adaptation rose by 50% from 2017-18 to 2019-20, Andersen said this was still far too low. The report also cited OECD data showing that the top 10 donors funded more than 2,600 projects with a principal focus on adaptation between 2010 and 2019. About eight in 10 countries have now adopted at least one national-level adaptation planning instrument, according to Unep, an increase of 7% since 2020. Yet some methods of helping people adapt can have multiple benefits, including reducing greenhouse gas emissions. For instance, restoring mangrove swamps or coral reefs in coastal areas to act as a buffer against sea level rises and storm surges can sequester carbon dioxide and foster healthy populations of fish and other wildlife, as well as providing tourist revenue. Early efforts to prepare for the impacts of extreme weather also reduce the need for rescue spending when disaster does strike. Adaptation has often been overlooked at international climate talks, in favour of the urgent task of cutting emissions. But the UN has been trying to highlight adaptation at the Cop26 talks, with its secretary general, António Guterres, repeatedly calling for half of the $100bn a year in climate finance to be delivered by the rich world to poor countries to be devoted to adaptation. Scientists backed up Unep’s call. Brian O’Callaghan, the lead researcher at the Oxford University economic recovery project, who has shown that a green recovery from Covid-19 could generate jobs and economic benefits, said: “Covid-19 recovery spending has so far not prioritised green investment – and more than any other sub-category, adaptation and resilience needs have been ignored. By failing to invest in climate adaptation, it seems like we’ve gone skydiving and decided we don’t need a parachute.” Job opportunities range from building flood defences and changing city infrastructure to planting trees around water courses and on hillsides to prevent landslips, restoring wetlands and peatlands, as well as town planning, building communications networks, preparing healthcare systems, educating children to prepare for disaster, and research and development into new technology. But Lisa Schipper, an environmental social science research fellow at Oxford University, said some adaptation efforts in the past had been misdirected, and lessons must be learned from those failures. “We need to rethink the design of projects so they involve local actors in order to incorporate a deep understanding of what drives vulnerability to climate change,” she said.The actors Stephen Fry and Kelly Macdonald and the former Liberal Democrat leader Jo Swinson have joined a coalition of campaigners calling on the public to harness the untapped power of their pensions to tackle the climate crisis. They are among the celebrities, activists and businesses joining the 21x Club, launched at the Cop26 summit in Glasgow by the Make My Money Matter campaign, set up by Richard Curtis, the screenwriter, director and Comic Relief co-founder. The campaign’s name is inspired by research published in the summer that suggests making your pension green is 21 times more effective at cutting your carbon footprint than stopping flying, going vegetarian and switching to a green energy provider combined. The 21x Club aims to take “the power of our pensions mainstream through a range of high-profile voices”, including the actor Peter Capaldi, the former UN climate envoy and Irish president Mary Robinson, and Christiana Figueres, a former executive secretary of the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change. The group, which also includes several high-profile businesses such as Ikea, the insurer Aviva and the drinks firm Innocent, will promote a new drive to make sure all members of the public can access a green pension. Make My Money Matter campaigns to move some of the £2.6tn invested in UK pensions alone out of industries that are harming people and the planet and into sustainable businesses. It said pensions had a critical role to play in moving towards a zero-carbon world, but “limited public engagement, poor transparency and destructive investment practices” meant too much of this money was invested in ways that caused harm, jeopardised returns and went against the values of millions of UK savers. Curtis said he was “delighted to help launch the 21x Club – a group of passionate, imaginative leaders and organisations each committed to using the hidden superpower of our pensions to build this better world”. Fry said: “If you had asked me a year or so ago how a normal person could most affect climate change, I suspect that changing one’s pension would have come very low down on my list – well below committing to eat less roast beef or buying a new bicycle. “But it does indeed turn out that we can make our money matter. It’s something of a magic bullet if we stop investing in fossil fuels or gambling, and instead invest in businesses that are going to change the world. “The size of this is shocking: trillions and trillions of cold hard cash that could be working every day to fight climate change. The world desperately needs new big ideas, and this is one of those.”BT has scrapped plans to find a joint venture partner to help fund the rollout of its next-generation broadband network to an extra 5 million homes, before a potential takeover move by the billionaire investor Patrick Drahi next month. The company said it had abandoned plans to find a partner for its subsidiary Openreach because the cost of rolling out the new network had dropped significantly, and takeup by homes and business had proved better than expected. In May, BT announced it was upping the pace of the plan for Openreach to bring full fibre to 20m homes by 2026 by 5m, through a potential £3bn joint venture with a third party. Bringing in a third party was viewed by some as the first step in being able to put a price on Openreach, which has once again been mooted as a potential spin-off target after Drahi’s Altice move to take a 12.1% stake in BT in June. “We can afford to fund it ourselves,” said Philip Jansen, the chief executive of BT. “The cost of passing a home with full fibre has dropped 15%; that is a huge saving when you look at 19m more homes to reach our target. “It is best for shareholders to have 100% control. We didn’t want to do anything to slow [Openreach] down or provide some complexity.” The cost per home has fallen from £300-£400 to £250-£350. Altice has said that building the stake is not part of a wider takeover plot. However, Drahi is free to make a move under UK takeover rules after 10 December. Jansen said that nothing had changed in relations with Altice since the company took the stake. “Like all our shareholders we have good interactions with them,” he said. “They fully support the strategy we are embarking on and delivering against. There is no conversation about board seats and that kind of stuff. They are very supportive of what we are doing. Yes there is 11 December, a potentially important date: who knows what will happen.” BT said that after delivering its £1bn cost-savings plan 18 months early, a £2bn target for 2025 would be brought forward by a year. It also lowered its forecast of capital expenditure in 2023 by £200m to £4.8bn. Drahi has a reputation for driving aggressive cost-cutting programmes at the telecoms businesses he controls. “These results demonstrate an acceleration in the pace of transformation of BT,” said Jansen. Shares jumped 11% on Thursday, making it the top riser on the FTSE 100. Last month it emerged that BT had hired the advisory firm Robey Warshaw to strengthen its defences against a possible takeover bid. BT reported a 3% decline in revenues to £10.3bn for the six months to September, while pre-tax profits were down 5% to £1bn. The company confirmed the reinstatement of a dividend to shareholders, 18 months after scrapping it to fund the £12bn rollout of full-fibre broadband across the country. Jansen said that the global supply chain and labour shortages had not had an impact on its fibre rollout plans. “We obviously have a very well-established supply chain; we have long-term deals with subcontractors,” he said. “There has not been a constraint on our build to date.” The company also said that talks over a potential sale of BT Sport were continuing. The favoured suitor is Dazn, the sports streaming service run by Sir Leonard Blavatnik’s Access Industries. “We are in talks with multiple parties,” said Jansen. “Not a long list, a small handful. We could continue to operate it ourselves with a small partnering effort, move to a joint venture and there is the possibility of an outright sale. We have had extensive long discussions but it is complicated. We are in no rush: we want to do the right thing for everyone.”Aston Martin’s losses widened in the third quarter of 2021 despite sales doubling year on year as it rolled out its new DBX sports utility vehicle targeted at wealthy female customers. Britain’s only large listed car manufacturer reported a loss before tax of £98m between July and September, up from £81m in 2020, in results published on Thursday. The DBX, which has been explicitly aimed at well-off women and costs from about £160,000, has significantly broadened Aston Martin’s customer base beyond the men who overwhelmingly buy its sportscars. That helped its overall unit sales more than double from 660 in the third quarter of 2020 to 1,350 between July and September this year. That in turn delivered a big increase in revenues, from £124m in the third quarter of 2020 to £238m this year. Revenues have nearly tripled over 2021 so far compared with 2020, when factories and showrooms were all closed during pandemic lockdowns. Aston Martin came close to bankruptcy at the start of 2020 before it was taken over by the fashion tycoon Lawrence Stroll, who has launched a thorough turnaround plan, albeit without yet dragging the company back to profit. Aston Martin has bucked the broader industry sales trend in recent months. Separate data from the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders (SMMT) on Thursday showed that UK car sales fell year on year for the fourth consecutive month. UK sales dropped by a quarter in October compared with the same month last year to 106,000. Mike Hawes, the SMMT’s chief executive, blamed the fall on the prolonged global computer chip shortage, plus “strong economic headwinds” in the form of tax rises and rising prices that squeeze households’ spending power. Aston Martin has, like almost every other carmaker, endured delays and shortages of parts, but that has not yet affected production or sales schedules because of the much smaller volumes produced at its factories in Gaydon, Warwickshire, and St Athan in south Wales. However, the ramp-up in DBX production was hit as the carmaker merged its paint shops and made other changes to its manufacturing process at St Athan. Tobias Moers, the chief executive who took over last August, said: “We’re facing a bit of disruption in the supply chain, but nothing that is compromising our production.” Aston Martin does not sell any purely electric cars, but Moers said the company would not have to go through further restructuring as it shifts away from internal combustion engines, which will be banned in the UK in 2035. Moers said the carmaker would be at 50% battery electric or higher by 2030. “It’s not easy to electrify” sportscars, he said. “Purely electric drive is a journey that we’ve just recently started with.” The company did not change its guidance for earnings this year, which will rely on an uplift from the first sales of its £2.5m Valkyrie “hypercar”, a limited-edition model that is sold out – although Aston Martin just missed its target of first deliveries to customers in the third quarter. It expects to deliver a “double-digit” number by the end of the year, Moers said. The carmaker is also struggling with expensive debt that it took on last year when it agreed new financing and a partnership with Mercedes-AMG. Financing costs soared to £133m during the third quarter, up from £79m in the same period last year.S Claridge races clear. [Pause.] He slides it past the keeper. [Pause.] And it’s in. It’s a line of commentary that won’t be familiar unless you spent the early 90s playing Championship Manager – the precursor to the ludicrously successful Football Manager empire. Last week a YouTuber from Plymouth gave up his job as an engineer to sign a 12-month contract to play FM 2022 full-time. Luke Robinson is now a content creator for Facebook Gaming. Mark Zuckerberg might not be everyone’s employer of choice – what with all the sinister CGI presentations to aliens, over-expressive leather jackets and Nick Clegg – and then there’s the continually undermining democracy bit. But being paid to play computer games. How different could life have been if that had been an option in 1991? Aged 12 my bedroom was a shrine to football. Posters of anyone from Shoot and Match on the wall. John Ebbrell and Ian Olney given as much prominence as Paul Gascoigne and Chris Waddle. I didn’t discriminate. And on the Stompa desk sat an Amstrad CPC 6128 (built-in disc drive!). Later I would dip in to the transfer market and reinvest my life savings on an Amiga 500. An incredible signing. Matt Walsham down the road already had a BBC Micro. Matchday was the first – with line-drawn graphics and clunky gameplay. There were no joysticks or controllers – you had to share a keyboard to play each other. But it was the gateway drug to football gaming. Gary Lineker’s Superstar Soccer had one major issue. Regardless of where you were on the pitch you could only shoot. There was no passing – in many ways the ideal Lineker game. Peter Beardsley’s International Football had three players in the opposition half at kick-off. Gazza’s Super Soccer changed camera angles as you got near the box and if you were pushing right on the joystick you’d suddenly have to push up to keep going in the same direction. Striker’s graphics were mind-blowing, the original spidercam – but it was quicker to slide-tackle up the pitch than run. Then there were classics – Emlyn Hughes International Soccer, Kick Off 2 – you could swerve it! And of course Sensible Soccer. You’re a goalscoring superstar hero. But it was the management games that really sucked you in. Brian Clough’s Football Fortunes. A Computer game AND a board game. It took 25 minutes to load on a cassette, the lines zipping along the screen to slowly reveal a very unconvincing green-jumpered Cloughie. Summer holidays spent with mates in my bedroom for days playing Treble Champions. That room must have smelled terrible – my parents pleading with us to go outside and get some fresh air. We got Paul Parker to a nine skill level. That was unheard of. You could manage only Altrincham for alphabetical reasons. We got them to the summit of the First Division – I tripped and knocked the monitor off. Game over. You could buy games directly from the classifieds in Amiga Power that just arrived in an envelope. Club Football: The Manager, where you got sacked if you couldn’t field 11 players even if there was an injury crisis. Football Manager 2, which included the physio room. Neil McNab out for 57 weeks. Diagnosis: car crash. On the Ball. It had seven discs! And then there was Championship Manager. The king of them all. It’s hard to explain why. It took 10 minutes to get through the classified results each week. There were about three tactics you could adopt. There was no training. But somehow it just worked. That old man on the cover pretending to be a manager pointing at you in his sheepskin coat. What price would Facebook pay for weeks of camcorder footage of Halesowen’s journey to the European Cup final played over the summer of 93? If only it existed. I watched one of Luke Robinson’s YouTube videos, entitled “Tottenham rebuild”. Arguably Antonio Conte needs a little longer than the half-hour this takes – but it’s had 74,000 views. We begin the season after Tottenham have lost in the Champions League final. Luke is very personable and his relationship with his Spurs-supporting dad, who joins us on this journey, is charming. They are either full screen or in a little box with the game taking centre stage. He explains he’s going to sell Harry Kane, which he does, for £86m to Manchester City, and offloads a few more. Dominic Calvert-Lewin and Lautaro Martínez arrive in Kane’s place along with some supporting actors in defence and midfield. And then he just presses a button and the season is over. He gets the computer to play the whole thing – we don’t see any games. Spurs have finished fourth and won the Europa League. Is an e-trophy really an e-trophy if no one was there to see it? Calvert-Lewin and Martínez have scored 100 goals between them. But we haven’t seen any of them either. Over the next three simulated seasons Luke and his dad finish fifth, fourth and second – culminating in the Champions League final. This is the only game you actually see played out – Dele Alli scoring the winning penalty in a shootout, for Manchester United. He moved there a couple of seasons ago when I wasn’t concentrating. Luke’s dad seems to get over the disappointment pretty quickly and you are left wondering who actually watches this stuff? Then like all minor blows to your own ageing and mortality you realise this isn’t for you. This is what it means to be in your 40s – harking back to disc drives and read error b, to Flimbo’s Quest, Lemmings and Treasure Island Dizzy. If people can make money filming themselves taking things out of boxes then of course there’s a market for this – some esports stars earn thousands playing Fifa. I recently downloaded Championship Manager 93 on my laptop. It runs slightly more quickly on a Mac. I took Cambridge United to the top of the Premier League. A front line of Darrell Powell, Dominic Iorfa and Nick Barmby were unstoppable. One accidental click to close the browser later and all that hard work had just disappeared. Perhaps I should have streamed it to see if Zuckerberg would take any notice. In the end I just went outside and got some fresh air.Boris Johnson has admitted receiving a free holiday at a luxurious Spanish villa linked to Zac Goldsmith, the former MP who was given a peerage and job by the prime minister. The latest update to the register of ministerial interests revealed that Johnson’s near week-long stay in the Marbella property in October was funded by the Goldsmith family. It did not specify how much the holiday was worth but this is likely to be declared separately in the register of MPs’ interests. The property is marketed online for rentals, reportedly for as much as £25,000 a week The register said: “The prime minister has a longstanding personal friendship with the Goldsmith family and, in that capacity, in October 2021 stayed in a holiday home in southern Spain, which was provided free of charge by the Goldsmiths. Given Lord Goldsmith is a minister of the crown, the arrangement has accordingly been declared.” No 10 has previously declined to answer questions about whether there could be a perceived conflict of interest, given that Johnson awarded Goldsmith a peerage after the latter lost his Richmond seat in 2019, and allowed him to keep his job as an environment minister. After the holiday, the Guardian revealed that documents indicated that the luxurious Goldsmith family villa had been held by an opaque offshore structure based in multiple tax havens. The papers suggested the minister and his family may have owned the property through a Maltese company held by companies in the Turks and Caicos Islands and administered by a wealth-planning firm based in Switzerland. In a statement at the time, Goldsmith’s spokesperson said he had “followed the ministerial interests process set out in the ministerial code”. She added: “His interests have been reviewed by the Cabinet Office and the prime minister’s independent adviser on ministerial interests. Other relevant interests have correctly been reported in line with the House of Lords’ code of conduct.” Johnson took the holiday during an unusual recess from parliament after party conference season, and No 10 had to defend his decision to go abroad during the energy and supply chain crisis. At the time, No 10 refused to confirm that Goldsmith was covering the cost of the holiday in Marbella or say how the prime minister had travelled to Spain with his family.When Katie McCabe returned to Arsenal from a successful loan at Glasgow City in 2017 she did not expect she would be staying. She had struggled for playing time and with injuries after turning down a host of other teams to join the trophy-laden club in December 2015 and was not a part of the then manager Pedro Martínez Losa’s plans. “When I came back from Glasgow City we trained for two weeks and I was out of contract in the December and [the new manager] Joe Montemurro sat me down after the two weeks’ training and then he said he was going to offer me a contract extension to the summer and I was thrilled,” she says. “To be honest I thought my Arsenal career was over and he gave me a lifeline.” That period of uncertainty now feels a world away. As the supporters’ player of last season, she provided 11 assists, the joint-most in the Women’s Super League, and scored four times. Now, five games in, the Republic of Ireland captain has three goals and three assists, matching her in-form clubmate Beth Mead despite playing predominantly at left-back, has been named the Barclays WSL player of the month for October, was named by the Arsenal legend Ian Wright as his current favourite player and was praised in the international break by the Ireland great Paul McGrath. “I didn’t know that actually,” she says with a grin when told she has matched Mead’s stats in fewer minutes. “Me getting up there to help create those goalscoring opportunities and get shots away is down to the team, the position we’re in off the ball and the organisation we have all over the park. Being on the end of the goals is obviously really nice.” The players were “gutted” when Montemurro announced he would leave this summer but are thriving under Jonas Eidevall, who recognised that the foundations laid by his predecessor, and the steps the club had taken to strengthen before his arrival, meant he did not need to overhaul the squad. “You can always improve each season,” McCabe says. “It was down to the coaching staff and Jonas to figure out how we could do that, and we worked on things from the start of the summer. “We had a lot of players at the Olympics but our academy players came up and came in and it was really important that we had them in the pre-season friendly games to help us get on target and up to scratch.” McCabe, a fan favourite for club and country because her slick play is coupled with a fiery, no-nonsense but also playful attitude on the pitch, has been given one of the catchiest chants (to the tune of Billy Ray Cyrus’s Achy Breaky Heart) by Arsenal fans. She admits she gets it stuck in her head. “It always makes me smile when I’m playing; even though I might have a cranky face on me I’m smiling on the inside,” she says with a laugh. McCabe’s versatility – she can play on the wing or at full-back – is valued. She has switched so often between the positions that she no longer has a favourite. “It changes week by week,” she says. “I do really like left-back now but if you had asked me that two or three seasons ago I would have said left wing.” The 26-year-old’s position in the team is unquestionable. With the arrival of forwards such as Tobin Heath and Nikita Parris it would have been easy for McCabe to wonder whether opportunities to play on the wing would be limited but her form, combined with the heavy schedule, has meant she is being used in both roles by Eidevall and to great effect. “You always have to be confident in your own ability,” she says. “When the girls started to get announced, the signings, it was more a feeling of excitement about being able to play with them; about how much they’re going to improve training, improve games and obviously add competitiveness to training. Everyone has to be at the top of the game and that only helps the team.” McCabe’s form is also benefiting Ireland. Last month in World Cup qualifying they lost 1-0 to Sweden courtesy of an own goal but beat Finland away in a game seen as crucial to their hopes of reaching a first major tournament. “Over the last few months we’ve really tested ourselves against higher-ranked opposition to get used to those stress scenarios of playing where we’re going to be without the ball but ultimately you need to get results, and that showed,” she says. “I know ultimately we lost the game against Sweden but especially in the second half we went toe to toe with them at times and really put them under pressure.” In September it was announced that the Ireland women’s team would be paid the same as the men. “It was monumental for us, to be honest,” says McCabe. “The work that the FAI had done, Séamus Coleman as the men’s captain too, that work behind the scenes to ultimately get the deal done was fantastic. It sent out a real message across the world of football at international level especially. “We’re making strides and from when I first came in to where we’re at I’m really proud of it. But we want to keep pushing, we want to keep breaking down barriers and keep that momentum going. We can’t sit still and that’s the message we want to send.” • Katie McCabe is the Barclays WSL player of the month for October. Read our interview with September’s player of the month, Beth Mead, here20. A Good Year (2006) A film to prove that straight-up feelgood comedy is not Ridley Scott’s forte and casting his favourite leading man is no guarantee of success, either. This is based on a novel by Peter “A Year in Provence” Mayle: incredibly, it is Russell Crowe playing the quirkily conceited yet adorable Brit who inherits a sumptuous house-plus-vineyard in the south of France, comes over intending to sell it, but instead falls in love with the place and all the picturesque Frenchness thereabouts, including Marion Cotillard. 19. Kingdom of Heaven (2005) A director’s cut was later to redeem some of its reputation but basically this period action movie from war-torn 12th-century Europe still feels like a bombastic liberal fantasy. Orlando Bloom plays a young blacksmith – the illegitimate son of nobleman Liam Neeson – who joins the Crusades not to drive the Muslims out of the Holy Land, but to broker peace. Weirdly, Scott returned to the tricky issue of the Crusades in Robin Hood (see below). 18. Black Rain (1989) Here is Michael Douglas in his action-lead heyday, playing a tough and ruthless cop adrift in Japan’s smoky, rainy, neon-lit Osaka – an urban locale that’s slightly reminiscent of Scott’s Blade Runner. Douglas and his cop partner, played by Andy Garcia, capture a Yakuza gangster in New York, then come to Osaka and hand him over to people they believe to be police but are in fact Yakuza in disguise. So Douglas has to journey into the dark infernal heart of Yakuza gangland to recapture his man. The action sequences are a bit perfunctory. 17. GI Jane (1997) Demi Moore plays the wannabe Navy Seal in this serviceable and underrated movie: she is navy veteran Jordan O’Neil, who always resented not being eligible for full combat during the first Iraq war of 1991. But now the rules have changed and she can become a Seal if she survives the terrifying training course, presided over by the super-scary Viggo Mortensen – and she doesn’t want any special treatment. It’s quite earnest and the sexual politics feel naive, but it has the authentic Scott virtues of forthright action and propulsive energy. 16. Someone to Watch Over Me (1987) This was the cheesy action-romance concept that was done more successfully five years later by Kevin Costner and Whitney Houston in Mick Jackson’s The Bodyguard – but Someone to Watch Over Me isn’t too bad. Mimi Rogers plays a high-society beauty whose life is in danger because she has witnessed a murder, Tom Berenger (an underrated, plausible lead) is the working-class cop assigned to protect her, and of course they fall in love. Lorraine Bracco, later to become a legend in Goodfellas and The Sopranos, is Berenger’s angry and heartbroken wife. 15. Black Hawk Down (2001) Scott’s true-life war movie set in 90s Somalia set out to create a modern American Dunkirk myth: the US is pursuing its peacekeeping operation in Mogadishu and special forces attempt to kidnap a warlord terrorising the blameless civilian population. But the mission turns into a fiasco when one of the Black Hawk choppers goes down, and now the only real object for the Americans is to get all their guys out alive. It is a situation treated with full-on, non-stop deafening pyrotechnics: an almost meaningless blizzard of action. Scott certainly puts his pedal to the metal. 14. The Counsellor (2013) Michael Fassbender has accumulated a bit of form as a Scott leading man in the past couple of decades, and here he is in this hyperactive, flawed action thriller from screenwriter Cormac McCarthy. He plays a lawyer (addressed as “counselor” in the American style) who is tempted by the big score. Through his criminal-clientele contacts, he figures he can get in on a lucrative Colombian drug deal; there is a great scene in which he proposes marriage to his girlfriend Laura, played by Penélope Cruz; Brad Pitt and Javier Bardem are in the mix. It runs out of steam but there’s a lot of energy in the first act. 13. Alien: Covenant (2017) Scott’s Alien: Covenant is the stylish second prequel to the first, classic Alien film, coming after Prometheus. The Covenant is the name of the spaceship, which is hurtling through the galaxy on a mission to set up a plantation on a distant planet apparently able to support human life. Fassbender returns as the inscrutable robot and there is a great scene at the beginning, set in a room of Kubrickian whiteness, in which the robot is being questioned by its scientist-creator and asked to choose a name for himself. He picks “David” after the Michelangelo statue. 12. Robin Hood (2010) All right, Russell Crowe’s Irish/geordie/Norfolk accent as Robin is a bit weird (he uncorked one of his legendary strops with a BBC radio interviewer who innocently asked where it was supposed to come from). But it’s an entertaining fantasy, powerfully and robustly directed by Scott, who showed his enduring talent for period warfare and battle scenes. Crowe’s Robin is no merry japester in the Errol Flynn style but a battle-hardened ex-soldier sickened by cruelty to Muslim civilians in the Crusades, and basically an anti-French loyalist of Richard the Lionheart. His entry into the world of stealing from the unjust rich is something he slides into for the most blameless of reasons. 11. Prometheus (2012) Scott’s ambitious and lovely-looking film takes place before his sci-fi classic Alien, and it is part prequel and part variation on a theme. Noomi Rapace is the scientist who discovers ancient cave paintings in Skye that depict primitive humans worshipping a specific constellation. Astronomers find this pattern of stars, and soon Rapace is on a spaceship heading there, with crew-members including Charlize Theron and Idris Elba as humanoids, and Fassbender as the eerily and unnervingly inscrutable servant robot, David, who glides about the place like an automaton-butler, but scarily may have a mind of his own. Prometheus repeats many ideas from Alien, perhaps without the original’s mule-kick charge, but with intelligence and style. 10. Hannibal (2001) Probably no sequel could in any way live up to Jonathan Demme’s classic The Silence of the Lambs, but Scott brought all his energy and unflinching appetite for chaos and gore to this followup. The talented Dr Lecter – still played by Anthony Hopkins – is now on the run and living incognito in Florence (perhaps in tribute to the infamous serial-killing “Monster of Florence”). He makes contact once again with Clariiiiiiice, now played by Julianne Moore, and their reunion is to involve an awful reckoning for a certain corrupt cop, played by Ray Liotta with something on his mind. 9. Matchstick Men (2003) Scott left his generic comfort zone for this genial and seductive little black comedy about con artists. Nicolas Cage plays the veteran grifter who feels sad about what he does – parting stupid people from what little money they have. He is divorced, lonely and, furthermore, suffers from OCD, a condition that only threatens to worsen as he gets older. He has a tricky relationship with a young wannabe conman, played by Sam Rockwell, whom he is supposedly mentoring in the slimy art of confidence-tricking. But then he is reunited with his long-lost and now teenage daughter (Alison Lohman) who, to his fatherly pride, wants to be a grifter herself and is very good at it – like Tatum O’Neal in Paper Moon – and this causes no end of quasi-family dysfunction and resentment with Rockwell, his supposed heir. 8. The Last Duel (2021) In this film, Scott created a big-screen, big-league costume period action drama of the sort no one else is able or willing now to make, and despite its flaws, it is directed at a full-tilt gallop with overwhelming, muscular force, a way with spectacle and storytelling gusto. Basically, it’s a Rashomon-style competing-testimony narrative based on a true story from 14th-century France. Matt Damon, sporting an outrageous mullet, plays Jean de Carrouges, who demands of the king the right to duel to the death with a certain Jacques Le Gris, played by Adam Driver, whom he accuses of raping his wife, Marguerite, played by Jodie Comer. The film tells us the story from Carrouges’ viewpoint, then Le Gris’ and finally Marguerite’s. Perhaps Marguerite’s view gets crowded out but this is a vivid and well-made picture. 7. The Martian (2015) Science fiction was something that Scott came to be known for, but The Martian could not be more different than the dark and disturbing Alien franchise: essentially optimistic in outlook, and, made with Nasa’s enthusiastic approval and co-operation, it actually won a Golden Globe for “musical or comedy”. Matt Damon plays all-American scientist/astronaut Mark Watney, who is part of a team conducting research on Mars. When the station is devastated by a dust storm, the commander believes Watney to be dead and flies off with the rest of the crew. But he is still alive and this Robinson Crusoe on Mars makes a resourceful and courageous attempt to survive and get word to planet Earth that he wants to come home. 6. Gladiator (2000) “Are you not ENTERTAINED?” Moviegoers around the world agreed that they were, and with this film, Scott single-handedly revived the sword-and-sandal genre that had lain dormant in Hollywood for generations. He also made an A-list star of beefy, macho Russell Crowe, who plays Maximus Decimus Meridius: father to a murdered son, husband to a murdered wife who will have his vengeance in this life or the next. He is the general who is betrayed and sold into slavery by the envious new emperor, Commodus, played by the soon-to-be-a-megastar Joaquin Phoenix, and who then plots his revenge in his new prominence as the greatest gladiator in the land. A mighty epic with some of the great period production design Scott is known for, making the very most of emerging digital effects for the spectacular Colosseum scenes. 5. All the Money in the World (2017) In his 80s, Scott directed one of his very best films, and maybe it’s no coincidence that it’s about an old guy who has more energy and cunning than anyone else on screen. This is a raucous thriller based on the true story of super-rich oil tycoon J Paul Getty and his refusal in 1973 to pay the ransom when his grandson was kidnapped in Rome. Getty was originally played by Kevin Spacey but Scott, disgusted with revelations about Spacey’s abusive behaviour, reshot all his scenes with Christopher Plummer in the role, who in turn gave one of his best performances as the cantankerous and high-handed Getty, glittering with mischief, malice and scorn. He is the autocrat-villain, who perhaps already haughtily, considers that his former daughter-in-law (Michelle Williams) in gaining custody of his grandkids after a divorce has already made him the object of a legal kidnapping. 4. Thelma &amp; Louise (1991) This classic road movie thriller, scripted by Callie Khouri and starring Susan Sarandon and Geena Davis, was probably the closest Scott came in spirit to a kind of freewheeling New Wave lawlessness. Louise (Sarandon) is the tough and savvy waitress who is best friends with the good-natured and innocent housewife Thelma (Davis), whose husband neglects her. When they head off for a fishing weekend, they make a stop at a roadhouse, where a predatory creep attempts to rape Thelma in the parking lot – he has to back down when Louise threatens him with a gun, but then she shoots him dead in a rage when this man shouts abuse. From there on in, Thelma and Louise are wanted criminals, whose crime importantly is not down to self-defence as a court might understand it, but just pure rage at the patriarchy and generations of misogynistic ill-treatment. The final scene and final image, showing the two women’s existential defiance, has become iconic. 3. The Duellists (1977) Scott made his dazzling feature debut with this complex and ambitious historical parable, derived from a Conrad short story, set in Europe during the tumult of the Napoleonic wars and partly inspired by the look of Kubrick’s period drama Barry Lyndon. It is about a young Frenchman called Armand d’Hubert, played by Keith Carradine, and how the course of his entire life is to be dominated by a mercurial, unstable and duelling-obsessed fellow officer, Gabriel Feraud (Harvey Keitel) who through a quirk of fate comes to believe that he has been insulted by D’Hubert, and demands satisfaction on the field of honour. The resulting duel is inconclusive (as many of course were) and Feraud becomes even more obsessed with the idea that he must submit again and again to a duel – with swords, sabres, pistols, anything – until one or the other of them is killed. Feraud is mad, but then the convention of duelling is mad, and so is the convention of glamorous, noble warfare, and D’Hubert has no choice but to agree as the two men get older and rise through the ranks, until their existential duel is finally settled. Scott was always good at period drama and confrontational machismo but he was perhaps never again to make anything with such nuance and subtlety. 2. Blade Runner (1982) Scott’s 1982 futurist classic was adapted from Philip K Dick’s quibblingly named 1968 novel Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep? With its new sleek, mysterious title, this movie introduced the world to the author’s vision and popularised new ideas in science-fiction cinema about identity, virtual reality and artificial intelligence. His vision of Los Angeles of the future (in fact, 2019) was to be one of Scott’s most potent and influential inventions as a film-maker: the megamodern cityscape, dominated by Asian corporations, with eerie, giant electronic ad signs, and often seen through sheets of driving rain. Harrison Ford plays Deckard, an ex-cop tasked by city authorities into resuming his work as a “blade runner”, a specialist killer whose job is to track down replicants (new-human android-servants) who have become disobedient. And he is to fall in love with one: Rachael, played with haunting, deadpan torpor by Sean Young – overwhelmed by the poignancy of the false memories that have been implanted in her mind. Perhaps it is the replicants that have souls, and not the downtrodden human beings, and Rutger Hauer’s replicant, Roy, has an amazing final speech (partly improvised by the actor himself) as he declaims about the vastness of his experience: “I’ve seen things you people wouldn’t believe. Attack ships on fire off the shoulder of Orion. I watched C-beams glitter in the dark near the Tannhäuser Gate. All those moments will be lost in time, like tears in rain …” The speech has a haunting poetry. 1. Alien (1979) It is more than 40 years old, and yet Scott’s sci-fi horror masterpiece is still lethally contemporary. It is about the vulnerability of our bodies, the fear of the Other, the fear of disease and viral invasion, and the idea of space exploration as a limitless new extension of human paranoia. The setting is a mining spaceship of the future, which reluctantly makes a detour on its homeward journey on picking up an SOS signal from a remote, officially deserted planet. John Hurt plays Kane, the technician who fatefully volunteers for the job of going down on to the planet’s surface to see what’s happening, Ian Holm is the cool scientific officer, Ash, and Sigourney Weaver is crew-member Ripley, who is to achieve legendary “final girl” status as the only person left to combat the terrible monster. When Kane returns to the ship, he brings a nasty little stowaway with him, and the film is so brilliantly structured and edited that it is impossible to say what it looks like until the very end. Alien matched Spielberg’s Jaws for shocks and thrills, and matched Sartre’s No Exit for the hell of other people. The simple idea of the alien beginning as a tiny little creature hardly bigger than a toad but then remorselessly growing to something the size of a bus, with multiple rows of teeth, is exquisitely frightening and horrible. Alien is a movie that kept alive the satiric, pessimistic and questioning tradition of sci-fi cinema, which was being swamped by the more childlike (yet brilliant in their own way) stories of Star Wars. And it was about biological weapons of mass destruction, which are beginning to proliferate in space in tandem with our own burgeoning rapaciousness and obsession with economic growth – an inspired parable of diseased humanity.After weeks of camping outside City Hall in New York, taxi drivers can finally head home after striking a deal with officials to rescue thousands of workers from crushing loans that had caused misery for their families. The news arrived on the 15th day of a hunger strike led by the drivers and their advocates. New York City’s Taxi and Limousine Commission (TLC) agreed to a city-backed guarantee to lower the monthly payments of taxi medallion owners, or “owner drivers” to a maximum $170,000 – far less than the average medallion debt of around $600,000, according to the New York Taxi Workers Alliance (NYTWA). The agreement was made with Marblegate, the largest medallion loan-holder, with more lenders expecting to follow suit. Soon, the most a driver can expect to pay back in loanswill be just over $1,100 per month. For driver Erhan Tuncel, 61, who has a total medallion debt of $690,000 with monthly payments of $3,800, the news was a great relief. “The lower monthly payment is a huge break for every single one us,” Tuncel said. “It means we can put in a full day’s work and be happy with the money we take home because owning and operating a medallion in New York City is an expensive business. On top of the medallion payments, we take on all the expenses like insurance, maintaining the vehicle, the TLC fees, inspection fees – they all add up. I’m ecstatic and happy for all the owner-drivers who are going to get a huge break from this.” The crisis in the city’s famed yellow cab industry began with the tin plate required to operate a yellow cab, otherwise known as a taxi medallion. The reasons for the large debt owed by taxi drivers are a lack of regulation by New York City, which allowed the price of the medallion to be artificially inflated (once to the point of $1m), and predatory lenders that targeted the taxi workforce, which is made up of many people of color in a sector long seen as a path to the middle class for immigrants. The city was complicit in marketing the medallion as “better than a stock” and a pathway to the American dream, leading taxi drivers to believe a medallion was an investment worthy of risking all they hold dear. The substantial debt eventually drove some drivers to suicide. The drivers’ case had won support from progressive elected officials at national, state, and local levels – including Senator Chuck Schumer, Congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio Cortez, and New York’s attorney general, Letitia James. In a statement Schumer, who brokered the deal with Mayor Bill de Blasio, said: “The medallion debt crisis has gone on for years, taking lives and livelihoods. I commend Mayor de Blasio for his leadership, the New York Taxi Workers Alliance for their steadfast advocacy, and Marblegate for their good-faith effort to forge a workable solution. Together, we will bring this ongoing situation to a just resolution for the thousands of cabbies who work every day to serve this city.” One of the NYTWA’s most vocal advocates is Zohran Mamdani, a state assemblyman from Queens. After 15 days of hunger striking and consuming nothing but water, Gatorade and eventually chicken broth, the activist-politician broke his fast upon hearing the news with just two slices of avocado and a date. “I woke up on Monday of this week and I wasn’t sure if I could go on. It had been 12 days at that point and I just wasn’t sure where we were and how long it was going to go. I was just so tired and I was so tired of being hungry,” he said. Mamdani said he viewed the hunger strike as a much-needed escalatory tactic that made the consequences of policy public. “By going on a hunger strike in front of City Hall, there was no way you could ignore what we were doing to our bodies in the service of this fight. It’s infectious – the courage, the belief. Then it all culminated in today and I just haven’t felt the emotions that I felt today in a long time.”A father injected two of his children with heroin “to make them sleep”, a child safeguarding review has revealed. The sisters, aged one and two, were living in Lancashire with two older siblings aged nine and 16 and parents who had issues around mental ill health, substance misuse and domestic abuse. Information about the heroin injection was received in 2019 from an older child not in the family but who had the same father. They said the babies had “been injected with heroin to make them sleep”. Test results confirmed it and the children were taken into care. A newly published child safeguarding practice review written by an independent adviser, Amanda Clarke, reveals that all four children were victims of chronic neglect for a number of years and there was “significant multi-agency involvement” with the family. “It was suspected that both parents prioritised their substance use over the care of their children, both in terms of their availability to provide care and emotional warmth, and in their use of financial resources, which resulted in times when the children did not have adequate food or warmth.” Even so, the children remained mostly in the parents’ care until the heroin incident. The review outlines a number of incidents including a violent domestic dispute in 2018 when both parents sustained serious injuries and police were called. On another occasion the father went to the school of the nine-year-old “significantly under the influence”. The children went to live with the maternal grandmother but concerns about her mental health and ability to provide basic care meant they were returned to the parents. The 16-year-old, who refused to go back, said her mother had overdosed and she couldn’t sleep fearing “she would wake up to find both parents dead and have to care for her siblings”. The report describes how the two-year-old, after being taken in to care, would scream regularly and for long periods, and was prone to “taking food and hiding food to gorge eat, and presenting as frightened that food would be taken away”. The youngest child’s behaviour in care was described as similar, along with an additional extreme fear of water and bathtimes. Clarke’s review makes a number of conclusions and recommendations and finds that there was only limited evidence that the children were asked about their wishes or feelings. The review says social care professionals allocated to the case often changed “and there was little opportunity for trusting relationships to be built” with the children. A central lesson was the need for social workers to put themselves in the child’s shoes. Often the complexity of a family’s life and the large amount of information could get in the way of identifying risk and that was the case here, Clarke concluded. The report says the phrase “safeguarding is everyone’s business” has been a well-used slogan in the sector for a number of years but should now evolve into “safeguarding everyone is everyone’s business”. Clarke concluded: “An essential question to remember for all professionals supporting families, however large or small their part may be in the multi-agency response, is: what is life like for the children living in these circumstances?” That did not always happen in this case, the review says.The pound fell heavily after the the Bank of England wrongfooted the City by leaving interest rates at their record low level of 0.1%, despite forecasting a jump in inflation to 5% by next spring. Sterling dropped by more than two cents against the US dollar when it emerged that only two members of Threadneedle Street’s nine-member monetary policy committee voted for a rise, confounding expectations of an increase in the cost of borrowing to 0.25%. Andrew Bailey, the Bank’s governor, said the decision was a “very close call” and put the City on notice that interest rates were likely to rise from the lowest level in the Bank’s 327-year history over the coming months. Markets took the governor’s comments to mean that the first increase in borrowing costs since 2018 would come either in December or, more probably, in February next year. Dean Turner, an economist at UBS global wealth management, said: “With markets on tenterhooks, in the end, the decision wasn’t even close. Despite very hawkish language of late, from the governor in particular, the Bank of England kept interest rates on hold by a majority of 7-2. The market reaction is telling, with sterling down sharply after the announcement and gilts rallying.” The pound was trading at just under $1.35 in late London trading. The Bank said the respite from higher rates might prove temporary, warning that if the economy performed as it expects, “it will be necessary over the coming months” to raise rates to hit the government’s 2% target. Yet it pushed back against the City’s belief that borrowing costs will reach 1% by the end of 2022. “At its recent meetings, the committee has judged that some modest tightening of monetary policy over the forecast period (the next three years) was likely to be necessary to meet the 2% inflation target sustainably in the medium-term,” minutes of the MPC meeting showed. “The latest developments, set alongside the committee’s updated projections, reinforce this view.” The MPC said it expected inflation as measured by the consumer prices index to be driven up by the recent surge in the cost of energy to peak at 5% in April then to fall back “materially” from the second half of 2022 as energy prices came down. In its quarterly monetary policy report, the Bank said there was more inflationary pressure than it had predicted in August even though the economy was growing more slowly. Supply chain bottlenecks and weaker consumer spending have resulted in the Bank halving its growth forecast in the third and fourth quarters of 2021. Growth is expected to be 1.5% in the third quarter and 1% in the final three months of the year. Most of the downward revision was caused by supply chain disruption, but the Bank also noted that retail sales had fallen for five successive months and consumer confidence had weakened. The MPC now thinks it will take until the first three months of 2022 – a quarter later than it previously thought – for the economy to regain all the ground lost during the Covid-19 pandemic. According to the minutes, seven MPC members wanted to wait and see what happened to unemployment following the end of the furlough scheme before deciding whether a rate rise was needed. “Current elevated global cost pressures were still most likely to prove transitory, leading to a one-off increase in consumer prices rather than persistently higher inflation rates”, the majority of the committee said. The two dissenting MPC members – Sir Dave Ramsden and Michael Saunders – said there was no sign that the end of wage subsidies this autumn had eased strains in the labour market and that inflation was likely to remain above 2% unless policy was tightened. Samuel Tombs, the UK economist at Pantheon Macroeconomics, said: “We continue to expect the MPC to hold tight again in December and wait until February to hike Bank rate, but the call remains finely balanced.”“It doesn’t matter how many times they grind us down!” roars Brett Anderson in a shouted-word addendum to glam-banging outsider anthem Trash, milling his winklepicker into the stage as if aggressively extinguishing a cigarette. A 25th anniversary celebration of Suede’s 1996 classic Coming Up – an album front-loaded with three Top 10 singles – was always liable to ignite quickly. And yet the Edinburgh audience still seem momentarily stunned by the ferocity with which the band and their thin streak of 54-year-old frontman assault their senses. Reunited 11 years now, nearly as long they lasted first time around from 1989 to 2003, the Londoners are overdue a nostalgia trip after three strong new albums since 2013. How better, following the pandemic’s dispiriting long pause, than with the record that propelled Suede to the stars just when they looked chucked on the dump? Their first album with miraculous teenage guitarist Richard Oakes (replacement for the seemingly irreplaceable Bernard Butler), Coming Up threw pop muscle behind Anderson’s sinuous songwriting and decadent epicene image, helping mixed-up small-town boys and girls everywhere suddenly feel like they belonged. Considering the dark turn Anderson’s life took once Britpop turned sour, it’s a wonder he’s alive today, much less still squeezing into a black shirt that looks like it buttons on the left, flopping a full head of foppish dark hair around and effortlessly vaulting the high notes in Filmstar. During Beautiful Ones, he towers leggily on a monitor leading the crowd in a chorus of extended la la la-ing. Come Saturday Night, Anderson’s crouched at the stage edge, shrilly crooning a ballad of bittersweet nocturnal thrills wrapped in a coat of chilly synth strings. Coming Up’s slight 42 minutes are extended with a couple of contemporaneous B-sides – a disarming off-mic acoustic rendition of Another No One sung solo by Anderson in a swirl of dry ice, and the first ever live performance of Have You Ever Been This Low? A subsequent energetic root through Suede’s repertoire new and old starts with Snowblind and Outsiders and ends with a thrilling run of So Young, Animal Nitrate and New Generation. The all-action Anderson dramatically whirls his microphone near the head of unreasonably calm keyboardist Neil Codling one minute, crumples into a ball on the floor the next. Never knowingly understated, and always irresistible.Is your company having its first festive celebration since Covid? Will it be a mega party to make up for the missed year – or will it be done differently, to mark the strange times we’ve been through during the pandemic? How do you feel about a resumption of face-to-face partying with your colleagues? What will you wear – after almost two years working from home are you ready to slip into glamorous party gear? Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.Simon Burnton was in Dubai. That’s it from Dubai today. Stay safe out there. “I thought I was the only one that knew!” says Zampa of his hat-trick. “But if it wasn’t for Wadey’s hands at the moment, I wouldn’t have the wickets that I do have. Just happy with the win to be honest.” What’s up next at the T20 World Cup? Sri Lanka and West Indies tonight, both of whom are already knocked out. Then the other group tomorrow, with Namibia v New Zealand and then Scotland v India. That’s clinical. Their biggest hitter, Maxwell, wasn’t required to face a ball. Australia go ahead of South Africa on net run rate, and go second in the group. Both of those teams have one match left. Australia face the West Indies, and South Africa face England. Still alive! 6.2 overs: Australia 78-2 (Marsh 16, Maxwell 0) Bosh! Simple stuff for Marsh. Pitched up from Taskin, Marsh drives on the up, no worries about keeping the shot down, and just rifles it between mid-off and cover for four. Then pulls for six to finish the job! 6th over: Australia 67-2 (Marsh 6) Australia need 16 to win. Shoriful Islam is the new bowler, left-arm quick. Warner drops a single, and Mitchell Marsh creams his first ball for four. Pull shot, WACA style. Marsh drops a run to cover, Shoriful has overstepped, and Warner will get the free hit. This might get him going. Or not. Skips down but almost yorks himself, only digging it out for a single to mid-on. Warner has the last ball of the Powerplay, leans back and tries to smash it over the leg side, slight inside edge on Shoriful’s cutter and it’s back into the stumps. 7 to win. Here comes Maxi. 5th over: Australia 58-1 (Warner 16) More of the same from Finch. Flukes a miscue over mid-on for a couple. Survives an lbw appeal while trying to scoop. Then stands still and smites six over extra. Taskin tries a slower ball, dug into the deck, but Finch picks it. Waits for it. Baseballs it over long-off for six more! Taskin sneaks a fast one through past Finch’s leg stump again, then finally gets some reward to end the over by firing in fast again, taking some seam movement in towards the stumps and hitting the top of off, as Finch swings across it. Still, 40 from 20, and Finch has killed off this match on his own. 4th over: Australia 44-0 (Warner 16, Finch 26) Warner gets away now, not overhitting, just up on his toes and punching behind point. Splits the field for four. Gets Finch on strike, and the skipper goes big over backward square leg for six! Easy off leg stump with Mustafizur having switched to bowling left-arm over the wicket. Then Warner goes hard enough at width to slice it off the top edge over short third for four, not once but twice in a row. 21 from the over! They need 30 more. Do it inside the Powerplay? 3rd over: Australia 23-0 (Warner 3, Finch 19) A mighty wind-up from Finch against Taksin, misses the lot and the ball just misses his leg stump. Wickets don’t matter here. Just get the thing done as fast as possible. Finch tries stepping to leg, anticipating width, but gets one speared in, and his big shot drags off the inside edge to mid-on. Sharp single. Now it’s Warner’s turn to fling the bat, and he misses as Taskin bowls wide of the lefty. Warner settles for one run off the hip. Good stuff from Taskin to have gone for 7 from 11 balls while they’re swinging this hard. But it comes to an end as Finch chips over midwicket for four. Should have been caught, but the man there is in by about 15 paces and can’t take it leaping back. 2nd over: Australia 16-0 (Warner 1, Finch 14) Now it begins! A couple of balls after slicing a shot away through cover to score a streaky four, Finch gets his front foot right out of the way and picks up Mustafizur down the ground for a huge six. Full, but not super full, so it was some shot for Finch to clean it out like that. Miles back into the stands. Follows up with a line drive that hits the bowler’s hands and shoulder, saving some runs. 1st over: Australia 4-0 (Warner 1, Finch 3) Taskin Ahmed to bowl the first over, and no fireworks from the bat to begin. Warner hops and drops a single, Finch booms a couple of big shots that meet fresh air. Taskin is bowling with excellent pace, mid-140s in metric money, and with swing before pitching and movement afterwards. Beats the bat twice, takes the edge on a third occasion that gives up a run to deep third, and another with an overthrow. Here we go with the chase. Have a look at some bowling figures. Zampa 5 for 19. Starc 2 for 21. They’re the only ones who bowled their full allowance. Maxwell 1 for 6, Hazlewood 2 for 8, two overs each. Cummins the hard-luck story, 0 for 18 from three. It’s all about how fast they can do it. Demolish this score in a few overs, and they might catch South Africa on net run rate, as a tiebreaker if both teams have points level. Admittedly SA have yet to face England, which you would pencil in as a loss, meaning Australia could pass SA by beating West Indies. But SA could turn over England if things go their way. So today matters. 15th overs: Bangladesh 70-10 (Taskin 6) That... was limp. Weak, from Bangladesh. Were not in the frame at all today. Zampa though had never taken more than three wickets in this format, and is now the proud owner of a five-wicket bag. And a five-wicket haul for Zampa! Yet another left-hander, yet another wrong ‘un, and Shoriful Islam edged hard off a big swing to slip. Zampa gets a consolation wicket three balls later, lumped down the ground and caught at long-on. Zampa on his hat-trick, first ball of his new over, and the chance goes down. You can’t blame Matthew Wade too much for that, with Taskin Ahmed going hard at a googly. The left-hander gets a thick edge, fast and a bit wide of Wade up to the stumps. Wade does get hands across to it, but only fingertips given the width. “That was my hat-trick ball!” says Zampa. “Yeah, I tried to catch it,” responds Wade. Rueful smiles all round. 14th over: Bangladesh 70-8 (Taskin 3, Mustafizur 4) Cummins has his turn lining up Mustafizur, bowling short, not so much in an intimidatory way as a method to draw fresh-air shots. When he does pitch up though, the Fizz lines up Cummins, a couple of runs over cover and a couple over mid-off. 13th over: Bangladesh 65-8 (Taskin 2, Mustafizur 0) The only fizz that Bangladesh will find today has just walked to the wicket. Left-handed, he has a special approach of backing outside leg stump to play Starc’s yorkers, but he still manages to keep out four in a row. Story of the day. Anticlimactic, flat. Down the leg side from Starc, should be a wide but the Bangladesh captain gets a bit of wood on it. Wade dives across, Starc barely appeals, and the umpire doesn’t bother to raise a finger, just nods in confirmation as Mahmudullah starts to walk. 12th over: Bangladesh 64-7 (Mahmudullah 16, Taskin 1) Maxwell gets to stroll through an over for the cost of two runs. Nice work bowling at this point of an innings. 11th over: Bangladesh 62-7 (Mahmudullah 15) The poor old captain stands at the other end, watching it all slip away. Zampa on a hat-trick! Was that the wrong ‘un again? It certainly doesn’t turn away from the right-hander. It burrows in at leg stump with pace. Maybe a toppy. Mahedi can smash a few late in an innings, and jumps his feet apart here to attempt a pull, but it gets under the bat and hits him in front. Umpire says out, and a review says umpire’s call on the edge of leg stump. The Shamim Show is over. Zampa tries his googly to the left-hander, turning away from the bat, and Shamim’s cut shot only makes contact with the edge of the bat. Wade catches a good one. 10th over: Bangladesh 58-5 (Mahmudullah 12, Shamim 19) Cummins starts bowling short and at the body of Shamim, and that keeps him quiet. Four runs from the over in dribs and drabs. Still scoring more consistently than any other Bangladesh players today. 9th over: Bangladesh 54-5 (Mahmudullah 11, Shamim 16) A bright moment for Bangladesh, and Shamim smacks Zampa for six. Slog-sweep from the left-hander, getting the ball turning back into him, and giving it everything over the long side of the ground. Boundary riders out, but he both finds the gap and carries the rope. Degree of difficulty: high. 8th over: Bangladesh 47-5 (Mahmudullah 11, Shamim 9) Starc again, and it’s a very Starc sort of over. A couple of wides, an overpitch that Shamim swats down the ground for four, another driven to deep cover for a couple. No Australian bowler has delivered consecutive overs today. 7th over: Bangladesh 38-5 (Mahmudullah 9, Shamim 4) At least Shamim Hossain looks composed on arrival, picking up a two and a couple of singles immediately from Zampa. Australia could be on for a huge boost on net run rate if they can finish off the other half of the Bangla batting. Another one! Cummins really is the one left out. Zampa gets a wicket with his first ball. Leg-spin 101: bowls a googly first up to a left-hander, who pokes at it and edges it to slip. Finch can attack with the score as it is, and has stationed himself in that catching spot. Thick edge going quickly at shoulder height, well caught. 6th over: Bangladesh 33-4 (Mahmudullah 8, Afif 0) End of the Powerplay, 33 for 4. Huge job ahead of Bangladesh from here. When it’s full, Naim looks great, dreamily driving Hazlewood through cover for four. The shorter one though he tries to take on, getting a limping sort of top edge that lands inside the circle with the midwicket fielder. 5th over: Bangladesh 28-3 (Naim 13, Mahmudullah 8) One good, one bad. The pattern repeats, as Mahmudullah nails Starc through midwicket with a pull shot, before poking and getting a thick edge for four wide of the keeper. 4th over: Bangladesh 19-3 (Naim 12, Mahmudullah 0) Cummins on to bowl, as Australia keep rotating their bowlers. He’s the first who doesn’t immediately get a wicket. Not far off, as Mohammed Naim flashes a drive past Steve Smith at backward point. But Naim follows up with a much more controlled shot through cover, finding the fence with style. 3rd over: Bangladesh 10-3 (Naim 3, Mahmudullah 0) A wicket per over at the moment. Another, and that’s the most important one. Mushfiqur Rahim has been Bangladesh’s best at this tournament. He matters most. Starc’s swing is replaced by Maxwell’s off-spin, and the all-rounder puts some revs on the ball and gets it turning in from outside the off stump. It hits Mushy just in line with off, and the turn is modest enough that the ball is going on to hit middle. No review. 2nd over: Bangladesh 6-2 (Naim 1) Another chop-on. Different style, this one, Hazlewood bowling back of a length as he usually does. The left-hander just reaches for it, looking to run away a single to deep third, and instead chops it down on the bounce and into his stumps. Whacked one pull shot to the fence in that over, but it ends with his wicket. 1st over: Bangladesh 2-1 (Naim 1, Sarkar 1) No, that score isn’t a discount deal. It’s two runs, one wicket. Gone in the first over! In-swing from Starc, full and moving, and though the line starts across the right-hander, the movement takes his inside edge as he drives, deflecting it back onto the stumps. Here we go... Bangladesh Mohammad Naim Liton Das + Soumya Sarkar Mushfiqur Rahim Mahmudullah * Afif Hossain Shamim Hossain Mahedi Hasan Taskin Ahmed Shoriful Islam Mustafizur Rahman Australia David Warner Aaron Finch * Mitchell Marsh Steven Smith Glenn Maxwell Marcus Stoinis Matthew Wade + Pat Cummins Mitchell Starc Adam Zampa Josh Hazlewood Sighs of relief from the Aussies. They will know what they’re chasing. It’s crunch time. For Australia, that is. For Bangladesh it’s chill out and relax time. They’ve already been knocked out of the T20 World Cup, so they can play as they like. Win, lose, this is their last match and their tournament ends tonight. Australia, however, have two matches left, so like two figures wrestling through the front window of a saloon, Bangladesh can leave while taking the Aussies with them. Or if Australia win tonight, the eucalypt and wattle dreams can continue a while longer. Australia’s efforts so far in this tournament have been lacklustre: a drab sort of of win over South Africa, a bigger one over Sri Lanka, then a pasting delivered by England. Bangladesh thrashed the Aussies on slow home pitches a couple of months ago. These conditions won’t be extreme, but scoring off spin will be vital. Meaning that Glenn Maxwell will be vital, and perhaps a bit of Marcus Stoinis. The Australians have to get working, or get leaving.The psychotherapist Aaron Beck, known as the father of cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT), died on Tuesday aged 100 at his Philadelphia home. CBT is a form of treatment that helps patients to analyse and manage negative thinking patterns rather than focusing on past conflicts. Here, two people tell us about their experiences with CBT and how it changed their lives. ‘My ability to cope has dramatically improved’ I suffer from trichotillomania, a compulsive hair-pulling disorder. Specifically, I pull out hair on my legs and hands, leaving me with lots of little scabs. I’ve done it every day since I was around 13. It can seem like a trivial issue, but it has impacted almost every facet of my life. I lose track of time once I’ve started a pulling episode; my sense of self and body image is completely scuppered. I’ve lost sleep and skipped meals because of it. Being locked down during the pandemic was particularly detrimental to my ability to manage it. I sought help when I was 16. My counsellor told me to spend six weeks logging when I pull, how I feel when I pull, and trying to think of creative distractive techniques to dissuade me from resorting to it. But the techniques only worked temporarily, and left me feeling like I might be doomed to live like this forever. A couple of years passed and I went to university, where I struggled to cope as my pulling episodes disrupted my work. I reached out to the university counselling service in my second year, which is when I started CBT. It was by no means a miracle cure, and I still pull out hair every day. But it has reframed my relationship with trichotillomania. What seemed gross to talk about before – such as painstaking details about why I choose specific hairs to pull out – could be explored openly. I was breaking down my behavioural cycles in incremental steps, rather than attributing the whole condition to phases of anxiety or adrenaline. The pulling can be triggered by anything, such as having a task to do that day. If before I was aiming for a pull-free day, and I ended up pulling, I’d give up and see the day as a failure and carry on as usual. But I’ve now recognised that as a cycle and redefined my goals. If I pull a little bit during the day nowadays, I won’t give up. More recently, I have also been on antidepressants for the last few months while working on my university exams. The combination has helped during this stressful time. My trichotillomania might take years to dissipate – if at all – but my ability to cope with it has dramatically improved. The iceberg is big but, thanks to CBT, it finally seems surmountable. Jasmine, 21, graduate, Bracknell ‘It was possible to understand why I was like I was’ My insecurity, anxiety, anger and excessive need to be appreciated all contributed to the failure of my first two marriages. I was diagnosed with depression at around 45, after my second divorce. I sought help from a clinical psychologist, who told me I had described 75% of the most common symptoms of depression in the first five minutes of talking to him. He agreed to let his colleague deliver one-to-one CBT sessions with me. It was like having the scales drop from my eyes as I engaged with the therapy by reading about living with depression. CBT helped me identify my negative thoughts, and guided me through the choices I’d make in response. It was possible to understand why I was like I was and that I could do something about it. I’m not saying CBT was a one-time, fix-all experience, and I have also taken antidepressants in the past. Memories can fade and old thought patterns creep back up on you without you realising. But a recent refresher course has put me back on track and helped to avert a third divorce. Being locked down together for a long time during the pandemic put pressures on our relationship, and I slid backwards into controlling and dominating, anxiety-based behaviour. We stayed together on the condition that I’d continue with an online course of treatment under the IAPT (Improving Access to Psychological Therapies) programme and keep doing CBT exercises. For me, CBT gave me an ability to enjoy life and manage myself in ways that would not otherwise have been possible. Peter Corker, 67, higher education marketing manager, KetteringIan, 69, Cornwall Occupation Retired, after 25 years in the Royal Navy (including commanding two submarines) followed by 25 years in the healthcare sector Voting record Ian didn’t vote while serving. Since then he’s voted Lib Dem or Conservative. In the EU referendum Ian voted leave Amuse bouche Ian has designed a flatpack wendy house that he is building for his two new granddaughters Kevin, 65, Cornwall Occupation Retired professional (retail management, freelance artist, teacher, charity worker) Voting record Mainly Lib Dem; never Conservative. In the referendum Kevin voted remain Amuse bouche Kevin, who has already cycled from Land’s End to John O’Groats, will soon pedal through France from the Channel to the Mediterranean For starters Ian I would describe myself as a small‑c conservative. I am a reluctant follower of rules. I prefer to make my own decisions. I like to see gradual change rather than radical change. Kevin I am a bit of a political maverick. I like to listen to all sides of the argument. We’ve got a very old democratic system, which I don’t think is capable of solving anything. I don’t think two-party politics is the way. The big beef Ian I voted in a nuanced way, 60:40, in favour of Brexit. I could see some of the downsides but in the end it came down to sovereignty. I feared the EU was becoming sclerotic with its own bureaucracy, with a tendency to wish to control sovereign states. Kevin I understand the problems of the EU but it doesn’t mean I wanted to divorce myself from them. We have lost the single market, but the main reason I voted to remain was because I saw the Tory party as incapable of making Brexit happen. I saw that the whole thing would be an utter mess if it went the wrong way – and so far it’s proving that. In Cornwall there was a passionate vote against the EU, from fishing and farming. Many are now saying that what they were promised hasn’t been delivered. Flower growers have lost huge amounts of money because they haven’t had the pickers. Ian I think that’s part of the short-term pain for longer-term gain. There will be visas for people to pick flowers and collect vegetables in due course. It will also give the opportunity to people in Cornwall to take those jobs. But we’ve come to rely on human beings when modern technology can do more. When you can find a Romanian flower picker prepared to work for the minimum wage, why invest to do something else? Sharing plate Kevin For me the Queen is just a figurehead, but we looked at countries with a president and couldn’t see the UK being comfortable following that path. The Dutch model, where they’re downsized, could be the way forward. Ian I think I respect the monarchy as an institution more than the people who populate it. The Queen fulfils the role very well. I’m not convinced her son will do the same. He’s a bit like a spoiled elder child. And I’m not sure William is going in the right direction, either. He’s started to move into the celebrity/Instagram circuit. I think there needs to be a little bit of mystery. Kevin Ian was saying that William is trying to model himself as a sort of David Beckham. I don’t even look at the royal family in that kind of detail. For afters Ian Kevin and I were born in the 50s; our parents were closely involved in the second world war and rationing, so we inherited a degree of stoicism that is no longer required. Perhaps people are less robust as a result. Kevin We did speak a bit about how these days people wear badges for everything. I’ve got no problem with them taking the knee or wearing pink ribbons, but social media has meant that everyone has started having labels attached to them, from single mother to gluten intolerant. I work for a charity that helps people who have had mental health breakdowns, and another that provides meals for people on the streets. These people have real issues, not badges. Takeaways Ian Discussing differences in a calm and measured manner does work. We didn’t even need a facilitator to find common ground and enjoy each other’s company. Kevin We did have some differences but we were also old enough to work out how to get round them. He is genuinely a very nice bloke. Additional reporting: Rachel Obordo • Ian and Kevin ate at The Alverton in Truro Want to meet someone from across the divide? Click here to find out moreThe government has been accused of an “orchestrated and deliberate attempt” to undermine parliament’s independent regulator, Kathryn Stone, after Kwasi Kwarteng said she should consider quitting. Dave Penman, the general secretary of the FDA union, which represents senior civil servants, said of the business secretary’s remarks: “Make no mistake, this is not some accidental misspoken comment. “This is part of an orchestrated and deliberate attempt to not only undermine the independent authority of a regulator but to influence decision-making and set a marker down for the future.” Sent out to defend the government’s approach to Owen Paterson’s case, just hours before his colleague Jacob Rees-Mogg announced a humiliating U-turn, Kwarteng said he “doesn’t feel shame at all” after Wednesday’s move by the government to protect Paterson from a 30-day suspension. He also suggested the standards commissioner, Kathryn Stone, who led the nearly two-year investigation into Paterson’s lobbying, should consider resigning. Kwarteng said: “I think it’s difficult to see what the future of the commissioner is, given the fact that we’re reviewing the process and we’re overturning and trying to reform this whole process. But it’s up to the commissioner to decide her position.” Penman said: “After months of anonymous, vicious briefing against Kathryn Stone, we now have the unedifying spectacle of a government minister publicly trying to force her to resign.” Paterson was found to have committed an “egregious” breach of lobbying rules for repeated contact with ministers and officials while being paid more than £100,000 on top of his taxpayer-funded salary. But Boris Johnson whipped Tory MPs to support the creation of a new committee chaired by a Conservative backbencher to review the entire standards process, which opposition parties have already vowed to boycott. Those who voted for the amendment included 22 Tories who were either already under investigation or had been ruled against by the standards commissioner. Kwarteng said it was “the express will of parliament”, although the vote was narrowly won by a majority of just 18, with dozens of Tory MPs choosing to abstain – one parliamentary private secretary who did so, Angela Richardson, lost her job. “I don’t feel shame at all,” Kwarteng told Sky News on Thursday. “It was an independent process, an independent vote at parliament. And I’m really interested in seeing the system reformed and made more just and fair by allowing people a right of appeal.” He insisted the vote, taken on the day that Paterson’s suspension was due to be confirmed, was not “about the rights and wrongs of what Owen Paterson said or did or how he was paid”. Instead, Kwarteng said, it was “about getting a system of fairness back into almost what might be a kind of employment tribunal” and that the right to appeal was something Paterson should have had. Kwarteng also called Paterson a “victim” of an unfair process, telling LBC: “If you look at what Owen went through, he was a victim, if you like, of a process or he was involved in a process, where he didn’t have a right of appeal.” Tory whips had rung round MPs on Tuesday night and asked if they would support the Leadsom amendment, and the chief whip, Mark Spencer, is said to have phoned Johnson that same evening to convince him it was the right course of action, with the prime minister agreeing. However, discontent is at fever pitch among some Conservatives. One who voted for the amendment said: “I really regret it.” Others lambasted the “politically insane” decision and Paterson and the government’s refusal to back an amendment that would have still sanctioned him, but reduced the suspension to below 10 days, meaning he would have escaped a recall petition. Labour said the call by Kwarteng for Stone to consider quitting was just the latest example of ministers trying to avoid public scrutiny. Thangam Debbonaire, the shadow leader of the Commons, said: “Having already ripped up the rules policing MPs’ behaviour to protect one of their own, it is appalling that this corrupt government is now trying to bully the standards commissioner out of her job. “Johnson must immediately distance himself from these latest attempts to poison British politics. And all decent people of all political beliefs must stand against these naked attempts by Tory MPs to avoid scrutiny of their behaviour.”The UK medicines regulator has become the first in the world to approve an oral antiviral pill for Covid in a move that paves the way for tens of thousands of vulnerable patients to receive the treatment from this winter. Nearly half a million doses of molnupiravir, a pill that can be taken twice daily at home, are due for delivery from mid-November and will be given as a priority to elderly Covid patients and those with particular vulnerabilities, such as weakened immune systems. The drug will initially be given to patients through a national study run by the NHS. Prof Peter Horby, the co-leader of the groundbreaking Recovery trial of Covid treatments at the University of Oxford, said the decision by the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) was very welcome and amounted to a watershed moment in tackling the pandemic. The MHRA said on Thursday that the drug developed by Ridgeback Biotherapeutics and Merck Sharp and Dohme (MSD), was safe and effective at reducing the risk of hospitalisation and death in people with mild to moderate Covid who are at increased risk of developing severe disease. The health secretary, Sajid Javid, said the decision marked a “historic day”, adding “the UK is now the first country in the world to approve an antiviral that can be taken at home for Covid-19. This will be a gamechanger for the most vulnerable and the immunosuppressed, who will soon be able to receive the groundbreaking treatment.” No 10 announced a deal last month to buy 480,000 doses of molnupiravir, also known as Lagevrio, after a clinical trial in the US showed a five-day course of the pills halved the risk of hospitalisation or death for at-risk patients. The first delivery is expected no earlier than mid-November. Molnupiravir interferes with the virus’s ability to replicate, meaning it is less able to multiply and reach high enough levels in the respiratory system to cause severe disease. Because the drug is most effective when given in the early stages of infection, the MHRA recommends it is used as soon as possible after a positive test for Covid and within five days of symptoms appearing. The drug is approved for people with mild to moderate Covid and at least one risk factor for developing severe illness, such as obesity, diabetes mellitus, heart disease, or being older than 60. “Following a rigorous review of the data by our expert scientists and clinicians, we are satisfied that Lagevrio [molnupiravir] is safe and effective for those at risk of developing severe Covid-19 disease and have granted its approval,” said Dr June Raine, the MHRA chief executive. “Lagevrio is another therapeutic to add to our armoury against Covid-19. It is also the world’s first approved antiviral for this disease that can be taken by mouth rather than administered intravenously. This is important because it means it can be administered outside of a hospital setting, before Covid-19 has progressed to a severe stage.” Horby said: ‘‘The approval of an oral antiviral for Covid-19 is a major scientific achievement and, to me, feels like a bit of a watershed. The MHRA are to be commended for, once again, moving very quickly to ensure the UK population gets access to drugs with proven benefit. “We do, however, have some more work to do, such as ensuring access and affordability, avoiding drug resistance, and seeing if this drug can benefit other patient groups such as those hospitalised with Covid-19.”The ultimate fate of Tony Soprano, the crime boss and protagonist of the television drama the Sopranos, has perhaps finally been revealed by the show’s creator. David Chase, in an interview with the Hollywood Reporter, explained the show’s much-discussed ending, which shows Tony Soprano, played by James Gandolfini, and his family eating in a restaurant. As the song Don’t Stop Believing, by Journey, plays in the background, Tony looks up, and the screen suddenly goes black. Tony Soprano’s ultimate fate has been the subject of debate among fans since the final episode aired in 2007. In the Reporter interview, Chase said he had always intended that Soprano should be killed in a restaurant, but said his initial vision for how that should be depicted was different. “Because the scene I had in my mind was not that scene. Nor did I think of cutting to black,” Chase said. “I had a scene in which Tony comes back from a meeting in New York in his car. At the beginning of every show, he came from New York into New Jersey, and the last scene could be him coming from New Jersey back into New York for a meeting at which he was going to be killed. Yeah. “But I think I had this notion – I was driving on Ocean Park Boulevard near the airport and I saw a little restaurant. It was kind of like a shack that served breakfast. And for some reason I thought: ‘Tony should get it in a place like that.’ Why? I don’t know. That was, like, two years before.” The Sopranos, which ran from 1999 to 2007, is widely regarded as one of the greatest TV shows as all time, but Chase said he had been frustrated by the response to the finale. “I had no idea it would cause that much – I mean, I forget what was going on in Iraq or someplace, London had been bombed!” he said. “Nobody was talking about that; they were talking about The Sopranos. It was kind of incredible to me. But I had no idea it would be that much of an uproar. And was it annoying? What was annoying was how many people wanted to see Tony killed. That bothered me.”A bird flu prevention zone has been declared across Great Britain to stop the spread of the disease among poultry and other birds. Since 5pm on Wednesday, all bird keepers have been legally required to follow strict biosecurity measures to help protect their flocks. On Wednesday a flock of poultry was culled near Dundee in Scotland after a bird flu outbreak. Earlier this week cases were detected in wild birds and poultry in Wrexham, Wales. The disease has been detected in wild birds at multiple sites across Great Britain. Bird flu circulates naturally among wild birds, and when they migrate to the UK from mainland Europe in winter the disease can be spread to poultry and other captive birds. In advice published on the Defra website, UK health agencies and food standards agencies say the risk to public health from the virus is very low. According to the NHS, bird flu can affect humans in rare cases if people touch infected birds, their droppings or bedding, or while preparing infected poultry for cooking. Under the prevention zone, people with more than 500 birds must now restrict access for non-essential visitors, change clothing and footwear before entering enclosures, and ensure vehicles are cleaned and disinfected regularly. Areas where birds are kept must be “kept unattractive to wild birds”, for example by netting ponds and removing food sources. Small “backyard owners” with only a small number of birds, including chicken, ducks and geese, have been told to limit risks and keep watch for signs of disease. In a joint statement, the chief veterinary officers for England, Scotland and Wales said all bird keepers had to take action. “Following a number of detections of avian influenza in wild birds across Great Britain we have declared an avian influenza prevention zone across the whole of Great Britain,” the statement said. “Whether you keep just a few birds or thousands, you are now legally required to introduce higher biosecurity standards on your farm or small holding. It is in your interests to do so in order to protect your birds from this highly infectious disease. “The UK health agencies have confirmed that the risk to public health is very low and UK food standards agencies advise that bird flu poses a very low food safety risk for UK consumers.”Poor and marginalised communities in Wales are most likely to be hit by disasters such as flooding caused by the climate emergency – and by measures to combat the crisis, a major report says. The report says that while people from the most deprived areas are least responsible for the crisis, their homes and livelihoods are most at risk from extreme weather events. It argues that measures to tackle the climate emergency, such as reducing the number of cars on the roads, are likely to make life more difficult for poorer people in remote locations, who cannot afford or get access to greener methods of transport. Another example it cites is the cost of introducing energy saving measures to homes, an upfront investment that poorer people may struggle to afford. It also says residents from more deprived areas are less likely to be able to pay for organic low-carbon food. The report, Inequality in a Future Wales, from the future generations commissioner for Wales, Sophie Howe, Public Health Wales and Cardiff University, concludes: “The poorest and most marginalised populations are least responsible for climate change but are the most likely to be exposed to its negative effects and have the least resources to respond, cope and recover.” It calls for ways to be found to involve such communities in making policies to tackle the climate emergency, such as inviting them to regional citizens’ assemblies. The report was published on Thursday along with heartfelt testimonies by people from across Wales affected by devastating flooding. A poem created by members of the Llanrwst Flood Action Group and edited by the writer Taylor Edmonds was released to give an insight into the fears of people in the market town in north Wales that was flooded last year. Called Emerging from Winter, the poem describes how when the rains next come, “we’ll be dragged from our beds at 3am to fill sandbags … boys will stand guard on each estate, texting updates as fields transform to open water, gathering waves. We’ll become isolated.” One Llanrwst resident, Sharon Williams, 58, said people were fearful whenever storms swept in. “It’s like walking on eggshells – every time we have heavy rain we are thinking, is this going to happen again?” Indo Zwingina, from Treforest in south Wales, which was also badly flooded last year, said more than 18 months on, the effect of the flooding was still acutely felt. “Every week, volunteers are still collecting rubbish the floods left behind. There’s a damaged footbridge near my home which still hasn’t been repaired, meaning everyone’s walk into town takes longer. Flood water brought knotweed to the community garden where I volunteer – it’s a lasting memory of when the water came. “Politicians need to listen to people in order to tackle climate change. We can only make the changes we need if they engage people and understand their lives and the reality for them. They can’t force ideas on people, it needs to be about what communities need and can do.” Howe said: “Climate change is an equality issue and this report finds that the link has so far been overlooked. We must reinvent policies to address the disadvantages to those who are most vulnerable. “People in our poorest communities, many of those who’ve been hit hardest by Covid-19, are least able to afford insurance and the cost of putting things right after floods, and that’s drastically unfair. “You’re also less likely to be in positions to take advantage of the new high-quality jobs that we will need to address climate change, and we need to put that right. With flooding occurring more and more often, we need a plan to ensure the financial burden doesn’t fall on those least able to pay – and an agreed Wales-wide approach to ensuring public services are able to respond in the right way.”In 1982, Diana Ross was interviewed by Smash Hits magazine. Her presence in among the breathless coverage of Duran Duran and Haircut 100 was testament to her continued commercial success two decades on from the Supremes’ first hit. She talked a little about that band’s 60s heyday, but, as befitting an artist who had just enjoyed two platinum albums stuffed with Top 10 singles, insisted that the 80s were the real “golden age. There’s so much opportunity.” But not, as it turned out, for Diana Ross, whose recording career stalled shortly afterwards. She had her last US Top 10 hit, a tribute to the recently murdered Marvin Gaye called Missing You, 37 years ago. Britain remained under her sway a little longer – Chain Reaction, a flop in the US, rightly reached No 1 in 1986 – but even so, it was all over bar the shouting by the early 90s. The ensuing years have been marked by the sense that Diana Ross doesn’t really know what to do to rectify the situation, or perhaps isn’t that bothered either way. A disastrous attempt to reunite the Supremes in 2000 aside, her tours still rake it in. In the studio, a nadir was reached with 2006’s I Love You, a covers album Ross audibly approached with all the enthusiasm of a hostage reading out their kidnapper’s demands. You could see why. The album appeared to have been masterminded by someone with a longstanding grudge against her: how else to explain the cruise-ship cabaret takes on The Look of Love and Take My Breath Away that lay within, not to mention the big band take on Queen’s Crazy Little Thing Called Love, complete with widdly-woo guitar solo by Brian May? The weird thing is that what to do with Diana Ross in 2021 doesn’t seem to be the most taxing of problems. Disco is enjoying one of its periodic moments in the sun, and Ross made a succession of fantastic albums during the disco era – not just 1980’s justly celebrated Diana, but the previous year’s superb The Boss (helmed by Ashford and Simpson) and 1978’s Ross – and there are dozens of producers and remixers who could be called upon to provide a supremely classy 21st-century reboot of their styles, ballads and all. Instead, Jack Antonoff is in charge, perhaps as a result of the recent US law that no female pop artist is allowed in the studio unless the former guitarist of Fun has already been safely installed behind the mixing desk. He is assisted in his endeavours by a team of big-name songwriters including Sam Smith collaborator Jimmy Napes and Amy Wadge, best-known for her work with Suffolk’s premiere dancefloor boogieman, Ed Sheeran. You can’t argue with the hitmaking pedigree on display, and initially it seems as if they might get away with it: the opening title track marries a piano line designed to provoke Motown memories – specifically of Marvin Gaye and Tammi Terrell’s You’re All I Need to Get By – with a killer chorus. But the uneasy feeling that they’re not really sure what to do sets in immediately with the arrival of If the World Just Danced, a frightful bit of anaemic pop-house that’s frankly so beneath Diana Ross, you suspect she had to wear a diving helmet while recording it. You listen to it first gripped by horror – not least because it’s hard to avoid the feeling it was put together specifically with Ross’s gay fans in mind, thus elevating it from the level of rubbish to that of insulting rubbish – and then panic. If this is their notion of a good idea, what else awaits? It didn’t look like Brian May’s name was in the special guest credits, but perhaps it’s best to double check. He isn’t, and in fairness, Thank You never quite plumbs those depths again, although there are a few moments that run close: the point, three minutes into In Your Heart, when Diana Ross’s voice gets the one thing it’s always cried out for, a burst of enemies-of-the-Daleks-must-be-exterminated Auto-Tune; a breakneck-paced, weirdly unfunky bit of horn-heavy house called Tomorrow; the closing Come Together, which sounds like the syrupy finale from a musical. For the most part, it deals in the Diana Ross of Endless Love rather than that of Love Hangover. That it majors in ballads isn’t necessarily a problem, although the fact that the ballads arrive in varying degrees of runniness is. Put it this way, there are moments where you don’t need to check the songwriters’ CVs to know they’ve worked with Westlife. The best of them is probably Beautiful Love: melodically strong, tastefully orchestrated, but nothing fit to steal Touch Me in the Morning’s place in her setlists. Infuriatingly, you get a couple of fleeting glimpses of a different Diana Ross album: tougher, funkier, less schmaltzy. I Still Believe offers Latin-flavoured disco: not amazing, but a marked improvement on most of what’s on offer here. Let’s Do It, however, is Thank You’s one unequivocal triumph: flurries of strings; a rhythm track that sounds as if it’s influenced by UK garage, of all things; an anticipatory, twilight atmosphere. It feels like proof that Diana Ross could still make a great album if she wanted to, if she was steered more carefully, or partnered more sympathetically. But she hasn’t been, and this is the result: Thank You, but no thank you. This week Alexis listened to Museum of Love – Army of Children LCD Soundsystem alumni turn out a genuinely weird track that drifts along, beatific but with a distinctly unsettling undertow.MPs are expected to get another vote “as soon as possible” on suspending the Conservative MP Owen Paterson from parliament, after Boris Johnson made a U-turn and ditched immediate plans to overhaul the standards system. Following a wave of anger from within his own party and allegations of Tory sleaze, the prime minister retreated. He signalled that he would not go ahead with a new committee chaired by a Conservative MP to review the case and wider sanctions policy, given that opposition politicians had vowed to boycott it. A motion trying to reverse Wednesday night’s vote is expected to be debated next week before the Commons goes into recess, when further details will be set out of how changes to the standards system will be taken forward on a cross-party basis. The standards commissioner and committee recommended Paterson’s suspension from parliament for 30 days for an “egregious” breach of lobbying rules. He will now face another fight for his political future. If the suspension is approved next week, it will trigger a recall petition – meaning if 10% of Paterson’s North Shropshire constituents back a byelection, one will be called. Jacob Rees-Mogg, the Commons leader, admitted the motion passed on Wednesday night had “created a certain amount of controversy” and “conflated the individual case with the general concern” that there was not an appeals process for MPs who felt the punishment they faced was unfair. He said the government wanted to “achieve improvements in our system for future cases”, but that after Labour and the SNP vowed to boycott the new committee established to review the system for scrutinising MPs’ wrongdoing, he realised cross-party consensus had not been achieved. Rees-Mogg promised to “bring forward more detailed proposals once there have been cross-party discussions”. The prime minister’s official spokesman said the vote on suspending Paterson would happen “as soon as possible”, and also suggested there would be a motion tabled to dissolve the government’s already-doomed new committee. Asked why the prime minister had changed his mind, the spokesman said it was “there was no cross-party consensus and so we’re changing our approach”. He added that “he fully acknowledged the strength of feeling in the house”. “We’re in a quagmire now,” said Chris Bryant, a Labour MP and the chair of the standards committee. He suggested the committee create a duplicate report suggesting the same sanction for Paterson when it meets next Tuesday, to be put to the Commons for another vote, to separate out the specific case from the general issue. Tory MPs unleashed fury on Wednesday by backing an amendment by the former Commons leader Andrea Leadsom that set up a new committee chaired by the Conservative backbencher John Whittingdale to review the handling of Paterson’s case and the whole standards system. On Thursday, a government source told the Guardian: “The one proposed last night is not viable.” Tory MPs had been put on a three-line whip and a parliamentary private secretary lost her job after abstaining in the vote, which the government won narrowly. Mark Harper, a former chief whip who was one of only 13 Conservatives to vote against the Leadsom amendment, tweeted: “This is one of the most unedifying episodes I have seen in my 16 years as a member of parliament. My colleagues should not have been instructed, from the very top, to vote for this. This must not happen again.” One backbencher who reluctantly supported the Leadsom amendment, said afterwards: “I really regret it.” Another said: “I have never heard ministers go through the lobby saying out loud ‘this is absolute madness’. The chief whip needs to go for this.” A frontbencher called it a “fucking disgrace and huge party mismanagement”. “Another day, another unforced error,” sighed another. Thangam Debbonaire, the shadow leader of the Commons, said: “The government’s pathetic attempt to hide from their actions doesn’t fix anything. Last night, they voted to allow corruption to take place unimpeded at the heart of British politics. MPs must now vote to uphold the sanctions against Owen Paterson. Any other result will allow Boris Johnson to create one rule for Tory MPs, another for everyone else.” Opposition politicians accused ministers of setting up a “kangaroo court” and acting like Russia. Whittingdale admitted on Wednesday night it would “prove challenging” to move forward with a committee with only Tory MPs prepared to sit on it, but he said the Commons had “passed a motion that clearly needs to be acted on”.By the time you finish reading this sentence, a 17-year-old in the United States will have turned 18 and become eligible to vote. And by the time you finish reading this sentence, someone will have died. In this nation of nearly 330 million people, a young person turns 18 roughly every 8 seconds, and someone dies every 11 seconds. This dynamic and fast-paced demographic change is transforming the country’s politics – and is also the glaring analytical hole in the growing school of thought coming to be known as “popularism.” After Democrats under-performed in the 2020 Congressional and down-ballot races, some have taken to arguing that the party paid a political price for supporting policies that were “unpopular,” resulting in disappointing electoral outcomes. The New York Times columnist Ezra Klein wrote a lengthy analysis of the phenomenon, most recently popularized by Democratic data analyst David Shor. Klein summarized the essence of popularism as the belief that Democrats “should do a lot of polling to figure out which of their views are popular and which are not popular, and then they should talk about the popular stuff and shut up about the unpopular stuff.” In the real world of winning elections in the context of a country roiled by white racial resentment and systemic racism, the results of this week’s gubernatorial election in Virginia exposed the naivete and folly of the popularism approach. Republican Glenn Youngkin stoked the flames of white racial fear by promising to outlaw so-called Critical Race Theory (CRT), code for any educational instruction about the realities of racism and oppression in this country. CRT is a law school construct and is not taught in any pre-college schools in Virginia or anywhere else, but it nevertheless sufficiently alarmed white voters that they turned out in record numbers and propelled Youngkin to victory over Terry McAuliffe, the Democratic nominee. McAuliffe certainly didn’t campaign on CRT and did his best to ignore it. But his cautious and conflict-avoidant ostrich approach failed miserably, in part because Democratic voters were not nearly as motivated by the bland popularism approach as Republicans were by what they saw as a threat to their racial identity. More broadly, beyond the obvious dangers of a moral slippery slope associated with such thinking as popularism (the Nazis were quite popular in 1930s Germany, for example), the analysis suffers from several fundamental mathematical flaws. Ironically, given the future-oriented image of tech-savvy Democratic data crunchers who champion the framework, the primary flaws of popularism stem from adherence to anachronistic models that are of limited use in today’s rapidly changing society. First, popularism fails to address the question of “popular with which groups of people?” Back in the 1970s when white voters accounted for nearly 90% of all voters, standard practice was to look generically at questions of popularity without doing a deeper demographic dive. In 2020, however, the electorate is no longer so monochromatic, with the white share of the electorate having fallen to 67%. Given that nearly 90% of African Americans consistently vote Democratic, and the majority of white voters almost always take the exact opposite position, a generic race-neutral analysis misses one of the major determinative data points in American politics. The second problem with the popularism school is its dependence on old metrics that don’t capture new realities. Historically, analysts have compared year-over-year changes in vote margins to try to identify meaningful trends in voter behavior, but such data is of only limited utility in times of extraordinary developments and can result in wildly inaccurate interpretations. It would be like a financial analyst trying to explain Delta Airlines’ $17bn drop in income in 2020 without factoring in the “black swan” event of the worldwide pandemic. In US politics, the 2020 black swan was the highest level of voter turnout in over a century, making it an even rarer occurrence than a global pandemic. The electoral tsunami also wiped out the usefulness of the traditional metric of comparing vote margins, and popularists who have tried to analyze 2020 electoral behavior with pre-2020 analytical tools have arrived at dangerously inaccurate conclusions about last year’s results. Many analysts looking at Democrats’ reduced margins in some heavily Latino counties in Florida and Texas have come to believe that large numbers of Latino voters abandoned Democrats in 2020 in favor of Trump. For example, in Hidalgo County – a 93% Latino county on the Texas border which Obama won by a margin of 42% in his 2012 re-election campaign (72% to 29% for Republican nominee Mitt Romney) – Trump shrunk the margin to less than 1.9%, securing 48.5% of the vote. This type of data point is a cornerstone of the popularism theory of the case, but it obscures the very inconvenient fact that the number of Latinos voting Democratic has actually increased over the past decade, even in Hidalgo County. It is difficult to square the circle of Democrats losing voters while at the same time increasing their vote totals. Looking up from the myopic microscope of vote margins to examine the bigger and more important picture of historic voter turnout reveals the real 2020 story. Simply put, Trump generated greater enthusiasm and turnout among his previously non-voting supporters than Biden and the Democrats did. While Biden attracted 22,000 more Democratic voters to the polls in Hidalgo County than Obama did nearly a decade ago, Trump galvanized 75,000 previously non-voting Republicans. The same phenomenon also explains the Democratic losses in the House of Representatives. In the 16 seats flipped by Republicans last year, an average of 34,000 more people came out to cast ballots for the Democratic candidate than in 2018. The challenge for Democrats was that Republican votes jumped by 54,000 votes per district. This is definitely a problem for Democrats, but the remedy is very different than what the popularists are offering. Rather than distancing themselves from issues that are unpopular with Trump supporters, Democrats need to double down on the issues that resonate with and inspire infrequent voters who are progressive. The third flaw in the popularism school of thought is reliance on stale data sets that fail to account for the electorate’s changing demographic composition. Every year, more than 4 million people, half of them people of color, turn 18, and these new voters are already transforming US politics. Biden won Arizona by fewer than 11,000 votes, and 39,000 18-year-olds cast ballots for the first time in that election, according to the Democratic data firm Catalist. In Georgia, where Biden prevailed by a similarly small margin of 12,000 votes, 59,000 18-year-olds voted, a tribute to the massive voter mobilization machine built by Stacey Abrams and her allies over the past decade. The diversification of the electorate is only going to accelerate in coming years, particularly in battleground states. In Texas, where Beto O’Rourke narrowly lost his 2018 senate race by 214,921 votes, more than two-thirds of those under 18 are people of color (67%), and nearly 300,000 people of color turn 18 every year; that’s equivalent to 33 new eligible voters of color in the Lone Star state every hour. O’Rourke is now considering a 2022 gubernatorial bid, and by the time ballots are cast in November 2022, 1.2 million more young Texans of color will be eligible to vote than was the case four years ago. Not only are these younger voters in the process of upending old electoral assumptions, but they are far more progressive and bring a different set of priorities in terms of determining what is popular. They backed Biden by a 34-point margin nationally, and that level of support was replicated in the critical states of the South and Southwest – including in a 31% Democratic advantage among 18-24-year-old voters in Arizona, and 20% advantage in Texas. On policy issues, younger voters have a very different definition of what is “popular.” A 2020 Gallup poll found that 70% of 18–34-year-olds supported “reducing the budgets of police departments and shifting the money to social programs,” more than twice the 32% level of support of those over 50. On immigration, the percentage of young people who support a pathway is twice as large as those who advocate deportation. Among those 45 and older, the immigration positions are split 50/50 according to a September Economist/YouGov poll. Popularists are right about one thing and that is that Democrats should champion popular policies. Looking at the correct data set shows that the electorate is becoming more diverse – and more progressive – by the minute. If you’ve made it this far in this column, 25 people have now turned 18 in the US. A future-focused popularism would pay greater attention to engaging these new voters changing the composition of the electorate than to polling data about the behavior of sectors of the electorate that had more sway in the past. Steve Phillips is the host of Democracy in Color with Steve Phillips, a color-conscious podcast about politics, and is the author of Brown Is the New White: How the Demographic Revolution Has Created a New American MajorityJoe Exotic, the zoo founder who gained notoriety for his role in the hit Netflix documentary Tiger King, has been diagnosed with an aggressive form of prostate cancer, he said in a social media post. In an Instagram post Exotic, whose real name is Joseph Maldonado-Passage, said he had received the news from his doctors. “It is with a sad face that I have to tell you the doctors called me in today to break the news that my prostate biopsy came back with an aggressive cancer, I am still waiting on the results from other test as well,” Exotic said. Exotic is serving a 22-year prison sentence after he was convicted of attempting to hire two men to kill an animal sanctuary owner, Carole Baskin. In the post Exotic, who has maintained his innocence, asked that he be released from prison: “So I can go home and get treatment on my own or enjoy what life I have left with my loved ones!” John Phillips, Exotic’s attorney, confirmed the news in a statement to CNN. “The PSA test is a blood test used primarily to screen for prostate cancer. It was high. He finally obtained biopsies. They revealed cancer. Medical care is different in a prison environment and fewer options are available,” Phillips said. In July a federal appeals court ruled that Exotic should serve a shorter prison sentence. According to the ruling, the court should have sentenced Exotic to somewhere between 17 and a half years and just under 22 years in prison, rather than between just under 22 years and 27 years in prison. A second instalment of Tiger King, called Tiger King 2, is scheduled to be released on 17 November. This week Baskin filed a lawsuit against Netflix and Royal Goode Productions, claiming the upcoming show used unauthorized footage of her and her husband, Howard Baskin.Azeem Rafiq has revealed he is still receiving abuse for speaking out about the racism and bullying he suffered over two spells at Yorkshire and said: “We wonder why people don’t come forward.” Yorkshire’s handling of an investigation into his allegations has been heavily criticised within the sport and by politicians, with the club’s hierarchy having been called to appear before a parliamentary committee on 16 November. The club will hold an unscheduled board meeting on Friday to discuss the fallout. On Wednesday night Gary Ballance admitted he had used racial slurs towards Rafiq when they were teammates at Yorkshire. Ballance claimed in a lengthy statement he had once enjoyed a deep friendship with Rafiq but that both men “said things privately to each other which were not acceptable” and offered remorse for his part of those exchanges. The independent panel which looked at 43 allegations in total from Rafiq determined those racial slurs from Ballance were delivered “in the spirit of friendly banter” and did not uphold that allegation – a conclusion which has caused a wave of condemnation from prominent politicians and campaign groups and kicked off an exodus of Yorkshire’s commercial partners. Rafiq says that despite the week’s events, criticism is still coming his way. He tweeted on Thursday: “We wonder why people don’t come forward. Even after everything that is out there, there seems to be personal attacks coming. What a sad state of affairs.” Rafiq will appear before MPs on the digital, culture, media and sport committee later this month and wrote in an earlier tweet on Thursday: “I wanted to stress this is not really about the words of certain individuals. This is about institutional racism and abject failures to act by numerous leaders at Yorkshire County Cricket Club and in the wider game. The sport I love and my club desperately need reform and cultural change.” Yorkshire CCC has been criticised for its failure to release the report of its investigation into Rafiq’s allegations. In September it published a summary of the findings of the report. While county chairman Roger Hutton said at that time there was “no question” Rafiq had been the victim of racial harassment and bullying over the course of two spells at Yorkshire, the club announced last week that no individual would face disciplinary action as a consequence. Yorkshire shirt sponsor Anchor Butter severed ties with the club over their handling of the matter and Emerald Group Publishing has withdrawn its naming rights of Headingley Stadium among other tie-ins with the team. Yorkshire Tea has dissolved its association with immediate effect and Tetley’s Beer has confirmed it will back out at the end of its current deal. In response to a suggestion by the finance and cricket journalist Isabelle Westbury in a tweet that “it [might] be more constructive to see high-profile sponsors of Yorkshire agreeing to stay on a number of strict conditions”, Rafiq stated: “Respect you &amp; where you are coming from but [the sponsors] have stood by the club for 14 months hoping they would do the right thing but the club &amp; its leaders are just not interested They still don’t think anything wrong has happened.” The former England captain Nasser Hussain fears Yorkshire’s handling of Rafiq’s racism claims will send a message to players in their academy that racial discrimination can be passed off as banter. Hussain said on Sky Sports: “They messed it up first time when it actually happened because no one had the guts to stand up and say: ‘No, we are not doing that in this dressing room.’ They next messed it up for years after that by not picking out people who used that terminology and they are still messing it up now when they had the option to say: ‘We have changed, we will not accept this sort of behaviour’. So they continue to mess it up. “Almost by Yorkshire saying it is just banter, they are sending a message through all their age groups that it is OK to say ‘you lot’ and ‘that corner shop must belong to your uncle’ and things like that. They are sending a message that this sort of mickey taking is absolutely fine and it’s not.” Meanwhile, a prominent group of the county’s politicians – including the former Labour leader Ed Miliband and Shadow Chancellor Rachel Reeves – wrote to the England and Wales Cricket Board chief executive Tom Harrison demanding “an immediate, comprehensive and independent inquiry into YCCC’s handling of the original allegations and the subsequent investigation”.The nature of this group and this competition meant that Australia needed not only to beat Bangladesh but to thrash them if they were to overtake South Africa and assume control of the second semi-final spot. What followed was one of the most one-sided contests in the history of the T20 World Cup, and a victory by eight wickets secured with 82 balls to spare. Adam Zampa was named player of the match after taking five wickets for 19, accounting for all but one of the last six Bangladeshi batters to fall, but these were opponents who put up the lamest of fights. Liton Das was bowled by Mitchell Starc with the third ball of the innings to set the tone, and Bangladesh went on to lose a wicket in five of the first seven overs, at which point they were 33 for five – and this on what their captain, Mahmadullah, later declared “the best wicket we played on, for batting especially”. One of the great challenges of this World Cup has been working out how Bangladesh came into it ranked sixth in the world. It is true they beat Australia 4-1 in a five-match series this year, but all those games were played in Dhaka – and this team do not travel well. They have now lost 14 of the 19 games they have played away in the last three years, and won 13 of 19 played at home. “It was useful for the bowlers in our team,” Zampa said of Australia’s trip to Bangladesh. “In terms of our batsmen the conditions were pretty alien in Dhaka, they were the toughest we’ve come across in international cricket. So we were probably going to be facing different bowling here, albeit from a similar bowling attack. For us [bowlers], we had some gold nuggets on the Bangladesh batsmen that we definitely tried to use.” Having bowled out Bangladesh for 73 there were hurried calculations at the innings break around net run rate. It turned out Australia had just over eight overs to win the game if they were to overtake South Africa, a line they crossed with 11 balls to spare. They were not the only ones who needed a calculator: when Aaron Finch lifted Mustafizur Rahman square for six to take his side to 35 for 0 halfway through the fourth over the stadium DJs played a clip from Bon Jovi’s Livin’ on a Prayer, infuriating the mathematicians in the audience who knew Australia were still two runs away from being halfway there. This was not a game for batting purists, with Bangladesh careless and Australia carefree. Such was the chasers’ hurry they swung their bat at almost everything, and eventually both Finch and David Warner were bowled heaving across the line – easily the most impressive thing about Bangladesh was the enthusiasm with which they celebrated these irrelevant breakthroughs – but they were only ever going to be delayed rather than denied, and even then not by much. A win against West Indies on Saturday will almost certainly take Australia into the semi-finals. As it happens they also recently lost a series there, and apparently picked up some gold nuggets on their batters too.Treasured material from Paul McCartney’s personal archive, including the original handwritten lyrics to songs such as Hey Jude and Nineteen Hundred and Eighty Five, is going on public display for the first time at the British Library. Paul McCartney: The Lyrics, which is free to the public from Friday, celebrates one of the world’s most successful songwriters and performers. Lyrics, printed photographs and original memorabilia spanning McCartney’s career reveal the process and people behind some of the most famous songs of all time. Highlights include previously unseen lyrics for Pipes of Peace, Jenny Wren and Tell Me Who He Is, an unrecorded song found in a notebook in McCartney’s archive and accompanied by additional items suggesting that it was written in the late 1950s. The lyrics, written in blue Biro on lined notebook paper, begin: “Tell me who he is, tell me that you’re mine not his, he says he loves you more than I do, tell me who he is.” All the material has been immaculately kept by McCartney. The exhibition coincides with the release of his book, The Lyrics: 1956 to the Present, which recounts his life and art through the prism of 154 songs from all stages of his career. Also on display is an original drawing by McCartney for the Put It There single, an early Beatles songlist, a postcard of The Beatles in Hamburg and George Martin’s score for Yesterday. Additional highlights include a selection of print photographs taken by McCartney’s brother, Mike, his late wife, Linda, and his daughter, Mary. All this is set to audio from the British Library’s sound archive to accompany each lyric on display. Andy Linehan, curator of popular music recordings at the British Library, said: “The British Library is more than just books; we also hold one of the most extensive collections of popular music in the world. It is great to be able to showcase some of our handwritten lyrics and sound recordings alongside previously unseen material from Paul McCartney’s own archive in this display. “Handwritten drafts of song lyrics have a special quality – they show that initial spark of creativity – and this is a chance for everyone to see the workings and learn the stories behind the songs of one of the world’s most successful songwriters and performers.” Linehan added that he hoped the display inspires new audiences “young and old”. Other lyrics by McCartney and The Beatles, including a draft of A Hard Day’s Night scribbled on the back of a birthday card, can be seen in the British Library’s permanent treasures display alongside works by some of McCartney’s literary inspirations including William Shakespeare, Charles Dickens and Virginia Woolf. McCartney, who has been busy promoting the Lyrics in recent weeks, has said writing the book “kind of turned into a therapy session”. In the book, he talks about his process of songwriting and compares it to solving a puzzle. Each song, he explains, “would illuminate something that was important in my life at that moment, though the meanings are not always obvious on the surface. “A lot of songwriters draw merely on their day-to-day autobiographical thoughts, but I like to take flights of fancy. That’s one of the great things about being an artist of any kind. I like songs and poetry that take off in unexpected ways.”Shares in Metro Bank surged by almost a third on Thursday after it received an approach about a possible takeover by the US private-equity group Carlyle. The market value of the challenger bank, which did not say how much Carlyle might pay if a firm offer was made, soared by as much as 40% in early trading on news of the deal, valuing the bank at more than £242m, before closing up 29%. “Metro Bank has engaged with Carlyle in relation to its possible offer and a further announcement will be made as and when appropriate,” the company said. “In the meantime, shareholders are advised to take no action.” Carlyle has until 2 December to make a formal offer or walk away, under UK takeover rules. The possible offer comes as the bank continues to work to revive its fortunes after an accounting scandal in 2019. The scandal resulted in the resignation of the chair, Vernon Hill, who founded the company in 2009, who had previously said that he would “probably die” before stepping down. Metro’s chief executive, Dan Frumkin, who took up the top role last year, has previously worked with Carlyle. He joined from Bermuda-based Butterfield Bank, where he was part of the management team who helped to restructure the troubled lender after its acquisition by Carlyle in 2010. The private equity group exited Butterfield via a two-stage listing on the New York Stock Exchange that completed in 2017. Last year, Metro significantly scaled back expansion plans after reporting a loss of more than £130m caused partly by the accounting error. The scandal prompted speculation that the bank may become a possible takeover target as its share price tumbled. Frumkin was promoted from chief transformation officer to the top role within months of joining Metro Bank as the scandal unfolded. While Metro Bank’s share price is up more than 130% over the past year, to about 140p, it remains at a third of the 400p it was trading at three years ago. When the company floated on the stock market in 2016 it was valued at £1.6bn. In July, Frumkin said attempts to revive its fortunes were “beginning to bear fruit”, with half-year pre-tax losses reducing from £240m to £139m year-on-year. Earlier this year Carlyle, which declined to comment on the possible takeover, lost a £1.1bn bidding war for the inhaler firm Vectura to the tobacco company Philip Morris. The private equity company has a portfolio of investments in the UK including the housing developer Beechcraft, video games producer Jagex, luxury clothing retailer END and global funds network Calastone. In November, Carlyle exited PA Consulting after it was acquired by the professional services firm Jacob in a deal valuing the business at £1. Last year Metro Bank moved to acquire the peer-to-peer lender RateSetter in a deal worth up to £12m. Speculation about consolidation in the banking sector has been fuelled recently by hopes that rising interest rates might boost the future prospects of challengers which have struggled to compete against the high street giants. On Thursday the Bank of England held the base rate at its historic low of 0.1%, but indicated it expects borrowing rates to rise in coming months.Aaron Rodgers may be a lot of things but stupid he is not. A noted bookworm and fill-in Jeopardy host, Rodgers of all people is keenly aware that words matter. In hindsight this explains why back in August when he was asked about his vaccination status by a reporter, he replied with a cryptic: “I’ve been immunized.” If you’re like me, you thought Rodgers’ response was him being him – eccentric with maybe a touch of arrogance – but you assumed immunized equaled vaccinated. A misdirection while technically not lying is one thing, but then Rodgers continued. “There’s guys on the team that haven’t been vaccinated. I think it’s a personal decision. I’m not going to judge those guys.” Those guys? Any Logic 101 class would suggest that “those guys” implies “those guys who are not me”. While not a straight-up lie, it’s no different than if a faux vegan who secretly downs a steak once a week was asked how she gets her protein and replied, “I have my protein sources, but I’m not going to judge my friends who like to hang out in the butcher shop.” Sigh. Well, now it’s looking likely that Rodgers misled us all along. On Wednesday, the news broke that Rodgers tested positive for Covid-19 and will miss Sunday’s game against the Kansas City Chiefs because he is, indeed, not immunized with an actual Covid vaccine. But the wounds cut much deeper than Rodgers missing four quarters of an NFL game. First off, there’s the simple selfish act of not getting a vaccine that protects yourself, your friends and your teammates. How can five million deaths worldwide, including more than 750,000 in the United States, not be enough to spook Rodgers into getting vaccinated? Keeping a dirty little secret like not being vaccinated from the public has exposed Rodgers as just another egotistical athlete who doesn’t think the rules (or science) apply to him. Per NFL Media, Rodgers had the nerve to ask the league and the NFLPA to grant him vaccinated status this summer because he had undergone treatment from his personal homeopathic doctor to raise his antibody levels. Ignoring the science of vaccines didn’t quite work out for Rodgers, since clearly his antibody counts were not high enough to protect him from contracting Covid. But he’s not wrong about operating in an orbit of special rules. The NFL, and almost certainly the Packers, have known about Rodgers’ status all season and yet they’ve allowed him to show up to his regular press conferences without a mask. This is a clear break in protocol, which states: “All players and staff who are not fully vaccinated must wear masks at all times when inside the Club facility.” Meanwhile, other unvaccinated Packers have reportedly been doing their media sessions via Zoom instead of in person. Different rules. It certainly begs the question that if this were another quarterback and not the reigning MVP, to whom the Packers acquiesced to this summer to keep him around, would that quarterback be afforded the level of protection? Vikings head coach Mike Zimmer has famously been at odds over Kirk Cousins’ refusal to get vaccinated. Ravens star quarterback Lamar Jackson, on the other hand, has contracted Covid twice and suffered symptoms, while his coach has turned a blind eye. An unvaccinated Cam Newton was released by the Patriots in training camp. Now this was likely rooted in performance issues and wanting to hand the keys to Mac Jones, but Newton has since been touting his new fully vaccinated status in a quest to get signed. There’s a key difference between Rodgers and other unvaccinated quarterbacks or even Brooklyn Nets guard Kyrie Irving, who is clinging to his “freedom”, versus just getting a shot and being allowed to play basketball. It’s truth. As asinine as some of their rationales may seem, at least the others were honest. Only time will tell what this does to Rodgers’ reputation both in house and in the public. While at least some of the Packers brass had to know if the NFL knew, it’s hard to discern how deep down the food chain the protection of Rodgers’ fell. Aaron Jones offered a misguided and widely mocked response to the question of whether he knew about Rodgers being unvaccinated. It’s not fair for Jones or anyone on the Packers roster to have to answer questions like this and there’s only one person to blame for why they are being asked. Beyond the locker room, the aura of Rodgers suddenly feels different. We’ll know a lot more about where Rodgers’ legacy stands in the coming weeks and certainly in the offseason when he very well may be looking to latch on to a different franchise. Rodgers’ incredible talent hasn’t changed. But an NFL general manager that cares about intangibles like trustworthiness might want to tuck those keys to the franchise far away because Rodgers doesn’t feel like a leader anymore. He feels like a bad used car salesman.On 23 May 2010, “within an hour after the Blackhawks won the playoff game that secured their place in the Stanley Cup Finals,” members of Chicago’s senior management, along with then-head coach Joel Quenneville and team counselor Jim Gary, had a meeting about an allegation of sexual assault involving a coach and player. The story they heard was that then-video coach Brad Aldrich had tried to “get under the sheets” with a Blackhawks player, then known only as John Doe, but who we now know is Kyle Beach. The details, as they’ve been since alleged, are that Aldrich had invited Beach to his apartment, gave him dinner and drinks, and turned on some porn. Aldrich then tried to be physically intimate. Beach, apparently, hit him. At that point, Aldrich allegedly stood up, grabbed a small baseball bat, and told Beach that “if you don’t lay down and enjoy it, I’ll make sure you never play in the NHL or walk again.” After they’d heard about the allegation at the May meeting, Quenneville apparently “shook his head and said that it was hard for the team to get to where they were, and they could not deal with this issue now,” according to an extensive report into the incident. Sure enough, there’s no evidence anyone told human resources about it until nearly a month later. Aldrich was then given an option: submit to an investigation or resign. He chose the latter, got severance and a playoff bonus. He got his name on the Stanley Cup. A few years later, Aldrich was working at a high school in Michigan when he was arrested and pled guilty to fourth degree criminal sexual conduct involving a minor. Until this year, a decade after the incident, the Blackhawks had never launched an investigation into Beach’s allegation. Since that report landed, general manager Stan Bowman and president and CEO John McDonough – both present at that meeting in May – have left. Quenneville, who was coaching the Panthers, resigned. And the NHL levied the Blackhawks a paltry $2m fine for their mishandling of the incident. On Monday, NHL commissioner Gary Bettman and deputy commissioner Bill Daly held a press conference. Doesn’t it say something about the culture of hockey, one reporter wondered, that in the 10 years since that May 2010 meeting, nobody – including Kevin Cheveldayoff, now general manager of the Winnipeg Jets, who was present for the May 2010 meeting – had ever publicly mentioned this allegation? “Do you find that troubling at all?” the reporter asked. “Kevin was such a minor player in this,” Bettman explained. “He had no reason to believe that anything other than the right things were going on.” No more a damning phrase than this can summarize the source of the NHL’s – and hockey’s – many issues. Whether it’s the concussion denials, the hidden prescription drug use, the quietly tolerated racism, the secret hazing rituals – you name it, it’s all the product of a governing ideology in hockey that has at its heart exactly the assumption Bettman laid bare: that silence can only mean the right things are going on. And what do you get with a league, and a sport, that subscribes to this ideology? You will probably get more Kyle Beaches. “I was scared, mostly. I was fearful. I’d had my career threatened. I felt alone and dark,” Beach told TSN last week about how he felt in the days after the incident in Aldrich’s apartment. “I felt like I was alone and there was nothing I could do and nobody to turn to for help.” In the days since Beach spoke publicly to TSN, there have been calls for change – even for Bettman’s resignation. For his part, Bettman appears to believe that change has already come – to the league and, perhaps, to him. “Had we known about this in 2011, everything would have been handled differently,” Bettman said a few minutes later. “But we didn’t… What we know now, I don’t think anybody knew when the complaint was filed. So, obviously it would have been treated differently because we wouldn’t tolerate this.” In the winter of 1997, then-St Louis Blues head coach Mike Keenan – so controlling that players on his earlier Philadelphia Flyers teams reportedly took to giving Hitler salutes behind his back – was embroiled in a tempestuous exit from yet another team. After two disastrous seasons and amidst Keenan’s feuding with star Brett Hull, Blues ownership had pulled the plug. During the All-Star game’s period break, the CBC’s Ron MacLean briefly noted Keenan’s ongoing settlement dispute with the Blues. Bettman, it so happened, was appointed the arbiter of the case. “How are you the arbitrator when you in fact are hired by the owners?” MacLean asked Bettman. “When we have a dispute within the family, we don’t see any reason to air our laundry outside,” Bettman replied. I don’t know. Maybe some things, and some people, never change.Hello, and happy Thursday, No, it’s not deja vu: Senate Republicans once again used the filibuster on Wednesday to stymie Democratic efforts to pass a significant voting rights bill. It’s the fourth time it’s happened this year, the most recent coming just two weeks ago. But Democrats and other voting rights advocates hope that this time is different. They never really expected 10 Republicans to sign on to the bill and advance it. Instead, they hoped to use the vote as a final chance to show the West Virginia senator Joe Manchin and Arizona senator Kyrsten Sinema, two of the staunchest filibuster defenders, that there is no hope of passing a voting rights bill while the filibuster remains in place. It’s a development that significantly escalates pressure on Manchin specifically. The voting rights bill that Republicans blocked in late October was one he personally helped write and sought GOP input on. The measure Republicans blocked on Wednesday, which would have restored a critical provision of the Voting Rights Act, is one he supports. Manchin has said that “inaction is not an option” on voting rights. But now Republicans have made it clear that while the filibuster remains in place, inaction is the only option. So where do things go from here? To start, I think we’ll begin to see a lot more explicit language from Chuck Schumer, the majority leader, about changing the rules of the filibuster. While Schumer has repeatedly said “all options are on the table” when it comes to voting rights, he’s stopped short of outlining specific changes he’d like to see or calling out Manchin and Sinema specifically. It’s only recently that Schumer has begun to talk about the need “to restore the Senate as the world’s greatest deliberative body”. I expect we’ll also see some increased pressure from the White House. Schumer continued that rhetoric on Wednesday after the filibuster. He described it as a “low, low point” in the history of the Senate, and questioned whether some of Congress’s greatest legislative accomplishments would have been able to overcome the filibuster if they had been proposed in today’s Senate. But will this be enough to sway Manchin and Sinema? I’ve written before about why I’m cautiously optimistic they will come around on voting rights. Manchin didn’t seem to be budging after Wednesday’s vote. “We’ve got Lisa Murkowski, we just need nine more,” Manchin said, according to Politico. “We need other people to be talking to each other and find a pathway forward. It can’t just be one or two people talking to both sides.” But as Democrats get mired in negotiations over the infrastructure bill, it may be harder to pressure their two holdouts. Biden said during a town hall in late October that it would be hard to deal with the filibuster while infrastructure negotiations were ongoing. In any case, the next few weeks will be critical in determining whether Democrats can actually protect access to the ballot box. Readers’ questions Please continue to write to me each week with your questions about elections and voting at sam.levine@theguardian.com or DM me on twitter at @srl and I’ll try to answer as many as I can. Also worth watching … I spoke with election officials across the country about the wave of threats and harassment they’ve seen over the last year Republicans in North Carolina and Ohio are pushing maps that would give them an extreme partisan advantage for the next decade.With the news dominated by seemingly omniscient beings refusing to act against the greatest challenge facing planet Earth, what better time for the Marvel Cinematic Universe to introduce its cosmic counterparts? Indeed, this weekend the Eternals – a celestial race of supers who have hidden away for thousands of years – will emerge on to cinema screens across the world to take on their evil counterparts, the Deviants. So far, so Marvel, but initial reaction to the film has been curiously muted. Though a reliably unreliable metric, the film’s Rotten Tomatoes score has dropped to 53%, the lowest of any film in the Marvel Cinematic Universe (though, it should be noted, nowhere near as low as other Marvel and wider comic-book fare). It’s by no means a washout, but the film has been criticised for its dense plotting and patchy CGI and, despite the efforts of Chloé Zhao in the director’s chair, it has seemingly been hampered by the idiosyncratic hallmarks of the MCU. Marvel is very far from crisis stations, but its “fourth phase” has proven fickle. Notwithstanding the impact of the pandemic, the response to its films and TV properties has been uneven, with the Multiverse-shaped way ahead promising to make the universe ever more complex. This suggests a huge amount of confidence, but the MCU is in danger of fluffing its creative lines. While films such as Iron Man 3 and Thor: Ragnarok were comedic riffs on the parameters that the MCU so clearly defined, its latest offerings have balked at the chance to deliver something new, and suffered for it. Cate Shortland’s Black Widow felt as if it was forced from above to quip its way out of a much darker, frankly more interesting tone. It’s a film, too, that was released years too late. Set after the events of 2016’s Captain America: Civil War, the film lacked meaningful stakes, given that Marvel fans already knew the eventual fate of the super-assassin. The studio’s TV offerings have been similarly patchy. WandaVision began with an intriguing set of sitcom vignettes, before descending into a final episode replete with bland CGI superheroism. Elements of The Falcon and the Winter Soldier provided the solid narrative and action-based beats we have come to expect from Marvel, but the series as a whole struggled to find its tone. The same is true with the studio’s foray into animation with What If…?. Though designed to be varied in tone, and predicated on the butterfly effect that one small change could have had on the MCU, the results have been erratic. Even the studio’s strongest offering, Loki, fundamentally altered the inner mechanics of the MCU, an issue that may hamper its future accessibility for the casual observer. The box-office takings have remained healthy, and this is of course an important bottom line. More so, the longevity of the genre does surely rely on it taking wider narrative and thematic swings. Introducing creators such as Zhao is fundamentally a good thing for the richness of the MCU, even if her subtle sensibilities may have been blotted out on a superheroic canvas. Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings thrived with a crackling cast and thundering score, but also introduced wuxia-inflected action and new, refreshing layers of mythos to the MCU. Despite this, its final fight is staged within the confines of the superhero structure, and Marvel arguably needs to begin challenging the framework that it has proved so critical in popularising. It is through the Multiverse, a concept steeped in comic-book lore, that it is looking to redefine the superhero story. In an interview with Empire, director Jon Watts described the upcoming Spider-Man: No Way Home as “Spider-Man: Endgame”. As such, the intention is clear: use this cosmic quirk to fill the screen with as many pre-loved characters as possible. Alfred Molina’s Doc Oc, first seen in Sam Raimi’s 2004 Spider-Man 2, will appear, and is likely to be joined by previous Spider-Men Tobey Maguire and Andrew Garfield. While said glibly, using one MCU film to describe another is symptomatic of the wider creative problems the studio is facing. In 2022, Benedict Cumberbatch will return as the titular hero in Doctor Strange in the Multiverse of Madness, where he is due to come up against Scarlet Witch. What’s more, Thor will be making an appearance in the upcoming Guardians of the Galaxy 3. Tying all these characters together is a fanboy’s dream, but it also risks bamboozling those who aren’t fully up to date. Just like the comic books it is derived from, the MCU has spun a wide-ranging mythology. For so long, this has been the foundation of the universe’s strength, with Avengers: Infinity War and Avengers: Endgame capping off this strategy in a swirl of bombast. Yet Marvel’s concerted attempts to bring this cinematic universe together risk creating an impenetrable narrative web worthy of Spider-Man himself.Jadon Sancho has been left out of England’s squad by Gareth Southgate but Marcus Rashford, Trent Alexander-Arnold, Harry Maguire and Jude Bellingham have been included for the final World Cup qualifiers. Sancho’s poor form and lack of game time for Manchester United have caught up with him after he was selected last month regardless. There is no place for Jesse Lingard, Ollie Watkins, Kieran Trippier or Fikayo Tomori for the games at home to Albania and away to San Marino. Sancho has no goals and no assists in 12 appearances in all competitions for United. Maguire’s form for the club has been poor, too, but he is back after missing recent internationals because of injury. Rashford is included for the first time since Euro 2020 after recovering from shoulder surgery and Reece James is also back after being forced to withdraw from the previous squad. Southgate said Bellingham had been left out last time at the 18-year-old’s request, the midfielder feeling he “needed a break”. The manager noted the development of Emile Smith Rowe, Conor Gallagher and Marc Guéhi in particular but said although they were playing well they had not done enough to dislodge existing squad members. Trippier, he explained, had not been selected in order to give an opportunity to James and Alexander-Arnold. On Lingard and Sancho he said: “They just are not playing a lot of football compared to the players in their position. I know people say I am inconsistent but I think I am actually quite consistent – if you are playing regularly you have a better chance of us assessing you. Both of them totally understand it. They know they have to get playing for their club. I am sure they will get back with us.” Mason Greenwood, another United player, again has no place in the squad. Southgate said he had met the forward in September and had “a very good discussion” but that the 20-year-old was not in his thoughts at the moment. “He’s at a massive football club with a lot of expectation,” he said, “and we don’t want to move too quickly. He feels he’s got huge competition to establish himself at his club. And he recognised that that is a big part of making your way in international football anyway.”Despite the stark warnings of climate breakdown from the IPCC and the UN, it’s business as usual for fossil fuel capitalism. An astonishing 56% of the G20 nations’ Covid-19 recovery funds for energy have gone to fossil fuel companies. In April, the Glasgow Financial Alliance for Net Zero (GFANZ) chaired by Mark Carney was launched to bring together leading financial corporations to redirect finance towards achieving net zero by 2050. Yet many of its signatories remain among the world’s top backers of fossil fuels. Some have even issued new financing to companies expanding fossil fuel infrastructure since signing up with the GFANZ. Oil extraction in the Amazon is being financed by GFANZ members HSBC and Citi, for instance, while Deutsche Bank, MUFG, and Credit Agricole are issuing bonds for a company that constructs pipelines in Indigenous territories. These are just some of the more prominent players in a financial system that remains too tightly entwined with fossil capitalism through unaccountable and complex global flows between fossil fuel corporations and private equity firms, asset managers, pension funds and other financial institutions. At Cop26, Rishi Sunak announced that the UK will become the world’s first “net zero-aligned finance centre” – seemingly a response to accusations that banks are not doing enough. His move was instantly criticised by climate campaigners as little more than a “marketing slogan”. If the Glasgow summit is to live up to its status as the “finance COP”, we need to radically transform the global financial system so that it serves public purpose over private profit. The GFANZ is a start, but it doesn’t go far enough. International agencies and national governments need to impose stringent conditions on how financial corporations operate, switching investments out of fossil fuels and into zero-carbon activities. Through carbon tariffs, renewable energy subsidies and state investments, fossil capitalism can – and should – be rendered unprofitable. A massive expansion of state-owned green investment banks will be critical for transforming finance. These provide patient loans and grants, used to fund research and development and startups in zero-carbon technologies. A promising example is the Scottish National Investment Bank, which invests millions across Scotland to deliver climate goals. Across the world, public banks are already the pioneers of green lending: they invest nearly as much as all private banks combined in the green economy, despite accounting for only 20% of total global banking assets. Importantly, public banks and public wealth funds retain a substantial stake in the capital created by the green transition – through, for instance, equity shares and revenue participation agreements. If we want to ensure a socially just – and thus effective – transition, green investment banks must be governed democratically, and their financial assets should be shared collectively among workers and citizens. This could take the form of a citizens’ dividend that would provide everyone with a guaranteed minimum income, for example. Such institutions can transform shareholder capitalism, which feeds profits back to company shareholders, into stakeholder capitalism, in which citizens and workers have a democratic ownership stake. “Business as usual” only leads us down the road of no return. We urgently need to change direction towards a radical industrial strategy that puts climate action at the forefront of financial investments. This will mean restructuring capitalism around a renewed sense of public purpose, channelled through ambitious missions to renew the capacities of the state and meet the challenges of the climate crisis. In practice, this means setting measurable goals such as creating good green jobs for unemployed coal workers, as exemplified by Spain’s national Just Transition Strategy, bringing stakeholders together to achieve them, and redirecting resources. New institutions will be needed to push forward this economic transformation. Europe already has its Organisation for Nuclear Research, known as Cern, which pools technology and resources for particle physics. We need an equivalent body for climate technology that would pool investments in climate action across countries and sectors (the G7 Panel on Economic Resilience, which I was part of, has already recommended precisely this). We also need a new social contract between the state, capital and labour. This will mean transforming the government’s reliance on parasitic public-private partnerships that socialise the risks and privatise the rewards of important public projects (such as the UK’s test-and-trace programme). To prevent this from hampering climate action, governments should enforce new conditions that ensure private contractors promote decarbonisation. They could follow Sweden’s example, which recently insisted that contractors only use green steel, made without coal. Governments could also take inspiration from Germany’s state-owned development bank, KfW, which offers loans to the steel industry that include conditions to reduce carbon and emissions. Or the French and Dutch Covid bailouts for national airline carriers Air France and KLM, which enforced conditions including cutting domestic flights that compete with rail travel and reducing absolute carbon emissions. Conditions like these need to be extended across the board to make it impossible for carbon-emitting companies to operate. At Cop26 it should be clear to delegates what lies at the root of climate catastrophe. The type of capitalism we have created is driving environmental breakdown and needs to be fundamentally redesigned. There is no time for tinkering; we need radical transformation now. Mariana Mazzucato is professor in the economics of innovation and public value at University College London, and the founding director of the UCL Institute for Innovation and Public Purpose (IIPP). Her latest book is Mission Economy: A Moonshot Guide to Changing Capitalism; Matthew Thompson is Research Fellow in Rethinking Public Value at IIPP.The Jack Eichel era in Buffalo is over, with a nasty public eight-month feud reaching a conclusion on Thursday when the Sabres traded their former captain and face of the franchise to the Vegas Golden Knights. The trade ends a stalemate between Eichel and Buffalo over how to repair his herniated disk, which has sidelined him since March. The dispute revolved around the NHL’s collective bargaining agreement giving teams the final say over the treatment of injuries. Though Eichel remains sidelined, the Golden Knights addressed their biggest long-term need in landing a top-line center by trading forward Alex Tuch, rookie center Peyton Krebs and two draft picks to the Sabres. Eichel is expected to have the disk replacement surgery he preferred, though the recovery timetable means he’ll likely miss most if not all of the remainder of the season. The length of the dispute also essentially eliminates Eichel’s chance to represent the United States at the Winter Olympics, which will be held in Beijing in February. Sabres doctors favored Eichel having fusion surgery and opposed the disk replacement procedure because it has never been conducted on an NHL player. Eichel was the Sabres’ highest-paid player and is in the fourth year of an eight-year, $80m contract. He topped 20 goals in each of his first five seasons and enjoyed a breakout year in 2019-20, when he had a career-best 36 goals in 68 games before the season was abruptly canceled due to the coronavirus pandemic. Overall, he finishes with 139 goals and 355 points in 375 career games with Buffalo. Buffalo acquired a top-10 protected first-round pick in the 2022 draft and a 2023 second-round selection. Vegas also acquired a 2023 third-round pick. The feud became public in May, when Eichel revealed what he called “a disconnect” with the team over treating the injury, and he questioned his future with a franchise that once regarded him as a key building block after selecting him with the No 2 pick in the 2015 draft. The dispute escalated over the summer, with Eichel changing agents in August in a bid to spur a trade. In September, the Sabres stripped Eichel of his captaincy before the start of training camp. In recent weeks, Eichel’s camp began threatening to file a grievance through the NHL Players’ Association, questioning whether Sabres doctors followed the collective bargaining agreement in giving his option of surgery serious consideration. The standoff drew the attention of the highest levels of the league, with NHL commissioner Gary Bettman calling it “a terrible situation”, without fixing blame on either side.Police have recorded a record number of rape offences in England and Wales, according to official figures. Although there was a fall in overall crime levels driven by coronavirus restrictions, the Office for National Statistics said recorded sexual offences had increased by 8%. “Rape accounted for 37% of all sexual offences recorded by the police. The number of rape offences in the year ending June 2021 was the highest ever recorded annual figure to date (61,158 offences),” said a report published on Thursday. The ONS said the record was driven by a large increase between April and June, in which there were 17,300 rape offences, compared with a quarterly average of between 12,000 and 15,000. The increase may reflect “a number of factors, including the impact of high-profile cases and campaigns on victims’ willingness to report incidents”, rather than solely an increase in the number of rapes committed. The rape and murder of Sarah Everard in March prompted a national debate over women’s safety, sexual violence and the response of police and prosecutors. Nick Stripe, the head of crime statistics at the ONS, said some caution should be exercised when interpreting the figures. “Prior to the pandemic, the number of police-recorded sexual offences was well below the number of victims estimated by the Crime Survey for England &amp; Wales, with fewer than one in six victims of rape or assault by penetration reporting the crime to the police. “The rise could be due to an increase in victim reporting as lockdowns eased, an increase in the number of victims, or to an increase in victims’ willingness to report incidents, potentially as a result of high-profile cases and campaigns in recent times,” he wrote on Twitter. The number of domestic abuse-related crimes also rose by 6% in the year, to almost 850,000 offences. The ONS said under-reporting made it difficult to determine the true level of domestic abuse in England and Wales, but data from support services suggests it intensified during lockdown periods. Other crimes, such as theft, were reduced during periods of lockdown as social contact was limited and people stayed at home. But falls in the incidence of these crimes were offset by a large increase in fraud and computer misuse offences, driving an overall rise in crime over the course of the year. The police also recorded 846,235 offences flagged as domestic abuse-related for the 12-month period, representing a 6% increase from 813,958 offences in the previous year. This included 687,328 offences of violence against the person labelled as domestic abuse-related, a 7% increase compared to the previous year. The ONS said it was “difficult to determine” the levels of domestic abuse in the country using police recorded data because of changes in the way the crimes are reported, so “we cannot conclude whether there has been an increase in the number of victims of domestic abuse”. It added: “Data from victim services suggests that experiences of domestic abuse may have intensified during periods of national lockdown and that victims faced difficulties in safely seeking support under these conditions.” Reports of fraud and hacking continued to rise – something the ONS previously suggested was due to criminals taking advantage of behavioural changes during the pandemic when many took to online shopping when there were restrictions on movement. In the latest period Action Fraud, the national fraud and cybercrime reporting centre, reported a 36% rise in fraud offences. The data showed a 34% increase in “online shopping and auctions” fraud in the latest year (from 70,761 to 94,795 offences) and a 51% increase in “financial investment fraud” (from 14,685 to 22,200 offences), the ONS said.Wilfried Zaha’s participation in January’s Africa Cup of Nations is in doubt, with the Crystal Palace forward said to be considering his international future after asking not to be included in Ivory Coast’s squad for this month’s World Cup qualifiers. The 28-year-old, who made his debut in 2017 and has 21 caps, was not selected in Patrice Beaumelle’s squad to face Mozambique and Cameroon, having informed the manager that he would remain in the UK. “He asked not to come because he comes home sick after each meeting,” said Beaumelle as he unveiled his squad. “He wants to reflect on the rest of his international career.” Zaha missed Palace’s draw against Arsenal last month because of illness after playing 74 minutes of the victory over Malawi in Abidjan. He returned as a substitute against Newcastle before scoring in Palace’s victory at Manchester City last Saturday. He and about 40 other Premier League players are due to take part in January’s Afcon in Cameroon. Zaha played in two friendlies for England under Roy Hodgson before switching to the land of his birth.In the grounds of a mental health hospital my sister, Philippa Day, looked at me with tear-filled eyes and told me that the Department for Work and Pensions (DWP)’s actions would kill her, and that when they did she wanted me to advocate for her so that it would never happen again. I looked at her gravely and made a solemn promise that if anyone took her from me I would do exactly that. Philippa had emotionally unstable personality disorder, agoraphobia, anxiety, depression and type 1 diabetes. In November 2018 Philippa was advised by her community psychiatric nurse (CPN) that she may have been entitled to more benefits than she was receiving and was asked to consider applying for personal independence payments (Pip). I accompanied Philippa to an organisation called Framework in Nottingham to receive advice around applying for Pip and to start the application. Philippa completed the application with the assistance of her mental health and diabetic teams and posted the form herself, feeling a great sense of achievement that she had walked to the postbox unaccompanied. In March 2019, Philippa discovered that her disability benefits had been stopped in January that year and she was only receiving the standard allowance – at this time about £60 a week. What transpired after was a downward spiral hastened by poverty and the difficulty of having her benefits reinstated. Despite numerous phone calls from both professionals and Philippa, there continued to be mistakes in the handling of her claim. Philippa called the DWP herself, sobbing while discussing her issues – recordings of these calls were included as evidence in our claim. She informed them that she was “starving and cold” and that she “literally needed a reason to live”. When she ended the call, my sister still said thank you. Notably, in July-August 2019 my sister received a letter instructing her to attend an assessment in the next city in the early morning. Her CPN appealed against this decision, highlighting that Philippa would not be able to engage in a face-to-face assessment outside her home due to her agoraphobia and complex mental health issues and that to do so would place her at significant risk of harm. Her community mental health team and her family worked tirelessly to mitigate the effects of this trip, however we were unsuccessful and in the early hours of 8 August 2019 my sister took an overdose that she would not survive. In the following pre-inquest reviews and the inquest itself, we continued to suffer from the cold and unyielding walls of the DWP and Capita, the private firm that carries out some benefits assessments. In a pre-inquest review it had been heavily implied by a Capita lawyer that I had written my sister’s suicide note, which directly implicates the DWP, for political gain. This was easily disproven with time stamps, however the outrage I felt remained. In the inquest itself, my mother, who had not been called to give evidence, felt the need to submit an oral statement detailing that she loved her daughter. My sister’s CPN, who was highly commended by the coroner for her work, gave evidence for two days on the medical interventions offered to Philippa and the impact that having her disability benefits removed had on her mental state. In a rare move, on the last day of the inquest the coroner, Gordon Clow, chose to read his conclusions in full. Hour after hour we listened to how 28 individual mistakes made by both the DWP and Capita led to Philippa’s death. In Clow’s conclusion, he states “the failure to administer the claim in such a way to avoid exacerbating Philippa Day’s pre-existing mental health problems was the predominant factor” in my sister taking an overdose. We are the first family to have received compensation regarding a benefit-related death, but we are not the only family that has suffered. Organisations and individuals are trying to hold politicians to account over these failures. I recently took part in Rethink’s campaign Stop Benefit Deaths, where individuals are invited to email the secretary of state urging them to meet with bereaved families, and calling for a public inquiry. In my campaigning against benefit deaths, I have had the privilege to meet others who lost their loved ones in similar circumstances. This included meeting at the Museum of Austerity, a VR piece that recently premiered at the London film festival featuring holograms of 10 people who lost their lives, with their stories told by family members. There was the power of shared experience in that room as we were led family by family to experience the piece alone. While going through the processes of applying for disability benefits, which could be described as arduous, disabled people feel alone and scared that the lifeline of their payments will be removed. My sister’s case and others like it have highlighted longstanding and systemic issues with the benefits system in the UK and have further damaged the public’s confidence in the DWP. This can only be rectified by a public inquiry, meaningful change and transparency about how benefits applications affect disabled people. Imogen Day is a mental health campaigner In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.orgThe proportion of children’s books featuring a minority ethnic character has almost quadrupled in the last four years, according to a new survey – but researchers say “we are not yet at the point where children of colour have the same experience of literature as their white peers”. The annual Reflecting Realities Survey from the Centre for Literacy in Primary Education (CLPE), which monitors the diversity of the UK’s children’s books, launched in 2018, when it found that just 4% of the children’s books published the previous year featured a black or minority ethnic character – and just 1% had a minority ethnic main character. Described as “stark and shocking” at the time, the proportions have increased in each year since, to 7% in 2018 and 10% in 2019, and - with 5,875 children’s picture books, fiction and non-fiction titles published in the UK in 2020 – to 15% in 2020, with 8% of titles featuring a minority ethnic main character. According to the latest official data, 33.9% of children of primary school age in England are from an ethnic minority background. “We know how long it takes to turn things around in the book industry. From idea to publication is quite a long process, so we weren’t really anticipating in the early phases of doing this work that we would get an upward trend every single year,” said the report’s author, Farrah Serroukh. “It’s a pleasant surprise.” The increase has been particularly significant for picture books and children’s non-fiction, with 48% of picture books now featuring a character of colour, compared with 6% in the 2017 output, and 34% of non-fiction titles. Fiction, however, remained static in 2020, with 7% of titles featuring characters of colour, the same as the previous year. “Of the three categories, it’s probably the hardest to do well,” said Serroukh. “It’s really hard to write a character of colour quickly. You can’t go from the intention of a character being white to shifting that character to being of a different background without doing the labour that’s necessary. There are no quick fixes. So you have to, from the outset, have had the intention to write the character of colour. And if that wasn’t the intention, you can’t really turn it around and change it to be something that it wasn’t originally.” Picture books, on the other hand, can “give the impression of presence quite easily by changing the palette”, said Serroukh, and “we have certainly seen a lot of that happening”. While the report praised picture books such as Pete Oswald’s Hike and Gaia Cornwall’s Jabari Tries, it notes that often the higher presence of characters of colour in illustrations didn’t “always carry through into the detail of the text itself”, and “there were also instances of ambiguity and fluidity in portrayals of ethnicity in illustrations”. Novels such as Catherine Johnson’s To Liberty! The Adventures of Thomas-Alexandre Dumas, illustrated by Rachel Sanson, and AM Dassu’s Boy, Everywhere were also praised as “captivating”, while You Must Be Layla by Yassmin Abdel-Magied was noted for its “nuanced portrayals” of demographic groups that have traditionally rarely featured as central characters. The report also highlighted the fact that in 2020, 90% of the main cast of characters of colour in children’s books influenced the narrative “in their expression of thought, voice or action”, compared with just 38% in the first year of the survey. “This is a positive indicator of the agency afforded to characters of colour,” the report said. “[It] indicates to us that significant editorial decisions are being made to ensure that characters of colour are given agency and voice.” But it criticised the “many” novels which fell short in this area, either because the ethnic minority presence “was too insignificant to reasonably be recognised as a meaningful reflection of realities”, or because the portrayal was “insufficiently or poorly developed”. The study compares the fact that 33.9% of children of primary school age in England are from a minority ethnic background, with the 8% of children’s books that have a minority ethnic main character. “There is still some way to go before UK children’s books more accurately reflect the reality of the school population, but the speed of change serves to reinforce the benefit and tangible impact of the survey and a wide range of other initiatives across the publishing, charity and literature sectors,” it said. “Every year we say this work is not just about the numbers, and we say it again this year. We can see that across the industry there are real and concerted efforts to change the quality of pictures, descriptions and stories of people from racialised minorities,” said CLPE chief executive Louise Johns-Shepherd. “We welcome these changes but we are not yet at the point where children of colour have the same experience of literature as their white peers.”Uneven vaccine coverage and a relaxation of preventive measures have brought Europe to a “critical point” in the pandemic, the World Health Organization has said, with cases again at near-record levels and 500,000 more deaths forecast by February. Hans Kluge, the WHO’s Europe director, said all 53 countries in the region were facing “a real threat of Covid-19 resurgence or already fighting it” and urged governments to reimpose or continue with social and public health measures. “We are, once again, at the epicentre,” he said. “With a widespread resurgence of the virus, I am asking every health authority to carefully reconsider easing or lifting measures at this moment.” He said that even in countries with high vaccination rates, immunisation could only do so much. “The message has always been: do it all,” Kluge said. “Vaccines are doing what was promised: preventing severe forms of the disease and especially mortality … But they are our most powerful asset only if used alongside public health and social measures.” Catherine Smallwood, WHO Europe’s senior emergency officer, said countries that had mostly lifted preventive measures had experienced a surge in infections. Vaccinations meant they had not seen “the same rates of hospitalisation or mortality we would have otherwise expected”, she said. “However, the more cases you have in crude terms, the more people will end up in hospital, and the more people will in the end go on to die. So there’s a very simple explanation for what’s going on. “We have many susceptible individuals, including in high-vaccinated countries, and this is leading to unpredictable explosive outbreaks of Covid-19. And that’s not where we want to be right now.” Germany reported a record-high number of Covid-19 cases on Thursday, with 33,949 infections in the past 24 hours compared to a previous high of 33,777 new cases in December 2020. The federal health minister, Jens Spahn, is to meet state health ministers to discuss how to limit the virus’s spread before the winter. Bulgaria and Romania, the two eastern EU countries with the bloc’s lowest vaccination rates – 25.5% and 37.2% of adults respectively – this week reported their highest daily Covid-19 death tolls since the beginning of the pandemic. Among the countries with the highest numbers of new daily infections, Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia are facing critical overloads on their health care systems and tightening measures, with Latvia imposing a nightly curfew, barring all public and most private gatherings, and limiting shopping to all but essential goods. Estonia closed all public events and gatherings to non-vaccinated people and required those who have had both jabs to wear masks indoors, while several Russian regions said they could impose additional restrictions to fight a rise in cases that has already prompted Moscow to reimpose a partial lockdown nationwide. Facing a dramatic increase in infections, the Dutch government will reintroduce tougher social restrictions from 6 November, making mask-wearing obligatory in public spaces such as shops and Covid passes mandatory for museums and other public spaces. The move follows neighbouring Belgium’s decision to tighten its restrictions from Monday after case numbers hit their highest level in a year, reimposing mask-wearing indoors and encouraging people to work remotely. Kluge said case numbers in Europe and central Asia had risen by 6% in a week, and deaths by 12%, with new daily infections surging by 55% over the past month. Europe and central Asia combined now accounted for 59% of all confirmed cases globally and nearly half of all deaths. Insufficient vaccination coverage and the relaxation of public health and social measures were to blame, he said. With a billion doses now administered in Europe and central Asia, vaccines were saving “thousands upon thousands” of lives. But while 70% of people in some countries are fully vaccinated, barely 10% are in others. “Where vaccine uptake is low, in many countries in the Baltics, central and eastern Europe and the Balkans, hospital admission rates are high,” he said. Kluge said the most alarming development was the rapid increase in infections and deaths in older population groups, with hospital admission rates more than doubling in a week and 75% of fatal cases now occurring in people aged 65 years and over. “If we stay on this trajectory, we could see another half a million Covid-19 deaths in Europe and central Asia by the first of February next year, and 43 countries in our region will face high to extreme stress on hospital beds,” he said. Authorities must accelerate vaccine rollouts, including booster shots for at-risk groups, he said: “Most people hospitalised and dying from Covid-19 today are not fully vaccinated.” But public health measures such as test and trace, and social measures such as mask-wearing and distancing, were equally vital, he said, adding that WHO estimates suggested that 95% universal mask use in Europe and central Asia “could save up to 188,000 of the half a million lives we may lose” before February. When applied “correctly and consistently”, preventive measures “allow us to go on with our lives, not the opposite”, Kluge said. “Preventive measures do not deprive people of their freedom, they ensure it.” Covid passes showing proof of vaccination should be viewed as “a collective tool towards individual liberty”.Ethiopia’s government has forged an alliance with Turkey amid reports that it wants to deploy armed Turkish drones in its bitter war against forces from the Tigray region. Abiy Ahmed, Ethiopia’s prime minister, signed a military cooperation agreement on a visit to Ankara in August with Turkey’s president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan. The details of the agreement have not been published, but officials told Reuters in October that Ethiopia had requested Turkey’s Bayraktar TB2 drones, considered to be the most effective munitions of their type in the world. Abiy’s trip came two months after Ethiopian forces had been expelled from Tigray’s capital, Mekelle, and before an October air and ground counter-offensive, which appears to have been rapidly pushed back. Alex de Waal, the director of the World Peace Foundation at Tufts University, said: “The fighting is already at an intense scale and ferocity, with perhaps 100,000 soldiers already dead on the Ethiopian side. Five million civilians are in need of food aid as a result of the conflict, and yet [Ethiopia] is still shopping for drones and other arms.” TB2 drones have become sought-after across Africa, Asia and parts of Europe after the remotely piloted craft were deemed to have tipped the balance in favour of Azerbaijan in its war with Armenia last autumn over the disputed enclave of Nagorno-Karabakh. Ethiopia’s government is already believed to have deployed drones made in Iran and China. But neither are considered as effective as Turkey’s TB2s, made by Baykar Makina, a company whose chief technology officer, Selçuk Bayraktar, is married to Erdoğan’s younger daughter. Neither government has publicly commented on the sale of drones but there is already evidence to suggest Turkish munitions are in use: a fragment of a Turkish-made laser-guided bomb found by Tigrayan forces was passed to a journalist and analyst, Martin Plaut, early last month. It cannot be conclusively determined from where it was fired, but western experts say the missile from which the fragment came can be used by TB2 drones. TB2 drones were initially used by Ankara against Kurdish separatists inside its own country and neighbouring Syria and Iraq. Since then they have also been deployed on behalf of the internationally recognised Libyan government in Tripoli to stave off an offensive by the eastern-based commander Khalifa Haftar. They cost about $1m to $2m a time – a tenth or less of the price of the higher specification US Protector drone, which Washington has only been willing to sell to a handful of countries. An increasingly assertive Ankara has rapidly stepped up exports, and last week Kyrgyzstan became the latest country to put in an order. The rapid spread of Turkey’s drone technology, and the authoritarian nature of some of the buyers, alarms some commentators. “What we are seeing is the consequences of the international community not wanting to deal with drone proliferation,” said Chris Coles, from Drone Wars, a UK-based NGO. “Drones are heating up conflicts in the region because pilotless munitions lower the threshold for war. A country might be condemned for supplying boots on the ground to intervene in a conflict, but there is far less complaint if instead they are supplying drones.” Thousands – possibly as many as 30,000, according to De Waal – of young, poorly trained and poorly armed Ethiopian soldiers are believed to have been killed since the start of the government’s October offensive. Mekelle has been targeted with a series of government airstrikes in recent days, with civilians often the victims. Six people, three of them children, were killed in a strike last week, according to reports from the ground, and at least 27 others were wounded. Accurate information about the conflict and its impact is hard to obtain, partly because very few journalists and humanitarian agencies are operating on the ground. Tigray remains subject to a blockade, with the UN complaining in August that only 10% of aid supplies were able to get through. On Wednesday the most comprehensive report yet into the conflict, a joint investigation by the UN and the country’s human rights commission, concluded that all sides in the conflict may have committed war crimes and other crimes against humanity.McDonald’s chief executive, Chris Kempczinski, has sparked outrage after the emergence of a text exchange with the Chicago mayor, Lori Lightfoot, in which he appears to blame two Chicago parents whose children were fatally shot. In the newly publicized texts between Kempczinski and Lightfoot from April, Kempczinski blamed the parents of 13-year-old Adam Toledo and seven-year-old Jaslyn Adams for their deaths. Adams died in a shooting at a McDonald’s drive-thru one day before the text exchange. Toledo had been killed by a Chicago police officer weeks prior, with video later coming out showing that the child had his hands in the air. “With both, the parents failed those kids which I know is something you can’t say. Even harder to fix,” wrote Kempczinski in a text to Lightfoot. Lightfoot texted back, “Thanks, Chris. Great to see you in person. Such a great work space, and your folks were terrific. I said to Joe I would be happy to reach out to the operator to offer support. He and his team members have got to be traumatized. Terrible tragedy. Thanks again, Chris.” The texts were obtained via a Freedom of Information Act request. Images of the correspondence were also posted in a Twitter thread about McDonald’s workers striking across the country. About 30 protesters who gathered on Wednesday outside McDonald’s headquarters in Illinois for a demonstration organized by a dozen organizations including the Chicago Fight for $15 and a union condemned Kempczinski’s comments, according to the Chicago Tribune. Children were also present, with boxes looking similar to a McDonald’s Happy Meal reading “McGarbage” and “Evil” as well as a banner asking Kempczinski to “take care of your workers so they can take care of us”. Organizers also sent Kempczinski an open letter critiquing his comments and requesting that he meet with protesters within seven days. “The CEO doesn’t understand or know our struggle. He’s blaming parents for violence on the streets and that’s not fair,” Adriana Sanchez, a McDonald’s employee from the Back of the Yards neighborhood in Chicago’s south-west side, told the Tribune. “These corporations exploit our communities and then dehumanize our families … Enough of the exploitation, enough of the ignorant racist comments.” In a message to McDonald’s corporate employees on Tuesday, Kempczinski said he reflected on his comments and expressed remorse. “When I wrote this, I was thinking through my lens as a parent and reacted viscerally. But I have not walked in the shoes of Adam’s or Jaslyn’s family and so many others who are facing a very different reality,” said Kempczinski. “Not taking the time to think about this from their viewpoint was wrong, and lacked the empathy and compassion I feel for these families. This is a lesson that I will carry with me.”In her Oscar-winning turn in last year’s Minari, Youn Yuh-jung played the mischievous granny you wished you’d had: the one who ignores your fun-sucking parents, takes you on wild adventures and teaches you to do your own thing. “You’re not a real grandma,” her Americanised grandson tells her. “They bake cookies! They don’t swear! They don’t wear men’s underwear!” In real life, Youn is pretty similar: lively, funny, unpretentious, and, she admits, not all that good at cooking. The 74-year-old actor has had an unconventional life and career, and most of us in the west know only a tiny fraction of it. “My problem is, I don’t plan anything!” Youn laughs over Zoom from Los Angeles. Unlike her character in Minari, she speaks fluent English, although she apologises for it not being good enough. Youn did not even plan on being an actor. “It was an accident,” she says. As a literature student in Seoul in the late 1960s, she visited a television studio where they were filming a children’s show. A presenter on the show asked her to stand beside him and receive a present from the audience. “So I did, and then they gave me a big cheque.” She was invited back the following week to do an audition, which she passed. Within a couple of months she had the lead role in the children’s programme. Did she enjoy the experience? “Honestly, I enjoyed the cheque.” Her career path from there was not entirely accidental. She became a rising star thanks to her TV portrayal of Jang Hui-bin, a 17th-century royal concubine. That led to offers from movie studios, but she turned most of them down. “Usually it was, like: ‘Poor girl meets rich boy and then the family denies her and they cannot get married.’ It’s all the same story. To me it was very boring.” Then along came Kim Ki-young, to whom Youn dedicated her best supporting actor Oscar (after flirting with Brad Pitt). The film was 1971’s Woman of Fire, a melodrama that’s extreme even by today’s standards. Youn plays a rural peasant working as a maid for a well-to-do composer and his pregnant wife. Before long she is having an affair with the weak-willed maestro, and also becomes pregnant. All hell breaks loose: the story takes in adultery, rape, abortion, murder, suicide and even rat-stomping. But Woman of Fire also highlights Korea’s class divides and patriarchal traditions. Kim was the great provocateur of Korean cinema, who has been compared with Luis Buñuel, Samuel Fuller, Nagisa Oshima and Roger Corman. His work tended towards the erotic, the lurid and the horrific, but often with a sociological bite. Woman of Fire was a remake of Kim’s landmark 1960 film The Housemaid, an influence on the work of modern auteurs such as Park Chan-wook and Bong Joon-ho (Parasite is essentially a variation on the same theme: lower-class interlopers upsetting privileged domesticity). Kim would remake The Housemaid again in 1982, after reworking similar themes in his equally bizarre 1972 film Insect Woman, in which Youn again plays the femme fatale. This time she’s a schoolgirl forced to become mistress to a wealthy man, but turns the situation to her own twisted ends. Uninhibited, passionate and forthright, Youn came to embody a new type of independent Korean woman. Korean society really was male-dominated at the time, not least the film industry. “I’m not the Korean beauty standard,” Youn laughs. “To be an actress you had to be pretty, very pretty. They didn’t care about acting. So to them I’m very strange-looking, and in a good way. Very modern. Not obedient to anybody.” Youn credits her liberal-minded mother for that. She and her two sisters were born in Kaesong, in what is now North Korea. The Korean war began in 1950, when she was two years old. She remembers being evacuated to the south, travelling in a freight train carriage with no seats. Her father died when she was nine. Her mother trained as a nurse and raised the children single-handedly. Youn would soon come to experience just how patriarchal Korea still was. In 1974 she married Jo Young-nam, a popular singer. “He was much more famous than me.” They moved to Florida, where Jo studied theology, and, as tradition dictated, abandoned her acting career to become a full-time mother, raising their two sons. In some ways, her American experience mirrored that of the family in Minari. “The church congregation was 2,000 people. Me and my husband were the only Asians.” She did not speak a word of English, but the community was welcoming and helpful, and she never experienced discrimination, she says. The marriage did not last, though, and the couple divorced in 1987 (in recent interviews Jo has said he regrets having cheated on Youn). Youn had little choice but to return to Korea and resume her acting career. “Somebody had to put food on the table,” she says. The couple’s divorce was a national scandal. (She no longer engages with the Korean media, she says. Even since her Oscar win she has done no interviews with them.) The stigma of being a divorced woman meant producers hesitated to give her work. She would get small roles here and there, where nobody would notice her. “I didn’t care about what kind of role. I didn’t have any choice. I just worked.” On camera as in life, though, Youn’s spirit seems to be irrepressible. The work steadily improved. In 2003 she began a fruitful partnership with Im Sang-soo, a film-maker very much in the Kim Ki-young vein. In A Good Lawyer’s Wife – an infidelity drama not dissimilar to The Ice Storm – she plays a grandmother who is having an affair with a younger man while her husband is dying. “I’m finally having an orgasm,” she tells her gobsmacked son. She has worked with Im three more times, including on his own modern-day spin on The Housemaid, which was a huge domestic hit and played in competition at Cannes in 2010. This time, Youn played the wily senior maid who never misses a trick. Lee Jung-jae, star of Netflix’s Squid Game, plays the man of the house. Elsewhere, she has continued to gravitate to the less polite roles: in 2016’s The Bacchus Lady she was a elderly prostitute servicing Seoul’s lonely seniors (“Don’t call me granny. My vagina is still young!”). She’s not afraid to take these roles, she says. “It’s not my life but it’s somebody’s life.” In recent years, Youn has developed a new career as a reality TV star. Most young Koreans would recognise her today from her hit show Youn’s Kitchen. The idea is genius: taking advantage of famous Koreans’ relative anonymity abroad, a bunch of celebrities run a pop-up Korean restaurant in foreign locations. Thus, unsuspecting punters in Spain might be served by Parasite actor Park Seo-joon (who has 20 million Instagram followers) or Train to Busan star Jung Yu-mi. Meanwhile, chef Youn is toiling away back in the kitchen. “Oh I was very tired,” she laughs. “My legs were swollen and I complained, ‘This is harassment of elderly people!’” Initially she refused to do it: “I don’t cook! If my maid is not coming to the house that day, I will just go hungry. But [producer Na Young-seok] kept coming to my house and trying to convince me.” Eventually she gave in, and the show has been a smash hit. In one episode, a guest invites Youn to come and cook at his hotel in Switzerland. The show might not run much longer: the anonymity of Korean stars is fading by the day. Korean culture is now a global force, in cinema, in pop music and in television. Youn hasn’t watched Squid Game yet, she says. “I’m here in LA. If I start watching it, I’m afraid I won’t be able to stop, so I’ll wait till I get home.” Does she have an explanation for why there’s so much great cinema coming out of the country these days? “There has always been great cinema in Korea,” she says. “But it’s only now the rest of the world is paying attention.” She says when she met film-maker Park Chan-wook after the Oscars, “he said, ‘I’m wondering, why did you get the award? Because you can act that in your sleep. It’s nothing special to you.’ He meant, I think, nobody saw me while I was acting in Korea.” Youn now has work on both sides of the Pacific. Just before the Oscar nominations she shot Pachinko, a miniseries for Apple TV adapted from the bestselling Korean-Japanese-American immigrant tale. She gets offers from the US, but “nothing suitable”, though she would love to do another movie with Minari director Lee Isaac Chung. She’s always up for something new. “I like adventure. I’m either very brave or very ignorant. But when you know everything you cannot do anything.” • Special Focus: Youn Yuh-jung starts on 5 November at the London Korean film festival.After 15 successful years in Liverpool and six in Oslo, Vasily Petrenko’s appointment as the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra’s music director was something of a coup. There was immediate proof of this in the Russian conductor’s ambitious and generally excellent Festival Hall debut concert in his new role. There were also plenty of signs that, under this conductor, the RPO’s profile is likely to rise just at a time when the orchestra, and musicians generally, most sorely need it. Petrenko’s theme in this first season will be British music, and the series is being marketed by the RPO under the impeccably post-Brexit catchline of “Freedom, Hope, Adventure”, that is sure to get the new culture secretary’s approval. Future concerts will include major works by Holst, Vaughan Williams, Britten, Walton and Elgar, and it was the last two who provided the bookends of this programme. Walton’s Johannesburg Festival Overture was written in 1956 for – as Petrenko pointed out from the podium – an apartheid-era city. A work of sunny insouciance, it bowled along under Petrenko’s crisp direction. Stravinsky’s Petrushka, in the composer’s original and more fully scored 1911 version, followed. This extraordinary score provided a prime opportunity not just for orchestral principals to shine in solos – special mention for Emer McDonough’s flute – but to note Petrenko’s deceptively relaxed grip on dynamics, accents and phrasing. Elgar’s violin concerto is Petrushka’s exact contemporary, but it could scarcely inhabit a more different musical and aesthetic world – diffident, introspective and emotionally uncertain. With Petrenko rightly avoiding any temptation to linger, the Chinese violinist Ning Feng gave a rich-toned and muscular account. It may not have been in what one might call the English tradition, but the scope of the Elgar concerto can take it and there was real musical depth to the performance. As always, in its final bars, there was an overwhelming sense that soloist and orchestra were returning from a very distant place after a long journey. Ning Feng’s encore, Paganini’s variations on God Save the King, was absolutely dazzling.Trevor Noah Trevor Noah unpacked the closely watched governor’s race in Virginia, where voters elected a Republican, Glenn Youngkin, in a state Biden won by 10 points just a year prior. “That’s a huge swing, people,” said the Daily Show host on Wednesday evening. “That’s like a Kim Kardashian going from Kanye to Pete Davidson level swing.” The Virginia gubernatorial election, in which Youngkin beat incumbent Terry McAuliffe by over two points, could be a “bellwether of the things to come in the midterms next year”, Noah explained, “in the same way your girlfriend saying ‘that guy’s cute!’ is a bellwether that you’re going to be single soon”. Why did Democrats perform so poorly in Virginia? “It depends on who you ask,” said Noah before a series of pundit clips positing a variety of reasons, from dissatisfaction with progressive policy ideas to the weaponization of critical race theory to the absence of a single loathed figure in Trump. “It would be bad enough if Democrats had one reason they lost. But they have like 50,” he said. “I mean it’s Biden’s unpopularity, it’s worries about the economy, it’s the fact that the pandemic is still hanging around like the Tootsie Rolls three weeks after Halloween. “Democrats kept trying to fire up their base by making this race about Donald Trump, but here’s the thing: Trump wasn’t running,” he continued. “Honestly, Democrats, you should enjoy this break from Trump while you can! Because after he wins in 2024, and declares himself emperor, you’ll be running against him forever.” Stephen Colbert On the Late Show, Stephen Colbert also processed a “disappointing night” for Democrats, though the party is “used to being disappointed”, he added. “That’s why they’re changing their logo from the donkey to Eeyore. “Here’s the thing, and maybe I’m alone, but I’m not that upset,” he continued. “I’ve already endured the worst election in American history live on TV sitting over there drinking a cocktail of bourbon and my own tears. This one just seems like another election.” Virginia, he noted, has a long tradition of electing a governor in off-cycle elections from the opposite party of the president, as has been the case in 10 of the last 11 elections. People tend to vote when they are dissatisfied with the people in power, Colbert explained, since “voting is like democracy’s Yelp review. You never leave a comment when the soup was tasty, but if you bring me still water when I asked for sparkling, I will burn your bistro to the ground. Seth Meyers Virginia’s flip to the Republican governor is “just kinda how American public opinion works”, said Seth Meyers on Late Night. “It waffles back and forth like your mom deciding between chicken or fish at a restaurant. You know as soon as the waiter takes your order and walks away she’s gonna turn to the rest of the table and say, ‘I think I should’ve gotten the fish.’” But “while this is true that this has happened before, and that public opinion is cyclical, the Democrats know how badly they got their asses kicked last night,” he added. Meyers decried the blame game directed at progressive members of the party, such as a Politico reporter tweeting “Dem members are already texting me blaming progressives for ‘debacle’ in Virginia.” “I mean, are you insane?” Meyers said. “Progressives are the ones trying to pass a bill that actually follows through on Biden’s agenda and improves people’s lives. The Manchins and Sinemas of the world are the ones shitting on it and dragging it out so it’s longer and more painful than Terry McAuliffe dancing on stage.” Many individual Democratic policies such as paid family leave and drug pricing reform are popular, Meyers added, “but you actually need to pass them and give people a reason to vote for you. Because just saying ‘we’re not Trump!’ doesn’t work when Trump himself isn’t on the ballot. It’s like if Taco Bell’s slogan was ‘hey, at least we’re not Chipotle!’” Samantha Bee And on Full Frontal, Samantha Bee delved into the start of what is probably the most important supreme court term for abortion rights in at least three decades. This week, the court heard two fast-track cases against the Texas abortion law, which bans abortion after six weeks, makes no exception for rape or incest, and empowers private citizens to sue anyone who facilitates an abortion. “While we don’t yet have an official ruling, it appeared on Monday that the court might be leaning toward allowing lower courts to block the Texas law, and some of the leaners might surprise you,” Bee said. Two Trump appointees, Amy Coney Barrett and Brett Kavanaugh, questioned the structure of the Texas law to evade federal judicial review; Kavanaugh also theorized that the arguments put forth in Texas could be used to pass a law allowing private citizens to sue neighbors with guns in a left-leaning state. “So I guess he’s protecting abortion rights by protecting gun rights …?” said Bee. The court will also hear a case brought by the only remaining abortion clinic in Mississippi, which banned abortion after 15 weeks in 2018. “It can’t be overstated how significant this case is in the battle to protect abortion rights, particularly with a supreme court so conservative they make their statue of Lady Justice stand behind a statue of Mr Justice,” said Bee. “The decisions the supreme court is making will impact lives for generations,” she concluded. “We can’t give up hope and we cannot stop fighting because abortion is healthcare.”The family of the serial killer Stephen Port’s third victim deny confirming his handwriting was on a “suicide note” found on his body, an inquest has heard. The body of Daniel Whitworth, 21, a chef, was found in a Barking churchyard near Port’s flat, on a bedsheet and with a note in his hand, in September 2014. The note claimed Whitworth had killed himself after accidentally giving a fatal overdose of the “date rape drug” GHB to Gabriel Kovari, 22, whose body had been found in the same churchyard three weeks previously, jurors were told. DC Yinka Adeyemo-Phillips, of Barking police, had previously told jurors that Whitworth’s father, Adam Whitworth, confirmed the handwriting on the day after his son’s body was found, and she had passed this confirmation on to other officers. But, giving evidence at Barking town hall, Adam Whitworth said: “I definitely didn’t say it was [Daniel’s writing].” He had been emailed a scan containing just the final sentence of the note – which Port had faked. He, and Daniel’s stepmother, Amanda Whitworth, were unable to confirm the writing, and neither could Daniel’s partner, Ricky Waumsley, he told the hearing. Ten days after Daniel’s death, he was shown the full note. Asked about the handwriting then, he replied: “I wasn’t there as a handwriting expert. I saw this note for five or 10 minutes. “I was told it was a suicide note so I was desperate to see it. Checking the handwriting wasn’t a top priority.” Whitworth said he told police the letter was “odd”. There were no names of any family members, no special phrases or words used by Daniel. It was signed “Love always, Daniel PW,” a sign-off he never used. It stated he had not told his family he had gone out, which made no sense, as he did not live with his father and stepmother, jurors heard. Whitworth said the family liaison officer DC Paul Slaymaker reassured him that police would use handwriting experts to confirm the note was genuine. “That’s what he said was going to happen. I made him say it several times,” Whitworth said. But, at an inquest in June 2015 it emerged that, instead of handwriting experts, police had themselves checked Daniel’s supposed handwriting against a diary found at his home. The coroner at the first inquest, which recorded an open verdict, also remarked on the fact the bedsheet his body was wrapped in had not undergone forensic analysis. Police “brushed off” family concerns over possible foul play, explaining Daniel would have been in a strange state of mind at the time of writing the note, and that the family was “overthinking” it. “As far as they were concerned this was the end of it,” said Whitworth, Daniel’s stepmother said the family, and Waumsley, could not think of any time when he could have met Kovari, whom the note said he had hooked up with at a party and who died on 28 August 2014. “I couldn’t believe he had taken the life of somebody else accidentally and it hadn’t shown,” she said. “There wasn’t a sign of any distress,” she added, saying Daniel had been in a “pretty good place” and looking forward to starting a new job immediately before he died. She described the anger the family felt after trying to deal with his “suicide” for a year, then to be told he was murdered. “We went through all those channels of trying to deal with a suicide,” she said. On learning he had been murdered “the only little comfort we had was that he really wasn’t in that dark place. Now we have got to take ourselves from suicide to a murder. Nobody knows how that feels.” In evidence, Slaymaker denied promising Whitworth the note would be examined by handwriting experts, saying as far as he was aware the handwriting confirmation had been dealt with by Daniel’s father. “I was given no instructions to deal with handwriting samples or analysis,” he said. Slaymaker also rejected criticism levelled at him by the families of the victims. The mother of Anthony Walgate, 23, Sarah Sak, had told the jury she felt “dismissed”, “belittled” and “ignored” by him, while Adam Whitworth described feeling “brushed aside” and “pushed aside” by him. Slaymaker told jurors: “I don’t think I am that type of person.” He added he always tried his best “particularly with families who have lost loved ones”, and apologised if he had come across in that way. Asked by Henrietta Hill QC, for the victim’s families, if he should have linked the deaths of Walgate, Kovari and Whitworth, Slaymaker replied: “I wish I had linked them, I do.” He denied dismissing the families’ concerns. In 2016, Port, now aged 46, was found guilty of murdering Walgate, Kovari, Whitworth and the final victim Jack Taylor, 25, between June 2014 and September 2015. The inquests, expected to last 10 weeks, will examine the “competence and adequacy” of the police investigations, and whether later killings could have been prevented.Sainsbury’s has been forced to delay a toy promotion and has warned there would be lower stocks of electronic goods for Christmas as supply chain problems continue to challenge retailers. Simon Roberts, the chief executive of the group, said the annual toy sale at Sainsbury’s had been delayed by two weeks – until next week – because the goods had only just reached ports in the UK. He said there was likely to be fewer electronic products on sale in the run-up Christmas because of the global shortage of computer chips. Roberts said rising costs were building before the festive season but the supermarket would “do all we can to mitigate inflationary headwinds as far as possible” for shoppers. Roberts said: “Our industry faces labour and supply chain challenges. However our scale, advanced cost saving programme, logistics operations and strong supplier relationships put us in a good position as we head into Christmas.” Sainsbury’s said it had largely shrugged off the problems with supplies that have dogged the UK industry – ranging from congestion at ports and shortages of shipping containers to staffing problems in factories and on farms – in the first half of the year with a return to profit and rise in sales as families bought more petrol and clothing and continued to cook more meals at home. Total sales, including fuel, rose 6% in the six months to 18 September, including a 0.8% rise in groceries despite issues with importing foods caused by a mix of the Covid-19 pandemic and Brexit. Clothing sales rose by one-third and fuel sales were up almost 63% as families returned to school and workplaces after last year’s lockdowns. Online grocery sales continued to rise, despite the easing of restrictions – increasing 13%. The group returned to profit, making £541m before tax, after a £137m loss a year before, saying it had cut costs at the Argos chain, reduced the cost of Covid safety measures and improved grocery sales. Sales at Argos fell by just over 7% after a busy 2020 when families were stocking up with kit to entertain children during lockdowns or technology and desks for work from homeRoberts said the reported fall in sales at Argos was not due to supply chain issues but problems had worsened in the early autumn He added that Sainsbury’s had gained market share from rivals by cutting prices on some key items and bringing in more innovative products While customers are returning to many pre-pandemic shopping habits, Roberts said online sales remained “very strong”. Sainsbury’s said it expected sales growth to moderate as shoppers returned to offices and dined out at restaurants and cafes more often, adding that it was on track to hit annual profit expectations.The BBC has been forced to edit an article condemned as transphobic after a woman quoted in the piece described trans women as “vile, weak and disgusting” and it emerged she had previously been accused of sexual misconduct. Standing behind its decision to publish the piece online last week – headlined “We’re being pressured into sex by some trans women” – the BBC took the decision on Thursday to remove a contribution from a former porn actor, Lily Cade, “in light of comments” she made after its publication, after a week of sustained pressure and criticism. The BBC also said Cade’s admission of past “inappropriate behaviour … should have been included in the original article”. This week more than 20,000 people signed an open letter calling for the corporation to apologise for the article, but the BBC rejected the complaints and said it was committed to covering different viewpoints in the name of impartiality. Since the article’s publication Cade, who was quoted in the original story, published violently transphobic remarks on her website – which has been down since Wednesday – appearing to call for the “lynching” of high-profile trans women. In a statement to the Guardian, Cade said she had only attacked “personas”, not people, and said Lily Cade was also a persona. An update added to the BBC article on Thursday reads: “We have updated this article, published last week, to remove a contribution from one individual in light of comments she has published on blog posts in recent days, which we have been able to verify. “We acknowledge that an admission of inappropriate behaviour by the same contributor should have been included in the original article.” The article was published from the BBC’s Nottingham office. Despite pushback from some members of staff in the BBC’s London headquarters, the regional office has its own editorial structure and ability to publish on the main BBC website. One BBC source said on Monday that the broadcaster had received 4,819 complaints about the article – which had been a subject of debate within the organisation for some time – but a further 5,520 people wrote in to note their approval of the piece. On Wednesday Chelsea Poe, a trans porn performer, said she had told the BBC journalist behind the article that Cade had been accused of sexual misconduct and was no longer working in the porn industry, but said she had not been quoted in the piece. A source at the BBC said the journalist behind the story had spoken to Poe but an editorial judgment was made not to quote her because the general conversation was deemed not relevant to the piece. On Monday the BBC said it stood by the article about the experience of some lesbians, adding it had been subject to a rigorous editing process and that it met its editorial guidelines, but by Wednesday executives were understood to be looking into issues raised since then, with the decision to edit the piece taken on Thursday. A spokesperson for the BBC said the article was “an important piece of journalism that raises issues that should be discussed”. Critics of the 4,000-word article focused on its use of a self-selecting survey of 80 people produced by a small campaign group that has said trans activism within the LGBTQ+ movement is erasing lesbians. The corporation argued that the lack of data on whether lesbians are being pressured to have sex with trans women justified the caveated inclusion of the group’s survey, which was one part of a longer piece. The article stated that several “high-profile trans women who have either written or spoken about sex and relationships” did not want to be included in the piece, but said it had reflected a range of views, including those given by trans women on YouTube. But further controversy emerged on Wednesday after Poe published a podcast in which she said she had been interviewed by the BBC journalist behind the article at the start of 2021. She said she told the journalist that Cade was no longer working in the industry “due to consent issues”, but her interview had not been used in the published article. The Guardian approached Poe for comment but she had not responded prior to publication. Cade acknowledged allegations made against her and apologised in 2017, in comments published on the website of the porn blogger trpwl. In an email to the Guardian she claimed that while sex without explicit verbal consent was common in the porn community, she thought the encounters had been consensual and had stopped working after they were made. Lui Asquith, the director of legal and policy for Mermaids, said the BBC article had caused distress in the trans community, and that the charity questioned its impartiality. “This article contributes to the irrational fearmongering aimed at trans women, who have been relentlessly and systematically targeted by the media in recent years. We should all expect better of our national broadcaster,” Asquith said.The last time 21-year-old Agnes Wanjiru was seen alive in public, she was leaving a hotel bar with two soldiers. Her body was found by a hotel worker two months later, stuffed into a nearby septic tank, naked but for her bra. The mother of a five-month-old baby, Agnes was a hairdresser who turned to sex work to support herself and her daughter, and had gone to the hotel expecting it to be full of partying British soldiers. An inquest later concluded that one or more of them must have killed her. According to the Sunday Times, which has been doggedly investigating this tragedy for weeks, a man identifiable only as Soldier X has been separately named by at least four colleagues as the culprit; he is said to have confessed that night to killing a woman, leading appalled fellow soldiers to her body. One of them claims to have reported Soldier X to senior officers but not been taken seriously. Grotesquely, what happened that night was such an open secret that soldiers reportedly joked about it on Facebook, with nudge-nudge references to septic tanks and “ghosts”. The rumour in the regiment was that Agnes had been accidentally choked to death in a sex game, but that story does not explain the stab wound found on her body. If a woman was allegedly killed by a soldier in a British garrison town today, hopefully no effort would be spared to uncover the truth. But Agnes didn’t die in Colchester or Catterick. She was Kenyan, and she died in March 2012 near her home in Nanyuki, where the British army has long had a training base; a poor black woman in a faraway country whose death could apparently be brushed all too easily under the carpet. Her sister Rose said that “if Agnes had killed a white man, by now I wouldn’t even know where she is jailed. But whoever killed her went free and is living his life”. In Nanyuki, complaints about the behaviour of British soldiers are reportedly prone to fall on mysteriously deaf ears. Kenya’s government relies on British military assistance in the fight against the Islamist terror group al-Shabaab, giving it a clear incentive not to embarrass its ally. Only after several weeks of Agnes’s face on British front pages did her family secure a promise that the Kenyan police investigation into her death would be reopened, and the killer hopefully brought to trial. Could her death become a broader tipping point for one of the few male-dominated institutions yet to face a reckoning over sexual violence? This week, Ministry of Defence sources briefed that army top brass would face a dressing down over “conduct and culture”, with the defence secretary, Ben Wallace, reported to be keen to “drive out unacceptable behaviour at all levels, particularly with respect to the treatment of women”. Wallace, a former captain in the Scots Guards, is said to have been alarmed by a series of scandals including Agnes’s death but also the suicide of a female cadet at Sandhurst, Olivia Perks, who was also only 21. An inquest next year is expected to examine claims that she had spent the night with a senior officer and was afraid of being disciplined. But these cases may be only the tip of the proverbial iceberg. The Tory MP Sarah Atherton, herself a former soldier in the Intelligence Corps, led a remarkable investigation earlier this year into the experiences of servicewomen and female veterans, for which the Ministry of Defence waived rules forbidding serving soldiers testifying to such inquiries. Atherton’s committee uncovered harrowing accounts of gang-rape, sexual assault, groping and exploitation. One servicewoman told MPs she found living in mess accommodation more dangerous than being deployed overseas. Others recalled contests to “bag the woman” on camp or aboard ships, and senior officers brushing complaints under the carpet to protect their own reputations. If this is what rogue soldiers do to their own female colleagues, how might they treat civilian women – often desperate or vulnerable – who they encounter on operations far from home? In the wake of Sarah Everard’s rape and murder at the hands of a police officer, some officers talked of a policing culture where predatory men went unchecked because female colleagues who complained were at best ostracised, and at worst afraid of nobody coming to their rescue if they were attacked on duty. Now imagine being a female soldier, knowing that in combat your life depends on your unit having your back, agonising over whether to report sexual harassment by one of them. The very phrase “closing ranks” comes from a battlefield tactic, and even today, military capability depends on units becoming so close-knit that soldiers are willing to die for each other. But if the culture that may have shielded Agnes Wanjiru’s killer is to change, the armed forces must make it safe for them to expose rogues in their midst. Memories will have faded over the nine years since Agnes’s death, but surely not enough to make a fair trial impossible. There is no excuse now for not granting her family the justice they have long been denied. But almost as important is an explanation of why it was denied; who knew what really happened that night in Nanyuki, how it was covered up, and what the Ministry of Defence will do to ensure such a thing never happens again. Gaby Hinsliff is a Guardian columnistDetectives are investigating after two artworks, commissioned in response to a series of homophobic and transphobic attacks in Liverpool, were destroyed. Merseyside police said they are treating the incidents as hate crime. The artworks were vandalised within days of going on display as part of Homotopia festival’s Queer the City outdoor exhibition. The incident, caught on CCTV, involved several individuals ripping down a poster reading Queer With no Fear at 4am on Wednesday, according to Homotopia’s director, Char Binns. The work, by the artist Ben Youdan, had been displayed in the window of Fact, a cinema and cultural centre. “It was found by a member of staff from Fact scrunched up in a ball at the Bombed Out church later that morning,” Binns said. A similar incident occurred on 29 October, when a piece entitled Hate Has No Place in Liverpool was ripped from a wall in the city centre. The artist Rosa Kusabbi described her illustration as a “joyous celebration of all things LGBTQIA and Liverpool”, including a banner reading Here and Queer. Binns said she was “absolutely gutted” by the incidents. “It’s very hard not to take it personally. We can’t say definitively what the motive was behind these artworks being removed, but we already operate as queer people in this climate of fear and this work was created in response to hate crime in our city. So regardless of the motive, it still makes us feel afraid and attacked.” Hundreds of people protested in Liverpool in June after a series of violent attacks. In one incident, a gay couple and their friends were threatened at knifepoint and beaten up by a group who shouted homophobic abuse. Youdan’s artwork, funded by Liverpool council’s culture department in response to the attacks, was intended as “something positive coming out of something very negative”, said Binns. She said the incident had left the team behind Homotopia, the UK’s longest-running LGBTQI arts and culture festival, feeling frustrated. “We want to be visible as a community. Homotopia is all about being out and proud and loud and fabulous. But if that makes us vulnerable, how do you do that? How can you be both visible and safe?” she said. Binns vowed that the artworks would be reinstated. “The bigger picture is that we are in the middle of this joyful festival where we have deliberately commissioned joyful queer art because we all need a break. We will reinstate this art. It will be bigger, it will be queerer. This is not going to stop us.” Harry Doyle, Liverpool city council’s culture lead, tweeted: “I’m absolutely disgusted that this bigotry is playing out on our streets … Hate has no place in Liverpool!!” Charlotte Irlam, inspector for community policing in Liverpool city centre, said: “We became aware of two artworks being vandalised in Liverpool city centre and can confirm both incidents are being investigated for criminal damage, and we are treating it as a hate crime. “We are checking CCTV footage and will be inspecting the other artwork around the city which has been installed as part of the outdoor exhibition. We are also engaging with the LGBTQ+ community to reassure them that we are taking this incident seriously and we will take action against those responsible. “Liverpool has a reputation for being a welcoming, friendly city and there is no place here for hate crime.”THE GREAT AND THE NOT SO GOOD The Fiver has been around for quite a while now. Our quick back-of-a-fag-packet calculations – 52 weeks times five days times say … eh, let’s say 20 years, minus, erm, 300 days to account for bank holidays, illness, roaring hangovers, fake family bereavements to get The Man off our back and the like – has us at 4,900 editions and counting. So we know a thing or two about longevity. Admittedly there may be a flaw in our methodology – we can’t remember a single thing about the period between 2002 and 2007, for example, or 2008 to 2019 – but you get the general gist. We’ve been around. We’ve seen some stuff. Happy 4,901st edition to us! So we can fully appreciate the stellar achievement of David Moyes, who is becoming the latest member of the League Managers’ Association’s 1,000 Club. It’s certainly an elite and prestigious roster of top talent, and when the former Preston, Everton, Manchester United, Real Sociedad and Sunderland manager takes charge of West Ham against Genk in Big Vase, he’ll become the 18th of the 35 names on the list to have never won a single major trophy in their entire puff. Well done, David! Well done, everyone! But only a bitter cynic would argue that the 1,000 Club – whose membership includes Steve Bruce (10 clubs), Dave Bassett (nine), Lennie Lawrence (12), Brian Horton (nine), ‘Arry Redknapp (seven), Sam Allardyce (10) and Neil Warnock (15), and whose rules stipulate no matches before the professionalisation of the WSL three years ago can count – betrays any Jobs For The Boys mentality. It still takes admirable guts, drive and determination to have the brass neck to keep ploughing a barren furrow for years on end, something The Fiver also keeps telling itself. “I am going to keep throwing some punches,” promises Moyes, who to be fair could feasibly win that elusive pot with the Hammers this season, and in doing so, haul that 1,000 Club failure rate back under 50%. LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE! Join Barry Glendenning and Scott from 5.45pm GMT for hot Big Vase clockwatch coverage. QUOTE OF THE DAY “If you’re asking me if I sleep well, yes, I sleep well. I still play well at golf. My wife is still talking to me so, if that answers your question, then yeah, I feel fine” – pressure, what pressure, for Aston Villa boss Dean Smith after four straight defeats. FIVER LETTERS “I find myself much bemused that, after a 20-year exodus, I seem to have re-subscribed to The Fiver. When I last read your nonsensical, untimely emails (often hitting my inbox at 6pm on a Friday), I was but a 30-year-old living in Upton Park. Now I’m in Newcastle, NSW, certainly none the wiser as I appear to have returned to the fold. Are any of your readers still around from 20 years ago? And do I now possess the Fiver World Record for longest absence?” – Neil Richardson. “Re: Neil Warnock (yesterday’s Fiver). Just wanted to send my congratulations to Colin, despite being a stalwart of those on the other half of the city (lifelong Owl here), and those past the viaduct in Rov’rum. He also used to be my nan’s chiropodist, and anyone who went near those feet deserves at least some success” – Joe Carr. “Re: Raymond Dyer’s analysis of the consistency of Brentford, currently sitting 12th with 12 points, 12 goals for and 12 against and his optimism that ‘long may it continue’ (yesterday’s Fiver letters). Well, I for one hope it dozen’t” – Mike Wrall. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’ the day is … Neil Richardson [brazen shamelessness left the station a long time ago and we need to keep our reader – Fiver Ed]. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS After repeatedly falling ill while away with the Elephants, Wilfried Zaha has asked to be left out of Ivory Coast’s latest squad and is considering his international future. 2019 throwbacks Ajax are through to the last 16 of Big Cup after doing the double over Dortmund with a 3-1 win. “If you want to go far as a team, you have to be critical,” tooted coach Erik ten Hag. “We were far too impatient and lost too much ball.” Joining them there will be Liverpool, following their comfortable 2-0 gubbing of a plot-losing Atlético Madrid. Manchester City were made to work hard by Club Brugge, but also handed out a beating, a 4-1 win taking them above PSG – held by Leipzig – and to the top of their Big Cup group. “I promise you, when you are Manchester City you realise nobody helps you,” parped Pep Guardiola. Apart from a sovereign state wealth fund, that is. Fulham are closing in on Bournemouth at the top of the Championship after a 7-0 clattering of Blackeye Rovers, their heaviest ever home defeat. “Generally, that is not the team you see when you support [us],” sighed Tony Mowbray. Arsenal partners Vivianne Miedema and Lisa Evans have joined the Common Goal movement, committing 1% of their salaries to supporting community organisations working with young people in situations of violence and conflict around the world. “The time for action is now,” said Miedema. And Gareth Southgate has announced his latest England squad, and though Marcus Rashford and Trent Alexander-Arnold are back, Jadon van de Sancho has been left out. Full squad: Johnstone (West Brom), Pickford (Everton), Ramsdale (Arsenal), Morris-Dancing Fiver (Fiver Towers); Alexander-Arnold (Liverpool), Chilwell (Chelsea), Coady (Wolves), James (Chelsea), Maguire (Manchester United), Mings (Aston Villa), Shaw (Manchester United), Stones (Manchester City), Walker (Manchester City); Bellingham (Borussia Dortmund), Henderson (Liverpool), Mount (Chelsea), Phillips (Leeds), Rice (West Ham), Ward-Prowse (Southampton); Abraham (Roma), Foden (Manchester City), Grealish (Manchester City), Kane (Tottenham), Rashford (Manchester United), Saka (Arsenal), Sterling (Manchester City). STILL WANT MORE? Trent Alexander-Arnold is good at football. Here’s Barney Ronay with more. No passing, no training … seven discs: join Max Rushden in a nostalgia bath, as he reflects on the joy of 90s gaming. David Moyes celebrates his 1,000 Club arrival in the grand style by getting his chat on with Jacob Steinberg. “We want to keep pushing, we want to keep breaking down barriers and keep that momentum going. We can’t sit still and that’s the message we want to send” – Arsenal’s Katie McCabe gets down to brass tacks with Suzy Wrack. In August 1984, Everton lost their first game of the season 4-1 to Spurs, a result every bit as shameful then as now. But they ended up as champions – Steven Pye explains how. There’s never a bad time to enjoy Emmanuel Adebayor’s revenge-goal against Arsenal, one of many pleasures awaiting you in this week’s Classic YouTube. And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! VOTE! VOTE! VOTE!Cancer experts are urging families to ensure their children get the HPV vaccine after it emerged that almost half of those eligible missed out last year because of the pandemic. A study published in The Lancet on Thursday confirmed that the jab was cutting cases of cervical cancer by 87%. The results were hailed as powerful further evidence that the vaccine has prevented, and will continue to prevent, thousands of young people from falling ill. The vaccine prevents infection from human papillomavirus, a group of viruses behind 90% of cervical cancer cases. It has been given to girls at the age of 12 and 13 in UK since 2008, and last year was made available to teenage boys for the first time. It also helps prevent cancers in men. However, a government report seen by the Guardian shows that Covid-19 “had a significant impact on the uptake of the HPV vaccination programme” in the last academic year. Thousands of children missed out on getting the vaccine. Schools were forced to close on 23 March 2020, which meant all school immunisation programmes were paused. Official figures show that only 54.4% of boys and 59.2% of girls in England got the HPV vaccine in 2019/20. That compared with a rate of 88.0% in girls in the previous academic year. Data for 2020/21 is due out in December, the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) said. Samantha Dixon, chief executive of Jo’s Cervical Cancer Trust, welcomed The Lancet study but added: “We must not get complacent and must work to ensure every child has the opportunity to access their vaccination, especially as Covid continues to affect programme delivery. “While uptake of the vaccine is relatively high, there are certain areas and communities where it is far lower. We’re living in a time of vaccine hesitancy and misinformation too so we must keep a really close eye on uptake to make sure confidence doesn’t fall.” In the most extensive proof yet that the HPV jab is saving lives, the Lancet study found cervical cancer rates in women offered the vaccine between the ages of 12 and 13 (now in their 20s) were 87% lower than in an unvaccinated population. “This research should provide compelling evidence of the success of the vaccine for teenagers and parents who are unsure about it,” said Dixon. In England girls and boys aged 12 to 13 years should be offered a first dose when they are in school year eight. The 2nd dose is offered six to 24 months after the first. The NHS says it is important to have both doses of the vaccine for proper protection. Schools are now trying to catch up after thousands of children missed out last year, but there have been reports that some who booked in for a catch-up HPV jab had appointments cancelled repeatedly. Prof Peter Johnson, the NHS national clinical director for cancer, said it was vitally important that those eligible came forward for their HPV vaccine. Vanessa Saliba, a consultant epidemiologist for UKHSA, said: “We encourage all who are eligible for the HPV vaccine to take it up when it is offered in school. All those eligible can catch up until their 25th birthday.” Kirsten Brooks, 28, a clinical knowledge specialist from Bristol, said she “massively regretted” not having the HPV vaccine when she was younger. She said: “I was an opinionated teenager when the jab was announced and turned it down, convinced by something I’d read online, I think. Then I just forgot about it.” She contracted HPV a few years ago. “I wish my parents had insisted, and now massively regret rejecting it. I do think ‘I could have saved myself from getting HPV, which could have developed into something worse’. If I had kids I’d make sure they get the vaccine.”Two years ago, All That Dust released a performance of Stockhausen’s Kontakte recorded in binaural format, which made marvellous sense of the spatial effects between the instrumental and electronic sounds. The label has now given binaural treatment to four pieces by Aldo Clementi, who died in 2011 at the age of 85. Clementi was a member of the same generation of avant-garde Italian composers as Bruno Maderna, Luigi Nono and Luciano Berio, though he never adopted the concepts of total serialism as eagerly as his better-known contemporaries. Instead, he sought out other ways of organising his music and creating the intricate polyphonies that he imagined, and found what he needed by going back to the age-old techniques of imitation and canon. The music he composed using these principles from the 1970s onwards was playful and joyous; it sometimes referenced other composers and styles, and was often exquisitely beautiful. Each of the four pieces here, none of them very substantial, is a gem. Ouverture, for three quartets of piccolo, two flutes and alto flute, was written for the great Italian flautist Roberto Fabbriciani, who recorded it alone by multitracking the 12 contrapuntal lines; Kathryn Williams follows Fabbriciani’s example, placing the listener at the centre of its web of intertwining, echoing voices. The four pairs of violins in Melanconia, all played by Mira Benjamin, move in and out of focus as they chase each other around the aural space, while the four instruments (flute, violin, piano and tuned percussion) in the brief Canone Circolare are given the freedom to choose how and at what distance they repeat the gentle material allotted to them. Most sonically spectacular of all is the metallic sound world of L’Orologio di Arcevia, with its jangling array of piano, tubular bells and ’spiels, apparently inspired by the sound of a clock in a belfry. It comes wonderfully alive in the performance by Joe Richards and Mark Knoop, and heard as intended through headphones, it’s fabulously involving, too. This week’s other pick Kermès, the latest disc on New Focus Recordings from the French-American pianist Julia Den Boer, brings together pieces by Giulia Lorusso, Linda Catlin Smith, Anna Thorvaldsdottir and Rebecca Saunders. It’s a cleverly contrasted collection of contemporary piano music, from the bravura flourishes of Lorusso’s Déserts and the gently rocking dissonances and ghostly fragments of Catlin Smith’s The Underfolding, to the strummings and creakings of Thorvaldsdottir’s Reminiscence and the abrupt contrasts and relentless clusters of Saunders’s Crimson.About half of the world’s fossil fuel assets will be worthless by 2036 under a net zero transition, according to research. Countries that are slow to decarbonise will suffer but early movers will profit; the study finds that renewables and freed-up investment will more than make up for the losses to the global economy. It highlights the risk of producing far more oil and gas than required for future demand, which is estimated to leave $11tn-$14tn (£8.1tn-£10.3tn) in so-called stranded assets – infrastructure, property and investments where the value has fallen so steeply they must be written off. The lead author, Jean-Francois Mercure of the University of Exeter, said the shift to clean energy would benefit the world economy overall, but it would need to be handled carefully to prevent regional pockets of misery and possible global instability. “In a worst-case scenario, people will keep investing in fossil fuels until suddenly the demand they expected does not materialise and they realise that what they own is worthless. Then we could see a financial crisis on the scale of 2008,” he said, warning oil capitals such as Houston could suffer the same fate as Detroit after the decline of the US car industry unless the transition is carefully managed. The challenge is evident at the ongoing Cop26 climate conference, where some of the nations most at risk of being left with stranded assets – such as the oil and gas exporters Russia and Brazil – are likely to try to slow down the transition as they have done at previous climate meetings, while those most likely to gain – such as the fuel-importing EU – are pushing for faster action. The new paper, published in Nature Energy, illustrates how a drop in demand for oil and gas before 2036 will reshape the geopolitical landscape. Current investment flows and government commitments to reach net zero emissions by 2050 will make renewable energy more efficient, cheaper and stable, while fossil fuels will be hit by more price volatility. Many carbon assets, such as oil or coal reserves, will be left unburned, while machinery will also be stranded and no longer produce value for its owners. The most vulnerable assets are those in remote regions or technically challenging environments. Most exposed are Canadian tar sands, US shale and the Russian Arctic followed by deep offshore wells in Brazil and elsewhere. North Sea oil is also relatively expensive to extract and likely to be hit when demand falls. By contrast, current oil, gas and coal importers such as the EU, Japan, India and South Korea, will reap hefty economic dividends from the transition because they will be able to use the money they save on overseas fuel purchases to invest in their own countries, including money for renewables that will modernise infrastructure, create jobs and improve energy independence. The situation for the world’s two biggest emitters – the US and China – is more complex as they have more diversified economies with both substantial fossil fuel assets and powerful renewable sectors. The UK is in a similar situation, but as a net energy importer, stands to benefit overall. Much depends on the speed and spread of decarbonisation, along with the tactics used by fossil fuel exporters to sell off their assets before they lose value. To assess the impacts, the study explored several different scenarios. The model forecasts large economic benefits for most importers of fossil fuels. The GDP of most European countries would increase under either net zero scenario, researchers found, with gains outstripping the lost fossil fuel revenue. The benefits vary across nations. The UK, for example, would potentially add $700bn to the value of its GDP under a net zero scenario, despite losing almost half of its fossil fuel assets, worth $120bn, by 2036. By contrast, the GDP of Norway, which is more dependant on oil exports, could fall by 9% unless it diversifies rapidly. The US could also face an overall hit of $3.5tn and Canada $920bn over the next 15 years if they do not reduce their economic dependence on fossil fuels. The projected losses in these two North American nations are independent of domestic climate policies because they stem mostly from a decline in demand for petroleum products once major markets such as the EU and China have shifted towards net zero. The extent of asset stranding will partly depend on low-cost producers, such as Saudi Arabia and the rest of the Opec group of oil-producing states. If they ramp up production and begin a fire-sale-style selloff, other exporters could be priced out, leading to a sudden collapse. Under this scenario $11tn of global fossil fuel assets would be stranded. However, if oil producers agreed on a quota system, the effects could be more evenly distributed and lower overall, though would still eventually reach $11tn of stranded assets, according to the projections. For a nation such as Canada, this could mean a 5% fall in GDP relative to business as usual, compared with 7% under the fire-sale scenario – a difference of about $400bn. Opec nations are likely to demand hefty compensation for lost revenue if they agree to quotas. Saudi Arabia, for example, would make only $1.3tn under a quota scenario, compared with $1.7tn from a fire sale. The authors of the study say a race to the bottom should be avoided at all costs. “If Saudi Arabia plays one way and the US another way, then we will see economic, financial and political instability worldwide, banks going bust and changes in capital flows. People need to think about these transition risks very seriously,” said Mercure, adding that major institutions, including the Bank of England and the Bank of France, were increasingly concerned about the potential dangers to the financial system. To prevent chaos, he said, oil exporters should diversify their economies as quickly as possible before change is forced on them when importers switch to renewables. Even more important, he said, was closer engagement between the two sides so the overall economic benefits of transition could be shared. “This needs to be a story of international cooperation and not leaving people behind.”In Los Angeles, it’s early and overcast. “It has that six-in-the-morning feel,” says Aimee Mann, eternally droll, from a home office wallpapered in fruity foliage. “So it’s been hard to get going.” Drab weather demands good knitwear, and Mann has paired thick-rimmed round glasses the size of ashtrays with a brown woollen sweater vest. She admits, with a whaddaya-gonna-do shrug, that she bought the Alexa Chung garm off Instagram. “I’ve actually bought several things from Instagram ads,” she says sheepishly. “How do they know?” When it comes to her career, the 61-year-old songwriter has never been one for the hard sell. In 1985, Mann’s band ’Til Tuesday had a US Top 10 hit with their debut single, Voices Carry, a sublime new-wave anthem about the liability of expressing emotion. With her shocked peroxide do, rat-tail plait and unyielding stare, Mann resisted sexual and commercial commodification. Misunderstood by their label, the group ended, then Mann spent the 90s with her first three solo albums of brilliantly spiky, weary, erudite guitar pop mired in major-label politics, from collapses and buyouts to brazen apathy at what to do with a late thirtysomething classicist more akin to Randy Newman than Britney Spears. By the millennium, Mann had quit to start her own label, SuperEgo, where she has remained, releasing wryly tragic character studies of people doomed to self-sabotage. “As I’ve gone on, it’s more interesting to see how my past experience can inform a song, but it’s not necessarily about me,” says Mann. She isn’t at all cagey in person, but funny and sharp as she reflects for two hours, until her stomach rumbles for breakfast. A few years ago, the film producers Barbara Broccoli and Fred Zollo approached Mann about writing the songs for a musical of Girl, Interrupted, Susanna Kaysen’s 1993 memoir about her institutionalisation in McLean psychiatric hospital, in Massachusetts, in the late 60s. Mann read it and “started immediately having ideas for scenes”, she says. “I was off and running before there was a script. It’s so obviously in my wheelhouse and I’d written about this stuff before.” Mann’s last album, released in 2017, was called Mental Illness, a joke at her dour reputation – one largely imposed on her by men perplexed by this drily funny woman with no taste for sugarcoating. (“I’ve never understood this ice queen thing myself,” wrote the critic Robert Christgau in 2002. “What’s the big thrill – getting to see them bite their lip when they come?”) When the pandemic stalled the play, Mann turned the songs into her new record, Queens of the Summer Hotel. Mann tells Kaysen’s stories over piano and woodwind, the elegant instrumentation plotting the distance between her tormented characters and the expected feminine archetypes of the era to quite beautiful, devastating effect. In a way, it is also Mann’s story, based on a lifetime’s experience of the tight constrictions of femininity. In 2002, she checked into the Sierra Tucson rehab centre with PTSD, severe dissociation, anxiety and depression. She hasn’t previously talked about it publicly. “I just haven’t had the distance,” she says. Back then, Mann was ostensibly riding a moment of career vindication after all the major-label strife. Paul Thomas Anderson had based his acclaimed 1999 film Magnolia on her songs. One was nominated for an Oscar. (She lost to Phil Collins.) But she was stressed by the pressure to capitalise on the opportunity, including touring heavily. “I started not to be able to function,” she says. That year, a drunk driver hit her tour bus, which flipped three times. She still played that night’s show. Although she wasn’t hurt, “I was really in shock for a long time, and I had a lot of intrusive thoughts about the car going over the embankment”. At first she resisted the idea of rehab. “I was a fairly insular person – as much as I’m telling a perfect stranger about my time in the nuthouse,” she says drily. “I didn’t want to be around other people – which is a symptom in itself, when containment becomes the most important thing.” But she eased in. “They also had eating-disorder patients and addicts and alcoholics and sex addicts. It was very interesting to talk to those people and see what you had in common. A lot of them came from trauma also. It’s just a variation in how you express it.” Her 2002 album, Lost in Space, detailed this period, but only obliquely. “It’s kinda getting harder to breathe,” she sang on Pavlov’s Bell. “I won’t let it show / I’m all about denial / But can’t denial let me believe?” Mann had watched in the 90s as the post-Girl, Interrupted generation – Prozac Nation author Elizabeth Wurtzel, Alanis Morissette and Fiona Apple – had their unfettered accounts of mental ill-health mocked by the media. “I saw that and thought, no way am I telling people what is happening with me,” she says. She had already learned to conceal her feelings as a girl of the 60s, when it was “understood that women were stupid”, she says, amused yet vociferous at the horror of it all. “The conventional wisdom was that women talked all the time, that they were bad drivers; that if they were unhappy in their marriage, it was because they didn’t accept literally what nature had destined them for. And so you can’t make a fucking mistake, because the mistake is going to be immediately attributed to your gender. They create a box and then put you in the box so that the box can control you. I think any woman my age is traumatised by growing up in the 60s and 70s because it was so relentless.” Even by those standards, Mann’s girlhood was extreme – the source, she thinks, of her PTSD. She was born in Richmond, Virginia, in 1960. When she was three, her mother got pregnant by a guy who worked for her father, and they kidnapped Mann and ran off to Europe. (Hence her anxiety about travelling.) Her father hired a private detective, who brought her home a year later to a new stepmother and two stepbrothers. Her new family members mocked her for wanting to play sports and musical instruments – in the 60s south, this was unladylike and might deter potential husbands. “The reasoning was so circular,” she recalls. “You would say: ‘Well, why can’t I do that?’ ‘Because you’re a girl.’ I would literally feel fucking crazy. You cannot reveal yourself.” Stoicism became all she had. “I remember being eight years old and being really proud that I was able to control my face so it wouldn’t make a fucking expression. In my family, if you looked unhappy or sad, the stepmother would say you were sulking. I mean, my fucking mother left when I was three years old – maybe I would have been sad! But if you looked happy, somebody would be like, this is a thing I can use against you.” She apologises for sounding bitter, although she doesn’t at all. Her mother died of lung cancer in 2018. They didn’t see each other often, until the end, when Mann forgave her. “I told her, I get why this happened – that guy had a combination of charm and neediness that was probably very compelling. And once she’s pregnant, what are you going to do? She’s trapped on every side.” That sort of mercurial figure recurs throughout Mann’s catalogue, notably on 2012’s rocky Charmer, in which she delved into the narcissistic psyche and its unsettling appeal. “I personally never found him charming, even at three, because I knew he was mean,” says Mann. “He would do a game where he would pinch you really hard – and that’s not a game, right? – and go: ‘What, that hurts?’ And then he would do it again.” Mann looks 20 years younger than she is, so it’s easy to forget that she was 16 when punk hit – the perfect age for David Bowie and Iggy Pop to inspire a repressed suburban girl to dye her hair lurid colours. “It was a revelation,” she says. “I played three chords on the acoustic guitar. I wasn’t really a musician. But the punk and new wave scene was so interesting, so inventive – literally do whatever you want. That Patti Smith was out there and people were accepting her? Oh my God, there’s a way out.” She left Virginia for music school in Boston, then quit to join bands. What gave her the gumption to go? “Part of it is that I knew I was really unequipped to be able to do anything else,” she says. “You know you don’t really fit in the normal world.” After stints in atonal punk band Young Snakes, and industrial metal group Ministry, Mann formed ’Til Tuesday and asserted, even in their earliest local press clippings, that they were going to make it. She’s always been a good judge of her own songwriting, she says (“it’s not as bad as what’s on the radio and that’s got to count for something”) and craved success because “there wasn’t a woman making the kind of music that I wanted to hear”. Joni Mitchell once praised the detailed range of emotions and anxieties that Mann expressed in her music. Nonetheless, she had no desire for stardom. “The attention I got in my family was negative attention. I equated that to: if somebody looks at you, it’s not good because you’re going to be criticised or yelled at or made fun of. I wanted to play music, but I didn’t like the idea of being in an airport and people looking at me. It’s that animal instinct – when another animal is staring at you, you physically experience it as a threat.” But her greatest problem was the music industry defaulting on punk’s promise of freedom. In the 80s, the label worked ’Til Tuesday to death. “Their attitude towards artists is they have a stable of horses and they want to hitch a couple up to a wagon,” says Mann. “And if one of them dies on the job, you just put another horse in there. They don’t care.” Being on the road with ’Til Tuesday was so intense that she once contemplated cutting her hand – enough to wound, not maim – to enforce a break. In the mid-90s, Mann, now solo – and repeatedly battling label execs who said they “didn’t hear a single” on her albums – found herself on Geffen, also home to Nirvana. “I remember having a conversation with someone at Geffen [who was] very shocked that Kurt Cobain had killed himself. They had a minute where they were like, maybe we should consider the mental health of artists on the road because it’s very unnatural.” It took her years to push back. “If your main survival technique was to be a people-pleaser, it’s really hard to not do that. Women especially have their careers controlled by this threat that you will be perceived as difficult.” One new song, You Don’t Have the Room, speaks to the nonexistent margin for error that women face. It fits the Girl, Interrupted story as much as it does Britney Spears, who has said she is afraid she will be judged harshly once her conservatorship ends. “It’s a fucking crime,” Mann says of Spears’ situation. “Talk about the prize horse being hitched up to the car and not letting that gravy train stop.” Mann quit the major system as soon as she could, buying back the rights to her then-unreleased 2000 album, Bachelor No 2 or, the Last Remains of the Dodo (its title a comment on the plight of the songwriter). “I was sick of asking for permission to make the music I wanted to make,” she says, “which I never felt was so crazy or left of centre. I’m not John Cage.” The pressures abated somewhat; Mann moved to Los Angeles and in 1997 married Michael Penn (brother of actor Sean). They joined the songwriting community around local club Largo, and fell in with likeminded comedians. It says something about the open-mindedness of comedy that it took Mann’s appearances on the sketch shows Portlandia and Tim and Eric Awesome Show, Great Job! to expose her to younger listeners. (In 2018, pop star Sky Ferreira, who has also battled the major label system, released a fantastic cover of Voices Carry.) Echoing the potential that Patti Smith showed her as a teenager, Mann is now part of the limited vanguard of older women in music who survived industry hostility to create into their 60s and beyond, from Kim Gordon to Marianne Faithfull. It’s challenging to age in a business that is “100% obsessed with the way people look, and now more than ever,” says Mann. “In the 60s, you had a lot of singers who were not that attractive, but they could sing and that was the point.” After being held to narrow standards of femininity, turning 50 “and I’m supposed to go, oh, who cares what I look like?” she says. “That’s a hard mental exercise.” You would call the past decade Mann’s prime if that didn’t elide her consistency. But last year almost stalled her headway. While mastering Queens of the Summer Hotel, she thought her computer speakers were broken and called Penn in to check. He said they sounded fine. Mann’s hearing had become distorted thanks to a nervous system disorder. She developed vestibular migraines and became sick and dizzy. Beset by tinnitus, she couldn’t listen to music for a year. “All my sensory input was distorted and overloaded – light from a phone or a computer made me sick, and I felt like I had a terrible hangover or concussion all the time.” She figured there had to be a connection with her PTSD – or perhaps from a childhood concussion sustained when her mother’s boyfriend crashed the car. She saw seven neurologists. One prescribed medication that made Mann psychotic, driving her to suicidal ideation. Then one asked whether she had a history of trauma – survivors showed a higher incidence of migraines. He told her to keep going to therapy and processing her past. “And then I got an ad on Instagram for an app – and I cannot believe that this is the story,” she says with comic disbelief. This chronic pain management app, based on cognitive behavioural therapy, confirmed what the doctor said – that childhood trauma “with additional stress – like, I don’t know, maybe being isolated in a pandemic! – makes your system really reactive. And when your nervous system is reactive, it starts sending out pain signals because it feels mistakenly like it’s in danger. I was like, that’s fucking it!” She laughs. “Between the vest and the app on Instagram, I’m like, all right, maybe there’s 1% good in the sea of evil.” Mann had thought she might never work again. “Music was so unpleasant, and there was no solace in it,” she says. The prospect was especially bleak given that she had only recently learned to truly love performing. When her health improved, she attempted live rehearsals, hoping to make it through five songs as a start. “It was so magical to play with these other people that it literally started to heal and calm my nervous system,” she says. “I realised that not seeing other people [in lockdown] was so stressful for me. People underestimate that we’re pack animals.” Mann still has some hearing distortion, meaning no guitar-heavy records for now. While she was unwell, she started work on a graphic memoir – she’s a huge comics fan (she has a song named Ghost World and the cartoonist Seth drew the artwork for Lost in Space) and the format reminded her of songwriting. “The artwork gives you a feeling that’s a little like the feeling music gives you,” she says. “And the dialogue has to be very specific.” It’s hard for her to see the overarching narrative of her story. Whereas she’s a good judge of her own songwriting, “it’s pretty hard to be objective about an entire life”, she says. “What to leave out, what to keep in.” Not to mention the time it takes to heal. “I was stubborn?” she suggests. “And I kept moving forward regardless of obstacles. Maybe that’s it.” Queens of the Summer Hotel is out now on SuperEgo RecordsHow hard will it be to transition away from fossil fuels? Speed matters – the longer we leave it, the harder it gets. Scientists now know that achieving any climate outcome, such as the Paris agreement goal of limiting global heating to 1.5C above pre-industrial temperatures, is dependent on cumulative emissions over time. In other words, there is a finite carbon budget, and we have already used most of it. The longer we continue with high emissions, the more drastic cuts will need to become in future years in order to stay within the overall budget. On the graph below, the total carbon budget is the area under the emissions line. If we hit the end of the budget without having cut emissions at all, by about 2029 we would have to eliminate all carbon emissions within a single year. Obviously that won’t be possible, so what will happen instead is that we end up on a temperature trajectory associated with a higher carbon budget: 2C, 3C or even higher, with catastrophic consequences. What about negative emissions? Can they help? Many of the conventional 1.5C scenarios depend on negative emissions in the second half of the 21st century. In other words, we would overshoot our carbon budget and then have to remove the excess carbon from the atmosphere artificially. On the graph, this would be trending the emissions line underneath the X-axis into negative territory. This is conceptually possible in that technologies already exist to do this, such as chemical scrubbers that dissolve CO2 and pump it underground, or power stations burning biomass that sequester their CO2. However, using either of these techniques to get rid of CO2 on the scale required – which would be potentially hundreds of billions of tonnes – is pretty implausible. It would be like reversing the global oil and gas industry for a few decades, and putting all the carbon we drilled out back in the ground. But surely if we wait longer we’ll have better technologies to help with the transition? This is a common argument, and it makes some sense. For example, if we had grid-scale electricity storage options or cheap advanced nuclear fission – both of which are in development but still some way off – we would potentially be able to substitute clean energy sources for fossil fuels in a way that does not reduce prosperity, and even contributes to economic growth as new markets open up. The problem is the carbon budget: every year of high fossil fuel emissions – currently at 35bn tonnes of CO2 equivalent a year – steadily eats away at the remaining carbon budget. At current emission rates our whole 1.5C carbon budget will be gone in about eight years, as the graph shows. If we just build more wind and solar, won’t that solve the problem? It would certainly help. We need to throw every clean energy technology we can at the problem given the urgency of the climate crisis. But the intermittency issue with renewables has not yet been solved, as the wind energy lull over the past few months in Europe – when coal-fired power plants had to be turned back on – demonstrated. This has led to a renaissance of support for nuclear in the UK, France and many other countries. There are also some sectors of the economy that can’t be decarbonised even with clean electricity: think cement-making, chemicals, steel, fertilisers or long-distance transport. These will most likely need hydrogen – but in all these sectors clean hydrogen-based options are still in their infancy. What happens if we miss the 1.5C target? The carbon budget for 2C is larger, but will still be used up entirely within 25 years at current rates of emissions. Moreover, accepting that 1.5C is no longer possible means accepting the increased climate damages that ensue. These have been laid out for us by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). For example, at 2C as compared with 1.5C, an additional 1.7 billion people would be exposed to severe heatwaves, 420 million to extreme heatwaves and 65 million more to deadly heat. The world’s natural life would be devastated, and coral reefs virtually eliminated from the tropical oceans. Rates of sea level rise would accelerate, displacing an additional 10 million people and putting 136 coastal megacities at increased risk of flooding. How does Cop26 fit in to this picture? One of the key demands of the countries most at risk – represented by the 48-member Climate Vulnerable Forum – is for an emergency pact to be agreed at Glasgow to keep the 1.5C goal alive. For some of these countries – such as the Maldives and Bangladesh – this is not so much a matter of policy as a matter of national survival. • The graphic in this article was corrected on 5 November 2021: the original graphic incorrectly had annual emissions of carbon dioxide ranging up to 4bn metric tonnes, instead of 40bn metric tonnes.Mark Zuckerberg and other tech executives could face the threat of criminal prosecution if they do not tackle harmful algorithms, the UK culture secretary has said, under government proposals to combat online abuse. Nadine Dorries also said internet trolls who threaten “serious harm” or post harmful misinformation could face jail sentences, in a marked stepping up of sanctions in the draft online safety bill. Dorries reserved her strongest warning for executives at Facebook’s owner, Meta, and other tech firms. She told MPs and peers on Thursday that in addition to the bill’s proposed powers to fine companies up to 10% of their revenues if they fail to protect users, there would be criminal sanctions as well. “But also there is the criminal liability on individuals. And I think people like Mark Zuckerberger [sic] and Nick Clegg [a Meta vice-president] and others who are wanting to take off into the metaverse, my advice would be stay in the real world because this … bill is going to be an act very, very soon and it is the algorithms which do the harm, and … you will be accountable to this act.” Addressing the wider tech industry, Dorries said: “Remove your harmful algorithms today and you will not be subjected – named individuals – to criminal liability and prosecution.” Dorries was speaking to a parliamentary joint committee scrutinising the draft bill, which aims to impose a duty of care on tech firms – with a particular emphasis on social media platforms such as Facebook and Twitter and video platforms such as YouTube and TikTok – to protect users from harmful content. The bill contains provisions for a deferred power to impose criminal sanctions on executives if they do not respond to information requests from the communications watchdog Ofcom accurately and in a timely manner. Dorries said that power could be brought in within three to six months of the bill becoming law, rather than the two years initially envisaged, and indicated that the criminal sanctions would be extended to cover failing to tackle algorithms that serve up harmful content. “[Platforms] know what they are doing wrong. They have a chance to put that absolutely right, now. Why would we give them two years … to change what they can change today,” she said. Dorries was scathing about Facebook’s rebranding and its investment plans for the metaverse, a virtual world where people will be able to live their social and professional lives through avatars, or animated digital representations of themselves. Referring to Meta’s recent announcement that it would hire 10,000 people in the EU to help build a metaverse, she said: “They are putting ten, twenty thousand engineers on to the metaverse. And rebranding does not work. When harm is caused we are coming after it. Put those ten or twenty thousand now on to abiding by your terms and conditions and to removing your harmful algorithms, because if you don’t this bill will be watertight. I am looking at three to six months for criminal liability.” Meta, which also owns Instagram and WhatsApp, is under severe political and regulatory pressure on both sides of the Atlantic after revelations by the whistleblower Frances Haugen. The former Facebook employee has detailed how the company was aware that its platforms harmed users and spread misinformation. Zuckerberg has said Haugen’s claims that the company puts profit over people’s safety are “just not true”. Meta has said it has 40,000 people working on keeping users safe and is investing multi-billion dollar sums in the effort, while acknowledging that the tech industry “needs regulation”. Dorries also said she was minded to adopt recommendations from the Law Commission – an independent body that reviews laws in England and Wales – to introduce criminal prosecution for the offences of sending messages or posts that “convey a threat of serious harm”; posting misinformation – “false communications” – intended to cause non-trivial emotional, psychological or physical harm; and sending posts or messages intended to cause harm without reasonable excuse. The Law Commission proposals suggested jail sentences of between two and 10 years for the offences, with the top of that range applying to threats to kill.It was a shit job, but someone had to do it. And it was just Kwasi Kwarteng’s bad luck that he drew the short straw of having to defend the government’s latest sleaze-bath on the morning media round. After all, it was a foregone conclusion that any hopes the business secretary might have had of getting a word in edgeways about climate change would be blown out of the water by Boris Johnson’s extraordinary decision to enforce a three-line whip on Conservative MPs to get Owen Paterson off the hook. Some ministers take these punishment beatings in good grace. As part of the job, even. Not Kwarteng. He was sullen, grumpy and dismissive right from the start of his interview with Nick Robinson on Radio 4’s Today programme, claiming the government had been thinking of changing the rules on appeal for the past 11 and a half years. So why had they waited until the vote on Paterson’s suspension to debate it in the Commons? Kwasi tried to ignore the question. So what would you like instead, given that you’ve had so long to consider it? Robinson asked. “Er …,” Kwarteng dithered, hoping something intelligent would come to him. Some hope. A cross-party committee of MPs, he said eventually. But that’s precisely the system that’s already in place. It was now dawning on Robinson that he was talking to a halfwit. Yes, said Kwarteng. Only this time they wanted a cross-party committee with a majority of Tory MPs who could be relied on to exonerate any Conservatives found guilty of multiple counts of paid advocacy. A committee that would make allowances for MPs who were genuinely too stupid to understand the rules. Or why businesses might choose to bung them an extra £100,000 for their services. Paterson hadn’t been paid for his intellect. He had been paid for his stupidity. “We’re showing very high standards in government,” Kwarteng insisted. Oh really, said Robinson. Then how do you account for the prime minister’s refusal to sack Dominic Cummings for his Barnard Castle safari? Or a former housing minister’s decision – later deemed unlawful – to award a planning permission to the Tory donor “Dirty Des” that saved him £45m? Or Priti Patel being found in breach of the ministerial code for bullying? Kwasi mumbled something about climate change. Robinson tried to make things easier for the business minister. Could he list even one thing Boris Johnson had done to deliver higher integrity and probity in public life? “Brexit,” Kwarteng replied. You couldn’t fault his mindless loyalty. Even if you could his intelligence. There was a long pause – dead air, as everyone paused to remember the lies that had been told to deliver Brexit. Not to mention the illegal prorogation of parliament and the signing of the Northern Ireland protocol in bad faith. This wasn’t the end of Kwarteng’s discomfort because moments later he was being asked pretty much the same questions by Kay Burley on Sky. Only by now Kwasi was seriously unravelling. Kwasi unplugged. So he doubled down. The commissioner for standards would have to resign, he said. Concrete boots and tossed in the sea. It was outrageous for her to have dared to find a Tory MP guilty of anything. Kwarteng fell silent once more. At least the prime minister would send him a congratulatory text for saying out loud what he was privately thinking. Or perhaps not. The first sign of a change in tone came during business questions in the Commons after the shadow leader of the house, Thangam Debbonaire, had recapped the previous day’s proceedings. The government was guilty of corruption for trying to change the rules on MPs’ conduct retrospectively and Labour would play no role in the sham committee the Tories were planning to establish to replace the one that had served the Commons perfectly well for years. In reply, Jacob Rees-Mogg, who had possibly been listening to Lord Evans, the chair of the committee for standards in public life, also giving the Tories both barrels at an event hosted by the Institute for Government, announced a partial climbdown. Though as with everything Rees-Mogg does, it was done without shame, without apology and with utter condescension. A primetime advert for the government’s levelling up agenda. The whole thing had been a complete misunderstanding by the opposition parties, Rees-Mogg said. The government had thought it blindingly obvious that there was no connection between the Paterson vote and the same one to change the rules on MPs’ behaviour. But Labour had been so stupid that it had managed to conflate the two. So to eliminate confusion, he was not going to proceed with the new rigged committee but was going to try to think of a way to achieve cross-party consensus that didn’t embarrass the government. Chris Bryant drily observed it was a bit late for that but, if it helped, his committee could write a second report by next Tuesday. Though its findings would be the same. Within an hour this partial U-turn had become a full handbrake turn, with the government announcing there would be a second – unwhipped – vote on Paterson. But the damage had been done. Boris Johnson’s Conservatives were now established as the party of sleaze. They had tried to pull a fast one and had been caught red-handed. That they had now been forced into acting properly was neither here nor there. One sometimes wonders what it will take for the penny to drop for Tory ministers and MPs. Was Paterson really too stupid not to realise that Boris would dump him if the shit looked like hitting the fan? Boris didn’t even have the courtesy to tell him he was no longer backing him. Owen found out from a journalist when he was in the supermarket. He then did the most gracious and sensible thing he had ever done as a Tory MP. He resigned. Johnson didn’t care one way or the other. Other people only existed as extensions of his narcissism. Did Kwarteng not wonder if he had been shafted and made to look untrustworthy for no good reason? Did the Tories who had voted with the government not realise their credibility had been trashed for good? That they had made it clear they had no principles that couldn’t be bought off? The past 24 hours had been peak Boris. Ur Boris. He had done what he always does. There isn’t a friend, wife, family member or colleague whom Bertie Booster doesn’t betray in the end. Or even in the beginning. A Farewell to Calm by John Crace (Guardian Faber, £9.99). To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.One of England’s largest social care providers has urged the government to change the vaccination deadline for all care-home workers, warning of a risk to levels of care as data confirmed that more than 50,000 staff could quit in the country from next week. The care provider Anchor, a not-for-profit chain of 114 services, said it was poised to lose about 120 staff because of the “no jabs no jobs” policy effective from 11 November, and said it had already stopped admitting people to some homes because of the nationwide staffing crisis. NHS data released on Thursday revealed that more than one in 10 care staff had still not had two doses of coronavirus vaccine. Only a few thousand of those people were granted medical exemptions from the jab. Otherwise the legislation makes double vaccination a condition of deployment in care homes. Rob Martin, managing director of care services at Anchor, said Anchor supported the principle of mandatory vaccines to protect society’s most vulnerable, but believes it should only be introduced at the same time as jabs are made obligatory for NHS staff, which is now expected to be in spring. “If left unchecked I expect the problem to worsen,” Martin said. “In the localities where there are staffing pressures, it means beds are being blocked … and there’s a backlog [of patients] in hospitals who can’t be discharged.” Care homes are already struggling with at least 105,000 vacancies, and analysis by the Guardian of NHS data shows that since May the workforce in adult care homes declined by more than 10,000. Some of those will be people who have already left through not wanting the vaccine, but operators are also battling to retain “burned out” staff and prevent their leaving to join the NHS – where staff can earn more and where double vaccination is not likely to be mandatory until next spring. Care operators have questioned why their staff are facing a tougher standard during the coming winter, especially as visitors going into care homes do not need to prove vaccination. Council care chiefs have also reported a threat to staffing from the company Amazon which is offering £2,000 signing bonuses and pay rates of £11.10 an hour and up to £22.20 for overtime. The median care home wage is £9.01 an hour. The latest NHS figures show that the areas where most care staff are set to be laid off include Manchester and Thurrock, where 21% of staff remain unvaccinated, Nottingham, where 19% are not double jabbed, and Wandsworth, London, where the latest figure is 18%. Independent care homes also called for the policy to be paused, as the health secretary, Sajid Javid, prepares to announce that NHS staff will only have to be double vaccinated from next spring. Nadra Ahmed, chief executive of the National Care Association, warned: “With staff set to exit we will see vulnerable people facing the dilemma of not being able to receive their assessed care needs, and families feeling the anguish of trying to step in.” Mike Padgham, chair of the Independent Care Group, which represents operators in the north of England, said: “What is the point in keeping hospitals working if there is nowhere to discharge patients to, if home-care providers don’t have the staff to care for people at home, and there are no staff for care and nursing homes?” Emma, 34, a care worker in Bolton, said she was one of eight staff to leave her care home because of the vaccination policy. Five of them, including herself, have had the vaccine, but are leaving because they are upset at the way they were forced to take the vaccine. She said she felt “blackmailed” and that she was taking a new job at an NHS hospital on higher pay. Dawn Mann, 44, left her Berkshire care home last week after deciding she did not want her second jab after adverse reactions to the first dose. The care home asked the regulator, CQC, to allow her to continue but it refused, and her GP declined to provide medical exemption. “I am sad about it,” she said. “It was a good job and they are stuck [for staff] already.” The Department of Health and Social Care said: “Vaccines save lives and while staff and residents in care homes have been prioritised and the majority are now vaccinated, it is our responsibility to do everything we can to protect vulnerable people. “Over 94% of care-home staff have received their first dose of a Covid-19 vaccine and nearly 90% have had their second. We are working closely with local authorities and care-home providers to ensure there will always be enough staff with the right skills to deliver high quality care.” • This article was amended on 5 November 2021 to clarify in the headline and text that Anchor has called on the government to delay, not scrap, the vaccination deadline for care-home workers; a clarifying statement was also added from Rob Martin, who is the managing director of care services at Anchor, not its chief executive as an earlier version said.As you consider your Christmas table – a bowl of cherries, a plump roasted bird and the cream on your pudding, you may spare a thought for the way the food gets to your table. Because three things this week signal cracks in our food production systems. First, the Fair Work Commission ruled late on Wednesday that farm workers on piece rates must be guaranteed a minimum wage under the Horticulture Award. The Australian Workers Union argued that workers should be guaranteed a minimum wage of $25.41 an hour, rather than just paid for the amount of fruit or vegetables they pick an hour. The commission said the current arrangements in the pieceworker provisions of the horticulture award were not fit for purpose as there was widespread “non-compliance” with negotiations under the Horticulture Award. The National Farmers Federation said the decision would push up farmers’ wage costs and blamed the complexity of the industrial relations system. Second, human rights lawyers flagged a possible class action by some Pacific Island workers who are reportedly losing up to two-thirds of their promised pay to labour hire companies, for deductions for things like transport, above-the-odds rents and even water. Third, there remains a massive shortage in farm labour, a shortage that government fixes such as relocation allowances have failed to address. The industry is still waiting on an agriculture visa for participating countries. Details remain vague but the government has promised a pathway to permanent residency. And clearly, the shortage has been amplified by the Covid pandemic which locked down borders, leaving temporary migrant workers locked out. Depending on who you believe, either the farmers are paying awful wages and conditions or Australians are lazy and won’t work outside. As the FWC underlined, more than half of the seasonal harvesting workforce are temporary migrant workers. “These characteristics render the seasonal harvesting workforce vulnerable to exploitation,” the FWC summary says. We rely on temporary migrant workers to do these jobs based on a range of visas that can leave those workers vulnerable. This has created a system that even Liberal treasurer Peter Costello railed against. “Our concept of an immigrant society is that all arrivals are offered the opportunity to become full, first-class citizens. Our culture and history is not compatible with the introduction of guest workers or different tiers of citizenship,” he said in 2006. And yet here we are. The other thing that has contributed is the choppy policymaking process, particularly at the beginning of the Abbott government that has speared Australia’s backpacker workforce, a group of young fit workers who also filled the void. I have long puzzled over this shortage of farm labour. Farmers have to acknowledge there are terrible cases of exploitation, including in programs that the government, a portion of (largely horticulture) growers, and Pacific Island countries favour. President of the Victorian Farmers Federation Emma Germano told me last year that every case of exploitation should be followed up by the Fair Work Ombudsman with offending farmers fined and forced to repay wages. Germano has long campaigned on the issue, as has the AWU. Australia is not the only place this shortage is happening. The United Kingdom relies on temporary farm workers from the European Union. Farms in the European Union rely on workers outside the EU. The UN Food and Agriculture Organisation estimated a shortfall of 1 million farm workers across Europe during the pandemic last year. Hell, even China has struggled to find farm workers for its harvest, with hundreds of millions of people abandoning the countryside for better paid city jobs. I’m convinced there is also a cultural aspect at work here. Aspirational families are imagining other careers for their kids. Even though interest in agricultural degrees is booming, ag graduates are still faced with four or five job options when they leave university. Agriculture is not the only industry struggling for workers. Many of our key service industries are largely run on temporary and migrant workers: aged care, food service and delivery, and cleaning just to name a few. Perhaps we need to look wider and question the globalised food system we have created. We want cheap food, we want food all year around and we want it now. That leaves workers, farmers and eaters vulnerable. And we haven’t started on the cost to the environment. Eventually, someone has to pay for the true cost of food.Emergency service volunteers in New South Wales’ far west are under-resourced and under-supported, leaving large stretches of the region without local road crash rescue services, former volunteers say. And as state and international borders open up, traffic is expected to increase, which will lead to more crashes, raising fears about the State Emergency Service’s ability to respond in the region. Graeme McCrabb, a Menindee local and former SES volunteer, said it had been a “downward spiral for five years”. “We’ve been scraping through by the skin of our teeth and at some point that’s not going to be the case,” McCrabb said. Minutes from a Central West &amp; Far West Combined Region Rescue Committee meeting in March reveal widespread problems in local SES units. Many units, including Walgett, Lightning Ridge and Ivanhoe were listed as offline, while others, including Menindee, Nyngan and Cobar, were operating at reduced capacity. In the city, road crash rescue services are provided by ambulance and police rescue, but in some remote small towns in the state’s far west SES volunteers are often the first on scene. While regional centres such as Tamworth and Dubbo have a police rescue unit, Dubbo is more than 500km from towns like Ivanhoe and Menindee. In Menindee and Nyngan, “most of the members of the local SES unit have resigned”, according to the minutes from the Central West &amp; Far West Combined Region Rescue Committee meeting. McCrabb said it can be a stretch to run two volunteer emergency service organisations (the Rural Fire Service and SES) in small towns, with the SES demanding a minimum 20 hours a week for leaders and a lack of support for the volunteers running the unit. Debbie Newitt, a Menindee local and former SES member, says one week Menindee’s SES unit received five calls, including a suicide and a motor vehicle accident with a fatality. Sign up to receive Guardian Australia’s fortnightly Rural Network email newsletter Newitt said the emotional toll was all the greater in a small town as “a lot of the time the people you come across and help are people you know, close friends or family.” She said management had never followed up and checked on their volunteers, despite knowing there had been fatalities. Newitt said former volunteers at Menindee SES had not been able to complete a communications course, meaning they were not considered active in January. As a result, when a young woman was trapped in her vehicle 5km outside of Menindee, it was the Broken Hill SES, 110km away, that was called. McCrabb was only alerted by a local resident and rushed to the scene. The injured woman’s grandmother, Jan Dening, said the Menindee SES arrived within 10 minutes of the accident. If they had had to wait an hour for the Broken Hill SES to arrive, she fears what would have happened. “It could have been a different story, she could have passed away.” Newitt said the lack of training that almost stopped them assisting in the crash prompted the unit’s 14 members to resign, with eight joining the RFS instead. McCrabb said the SES equipment, including two boats and a patroller truck, were now unable to be used, and he called for a more centralised approach to emergency services to allow the RFS volunteers to make use of such assets. During activities such as making food deliveries during Covid, McCrabb said they were unable to use the state-owned vehicles as the keys and locks had been changed. Roy Butler, the MP for Barwon which covers a vast stretch of NSW from Lightning Ridge to Broken Hill, said he had been advised by the government that the State Rescue Board had agreed to refresh a review of rescue service delivery. Butler, a member of the Shooters, Fishers and Farmers party, said he was seeking a meeting with the minister for police and emergency services, David Elliott, saying not enough had been done to address the situation. Butler said there was “not an appreciation of the seriousness of the issue”. Road rescue services in the region were “unprepared and inadequate” as volunteers and staff did not have access to enough training and support, he said. “Getting trained people can make the difference between someone being alive the next day or even making it to hospital,” he said. Butler said the situation had led many people to walk away, with volunteer numbers now at an “all-time low” across the far west. An SES spokesperson told Guardian Australia “in the state’s west, the areas that run along the Darling River are serviced by NSW SES units at Walgett, Brewarrina, Bourke and Wentworth. NSW SES units with road crash rescue accreditation include Broken Hill, Hay, Brewarrina, Cobar, Bourke and Wilcannia. “It is a function of the NSW State Rescue Board to ensure the maintenance of efficient and effective rescue services throughout NSW,” the spokesperson said. A Rural Fire Service spokesperson said the RFS had established Road Crash Rescue (RCR) units in several locations across the state, in Mungindi, Ellerston, Howes Valley, Louth, Pooncarie, Euston, Moulamein and Menindee, and was continuing to expand its services with training and accreditation in Nymagee. McCrabb said the RFS could not take over the SES’s responsibilities without more funding and resources. “This region is forgotten from Sydney, from the powers that be. It’s just not good enough that we’re just left floundering in this situation.” Elliott’s office was contacted but did not provide comment. Sign up for the Rural Network email newsletter Join the Rural Network group on Facebook to be part of the communityThe Coalition’s voter ID bill could be challenged in court as a disproportionate measure that excludes people from voting, constitutional law expert Prof Anne Twomey has warned. The Morrison government insists nobody would be completely prevented from voting but Twomey argues the proposed legislation could still be struck down for the “imposition of additional administrative burdens that make it more difficult to vote or discourage people from voting”. In addition to concerns about the bill’s impact on groups including Indigenous Australians and people experiencing homelessness, Labor is warning the bill “is a recipe for disaster on polling day” because it could add to queues and be inconsistently applied. The voter integrity bill would see voters asked to show a wide range of photo or non-photo identification in order to vote. People could cast a declaration vote – after providing their date of birth and signature – if they were unable to show any ID. The government introduced the bill in the October sittings of parliament, prompting fears it could be pushed through ahead of the 2022 election with the support of One Nation, which has claimed credit for it, and Centre Alliance, which has supported it in principle but is yet to decide its position. In September, Twomey made a submission to a Senate inquiry considering a similar One Nation bill, noting that voter ID requirements had a “long history in other countries … to prevent or deter certain groups in society from voting”. Twomey warned that – even with measures in place for itinerant, disadvantaged and Indigenous electors in remote areas – “the additional procedural burden, the effort required, the confusion that it can create and the message that it sends of being ‘suspect’ or unwanted, may be enough to suppress the vote”. Twomey told Guardian Australia this week the constitutional issues with the government bill were “likely to be similar”. Courts would determine the bill’s “burden” on the capacity to vote, including “complete exclusion from voting” and “additional administrative burdens”, then assess whether it was “reasonably necessary or proportionate to achieving a legitimate end”, she said. Twomey said “the key will be the extent of the burden” and any challenge would need evidence to show “even if it doesn’t legally exclude anyone, does it have the effect of suppressing the vote”. Twomey said if a court accepted there was a “burden … then there is a good argument that it would fall over at the proportionality level” as it was “likely that it is not reasonably necessary or proportionate”. But the University of Queensland professor Graeme Orr said it would be “procedurally hard” to challenge the law, as evidence of its impact would be clearest only after polling day. Orr said the law was “entirely unnecessary” and it was a “stupid time” to introduce it before an election in which Covid-19 would be circulating in the community. Nevertheless, he said it was “very hard to imagine” a challenge would succeed “unless [the law is] tweaked in future or there is some evidence of its disparate impact”. “How do you get someone to say ‘I don’t have ID so I couldn’t vote’ – the answer is get some ID,” he said, noting the “wide array” of documents which would be accepted. The shadow special minister of state, Don Farrell, said voter ID would work out “catastrophically” as it was “the first time in 120 years” it would be implemented – and just months out from a federal election which would require social distancing due to Covid. Farrell said the requirement could double the time taken to be marked off the roll and created “enormous” potential for conflict between poll workers and voters. Labor’s shadow multicultural affairs minister, Andrew Giles, has questioned whether the laws will disadvantage culturally and linguistically diverse people because of discrepancies in spelling between the electoral roll and their ID documents, and how much discretion polling officers will have in such cases. “While there’s no evidence of voter fraud in Australia, there’s a plethora of evidence of right-wing voices wanting to restrict the franchise, especially in respect of First Nations people and multicultural communities,” he told Guardian Australia. Giles, a former chair of the Joint Standing Committee on Electoral Matters, said the Australian Electoral Commission had told the committee that “the instance of multiple voting for the House of Representatives was just 0.03%”. Parliamentary library advice, prepared for Labor, concluded that studies of US voter ID laws found “no detectable effect on turnout” but noted the laws are “relatively new” and effects may emerge over time. The advice recognised that “not all Australians are equally likely to have access to common forms of identification”. But it concluded that there was “no neat summary of who has what ID, however there seems to be little suggestion that there is any particular group of Australians who have no access to any form of ID document”.Readers have come to expect certain things from Australian author Hannah Kent: immaculate research, immersive descriptions of nature, sensitive portraits of women on the fringe. The author’s third novel delivers on all points. But while Devotion is structured around tragedy (portentously signposted by “Before” and “After” sections), she has adamantly set out to write a book of optimism and joy; an antidote, as she told Guardian Australia, to queer love stories centred in pain and shame. Set in the late 1830s, it follows teenage narrator Hanne and her friend Thea as their Lutheran community flees to a new settlement in South Australia (modelled on Hahndorf, where Kent’s own forebears settled). The exiled hamlet recreates itself – effortfully, incongruously – on the lands of the Peramangk people. “All this way,” Hanne reflects, “and they have disfigured the land back into Prussia.” Kent examines the intricacies of village dynamics, and how these are transposed as the persecuted become colonisers. But this is only part of the plot. The real story is of Hanne and Thea’s fledgling love, unfurling in a time that doesn’t have the language for it. The book’s title, Kent says, refers to devotion “in whatever manifestation”. Hanne has synaesthesia. She hears the natural world as music, listens to walnut trees and banksias, feels melodies of light, cold and mud on her skin. Drenched in the language of religion, she understands god, love and landscape as a single song – the joyful, intuitive synthesis of Mary Oliver or Seamus Heaney (who Kent cited as an influence on her previous novel). The language of the bible lends a sonorous lyricism. Hanne feels “Thea’s hand in my hair, her nearness sounding through me like hallelujah”; she catalogues the Australian bush as “Holy Writ of living things, each one a prayer against the teeth”. (This angle is occasionally taken too far, almost to the point of caricature: “Why do men bother with churches at all when they might make cathedrals out of sky and water?” Hanne asks sanctimoniously, with shades of EM Forster’s Mr Emerson – satire of this sort of heady soulfulness, even in 1908.) Sign up for the fun stuff with our rundown of must-reads, pop culture and tips for the weekend, every Saturday morning Love can remind us who we are – and for Hanne, the stern restraint of her Prussian family is crushing. “I yearned to be touched, simply to know that I was there.” The deep uncertainty she feels about her body is heightened, for the reader, by Kent’s vivid evocations of pre-industrial life: smells; sounds; aches; fluids. Hanne experiences this physical ambivalence about (heteronormative) womanhood as the feeling she is “ill-made”: “where once I was sleek, epicene, utterly at one with my frame, I now felt a fracture between myself and my body”. Until she meets Thea, whose unconventional family “does not ignore the body”. Their connection is tactile from the start, the weight of Thea’s arm “a balm”. Kent says the novel crystallised after Australia’s 2017 marriage plebiscite. Dedicated to her wife, it is a paean to the peace two people can find in domesticity. It reads (perhaps relatedly) like a personal love letter; often beautiful, sometimes arrestingly so: “If the earth one day burns out its charge, you will find me in the ash. If the sea dries, find me in its sand.” But too much of this solemn ecstasy – Thea’s father “utters” her mother’s name “like an affirmation”; Thea herself is “a chink of light in a curtain” through which “the world beyond blazes” – can become cloying. Devotion’s sentimentality is unleavened, either by humour or by the darker ambiguities that made Burial Rites and The Good People so compelling. The real stories and historical crimes behind those novels pushed Kent to write in a place of unwieldy and uncomfortable humanity – with a potent flair for making you question who, exactly, to back. Without that constraint, the neat characters here have little arc except that pre-determined by type: sympathetic outcasts, spiteful gossips, limited patriarchs, kindly outsiders. The novel also skims over its racial politics. Kent’s writing was informed by conversations with Peramangk and Ngarrindjeri elder Mandy Brown; and at a recent event, she highlighted the complexities of setting any story in this period without “privileging the perspective of the oppressors”. The “creative risk” she takes in Devotion is in part, she said, a way to get round this. But the supernatural route (no further spoilers) feels to me like an abnegation of the bigger risk – that of engaging more closely with the politics of either of the peoples she has chosen to portray. She touches on their encounters so fleetingly that it feels more like due diligence, cushioning the novel’s principal, romantic theme. The moments in Devotion that stick are simple and intimate: a cheek against a pale trunk; two girls side by side, “the entirety of the universe ending at the periphery of [their] curled limbs”. It is a love story, ardent and wholesome, and it drapes its reader in lush historical detail. Fans will find a lot to savour. Devotion by Hannah Kent is out now through PicadorRecently, in the shadow of Melbourne’s latest instalment of the bestselling lockdown franchise, my partner and I introduced all our precious belongings (chests overflowing with trinkets, cursed rings, paintings of dogs playing poker) to each other, and moved them and ourselves by extension into a new unit together. The decision to move in after one year of strange pandemic dating was motivated primarily by deep affection for each other and the desire to spend time together, the economic realities of being millennials who earn a living from our art in Australia’s astonishingly broken rental market, and also the dystopian logistical challenge of navigating curfews and public health disorders designed to keep us apart. You know, the usual. Living with your significant other has had a particular cachet of “importance” in modern dating for a while, with questions asked of when the right time to make the move is, how long one should wait, and what the dire consequences could be to your relationship. I even had a well-intentioned friend caution me that moving in with Eilish, only a few months after I’d moved from Sydney to be with her, in the middle of a state sanctioned lockdown that would force us to exclusively rattle around together in the same house with no break like a couple of sexy depressed peas in tastefully decorated pod, could be perhaps considered hasty, perhaps ill-advised. I never had a single doubt however. I’ve always believed in the “stress test” maxim, a term I’ve appropriated from the critical infrastructure community, misunderstood, and regurgitated to fit into my silly little brain – it’s basically the idea that dating is like a long steel beam, and we shouldn’t shy away from putting weight and pressure and stress on it relatively early on in the relationship. Better to do it now before you build an entire life on that one weak beam. I’ve seen so many people do everything they can to avoid testing the strength of their relationships, moving like Olympic figure skaters on thin ice, only for it to finally crack at the worst moment. Eilish and I started off with a relatively high stress level, dating digitally across hard borders, trusting that what we were building would last. Moving in together, I thought, would be easily borne by the robust length of metaphor steel we’d forged together. That said, living together has a curious intimacy, a closeness that is hard to predict or plan for, that moves beyond the practicalities and logistics of actually physically moving in together (although moving is always stressful in itself). We didn’t even have many issues with the practicalities, our belongings somehow fitting together without much need for compromise. Eilish considers herself a maximalist (she arrived with a children’s crusade of pot-plant babies, each room transformed into a miniature jungle) and I’m a veteran minimalist of many moves (I once seriously asked myself if my washing machine “sparked joy”) , so when you mix the two together you just end up with a normal amount of stuff. Over the last five years I’ve mostly lived in share houses or alone in tiny studio apartments, and both of these are completely different attitudes to habitation to living with a partner. In a share house (especially the grown up inner-city share houses of mid-30s professionals our generation tend to live in), your attitude to space is about being as unobtrusive as possible, scurrying from the bathroom to the kitchen on soft feet, ferrying steaming plates of food back to your bedroom which becomes a kind of haven, a hermit’s cave, a wizard’s tower. Living alone, in contrast, treads the line between moments of unobserved and glorious chaos, and ultimate pedantic control. Neither of these are quite possible when you’re living with a partner – someone who functions in the same way as a housemate, except they’re in your bed too, and ideally you want them to be there. There is a blend of freedom and big brother style scrutiny that you can’t really prepare for if you’ve never done it before. What I’ve found most interesting is the experience of seeing myself through the lens of my partner – not so much in the sense of being “studied” by my partner, but of being suddenly aware of my own actions and routines through her eyes: when she notes that I make tea every day at 2.30pm on the dot, or she catches me lost in the mirror for the third time that day, preening like a happy little bird. Suddenly I’m learning a lot about myself. I’m happy to say that despite being locked in together for months, the experience has only been wonderful, the mixture of our lives together only helping to create a stronger alloy for our metaphor beam. I realised that we were fine, and were going to remain fine, after we pitted ourselves against the ultimate test for any couple: constructing a huge Ikea wardrobe. We spent the entire day kneeling on the floor of our bedroom, my weak soft hands rubbed raw from hundreds of screws, our eyes sore from trying to decipher cryptic instructions, and after hours of toil we found ourselves with a giant sagging wooden box, like a giant’s coffin, with unattached sliding doors that we simply could not fit on. We took turns preserving our sanity – one of us would go have a cup of tea, or lie face down on the carpet in another room, or go scream into a pillow, while the other kept working, deconstructing bits of the doors, watching “how-to” guides on YouTube. We’d shift from being furious at the arcane Swedish box, to being filled with endless exhaustion and sorrow, our existential crisis built by our own hands. If scientists ever wanted to create a fool-proof stress test for a new relationship, for a couple newly living together, the impossible burden of a double Ikea Hasvik wardrobe is the perfect place to start. But throughout that cursed day, we never got annoyed at each other, never got frustrated by the other person – we were instead united in our hatred for this horrifying closet. And while I believe in my stress text maxim, I also believe that a healthy relationship comes from knowing when to stop putting pressure on yourselves, when to compromise, which is why we ultimately succeeded in our quest against the wardrobe by hiring someone else to do it.It’s home to an area called the Lost World, and for decades, the Scenic Rim did feel a little like the middle child, cowering around the hemline of Brisbane’s bright lights and the glittering Gold Coast, about 60 minutes’ drive inland and south. But while no one was paying attention, plenty was happening behind the scenes, and this kid shot up. So much so that in Lonely Planet’s list of 10 regions to visit in 2022, the Scenic Rim rubs shoulders with the likes of Burgundy, Vancouver and Puerto Rico. Older and younger Queensland siblings (and smug Aussie cousins) … eat your heart out. At about 10 times the size of the Gold Coast, this rich, green, mountainous region is home to seven distinct areas – most with names just as picturesque as “Scenic Rim” – and six national parks, including world-heritage-listed Gondwana rainforests. To cover the whole region and take part in activities, allow at least two days to visit. Tabitha Bird, author of A Lifetime of Impossible Days and the Emporium of Imagination, lives on the western side of the region in a town called Boonah, which is also the setting for both of her books. “I was writing my first book and when I came out here I realised it had no setting, and then I discovered this was the perfect place with its characters,” she says. “Towns like this attract a lot of quirky souls. “My second book has even more of the town featured in it and the locals love it. I often do things like a ‘getting lost drive’, the whole point of the drive is to get lost and discover the region. The Scenic Rim was named by the Binna Burra tourism pioneer Arthur Groom in the mid-1900s. But Jenny Jenner, of Kalbar Sunflowers, says her visitors are still surprised by the area, a century later. “People come out and say, ‘Why haven’t we found this place before now?’ It’s so scenic, tranquil and peaceful.” “Visitors love being able to do an experience … picking flowers; riding camels or climbing a mountain.” Don’t miss Perhaps unsurprisingly, given all the national parks, the Scenic Rim is home to hundreds of walking tracks. For a challenging day hike, try the 7.4km Lower Portals Track in Mount Barney national park which leads to a deep freshwater pool. Cunningham’s Gap in Main Range national park has a breezy 1.6km rainforest circuit; while O’Reilly’s Rainforest Retreat has a 800m elevated walkway through the rainforest canopy, which is free and open to the public. For serious hikers, the 34.5km Scenic Rim Trail, which meanders through private property and Main Range national park, is a four-day hike with small, free campsites along the way. These should be booked before setting out, as spaces are limited. Where to sleep After devastating fires in 2019, the rainforest and tumbling valleys at Binna Burra Lodge are bursting back into green. Camping starts from $40 a night or, if you don’t want to BYO, book one of their new safari tents, from $104. For quaint, historic cottages which tell a story, head to Mount Barney and Barney Creek Cottages (from $174) or to Rathdowney with its Tuckeroo Cottages and Gardens (from $128). Where to eat The agricultural region has farm gates and cellar doors galore. Lavender lovers will adore Mount Alford’s Karoomba Vineyard and Lavender Farm which injects these fragrant flowers into its dishes. Nearby, sample the craft brews with quirky names like Shazza, Digga and Fat Man at Scenic Rim Brewery. Pick your potion at Mount Tamborine’s Witches Falls Winery (the 2019 Prophecy Syrah runs out the door). For something more eccentric, Harrisville’s Summer Land Camels offers everything from rides to tastings – of fetta, halloumi, gelati and even a world-first vodka, all made from camel milk. There’s also a Scenic Rim Farm Box, an innovative idea born out of Covid-19 lockdowns to bring the country flavours to the city. Visit Kent’s Lagoon shop, take some produce home, or even have it delivered. When to go During sunflower season, in spring and summer, farm fields of gold burst into bloom. In 2021, drought-stricken Kalbar farmers, frustrated by strangers traipsing through their flower fields for Instagram opportunities, decided to launch a festival, and Kalbar Sunflowers blossomed. Head here for ticketed events including sunrise yoga, sunset dinners among the flowers, and pick-and-pay for bunches to take home. There are still photo opportunities – but these ones actually contribute to the local economy.The Institute of Public Affairs paid to push targeted Facebook ads based on a “faulty analysis” claiming net zero would cause massive job losses in key Liberal and National seats during last month’s Coalition infighting. Last month, as the Coalition debated a net zero 2050 policy, the IPA paid for a series of Facebook and Instagram ads targeting the electorates of Nationals Barnaby Joyce, David Littleproud, Mark Coulton, Ken O’Dowd and Anne Webster, as well as the Liberal trade minister, Dan Tehan. The ads warned the policy “will destroy” huge numbers of jobs in each electorate. In Flynn, O’Dowd’s electorate, the ads warned “net zero emissions will destroy one in four jobs”. Other electorates would lose one in five, one in six or one in seven jobs, the ads claimed. The ads relied on and linked to an IPA analysis described by experts as “beyond cynical” and almost “comical if the stakes weren’t so high”. The IPA’s research identified 10 industries with higher-than-average emissions – the agriculture and air transport sectors, for example – and tallied the total numbers of jobs in each sector, describing them as “at risk” from the policy. However the ads went one step further, using figures premised on the assumption that every single job in that sector would be wiped out if a net zero policy was adopted. The underlying report, for example, assumes that all 306,200 agriculture jobs identified in Australia by the Australian Bureau of Statistics would be at-risk from a net zero policy because the sector’s “emissions per job are above the economy-wide average”. Dr Rebecca Colvin, a senior lecturer at the Australian National University with expertise in energy transition and development, described the IPA’s analysis as “faulty” and “an exercise in counting without context, a far stretch from a rigorous analysis”. “So they have simply counted the number of jobs in those sectors and deemed them ‘at risk’. There is no nuance, nor explanation of what ‘at risk’ means,” she said. “To then use the report as the basis for a targeted social media campaign that declares these jobs will ‘be destroyed’ by a net zero target is beyond cynical It would be comical if the stakes weren’t so high.” Facebook estimates suggest the ads would not have cost a huge amount. The expenditure would have been roughly several thousand dollars. But Facebook data also shows most of the ads could have had a maximum audience of 500,000 people. The IPA’s director of research, Daniel Wild, said the thinktank had “led the debate about the economic and humanitarian consequences of a net zero emissions by 2050 target”. “It says everything about the media, big business, universities and the political class that they failed to acknowledge the impact that net zero emissions will have on Australians living in the regions and outer-metropolitan parts of the major cities,” he said. “Regardless of how a net zero emissions target will be pursued, high-emitting jobs in industries such as mining, agriculture and manufacturing are the most likely to be destroyed.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning He said the research was disseminated to the public and policymakers to “communicate the impact that a net zero emissions target will have on Australians”. When asked to respond to Colvin’s criticisms of the research being “comical if the stakes weren’t so high”, Wild said: “The stakes are very high for the more than 650,000 Australians who stand to lose their job from net zero, many of whom will never work again.” Colvin said farmers knew Australia would clearly still need food in a decarbonised economy, and the need for travel and the mining of many minerals would not evaporate. “Suggesting otherwise is an insult to the intelligence of the workers in these industries.” The Coalition has since adopted a policy of net zero by 2050. Colvin said the adoption of the policy was an important milestone. But she said there was more work to be done, including implementing credible interim targets to help workers in exposed industries. “Fear-mongering based on a faulty analysis does not help Australia achieve a just transition to a net zero future,” she said. Colvin is a member of the Blueprint Institute, which conducted recent polling in coalmining and power generation regions. The polling showed strong support for the net zero target, she said. Colvin also noted Meat and Livestock Australia, the peak body for the red meat and livestock industry, supported net zero emissions in the sector by 2030.Hopes that enough of the Great Barrier Reef could escape global heating long enough for it to recover have been challenged by research finding less than 2% of its coral reefs have escaped bleaching since 1998. The world’s largest coral reef system has suffered five mass bleaching events in that time – caused by rising ocean temperatures driven by the burning of fossil fuel – which have undermined its survival. The most recent event was the most widespread yet. In a study released on Friday, James Cook University’s Prof Terry Hughes and colleagues studied the locations of bleaching events and found only 1.7% of individual reefs had avoided bleaching. Almost all of the places that escaped damage were in an area known as Swain reefs in the southern section of the world heritage listed marine park. Some reef experts hope cooler areas will act as refuges from bleaching, enabling corals to survive and naturally disperse their larvae on to damaged reefs. But the research in the journal Current Biology found areas “earmarked earlier as candidate refuges” had now experienced severe or moderate bleaching at least once. “The world is now littered with former potential coral reef refuges that have since bleached,” leading reef expert Hughes said. Hughes said reefs would struggle to survive even if countries were successful in meeting pledges made at the ongoing Cop26 climate talks in Glasgow. Tropical reefs are one of the world’s most susceptible ecosystems to climate change, with widespread impacts already being seen with global heating at 1.1C. When corals sit in unusually warm water for too long, they separate from the algae that give them most of their food and their colour. In extreme cases this bleaching can kill the coral. Very high temperatures can also kill corals outright. Analysis of the latest emissions pledges at the Glasgow climate summit this week found if all countries were to meet their targets then there was a 50-50 chance that warming could be kept below 2C. Hughes said a drastic cut in greenhouse gas emissions by all countries was vital for the future of corals reefs. “So far 1.1C [of warming] has been sufficient to trigger five mass bleaching events,” he said. “The higher the temperature goes, the more difficult it will be. I am confident [corals reefs] could handle another 0.3C of warming, but they will struggle at 1.9C and there’s a lot of optimism in that 1.9C figure.” Coral larvae drops sharply Research in 2019 suggested the back-to-back mass bleaching of corals in 2016 and 2017 had caused a crash in the amount of coral larvae being produced. A separate study published on Friday, also in Current Biology, estimates the number of baby corals being produced across the reef had dropped by 71% since the first mass bleaching event in 1998. The study used a model to estimate how much coral larvae – the free-floating coral offspring – was being produced across the reef. The drop in larvae was undermining the reef’s resilience, the study said. But some areas continued to avoid the worst of the bleaching and these could keep supplying other parts of the reef with coral larvae in the future, and should be a focus of conservation efforts. The University of Queensland’s Prof Peter Mumby, a co-author of the study, said these coral “refugia” were on the outer reef and close to strong currents. “We don’t yet know how long those thermal refuges will exist. They won’t last forever,” he said. “There are still healthy reefs producing larvae, but if we see these patterns [of warming] continue you would expect it would affect rates of coral recovery. One of the biggest concerns is even if we can stick to the 1.5C target, we still have committed warming.” Earlier this year the World Heritage Committee agreed not to put the reef on a list of its “in danger” sites, against the recommendations of United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation experts. The Australian government had lobbied furiously against the recommendation, saying that while climate change was the reef’s biggest threat the appropriate forum to tackle climate change was the UN’s climate convention. Since then, the Morrison government has refused to set stronger climate targets for 2030, and has claimed promoting growth in new technologies will be enough to see the country reach net zero emissions by 2050. The World Heritage Committee is due to consider again whether to place the reef on its in danger list at next year’s annual meeting in Russia.A handful of productions have already been released examining Australia’s catastrophic black summer bushfire season of 2019-20, including an ABC TV special (Wild Australia: After the Fires), a feature-length documentary shown in cinemas (A Fire Inside) and a six-part scripted drama series (Fires). Each has merits, but shared among them is a “don’t mention the war” tendency to acknowledge the role of human-induced climate change indirectly, cursorily or not at all, as if embracing of that old, denialist mantra that “now is not the time to talk about climate change”. In front of this backdrop comes director and Oscar-winning producer Eva Orner’s new exposé Burning – one of those rare documentaries that boils your blood and rattles your bones, leaving viewers longing for and (hopefully) demanding political change. Premiering in Australia at the Sydney film festival before its arrival on Amazon Prime Video on 26 November, it is the documentary Australia and – I think it is fair to say – the entire world deserves, exploring a complex subject with courage and clarity, taking seriously three simple but ever-salient words often heard in the climate protest movement: “Tell the truth.” Although it is always an appropriate time to talk about the climate crisis, Burning arrives at a particularly timely moment, with Cop26 now under way. The Australian government is being justly berated for its rhetorical shift (not to be confused with real action) towards net zero emissions by 2050, following a similar shift in that direction by News Corp, a company whose actions – in the words of Ketan Joshi – “have caused irreversible harm to human life, on a scale no other media organisation on the planet could ever aspire to”. When it comes to the climate crisis, as in Agatha Christie’s Orient Express, there’s a lot of blame to go around; a lot of fingerprints on the knife; a lot of people (howdy, Mathias!) who would probably like their past behaviour expunged from history. The point of Burning is not to level scores, but, again, to simply tell the truth, working from the vantage point that, as one interviewee puts it: “The greatest tragedy of this terrible black summer bushfire season was that we saw it coming.” Part of the difficulty in making this kind of documentary, which juggles many topics worthy of entire productions themselves and enters a conversational space fraught with politics and vested interests, involves anticipating and addressing counter-arguments without giving them unnecessary oxygen or embracing bogus two-siderism. This is presumably why Orner frontloads Burning with analysis of how there have always been fires in Australia, with this section of the film featuring the reflections of Greg Mullins, a former commissioner of Fire and Rescue New South Wales, who acknowledges that “fires in Australia are a constant” and “every year there are bushfires”. Mullins reminisces on how they used to be fought in the old days, including his first big fire in 1971, when people were beating out flames with tree branches, wet sacks and rakes. This pre-empts an explanation of how anthropogenic climate change has led to increased frequency and severity of fires. Firefighters once assumed, explains Mullins, that a very damaging fire would occur in NSW about once a decade. But after 1994 it was clear, he says, that Australia was experiencing more and more of them, those old assumptions no longer applying. As the veteran journalist Marian Wilkinson puts it: “This is exactly what climate scientists have predicted for Australia – longer fire seasons, more intense fire seasons.” It is of course is a global issue, though Australia remains the film’s focus. Burning recounts Scott Morrison famously bringing a piece of coal into question time in 2017, using parliament for what was, says Wilkinson again, “essentially a marketing presentation”. This event is significant in that it was one of the clearest (albeit far from the only) demonstrations of the extent to which our political leaders have become spokespeople for the fossil fuel industry, beholden to them. Underpinning the entire film in fact is an acknowledgement that the story of modern Australia is in many senses inseparable from the story of mining companies and the extraction of resources. Another important area of discussion, touched on briefly but with impact, is the role the media – particularly conservative outlets – have played in fuelling climate misinformation and denialism. There are also more inspirational elements, such as the story of young climate striker Daisy Jeffrey, which Orner threads throughout, resisting the cliched “but wait, there’s hope!” message often crowbarred into a documentary’s final moments. The director deftly balances many threads, and views the climate crisis through several lenses, including from environmental, political, social and moral perspectives. The pace is quick but not in a way that shortchanges important talking points. There are moments of tenderness – for instance a contemplation of trees being “arcs of time” – and there are also moments that make you want to shake your fists and scream “How could you?” at our politicians, Morrison especially. This is a tremendously well-made film with a burning vitality: without question one of the most important Australian documentaries of the 21st century so far. One of its many messages is the point that now is the time to talk about the climate crisis. As it will be tomorrow, and the next day, and the day after that. Burning is screening at the 2021 Sydney film festival and will be streaming on Amazon Prime Video from 26 NovemberScientists have identified a gene that doubles the risks of respiratory failure and death from Covid and could explain why people of south Asian heritage are more vulnerable to the disease. The gene, which changes the way the lungs respond to infection, is the most important genetic risk factor identified so far and is carried by roughly 60% of people with south Asian backgrounds, compared with 15% of those with white European backgrounds. The finding could partly explain the excess deaths seen in some communities in the UK and the impact of Covid-19 in the Indian subcontinent. Prof James Davies, a geneticist at Oxford University’s Radcliffe Department of Medicine and a senior author of the paper, said: “The genetic factor we have found explains why some people get very seriously ill after coronavirus infection … There’s a single gene that confers quite a significant risk to people of south Asian background.” Other scientists cautioned that the findings needed further confirmation and that genetic explanations should not overshadow other potentially more significant socioeconomic risk factors faced by ethnic minorities, including workplace exposure and unequal access to healthcare. The study builds on previous work that identified a large chunk of DNA that appeared to influence how severely ill people become from Covid, based on genetic sequencing of tens of thousands of hospital patients in the UK and other countries. The latest study homed in on a single gene called LZTFL1, which was revealed to double the risk of respiratory failure and death. The gene, which was previously unstudied, was found to act as a switch to turn on a crucial defence mechanism that prevents the Covid-19 virus from entering epithelial cells that line the lung. With the high-risk version of the gene, this response was blunted, meaning the virus would continue entering, infecting and damaging cells in the lung for a longer time period after exposure. “Although we cannot change our genetics, our results show that the people with the higher-risk gene are likely to particularly benefit from vaccination,” said Davies. “Since the genetic signal affects the lung rather than the immune system, it means that the increased risk should be cancelled out by the vaccine.” Davies said the findings also pointed to the possibility of new treatments targeting the lung cells’ response. Most current treatments work by changing the way the immune system responds to the virus. The findings could offer some explanation for why south Asian populations have been worst affected in the pandemic. In England’s second wave, ONS data showed a risk of death three to four times higher for people of Bangladeshi backgrounds, 2.5 to three times higher for those of Pakistani backgrounds and 1.5 to two times higher for Indian backgrounds compared with the general population. Unlike the excess risk seen in black populations in the first wave, in south Asian groups there remained a significant unexplained risk once socio-economic factors were taken into account. “[Genetic factors] would account for a large proportion of that,” said Davies. Raghib Ali, of the University of Cambridge and an independent expert adviser on Covid-19 and ethnicity to the Race Disparity Unit in the Cabinet Office, said: “This is an important study which contributes to our ongoing efforts to understand the causes of the higher death rates from Covid in some ethnic groups and specifically as to why their outcomes or survival from Covid are worse after infection.” However, others urged caution. Nazrul Islam, of Oxford University’s Nuffield Department of Population Health, pointed out that some ethnicities are not well represented in the large genetic databases used to determine the prevalence of particular genes such as LZTHL1. “It provides an easy gateway for policymakers to say ‘it’s genetic, we can’t do anything’,” he said. “We have to be very careful in analysing the data, questioning it repeatedly, and how we disseminate the findings. It has profound social issues.” The study is published in the journal Nature Genetics.A 14-year-old boy and three other teenagers have been found guilty of murdering the schoolboy Keon Lincoln, who was shot and stabbed outside his home in January. Jurors returned a guilty verdict against the 14-year-old from Birmingham, as well as a youth aged 16 from Walsall, who was caught on CCTV armed with a large knife as Keon was attacked near his home in Handsworth. Tahjgeem Breakenridge, 18, and Michael Ugochukwu, 18, were also found guilty of murder. The 14-year-old was also convicted of possession of a firearm with intent to endanger life, while the 16-year-old, Breakenridge and Ugochukwu were further convicted of having an offensive weapon. Both cannot be named because of a court order. Jurors at Birmingham crown court have yet to reach a verdict on 18-year-old Kieron Donaldson, who denies murder, and will resume their deliberations on Friday. During a five-week trial, the court heard how Lincoln, 15, was shot while on the ground and stabbed eight times by a “gang” of attackers clad in masks and gloves at about 3.35pm on 21 January. He died just over two hours later at Birmingham children’s hospital after suffering stab wounds to the legs and back as well as being shot in the abdomen. Lincoln’s mother, Sharmaine, joined the crowd of people who gathered around her dying son and was heard to say, “he’s only 15”. The gunman told jurors he was not at the murder scene but admitted he had lied to police. The court was told Breakenridge, Ugochukwu and the 16-year-old were all caught on CCTV armed with long-bladed knives. Donaldson, of Perry Barr, is alleged to have “helped and supplied weapons” but not to have been at the scene of the pre-planned attack. Prosecutor Michael Burrows QC told the court: “Plainly, it’s obvious this attack was planned. The attackers were out together armed with weapons. In the case of [the 14-year-old], he was armed with a gun loaded with ammunition.” The jury was told a stolen white Ford S-Max car was driven away from the scene and crashed soon after, with forensic evidence from the vehicle tying the defendants to the attack. The four defendants convicted of murder were all remanded in custody by the trial judge, Lord Justice William Davis, until a sentencing hearing on 29 November.On Tuesday, a state of emergency was declared in Ethiopia after Tigrayan forces said they were gaining territory and considering marching on the capital Addis Ababa. We would like to hear from people in Ethiopia and the capital in particular about the situation inside the country, and also from those who are part of the diaspora. Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below, anonymously if you wish or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. Though we’d like to hear from you, your security is most important. We recognise it may not always be safe or appropriate to record or share your experiences – so please think about this when deciding whether to send your information to the Guardian. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.Cameron Norrie is unlikely to qualify for the ATP Finals in Turin after he bowed out of the Paris Masters in the third round, losing 6-3, 7-6 (3) to Taylor Fritz of the United States in an intense two-set tussle. Earlier, Hubert Hurkacz, who sits eighth in the ATP Race to Turin, recovered from a set down to beat Dominik Koepfer 4-6, 7-5, 6-2 and reach the quarter-finals in Paris. His victory meant Norrie had to defeat Fritz to maintain a decent chance of qualification, which he was unable to do. Hurkacz can now secure his place in the ATP Finals, and rule Norrie out, if he wins his next match, against Australia’s James Duckworth, the world No 55. Thursday afternoon’s match on centre court pitted Norrie against another of the most improved players of the year. Fritz, the world No 26, is in the midst of a blinding season-ending run and had dispatched Andrey Rublev, the fifth seed, in straight sets in the previous round. He started in similar form, serving seamlessly before taking advantage of a loose Norrie service game at 3-2 to take charge of the set. Even as Fritz remained in control of the baseline for much of the second set, Norrie was typically tough and he recovered from a 4-4, 0-30 deficit to generate two set points at 5-4, 15-40 on Fritz’s serve. Throughout the season many players would have buckled against Norrie in such a position, but Fritz saved the first set point with an enormous unreturned serve and then struck a thumping forehand winner on the second. After scuppering Norrie’s biggest opportunities, Fritz’s serve flowed, he dictated once more and he convincingly took the tie‑break to win the match. Another consequence of Norrie’s defeat is that he misses out on a first career meeting with Novak Djokovic, the world No 1, who will now face Fritz in the quarter-final. Djokovic advanced on Thursday after Gaël Monfils was forced to withdraw from his home tournament with an adductor injury. Norrie has guaranteed himself one of the two alternate spots in Turin. He is next scheduled to compete at next week’s Stockholm Open but he says that he will wait to see how the results play out in Paris before deciding to also compete there. His only remaining chance of qualifying for the top eight is if Hurkacz loses to Duckworth in Paris, then loses early in Stockholm and Norrie wins the tournament. “That sounds difficult,” he said. “I gave it my best shot. I mean, it was unfortunate Taylor was too good today. I’ll have to think, but I’m going to go to Turin anyway, I think there are two alternate spots – depends on how everything turns out – but I will be an alternate there and then I will go and get prepared and get ready for Davis Cup.”The MP Claudia Webbe has been sentenced to 10 weeks in custody suspended for two years after being found guilty of a campaign of harassment, including threatening an acid attack, against a woman. Webbe was found guilty of harassing Michelle Merritt, a friend of her partner, with threatening phone calls. A trial was told she had called Merritt a slag, threatened to “use acid” and said she would distribute naked pictures of Merritt to her family. The 56-year-old has also been ordered to undertake 200 hours of unpaid work after being found guilty of harassment. The sentencing of Webbe, who was elected as a Labour MP but now sits as an independent, represents a dramatic fall from grace. In 2019, she was one of the most powerful minority ethnic figures in UK politics, a key aide to Jeremy Corbyn and the chair of the party’s disputes panel. Webbe was elected with a majority of 6,019 but had the whip withdrawn last year after she was charged. She is expected to appeal against her conviction for harassment. But her sentence at Thursday’s hearing will prompt an automatic recall petition in Leicester East if her appeal fails. Both Labour and the Conservatives are preparing to battle over the seat if Webbe fails to turn over the court’s decision. Reacting to the sentence, Webbe continued to protest her innocence and said she had received numerous racist threats. “I am very disappointed by the decision of the magistrate and want to strongly reiterate that I am innocent. I am lodging an appeal and despite today’s sentence I fully expect the appeal to be granted and that ultimately it will be successful. “Throughout this process I have received numerous threats to my life and vile racist abuse. The cowards responsible for these attacks will not deter me from clearing my name. “I want to thank constituents, family, friends and my comrades in the Labour movement for their support and solidarity, and to my legal team for their professionalism during this process.“ In a victim impact statement to the court, Merritt said a “sad, distressing darkness” had enveloped her since the threats from Webbe began several years ago. She said it has affected her career, her friendships and her trust in other people and said she still fears if she might be attacked because of the MP’s political connections. “I am scared of Claudia Webbe … because of Claudia Webbe’s position in government I don’t know what she is capable of,” she said. “Since the end on 2018 and even more since the rescheduling of the March 2021 court case, I have had a foreboding sense that Ms Webbe, someone who has the wherewithal to follow through on her threats or via someone else, would seriously try to hurt or harm me. A sad, distressing darkness has cast a huge shadow across all areas of my life,” she said. Chief Magistrate Paul Goldspring described Webbe’s behaviour on Thursday as “callous and intimidatory”. “You were jealous of the relationship between [Webbe’s partner] Lester Thomas and Michelle Merritt, and probably felt in some way threatened by it.” He said Webbe “showed little remorse or contrition” and would have been jailed immediately were it not for her previous good character. Defence counsel Paul Hynes QC said his client had received threats of violence on social media, as well as racist comments. Webbe denied harassment between 1 September 2018 and 26 April 2020 but after a two-day trial last month, Goldspring found her guilty. “I found Ms Webbe’s evidence to be vague, inconsistent and at times to be illogical. It was shaped around the overwhelming evidence against her she could not innocently answer, but ultimately I found it to be untruthful.” He said her conduct towards Merritt was “oppressive and was designed to be so”. “In particular threatening to send intimate photographs to her family and to ‘use acid’ are in my view the best evidence of the intent.” Webbe is a former chair of Operation Trident, which was set up in response to shootings disproportionately affecting black people in London. She was a councillor in Islington between 2010 and 2018 and was a member of Labour’s national executive committee. She entered the House of Commons in December 2019, winning the seat formerly held by Keith Vaz, the former Labour minister who retired from parliament in the wake of a scandal involving cocaine and sex workers. In September an official report found Vaz had engaged in “sustained and unpleasant bullying” towards a member of parliamentary staff. Because Webbe received a custodial sentence of less than a year, if her appeal fails a recall petition would be triggered in her constituency. To prompt a by-election, 10% of the electorate within the constituency would need to sign the petition. While she appeals, she is allowed to continue to be paid as an independent MP and vote in parliament. In January 2019, Fiona Onasanya, the former Labour MP for Peterborough convicted for perverting the course of justice, was sentenced to three months’ imprisonment. Her final appeal was refused in March, triggering the recall process and a by-election in June. Vaz told the Guardian last month that he would not stand again as a Labour candidate in Leicester East but he is known to still carry some support among the constituency party’s executive and voters. The new rule means by-election candidates will be chosen by a five-member panel, three of whom will be selected by the constituency party executive. Local Conservative sources said the party has already begun the interview process for a prospective candidate. The Conservatives’ vote share increased from 24.2% in 2017 to 38.6% in 2019.Marvel’s latest big-budget adventure Eternals has been pulled from Saudi Arabia, Qatar and Kuwait after Disney reportedly refused to cut a same-sex kiss. According to the Hollywood Reporter, the $200m movie will not be released in the Gulf region countries after being removed from local sites. The studio has yet to comment or confirm but sources claim that the reason is a kiss between Brian Tyree Henry’s character and his on-screen husband, played by Haaz Sleiman. It marks the first gay kiss in the Marvel Cinematic Universe. Homosexuality is still illegal across much of the region and is punishable by death in both Saudi Arabia and Qatar. A local cinema chain confirmed to the trade that the film was “banned” but had no explanation provided. In Singapore, Eternals has become the first Marvel Cinematic Universe film to gain an M18 certificate, which restricts audiences to those aged 18 and older. A spokesperson for the country’s Infocomm Media Development Authority confirmed that it was a result of “homosexual references”. The film also contains a sex scene between two heterosexual characters. Director Chloe Zhao, who won the Oscar for best director earlier this year for Nomadland, spoke recently about her desire to not tweak any scenes to appease censors. “I don’t know all the details, but I do believe discussions were had and there’s a big desire from Marvel and myself – we talked about this – to not change the cut of the movie,” she said to Indiewire. “Fingers crossed.” Lebanese actor Sleiman, who came out as gay in 2017, spoke about the importance of the scene at the film’s premiere. “It’s life-saving,” he said to Variety. “Can you imagine how many lives this is going to be saving – kids, young queer folk, who are being bullied, committing suicide, and not seeing themselves being represented? And now they get to see this – it’s above and beyond.” The news follows a similar ban in 2020 for Pixar’s Onward which featured a brief scene involving a lesbian cyclops police officer voiced by Lena Waithe. In Russia, the use of the word “girlfriend” was changed to “partner”. Eternals has started opening in many global territories with a US release on 5 November where it’s expected to open to around $75m. The Guardian has reached out to Disney for comment.Why has Owen Paterson resigned? He faced the prospect of a 30-day suspension from the House of Commons – a penalty that appeared to have been lifted on Wednesday, at least temporarily, after Boris Johnson backed an attempt to tear up parliament’s anti-sleaze system. On Wednesday Paterson said he looked forward to trying to clear his name after being found to have lobbied the government on behalf of companies that were paying him more than £100,000. But after Johnson withdrew his support, Paterson’s hopes of being allowed to reopen his case evaporated. In his statement he also said he feared his wife’s suicide becoming a “political football”. He has previously linked her death to the investigation into his conduct. What had the government announced? A complete 180-degree U-turn on its position on Wednesday night. Ministers will now table a new motion – probably as soon as early next week – unpicking the one passed on Wednesday. Wednesday’s motion paused judgment on the Paterson lobbying case while a cross-party committee examined the Commons’ standards system with a view to establishing some kind of appeals process. The committee was to be chaired by the former culture secretary John Whittingdale. He was investigated by a previous parliamentary commissioner for standards over a trip to the MTV Europe awards in Amsterdam in 2013 with his then girlfriend, a dominatrix sex worker. The motion protecting Paterson was passed after Boris Johnson whipped Conservative MPs to support it – a highly unusual decision that Labour’s Keir Starmer called “corrupt”. Why did Johnson change his mind? According to Johnson’s spokesperson, it was because he realised the plans for a committee set out in the Andrea Leadsom amendment he backed on Wednesday could not go ahead once Labour and the SNP had said they would boycott it. But No 10 had also faced a significant backlash from Tory MPs about what they saw as the grubbiness of the manoeuvre, which conflated Paterson’s position with broader issues about the system for policing MPs’ behaviour. Johnson is also notoriously fixated on newspaper headlines, and on Thursday even the usually supportive Daily Mail called the move to protect Paterson “shameless”. What would have happened to Paterson if he had not stepped aside? He announced on Thursday afternoon that he would now step down from parliament rather than face the potential humiliation of a byelection. The government had planned to table a motion early next week to unpick Wednesday’s vote by reinstating Paterson’s suspension and dissolving the mooted cross-party committee. It was not planning to whip MPs, but given that Leadsom’s amendment only passed with a narrow majority of 18 on a three-line Conservative whip, the motion undoing it would have been highly likely to pass. Paterson’s 30-day suspension was long enough to have triggered the parliamentary recall process. That means if 10% of his constituents signed a petition, a byelection would have to be held. What will happen to Paterson’s North Shropshire constituency? In accordance with arcane parliamentary procedure, in order to surrender his seat on the green benches Paterson will have to be formally appointed to one of two historic non-jobs, crown steward and bailiff of either the Chiltern Hundreds or the Manor of Northstead. A byelection will then be scheduled and could take place within weeks. While he won the seat with a thumping majority of more than 22,000 in 2019, opposition parties are likely to campaign hard on the issue of sleaze. Dates have not yet been set for two other byelections in Conservative-held seats, Southend West, whose MP David Amess was stabbed to death last month, and Old Bexley and Sidcup, the constituency of the former minister James Brokenshire, who recently died of cancer. Opposition parties have agreed not to stand candidates in Southend West out of respect for Amess’s memory. Will parliament’s anti-sleaze system still be replaced? That is unclear. Announcing the government’s dramatic change of position on Thursday morning, the leader of the House of Commons, Jacob Rees-Mogg, said the government still believed there was a case for an appeals process to be introduced. He conceded, however, that it had been wrong to link calls for reforms to the process to an individual case, and he promised to seek cross-party consensus on the way forward. He did not specify whether that would take place through the existing cross-party parliamentary standards committee, chaired by Chris Bryant, or in some other forum. There is still likely to have to be a House of Commons vote to undo the results of Wednesday’s motion.Facebook has removed a post by Ethiopia’s prime minister for “inciting and supporting violence” as diplomats stepped up attempts to instigate a ceasefire in the country’s year-long civil war. Abiy Ahmed, the winner of the 2019 Nobel peace prize, vowed to “bury” his government’s enemies in a Facebook post on Sunday as forces from the Tigrayan People’s Liberation Front (TPLF) moved closer to Addis Ababa. Facebook’s owner, Meta, said on Thursday that it had removed the post. “As the ongoing conflict in Ethiopia intensifies, we are committed to helping keep people safe and preventing online and offline harm through our platforms,” the company said. “We were made aware of a post by Ethiopia’s prime minister and removed this for violating our policies against inciting and supporting violence. At Meta we remove content from individuals or organisations that violates our community standards, no matter who they are.” The company’s approach towards political figures has changed significantly this year since Facebook barred Donald Trump until at least January 2023. Announcing that suspension in June, Facebook said it would end a policy of keeping up posts by politicians even if they broke posting guidelines. The Facebook whistleblower Frances Haugen claimed last month that the company was “literally fanning ethnic violence” in countries including Ethiopia because it was not policing its service adequately outside the US. On Thursday the US special envoy for the Horn of Africa, Jeffrey Feltman, arrived in Addis Ababa to press for a halt to military operations and a start to ceasefire talks. The chair of the African Union Commission, Moussa Faki Mahamat, said he met Feltman to discuss efforts towards dialogue and political solutions to the conflict, which has pitted Ahmed’s central government against the TPLF and its allies. The EU and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD), an east African bloc, joined the chorus of bodies calling for a ceasefire. Uganda’s president, Yoweri Museveni, announced an IGAD meeting on 16 November to discuss the war. Kenya’s president, Uhuru Kenyatta, urged the rival parties to lay down their arms and find a path to peace. “The fighting must stop,” he said in a statement. The UN secretary general, António Guterres, said he had spoken to Ahmed on Wednesday and offered to help try to create the conditions for peace talks. Abiy’s government declared a state of emergency on Tuesday as Tigrayan forces threatened to push forward to Addis Ababa. A TPLF spokesperson said on Wednesday that its troops were in the town of Kemise, in Amhara state, about 200 miles from the capital.Thirty people are facing legal proceedings after Turkish police launched an investigation into the spread of rumours on social media that President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan had died. Twitter users who posted under the trending hashtag “olmuş” – roughly “is said to be dead” – were being investigated for sharing “disinformation and manipulative content”, a police statement issued on Wednesday said. Separately, Erdoğan’s personal lawyers filed a complaint with the Ankara public prosecutor’s office, requesting that the relevant Twitter users be investigated on charges of “insulting” the president, which can be punished with a prison term of up to four years. Erdoğan’s health has been the subject of on-and-off speculation since 2011, when one of his doctors was forced to go on record to deny that the Turkish leader had cancer. Erdoğan, now 67, underwent serious stomach surgery in 2012. The latest wave of rumours appears to have been sparked by footage from last week’s G20 summit in Rome, in which the president appeared to have trouble walking. The Turkish leader’s last-minute decision not to attend the Cop26 talks in Glasgow, citing a dispute over security protocols, and his absence from a celebration on Wednesday marking the 19th anniversary of his party’s ascent to power, fuelled the fire. He also appeared unwell, at times slurring his speech, in a video to mark Bayram (Eid) in July. Erdoğan’s communications director, Fahrettin Altun, and several politicians from the ruling Justice and Development party (AKP) refuted the claims that the president was ill, tweeting videos and images of the president at recent engagements. “The chief has arrived from Istanbul to Ankara. He is very healthy. Those who try to bite him would lose their teeth,” the deputy party leader, Ahmet Hamdi Çamlı, tweeted. Last month, Erdoğan’s official Twitter account posted a video of the Turkish leader playing basketball with his aides after opposition politicians began questioning whether he was physically and mentally fit for office. “My political life was spent struggling against Erdoğan … My only hope is that Erdoğan is fit and healthy at the [next] elections and that he accounts to the people at the ballot box,” tweeted Aykut Erdoğdu, the deputy leader of the opposition Republican People’s party. Turkey is due to hold a general election before June 2023. While human rights groups say the country’s institutions have been weaponised against Erdoğan’s opponents during his nearly 20 years in office, the country’s struggling economy has led support for his party to ebb to historic lows. Publicly “denigrating” the Turkish republic, Turkishness and the head of state has been illegal in Turkey since 1926, but the number of criminal complaints filed skyrocketed after Erdoğan, previously the prime minister, became president in 2014. More than 160,000 investigations have been launched and nearly 13,000 people have been convicted for “insulting” the president in the last seven years, according to justice ministry data. Also this week, Turkish media reported that a journalist had been sentenced to two years in prison for insulting the president by sharing a 300-year-old Ottoman poem on Facebook, and a 96-year-old woman from Şanlıurfa would stand trial for comments in a video posted to social media in which she “used remarks that can be offending to the president’s honour and respectability”. In a decision last month, the European court of human rights ruled that a man who was detained for Facebook posts critical of Erdoğan in 2017 had had his right to freedom of expression violated. The court called on Turkey to change the law and pay recompense to those charged – but while the Strasbourg body’s rulings are binding, Ankara has often ignored them.It is the festival that celebrates the triumph of light over darkness, and this year Diwali held a special significance for India as it got back into full swing for the first time since the coronavirus pandemic began. Oil lamps lit up windows, shops, homes and monuments across the capital, Delhi, and devotees gathered at temples and shrines, as excitement over the festival, severely dampened last year by Covid-19, gripped the country once more. In the holy city of Ayodhya in the state of Uttar Pradesh, 900,000 earthen lamps were lit on the banks of the Sarayu River as dusk fell on Wednesday. Hindus believe the city is the birthplace of the god Ram. In Amritsar, the Sikh Golden temple was enveloped in fairy lights. In accordance with longstanding tradition to mark the festival, the armies of India and Pakistan exchanged sweets at the Tithwal crossing bridge on the Line of Control that divides the Indian and Pakistani parts of Kashmir. The Hindu festival represents new beginnings, but for many across India who lost their relatives and loved ones in the devastating Covid-19 second wave that swept through India in April it was the first Diwali without family members. In Delhi, Shriya Chatterjee, 42, said the festival would not feel the same without her mother, who died in April from the virus. “My mum loved Diwali,” she said. “She had all these traditions she would make us do every year and would boss us all around to make sure everything was perfect. It would drive me crazy but now this year I’m making sure we celebrate as she would have. But I’ve avoided parties and we are keeping it small, to be cautious because we know that Covid hasn’t gone away.” Even though coronavirus cases in India are currently at some of their lowest levels since the pandemic began, with just over 12,000 new cases reported per day, zero Covid deaths in Delhi and the lowest active caseload in more than 250 days, there were concerns that complacency during the festival could lead to a new rise in cases, or even set in motion India’s third wave. In an address, India’s prime minister, Narendra Modi, had urged people to take precautions during the celebrations and to be wary of Covid. However, Diwali parties were in full swing across Delhi in the days leading up to the festival, and markets in the capital and across the country were crammed with people squashed together, with little room for Covid precautions to be observed. For Delhi residents, the morning of Diwali also brought with it the annual spectre of pollution, as air quality hit hazardous levels and a thick brown smog shrouded India’s capital. Levels of PM2.5 – the smallest and most harmful particles polluting the air – peaked at an average of 389 on Thursday. The figure is more than 15 times higher than the safe limits set by the World Health Organization. Though polluting firecrackers were banned, and police seized four tonnes of them the night before Diwali, they could still be heard erupting across the city as night fell.Corruption, chaos and calamitous party misjudgment finally led to Owen Paterson’s resignation over breaking lobbying rules. Boris Johnson’s blatant attempt to put himself in control of parliamentary standards, abolishing an independent system that was investigating Paterson, caused well over 100 of his own MPs to rebel. There is sympathy for Paterson. He is a man still mourning the loss of his wife, a fact he referenced in his resignation letter. But the trajectory of today’s events appears to have had little to do with that sympathy or to suggest particular regard for Paterson personally: it’s reported that he was never even warned of the U-turn that ditched him. Who forced this humiliating reverse? What fright sent the wretched Jacob Rees-Mogg out to eat an unfamiliar dollop of humble pie? Following a wave of anger from within his own party and renewed cries of “Tory sleaze”, the prime minister abandoned plans to overhaul the parliamentary standards system – one that had just found the former Northern Ireland secretary in breach of parliamentary rules by lobbying for companies that were paying him over £100,000 a year. The filthy miasma steaming off the Thames at Westminster had even choked up some of the government’s loudest cheerleaders. The Daily Mail blasted across its front page, “Shameless MPs sink back into sleaze”. Its leader was lethal: “So now we know the lengths to which a venal political class will go to protect its own.” The Times leader was fierce: “It would be good for parliamentary democracy if this time [the prime minister] were made to pay a price.” The Sun said: “The Tories have made a big mistake changing parliament’s rules to save Owen Paterson’s job”, when it was “obvious the veteran MP’s antics were out of order”. When only the Pravda Telegraph stood by its party with a glowingly friendly interview with Paterson, the government had run out of shamelessness. Was it the defection of their friendly press that tipped the scales against him? Ben Page, chief executive of Ipsos Mori, says: “Knowing No 10, they will have focus-grouped it.” Those groups may have suggested in advance that it would have no cut-through, but then came the jolting headlines. “It sticks two fingers up at the electorate,” warned the Mail. But will that show up in the polls? That’s the impossible question: how much does Johnson’s electorate care about these democratic disgraces? Pollsters, political academics and Westminster observers have given up predicting when some “tipping point” might come; when the scales fall from voters’ eyes and they suddenly realise they have elected a gang of crooks, liars and cheats. “It’s priced in with Boris,” says Rob Ford, professor of politics at Manchester University, “as it was for [former Italian prime minister] Silvio Berlusconi. It was very different with John Major who stood as Back-to-Basics Honest John.” Brazen it out, that seemed to be the Tory way. Business secretary Kwasi Kwarteng opened his flailing pitch on the Today programme with the jaw-dropping claim that his government was only “trying to restore integrity and probity in public life”. Chris Bryant, Labour MP and chair of the committee on standards, did not appear to be exaggerating one iota when he said this smacks of Putin’s Russia. Labour’s refusal to take part in Johnson’s new rigged system killed it at birth. Until now nothing the non-stick prime minister has done has alienated his supporters. Professor Bobby Duffy, director of the King’s College Policy Institute, puts it like this: “Voters are like an 800lb gorilla sitting quietly in the corner getting on with their lives and eating their leaves … until suddenly that gorilla sits up and notices you, and then you’re in real trouble.” Yet Duffy doesn’t know when that “noticing” happens. “It builds over time. I’m astounded the Tories haven’t been noticed yet.” Think how many political shocks have been absorbed already: proroguing parliament was a constitutional outrage; so was absolving Dominic Cummings of breaking Covid rules; and so was ignoring how Priti Patel’s bullying broke the ministerial code, causing Alex Allan to resign as Johnson’s adviser on standards. The panel selecting the next head of the broadcasting regulator, Ofcom, was dismissed so that the prime minister could try to shoehorn “not appointable” ex-Mail editor Paul Dacre into the job. Details of lush Covid contracts for pals of Tory ministers are still to unravel. So most of Johnson’s MPs, many who are themselves taking fat lobbying fees, all thought there was nothing to stop him abolishing the investigations system. The independent parliamentary commissioner for standards, Kathryn Stone, was dead right to stand her ground after previous resignations had had zero impact. On and on it goes, unless or until voters decide enough is enough. Might that be when, as Ford puts it, voters who priced in Johnson’s bad faith decide: “It’s one thing to suspect your wife is having an affair, but quite another to find her in bed with your best friend.” That recognition of betrayal, according to pollsters, is unlikely to come as a result of any one of these outrages to democracy. Expectations of MPs are already very low: as Page’s veracity index shows, only 15% of voters trusted them last year. So those offences only join the steady drip of charges. And what about those pledges of a high-wage, high-skilled, levelled-up future where Brexit delivers a £350m-a-week bounty to the NHS? That nirvana is not where the country is heading, so will there be a backlash when those promises are not met? In the real world, prospects are worsening by the week. The latest bad news comes in the Resolution Foundation’s report that, in this parliament, voters can expect the weakest annual growth in disposable household income since records began, just 0.1% or possibly zero. Now add in NHS waiting lists, which will remain high. When people find their earnings falling badly short, the lipstick may rub off the pig they elected, as they start to notice that the filth he wallows in really does stink. Polly Toynbee is a Guardian columnistThe British socialite Ghislaine Maxwell is subjected to such invasive surveillance in jail that it “rivals scenes of Dr Hannibal Lecter’s incarceration” from The Silence of the Lambs, her lawyer has argued in making yet another request for bail pending her trial. Maxwell is charged in Manhattan federal court for allegedly procuring teenage girls for the disgraced wealthy financier Jeffrey Epstein. Opening arguments in Maxwell’s case are scheduled to begin on 29 November. “Maxwell’s conditions of detention for the past 16 months continue to be reprehensible and utterly inappropriate for [a] woman on the cusp of turning 60 with no criminal record or history of violence. It is unwarranted, unrelenting, and utterly inappropriate,” her lead attorney, Bobbi C Sternheim, wrote in court papers. “[She] has been subject to physical and emotional abuse by the correction officers, poor and unsanitary living conditions, insufficient nutrition, difficulties reviewing the millions of legal discovery documents in the case against her, and sleep deprivation.” The lawyer also complained about flashlight checks every 15 minutes at night that were preventing Maxwell from sleeping, hostility from guards and being tracked by surveillance cameras as she walked through the facility. Sternheim, who has discussed these alleged conditions in prior court papers, has also argued that Maxwell is “over-managed because of the intense criticism” that followed Epstein’s jailhouse suicide in August 2019, weeks after his arrest on sex trafficking charges. Sternheim has previously invoked The Silence of the Lambs – in which Anthony Hopkins plays an imprisoned serial killer – to describe Maxwell’s jail conditions. In April, Sternheim said in written arguments to a federal appeals court: “Though she is a model prisoner who poses no danger to society and has done literally nothing to prompt ‘special’ treatment, she is kept in isolation – conditions fitting for Hannibal Lecter but not a 59-year-old woman who poses no threat to anyone.” Asked for comment, the US Bureau of Prisons said in an email: “For privacy, safety, and security reasons, we decline to comment about the conditions of confinement for any particular inmate.” They did say that the bureau was “committed to ensuring the safety and security of all inmates in our population, our staff, and the public” and that “additionally, the BoP takes allegations of staff misconduct seriously and consistent with national policy, refers all allegations for investigation, if warranted. “Incidents of potential criminal activity or misconduct inside BoP facilities are thoroughly investigated for potential administrative discipline or criminal prosecution,” the email also said. The filings came just before the weeks-long process of selecting a jury began on Thursday in New York. Maxwell has said she is innocent of charges alleging that she recruited teenagers who were not yet adults for Epstein to sexually abuse from 1994 to 2004, Judge Alison Nathan told 132 prospective jurors. The judge warned prospective jurors not to discuss the case with anyone or research it, on the internet or anywhere else. She said the final jury of 12 jurors and six alternates will be asked to render a verdict after a trial expected to last about six weeks based only on evidence they learn about in the courtroom.Owen Paterson’s resignation as MP for North Shropshire leaves empty a seat he has held for 24 years, and follows a traumatic period in which he lost his wife of 40 years to suicide. His resignation statement said he would “remain a public servant but outside the cruel world of politics” and that his children had asked him “to leave politics altogether, for [his own] sake as well as theirs”. Born in Whitchurch, Shropshire, Paterson read history at Cambridge University and pursued a career in the leather industry. He joined his family’s business, the British Leather Company, in 1979 and went on to become president of the European Tanners’ Confederation. His move into politics began when he contested the Wrexham seat in the 1992 general election, losing to the Labour incumbent. He won the North Shropshire seat at the 1997 general election with a majority of 2,195, taking over from John Biffen, the former Conservative cabinet minister of the Thatcher era. His majority increased at each subsequent election, rising to 22,949 in 2019. That year he took 62.7% of the vote, compared with 22% for Labour and 10% for the Liberal Democrats. Paterson has held a number of senior roles throughout his political career, including secretary of state for Northern Ireland. He oversaw the release of the Saville report on the events of Bloody Sunday, which led to David Cameron as prime minister issuing a formal apology. Paterson is president of the Northern Ireland Conservatives. In the September 2012 reshuffle, Paterson was made environment, food and rural affairs secretary, a role he held for two years. He strongly supported badger culling to curb TB, spoke out against the foxhunting ban and was widely regarded as a climate change sceptic. In 2013 he claimed there were some advantages to the climate crisis, such as fewer people dying of cold in winter and the growth of certain crops farther north. During his time in office, money spent on preparing the UK for the impacts of global heating almost halved, from £29m in 2012-13 to £17m in 2013-14. Considered a true-blue Tory, he believes in minimal taxation and bureaucracy. He is also a longstanding Eurosceptic and was a prominent Brexit campaigner, helping to found the Conservatives for Britain pressure group. In 2012 he rebelled against the prime minister to oppose gay marriage. After leaving the cabinet in 2014 he set up a private thinktank, UK 2020, which he wound down in 2019 after receiving nearly £39,000 from unknown donors to fund overseas trips. He mainly travelled to the US where he gave a number of speeches to rightwing political groups. After his wife, Rose, the chair of Aintree racecourse, killed herself in June last year, Paterson spoke of the anguish his family had experienced. “Never a minute goes by when I do not think ‘how on earth did I not notice?’,” he said. “We will never know definitively why Rose did this but the impact on us is absolutely terrible. I was married to her for 40 years, that is a long time and we never had an inkling of this.” On Thursday he said the turmoil over his lobbying paled in comparison to the loss of Rose. “She was everything to my children and me. We miss her every day and the world will always be grey, sad and ultimately meaningless without her,” he said. The Rose Paterson Trust raises funds to support suicide prevention projects. • In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org.While his Sudbury Town teammates jiggled edgily inside the centre circle, Steve Ball felt relatively calm. If Nicky Smith scored his penalty in the shootout, the sixth-tier club would create an FA Cup sensation, winning at Brighton and Hove Albion in a first-round replay and propelling their tiny Suffolk market town into the national headlines. “There were lots of nervous players next to me but I remember saying: ‘He won’t miss,’” Ball remembers. “And then we were off and running, jumping on him, celebrating. It was a great night.” Ball’s confidence was well founded: he had played alongside Smith in the Football League and knew all about his colleague’s prowess from the spot. The pair were among five players who had joined Sudbury after leaving Colchester United, 14 miles to the south-east; the clubs had close bonds and, from the outside, it seemed a standard case of careers winding down at a friendly local non-league venue. But Sudbury, managed by the former Arsenal defender Richie Powling, made history at the Goldstone Ground and went on to give Brentford a scare before succumbing at the next stage. That was in November 1996. On Friday night, in a marvellous quirk of this year’s draw, Colchester’s current squad will make the same 20-minute drive as that handful of their predecessors. They will contest a derby that, beyond pre-season friendlies, had never been on the cards. Their opponents will be AFC Sudbury, formed in 1999 after Sudbury Town controversially merged with Sudbury Wanderers; while the town’s football landscape may be different, the highly charged emotions that consumed it 25 years ago will bring memories flooding back. “The atmosphere is going to be electric in there,” says Tony English, another former Colchester player who joined Sudbury alongside Ball in the pre-season of 1996-97 and became Powling’s player-assistant. “To get where we did back then, and where they have this year, for a place of that size is unbelievable. There’s a hardcore of 300 or 400 fans who turn up every week and they probably thought they were only going to see it once in their lives.” The teams will meet at King’s Marsh, a neat facility that will sell out at 2,000. A 3G surface will be easier to master than the bobbly, sloped pitch at Priory Road, the cherished but rickety venue where Brighton were initially held to a goalless draw in 1996. “It was a bit of a leveller back then,” says Ball. “So I think we accepted it’d be a totally different game at their place.” But Brighton were at rock bottom, propping up the league and soon to be homeless; Sudbury thrived amid what Ball calls a “toxic” environment in the replay and drew 1-1 after extra time, setting the stage for Smith’s heroics. “We had nothing to lose but were battered for 15 minutes, went a goal down and I remember thinking: ‘My God,’” says English. “Then we equalised and I thought the second half would be like the Alamo. If anything, though, we were on top after that. I hit the bar with my penalty but it ended up being a fantastic night.” Locally, the list of heroes still rolls off the tongue: from the strapping Colchester-born centre-forward Christian McClean to the diminutive but lion-hearted goalkeeper Steve Mokler. Then there was Powling, whom Ball calls “a lovely guy, a real disciplinarian who wanted things done right and keeps things professional”. Ball remembers wondering why, two games into his time at Sudbury, he received a paycheque that was £50 short. Powling, ever the stickler, had fined him for breaking a corner flag as he chased to keep a ball in play. “We bounced off each other really well,” English says. “There was a camaraderie and togetherness that got us through those high-intensity cup games.” The Brentford tie, so popular it was moved to Colchester’s old Layer Road home, essentially heralded an abrupt end to Sudbury Town’s journey. Financial problems soon caused them to resign from the league; when the merger came, the class of 1996 had drifted apart. Beyond a dalliance with the first round in 2000, when they lost 6-1 at Darlington, the new setup have struggled to hit comparable heights until now. “There was a big rivalry between Town and Wanderers,” Ball says. “After the new club formed there was a bit of animosity between the two sets of supporters but, over the years, that’s gone. There’s a great feeling down there and the whole town seems to be behind their team.” English agrees, saying: “It’s probably pulled the town closer together.” Times may have changed but the ties remain intricate. Ball, who spent six months as Colchester’s head coach last season and heads the League Two club’s recruitment setup, was manager of Leiston Town in 2013-14. Among his first signings was Angelo Harrop, whose father, Geoff, was a highly regarded youth coach at Colchester. Harrop co-manages AFC Sudbury with Rick Andrews; their eighth-tier Isthmian League North side, stocked with products of an academy setup that is hugely impressive for its level, will fancy their chances of an upset. “Angelo was an intelligent footballer and has got them playing well, in a technical manner,” Ball says. “It’s great to see him thriving.” There is, once again, a buzz around those quiet country lanes. “It’s a lovely place to live, beautiful villages around it, but they are big football people in that town,” Ball continues. “Once the bandwagon started rolling it was clear the passion locally is huge. I’ve told all our staff to expect the same again: they’ll make it difficult for us.” For English, who coaches at a local school, it will be a night to savour. “I’m hoping Sudbury have a go and Colchester play with the intensity and purpose they’re capable of,” he says. “If that happens, you’re in for a really good spectacle and I hope both sides do themselves proud.”The police and crime commissioner of one of England’s most troubled forces is being investigated over an allegation of a historical sexual assault. Steve Turner, who became Cleveland police and crime commissioner in May, is resisting pressure to resign after the revelation by the Mirror. Turner, a Conservative, was already in the spotlight after he was named in parliament as having been cautioned some years ago for theft when he worked at a supermarket. His job gives him oversight of Cleveland police, which in 2018 became the first English police force to be rated inadequate across all areas. The police watchdog, the Independent Office for Police Conduct (IOPC), has now begun an investigation into the allegation of a historical sexual offence. The investigation will be carried out by another force. An IOPC spokesperson said: “Any allegation that a criminal offence may have been committed by a police and crime commissioner (PCC) must be referred by the appropriate authority to the IOPC to determine whether the matter should be investigated. “We have now begun a managed investigation after a complaint referral from the Cleveland police and crime panel regarding the alleged conduct of the current PCC prior to taking up the role. This investigation, which follows an allegation of a serious non-recent criminal offence, will be carried out by a force from another area under our direction and control. “We have contacted the complainant to make them aware of our involvement. As this investigation is at a very early stage, it would not be appropriate to comment further.” The IOPC is also assessing whether or not action is required in relation to the theft, a spokesperson said. Turner’s office said he has no plans to resign or temporarily step down. His predecessor, Barry Copinger, resigned in September 2020 after the county’s chief constable, Richard Lewis, raised concerns about a freedom of information (FoI) breach. An investigation by the Information Commissioner’s Office (ICO) concluded Coppinger did not commit a crime by deleting WhatsApp messages on his phone. In August the IOPC said the former Cleveland police chief Mike Veale would face gross misconduct proceedings. There was “sufficient evidence” he breached professional standards while leading the force, the IOPC said. Veale, who quit Cleveland police in 2019 after just a year in post, led the Sir Edward Heath inquiry while at Wiltshire police. The office did not disclose the nature of the alleged misconduct but it has previously said it was looking into complaints of “inappropriate behaviour towards colleagues, discrimination, and unprofessional behaviour”. Cleveland police is currently seeking yet another police chief constable – its seventh in nine years – after Lewis announced he was leaving to rejoin Mid-Wales police at the end of the year. In a statement, Turner said: “I am appalled at the allegation and the connotations around it... I will cooperate fully, as will my office.”Boris Johnson has been called “Mr U-turn” in his time as prime minister this reputation has been well-earned. A conservative count gives more than 30 often panicked policy changes since the 2019 general election. ‘Ignore Covid’ to national lockdown 31 January 2020 The BBC quoted the prime minister as saying the “best thing would be to ignore” Covid around the time the first UK case was detected; a claim Downing Street declined to deny. Ministers soon had to take drastic action. Mass community testing 12 March 2020 Mass testing was ended despite World Health Organization (WHO) advice that it was vital. The health secretary, Matt Hancock, subsequently announced a target of 500,000 tests a day by the end of October 2020. Bereavement scheme 20 May 2020 A scheme granting indefinite leave to remain in the UK to relatives of foreign national NHS staff who died from Covid-19 initially excluded cleaners, porters and social care workers. It was eventually extended to low-paid workers. Visa surcharge 21 May 2020 Johnson backed away from a policy requiring people coming to the UK to work for the NHS to pay a health surcharge. Proxy voting 3 June 2020 Ministers dropped their opposition to allowing proxy voting for shielding MPs amid significant opposition. Marcus Rashford’s free school meals campaign 16 June 2020 Johnson belatedly bowed to pressure to help feed hungry children outside school term time, insisting he had been unaware of his own government’s concerted fight against the England footballer’s campaign. NHS app 18 June 2020 Several months and millions of pounds after backing an NHS anti-Covid app, ministers finally acknowledged it would not work. Reopening primary schools 9 June 2020 Johnson insisted primary schools in England should reopen. But ministers eventually agreed to listen to experts who had warned the plan was unworkable. Face coverings in shops 14 July 2020 The government insisted face coverings should not be mandatory in shops because people would not be in close proximity for long. Weeks later, they became mandatory in England. Huawei ban 14 July 2020 Johnson had ignored Washington’s warnings that Huawei posed a threat. But he backtracked and it was announced that Huawei kit would be stripped out of the 5G phone networks. Local contact tracers 10 August 2020 Ministers finally agreed to adopt a regional approach to contact tracing – following the examples of some foreign nations – after months of pursuing a £10bn centralised contact-tracing model. Exam results in England 15 August 2020 Johnson initially insisted 2020’s A-level results were “robust” and the education secretary said there would be no U-turn on their calculation. Within two days, the government U-turned. Face masks in schools 25 August 2020 Days before secondary schools in England were due to reopen, Johnson scrapped his government’s plan to advise against wearing face masks. Eviction ban 20 August 2020 Ministers made a series of threats to lift the ban on evictions imposed during the pandemic – including in August 2020 – and relented several times. England’s second lockdown 31 October 2020 Having ignored scientific advice in favour of a two-week national “circuit breaker” lockdown for England in September, Johnson announced a month-long lockdown for November. Furlough scheme extension 5 November 2020 The chancellor had looked to wind down the furlough scheme. But he was forced into a series of embarrassing climbdowns because of the scale of the second coronavirus wave. Marcus Rashford’s free school meals campaign – again 8 November 2020 Ministers took up the fight against Rashford once again. And, once again, they backed down; announcing a £170m winter grant scheme for families struggling due to Covid. Cancelling Christmas 19 December 2020 Johnson again tried to avoid making a decision on Covid restrictions and, again, was forced to belatedly introduce them. The nation’s Christmas plans were plunged into chaos. Lockdown a day after opening schools 4 January 2021 A day after urging children to return to classrooms, insisting it was safe, Johnson announced it was not safe even to leave the house and locked England down. Health secretary’s resignation 26 June 2021 Johnson accepted Matt Hancock’s apology for breaching social distancing guidelines and declared the matter “closed” on the Friday. Johnson accepted Hancock’s resignation on the Saturday. Johnson and Sunak self-isolating 18 July 2021 The prime minister and chancellor were forced to self-isolate after coming into contact with the health secretary, who had contracted Covid. They had tried to avoid it, claiming to be part of a pilot testing scheme. Foreign aid spending 13 July 2021 In his 2019 manifesto, Johnson promised overseas aid spending of 0.7% of GDP. About a year and a half later, he cut billions of pounds from the budget. Taking the knee 14 July 2021 Johnson demanded action against people guilty of racial abuse at football matches after being criticised for offering tacit backing to those who booed England’s players taking the knee to protest against racial abuse at football matches. Air passenger quarantine 17 July 2021 Plans to allow Britons who have had two jabs to return from amber list countries without isolating for up to 10 days were dropped in respect of France – one of the most popular destinations – at the last minute. The Northern Ireland protocol 21 July 2021 Johnson trumpeted the deal he struck over Brexit. But, within less than two years, his government was already trying to unpick it, claiming it had proven unworkable. Critical worker pingdemic 22 July 2021 An insistence that double-vaccinated critical workers would not be exempted from self-isolation was dropped as hundreds of thousands were pinged. Afghan guards 20 August 2021 Ministers backed away from their initial refusal to support 125 Afghan guards who protected the British embassy in Kabul before its fall. It later emerged only one had made it to the UK. National insurance rises 8 September 2021 Johnson was accused of breaking a key manifesto pledge not to raise taxes when his government brought forward plans to hike national insurance contributions. Vaccine passports 12 September 2021 Vaccine passport plans were dropped only two weeks after Downing Street insisted it would press ahead. Within another two days, the prime minister raised the prospect yet again. Foreign lorry drivers 24 September 2021 With queues forming at fuel stations, ministers were forced to rethink their post-Brexit anti-immigration stance and invite thousands of foreign lorry drivers to the UK. Sewage 26 October 2021 Ministers announced a partial U-turn after reject calls to place a legal duty on water companies to reduce raw sewage discharges into rivers. Parliamentary standards and corruption 4 November 2021 Plans to immediately scrap the parliamentary standards system were dropped amid public fury, as the Tories were accused of acting to protect one of their own.Scientists on the Zoe Covid study believe UK cases of coronavirus may have peaked for the year, a suggestion that prompted some experts to warn that it was too soon to know how the epidemic would play out in the weeks ahead. The study, which estimates the number of Covid cases in the community from the information that users log on an app, found a clear decline in cases in under-18s since mid-October, with infection rates levelling off in most other age groups though still climbing in 55- to 75-year-olds. The trends are based on 42,359 swab tests taken between 16 and 30 October and point to 88,592 daily symptomatic cases, a decrease of 4.7% on the previous week’s Zoe data. The numbers equate to one in 53 people in the UK currently with symptomatic Covid infections. “Young people have been driving the big numbers of cases, and the big numbers look from our data to have finished,” said Prof Tim Spector, the lead scientist on the Zoe study, at King’s College London. “There are multiple reasons behind it, but a lot is driven by the pattern we are seeing with kids, plus the history of the past waves.” It comes as figures on Thursday showed that 37,269 people across the UK tested positive for Covid in the previous 24 hours, a small drop on the 41,299 seen the day before. However, the number of deaths within 28 days of a positive Covid test recorded over the same period – 214 – was almost the same as the 217 reported the previous day. In the autumn term Covid infections have soared in secondary school children, a cohort largely unprotected because of the slow rollout of vaccines to the age group. The Office for National Statistics estimates that more than 9% of children in years seven to 11 were infected in the week ending 22 October. But the sustained high rates of infection in schools have driven up levels of immunity to the virus and at some point, with help from vaccinations, cases are expected to fall back down. Outbreak modellers expect this to happen unevenly across the country, with hard-hit areas such as London among the first to see cases drop in the age group. What is unclear is when infection rates at schools will peak. Scientists on the React study, at Imperial College, have reported similar evidence for a downturn in cases at the end of October, but warned that the decline could be temporary and driven by children being out of school for half-term. Kevin McConway, an emeritus professor of applied statistics at the Open University, said cases had fallen for only a short time and what would happen next was highly uncertain. “While I very much hope personally that the decline continues, I really don’t think we can be anywhere near certain that it will,” he said. He added that while the Zoe study provided some plausible reasons for cases to keep falling, a lot seemed to be “expressions of hope more than definite predictions”. McConway said: “We can hope that the peak for 2021 has been reached, but we still need to plan accordingly for what should be done if it hasn’t been reached.” Mark Woolhouse, a professor of infectious disease epidemiology at Edinburgh University, said a worrying trend was the rise in cases in older and much more vulnerable people. “Even though the vaccines give very good protection against severe disease they do not give complete protection, and these age groups continue to dominate hospital cases. I would not want to conclude that the UK Covid-19 pandemic is in decline until it declines in older and more vulnerable age groups. That has not happened yet.”The documentary-maker Max Stahl, who has died of throat cancer aged 66, exposed the atrocities of the Indonesian government in East Timor. But he first found fame under his birth name of Christopher Wenner as a presenter of the BBC children’s television show Blue Peter. His sporting prowess shone through when he abseiled down the east tower of Television Centre, but the overriding story of his two years on the programme (1978-80) was how he stumbled through scripts and appeared uncomfortable in front of the camera. Nevertheless, his constantly arguing over Blue Peter’s content with the editor, Biddy Baxter, who held an iron grip on the show, gave a glimpse of what he would later bring to news and current affairs television. Displaying immense bravery, Wenner made documentaries in places of war and upheaval. His most important contribution to bringing understanding to western audiences of brutal acts committed away from the glare of the outside world came when in 1991 he travelled to East Timor (now Timor-Leste), a former Portuguese colony ruled by an Indonesian dictatorship since being invaded in 1975. At the Santa Cruz cemetery in the capital, Dili, he filmed shocking scenes of a massacre of almost 280 peaceful demonstrators by Indonesian troops. The protesters were staging a pro-independence march following a memorial service at a nearby church where a student had been shot dead two weeks earlier. “I was just getting my camera ready when there was a wall of sound, at least 10 seconds of uninterrupted gunfire,” he said. “The soldiers who arrived fired point blank into a crowd of a couple of thousand young people.” Before being arrested and questioned for nine hours, he buried his film in a freshly dug grave, later recovering it and smuggling it out of the country. Back in Britain, the pictures were shown first on Channel 4 News, and then made into the film Cold Blood: The Massacre of East Timor, co-directed with Peter Gordon and broadcast in ITV’s First Tuesday documentary strand in 1992; the film was the overall winner in Amnesty International’s first UK Media Awards. So that he could protect his identity and return to East Timor, Wenner was credited as Max Stahl (his middle name and a variation on his mother’s maiden name) and continued to use it throughout his career. A year later, John Pilger was planning his own documentary, Death of a Nation: The Timor Conspiracy, interviewing witnesses to atrocities and telling the full story of the Indonesian genocide, the islanders’ struggle and the role of western governments, and Stahl contributed to the film. He travelled to East Timor independently of Pilger and the director David Munro – all of them carrying small cameras hidden in bags – to ensure that, if any of them were arrested, at least some film would get out. Stahl shot rare footage of Fretilin guerrillas training and his interviews included one with “Delfin”, who said he became a resistance fighter after witnessing a massacre in which 66 men and boys were killed and all the women raped. He also filmed the exhumation from a mass grave of some of the dictatorship’s other victims back in Indonesia. When Death of a Nation was screened in 1994, it elicited more than 4,000 calls a minute to a helpline number and thousands of viewers wrote to their MPs. The two documentaries – Cold Blood and Death of a Nation – were credited with raising awareness of East Timor’s plight, and were “crucial in bringing forward our liberation and saving countless lives”, said José Ramos-Horta, the political activist and East Timor’s second president after independence came in 2002 as Timor-Leste. Stahl showed his affection for the country by making his home there until moving to Australia last year for medical treatment. He founded the Max Stahl Audiovisual Centre for Timor-Leste in Dili, an archive containing 5,000 hours of footage shot over several decades, and in 2019 he gained Timorese citizenship and was awarded the country’s highest honour, the Order of Timor-Leste. He was born in London, the third of four sons of Gunilla (nee Stahle), the daughter of a Swedish diplomat and director of the Nobel Foundation, and Michael Wenner, of Swiss and French descent, who was a British diplomat and had served as a paratrooper and commando during the second world war. After studying at Stonyhurst college, Lancashire, Christopher gained a degree in literature at St Catherine’s College, Oxford, where he acted with the dramatic society. He also appeared alongside fellow students in a 1975-76 touring production of The Taming of the Shrew by the Oxford and Cambridge Shakespeare Company. He directed fringe theatre productions and acted in repertory theatre in Derby before joining Lesley Judd and Simon Groom as a Blue Peter presenter in 1978. Apart from being seen on TV as a trooper, uncredited, in the 1984 Doctor Who story The Awakening, Wenner dedicated the rest of his career to covering conflicts in faraway countries. He started by producing Death of a Priest (1981) in Guatemala and directing The Front Line and Crucified Church (both 1983), about the civil war in El Salvador, where his father had been British ambassador. He caused concern when it was believed he had been kidnapped in Lebanon in 1985, but he turned up after being missing for 19 days and made The Hashish Connection (1988), about the country’s illegal drugs trade. Then, after his first visit to East Timor, he filmed in Serbia during the Balkans war and in Kosovo (1995-99), now using the name Max Stahl. He also made documentaries in Russia (The Hunt for Red Mercury, 1993), Guatemala (Plunder: Mayan Treasure Hunters, 1990) and post-Soviet Georgia (Out of the Shadows, 1992) and Chechnya (Sufi in Chechnia, 1992). While working on Blue Peter, he met Liz Trubridge, a production assistant on the programme (and later producer of Downton Abbey), whom he married in 1984. The marriage ended in divorce. He is survived by his second wife, Ingrid (nee Bucens), whom he married in 2008, their son, Leo, and daughter, Malin, and the sons of his first marriage, Ben and Barnaby. • Max Stahl (Christopher Max Wenner), film-maker and television presenter, born 6 December 1954; died 28 October 2021From safe-haven pubs and soundproofed dens to calming Spotify playlists and pheromone diffusers, desperate pet owners are turning to a number of unusual techniques to try to soothe their anxious pets on Bonfire Night. Increasing awareness of the distress caused to animals by pyrotechnics has led to growing backlash against fireworks in recent years. Sainsbury’s stopped selling them in 2019, and other supermarkets have increased their low or no-noise offerings this year. Despite this, the RSPCA is anticipating a bumper year for calls about distressed animals. A recent poll has shown that, with so many fireworks events cancelled, 52% of the public will be attending unofficial at-home displays, up from 41% in 2020 and 23% in 2019. “Our pets’ senses are very sensitive, and they can pick up vibrations and sounds that we as humans can’t,” said Anna Ewers Clark, a vet at the charity People’s Dispensary for Sick Animals. “So fireworks aren’t only loud to them, they also cause a whole sensory overload. “They also don’t understand where the noise is coming from. It’s a perfect storm of factors that can be very overwhelming and scary for them.” This year Pets At Home has launched three playlists on Spotify – soft rock, reggae and classical – for owners to play for their pets, a technique that can provide a “buffer” against the sound of the fireworks outside, Ewers Clark said. In fact one pub in Manchester said it would be turning its music up in order to drown out the noise of fireworks and create a “safe haven” for dogs on Friday night. The dog-friendly New Grove Inn in Whitefield said it would also be offering special dog treats to help canines get through the stressful evening. To ensure animals have as stress-free a night as possible, Ewers Clark recommends the following tactics: Music Dog-oriented music is becoming big business, and there’s even research into what kind of music animals prefer – a 2017 study by the SPCA and the University of Glasgow found that reggae and soft rock were the best genres for reducing stress, barking and heart rates in dogs. Soundproofing “Building a den or a safe place works really well for a lot of pets,” Ewers Clark advised. But don’t forget small pets like rabbits and guinea pigs too. “A lot of small pets will really benefit from having somewhere to hide, perhaps some blankets or some hay. It will help to muffle the noise, and also gives them that sense of security.” Pheromone diffusers “Pheromone diffusers and calming supplements are absolutely fantastic,” said Ewers Clark. “But they do unfortunately often take a little while to kick in.” Using them once an animal is already stressed out has little effect, she said. “I would recommend getting them straight away and putting them in place for new year.” Noise desensitisation For particularly troubled pets, Ewers Clark recommends getting in touch with a behaviourist to help your dog densensitise to sound over time. “We basically play the sounds at a very low level, so your pet is not reacting. And then we do counter conditioning, where we pair it with something really, really positive, like a treat or a game,” she said. “So they don’t just learn the noise isn’t scary, they learn that actually it’s a fun time. And you can gradually increase the level of noise until it’s similar to the real thing.”Hannah Gutierrez, the armourer who oversaw guns and ammunition on the western Rust, was to be paid a total of $7,913 (£5,863) for her work on the film, according to a draft of the production budget obtained by The Hollywood Reporter. Such a sum is not atypical for a new hire on a fairly small-budget feature, but it is likely to come under scrutiny in the wake of the fatal shooting on set of cinematographer Halyna Hutchins by star and producer Alec Baldwin. Baldwin was to be paid $150,000 for his work as lead actor, and another $100,000 in his capacity as producer. Four of the five other producers were all to be paid $150,00. The total budget for the film was $7,279,305, with fewer than 100 employees – 75 crew and 22 actors – as well as 230 background extras. The director, Joel Souza, who was also injured by the gun Baldwin fired, was to earn $221,872, and Hutchins was to have earned $48,945. Dave Halls, the first assistant director who handed the gun to Baldwin, according to sheriff’s affidavits, was to earn $52,830. As well as Gutierrez’s salary, a further $7,469 had been budgeted for “armorer crew”, as well as $17,500 for the rental of weapons and $5,000 for rounds. Speaking on Wednesday, a lawyer for Gutierrez suggested that a disgruntled employee on the set had attempted to sabotage production by deliberately placing a live round into the gun used by Baldwin. Jason Bowles said his client had pulled ammunition from a box that she believed contained only dummy rounds that were incapable of firing. He said he thought it was possible that someone purposely placed real bullets, which look similar to dummies, in the box. “We’re not saying anybody had any intent there was going to be a tragedy of homicide,” he told ABC’s Good Morning America, “but they wanted to do something to cause a safety incident on set. That’s what we believe happened.” There are indications of unrest on the set of Rust prior to the incident on 21 October. Before the shooting, camera operators had quit the film to protest against what they said were long hours and other objectionable working conditions, authorities in Santa Fe have said. Some complained about being put up in hotels some considerable distance from the set, meaning a lengthy commute further extended a long day. Producers for the film, some alleged, were housed much nearer to the set. The budget released to The Hollywood Reporter does not appear to substantiate this discrepancy. Some $25,000 for hotel rooms for the five producers had been allocated ($5,000 per person), as well as $95,200 for 21 below-the-line crew members ($4,533 per person).Owen Paterson has announced his resignation as MP for North Shropshire, after Boris Johnson made clear he would no longer seek to prevent the former cabinet minister from being punished by parliament for lobbying. Yesterday Johnson ordered his MPs to vote down a report saying Paterson should be suspended from the Commons for 30 days. But less then 24 hours later, in one of the swiftest and most comprehensive government U-turns in recent times, No 10 announced that it was going to effectively tear up yesterday’s vote, allow a fresh debate on suspending Paterson and start again from scratch in attempting to gain cross-party support for reform of the disciplinary process for MPs. There is a Westminster joke about how eventually everyone gets let down by Boris Johnson, and the U-turn meant that Paterson - who yesterday enjoyed the full support of the No 10 machine - was today facing inevitable suspension from the Commons, and a possible recall election too. (See 4.31pm.) Paterson, who only last night was saying that he was looking forward to clearing his name and was calling for the resignation of the parliamentary commissioner for standards (see 11.11am), responded to the PM cutting him adrift by announcing that he was resigning as an MP. In a statement Paterson said he was doing so to put his family first. (See 2.45pm.) Johnson’s U-turn makes the government less vulnerable to the toxic charge of corruption and cronyism than it was, but the episode must have caused some reputational damage and Tory MPs who loyally defended what the government was doing yesterday are looking particularly exposed. It also remains unclear whether reform of the standards system will ever happen. Labour has not entirely ruled out joining a cross-party initiative in this area, but ministers’ main demand is to insert an appeal process into the current system - and Sir Keir Starmer argues this is unnecessary. (See 3.38pm.) Claudia Webbe, who was elected as a Labour MP, has been sentenced to 10 weeks in custody suspended for two years after being found guilty of a campaign of harassment, including threatening an acid attack, against a woman. Lord Evans, the chair of the Committee on Standards in Public Life, has launched a full-frontal attack on the government’s decision to tear up the independent system for combating sleaze in parliament, describing it as “a very serious and damaging moment for parliament and public standards in this country”. Boris Johnson has been accused of “staggering hypocrisy” after it emerged that he flew back to London from the Cop26 climate summit in Glasgow by private jet to go to a dinner at a men-only private members’ club. Johnson has admitted receiving a free holiday at a luxurious Spanish villa linked to Zac Goldsmith, the former MP who was given a peerage and job by the prime minister. Sir Ed Davey, the Lib Dem leader, has described Owen Paterson’s resignation as a victory for the British public. Davey said: Boris Johnson thought he could rewrite the rules to defend himself and his Tory chums from charges of sleaze and corruption without anyone noticing. But he underestimated the British people and how badly this would go down, including among many lifelong Conservative voters. It just shows that the Conservatives are taking people for granted. The public wants decency and honesty from their government, instead under Boris Johnson all they get is lies, chaos and cronyism. Boris Johnson has issued a statement paying tribute to Owen Paterson. He said: I am very sad that parliament will lose the services of Owen Paterson who has been a friend and colleague of mine for decades. He has had a distinguished career, serving in two cabinet positions, and above all he has been a voice for freedom - for free markets and free trade and free societies - and he was an early and powerful champion of Brexit. I know that this must have been a very difficult decision but I can understand why - after the tragic circumstances in which he lost his beloved wife Rose - he has decided to put his family first. Ian Blackford, the SNP’s leader at Westminster, wants Boris Johnson to launch an inquiry into Tory sleaze. One suspects he is unlikely to get his wish. At the No 10 afternoon lobby briefing the PM’s spokesperson also said that Boris Johnson still had confidence in Mark Spencer, the government chief whip. “The prime minister has confidence in the chief whip and he continues to do an excellent job delivering for the government,” the spokesperson said. According to the Guido Fawkes blog, many Conservative MPs blame Spencer for the Paterson vote fiasco, which has led to one of the swiftest and most comprehensive government U-turns on record, and prompted Owen Paterson to resign as an MP. (If MPs had voted to suspend Paterson, he may have decided to resign anyway. If he hadn’t, campaigners might have tried to get the 10% of voters necessary to sign a petition calling for a recall election – a procedure allowed for a suspension of more than 10 sitting days. But there is no guarantee that this would have inevitably led to Paterson’s departure. Recall has been tried in three seats since the process was introduced in 2015 but in one, North Antrim, campaigners did not collect enough signatures. In another, Brecon and Radnorshire, the offending MP was reselected by his party to fight the byelection, which he lost. And the two seats where recall did lead to the MP changing – Brecon and Radnorshire, and Peterborough – are both marginals. North Shropshire is a safe Tory seat (see 3.21pm), which means activists from other parties would have little incentive to trigger a byelection.) At the afternoon lobby briefing Downing Street said that there was now no need for a vote on the standards committee report saying Owen Paterson should be suspended, in the light of his decision to resign as an MP. Gavin Barwell, the Tory peer who was chief of staff to Theresa May when she was prime minister, has criticised Owen Paterson’s friends who encouraged him to contest the standards committee report saying he broke the rules banning paid lobbying. Pete Wishart, the SNP spokesperson on Commons matters, is also calling for Boris Johnson to apologise for his handling of the Owen Paterson affair. Wishart said: Boris Johnson must now come to parliament to answer for his grubby role in the Tory corruption scandal. The prime minister must perform a full U-turn, apologise to the standards commissioner, and commit to an independent inquiry into the growing problem of Tory sleaze, cronyism and corruption at the heart of the UK government. This Tory government is the sleaziest in decades. It has been beset by scandal after scandal - with the prime minister and his Tory colleagues guilty of breaking the ministerial code, acting unlawfully, handing peerages to donors, contracts to cronies and special access to their pals. The Owen Paterson affair is just the tip of the iceberg. It absolutely stinks. In an interview with BBC Radio 2’s Jeremy Vine show at lunchtime, before Owen Paterson announced his resignation, Sir Keir Starmer said that Paterson and his supporters were “completely wrong” when they claimed that the Commons standards process did not give him a right of appeal. Starmer explained: I’m sorry, that is completely wrong. The independent commissioner comes to a decision and then there is an appeal to the standards committee. And that appeal involves that individual, Owen Paterson, being able to put in, with his lawyers, his appeal points in writing and also to make his case in person which he did. So he’s been through the appeal. And this idea there’s not an appeal is such a ... I’ve been six years in politics and many years as a lawyer, I’ve heard some really, really dodgy defences. That is as dodgy as they come. Starmer said that Labour would not get involved in cross-party talks if they were designed to “get rid of the independent commissioner and replace it with a group of politicians to judge our own behaviour”. But he said he was open to plans that might strengthen the role of the commissioner. Yesterday the Commons voted to set up a committee with a Tory majority, chaired by John Whittingdale, the former culture secretary, to review the way standards inquiries are carried out. But Labour and the SNP both said they would boycott it, and the plan to set it up has now been shelved. The government is now going to make another attempt to reach cross-party consensus on reform (see 10.50am), but almost nothing has been said yet about what this might entail. Labour sources say whether or not the party participates will depend on what is being proposed. Owen Paterson’s decision to resign means there will be a byelection in North Shropshire. But Paterson had a majority at the last election of 22,949, and so for the Conservatives to lose there it would have to be a catastrophic electoral meltdown for the party. The Tories did lose Chesham and Amersham, another very safe seat, in a byelection earlier this year. But their majority in the seat in 2019 was “only” 16,223 (29%), not 41% as it was in North Shropshire at the general election. And in 2019 the Lib Dems (byelection experts, who specialise in hoovering up soft Conservative votes) were in second place in Chesham and Amersham, where HS2 was also a big factor. Paterson’s main opponent at the last three elections in North Shropshire was the Labour candidate. Sir Keir Starmer has issued a statement responding to the news of Owen Paterson’s resignation, saying Boris Johnson should apologise. Starmer says: This has been an unbelievable 24 hours even by this government’s chaotic standards. Only yesterday Boris Johnson was forcing his MPs to rip up the rules on standards in public life is a truly damning indictment of this prime minister and the corrupt government he leads. Boris Johnson must now apologise to the entire country for this grubby attempt to cover up for the misdemeanour of his friend. This isn’t the first time he’s done this but it must be the last. And Boris Johnson must explain how he intends to fix the immense harm he has done to confidence in the probity of him and his MPs. Opposition MPs may be surprised by the claim in Owen Paterson’s statement that some of them mocked his wife’s death by suicide last year. (See 2.45pm.) He may have been referring to a moment during PMQs yesterday. In his sketch (paywall) for the Times (paywall), Quentin Letts said: “At PMQs earlier, Boris Johnson had mentioned Rose Paterson’s suicide. Up went several aw-diddums ‘ahhs’ from the Labour side.” My colleague John Crace, the Guardian’s sketchwriter, was also in the gallery and he tells me he did not see anything that could be described as MPs mocking Rose’s death. My impression was that when Johnson mentioned Rose’s suicide, that did prompt a faint reaction from some MPs, but that was more because they felt Johnson was using Rose’s death as cover because he was finding it hard to justify the vote exempting Paterson from the standards committee recommendations. But I was listening to the debate on TV, not watching from the gallery, so I may have missed aspects of the reaction. Here is the full statement from Owen Paterson announcing his decision to resign as an MP. I have today, after consultation with my family, and with much sadness decided to resign as the MP for North Shropshire. The last two years have been an indescribable nightmare for my family and me. My integrity, which I hold very dear, has been repeatedly and publicly questioned. I maintain that I am totally innocent of what I have been accused of and I acted at all times in the interests of public health and safety. I, my family and those closest to me know the same. I am unable to clear my name under the current system. Far, far worse than having my honesty questioned was, of course, the suicide of my beloved and wonderful wife, Rose. She was everything to my children and me. We miss her every day and the world will always be grey, sad and ultimately meaningless without her. The last few days have been intolerable for us. Worst of all was seeing people, including MPs, publicly mock and deride Rose’s death and belittle our pain. My children have therefore asked me to leave politics altogether, for my sake as well as theirs. I agree with them. I do not want my wife’s memory and reputation to become a political football. Above all, I always put my family first. This is a painful decision but I believe the right one. I have loved being the MP for North Shropshire and have considered it a privilege to have been elected to serve my constituents for 24 years. I would like to thank my staff who have worked for me so loyally over many years. I also want to thank those who have stood by me so staunchly. I wish them all the best in that difficult but vital job of being a member of parliament. I will remain a public servant but outside the cruel world of politics. I intend to devote myself to public service in whatever ways I can, but especially in the world of suicide prevention. At this incredibly difficult time for my family, we ask that the media respects our privacy and lets us grieve my beloved Rose, the best person I ever met. Paterson said he would not be making any further comment. Owen Paterson is going to step down as an MP, PA Media reports. The meeting between Lord Frost, the Brexit minister, and Clément Beaune, the French minister for Europe, in Paris this morning does not seem to have achieved much. They were talking about the dispute about fishing licences. But in its readout afterwards, the UK government just said: Lord Frost and Europe minister Clément Beaune met in Paris this morning. As foreshadowed, they discussed the range of difficulties arising from the application of the agreements between the UK and the EU. Both sides set out their positions and concerns. The two ministers will speak again early next week. Frost also has a meeting tomorrow in Brussels with Maroš Šefčovič, his EU counterpart, which will focus on the ongoing dispute about the Northern Ireland protocol. According to Laura Kuenssberg, the BBC’s political editor, on the World at One, Owen Paterson did not get any advance warning about the government U-turn that means MPs will get a fresh vote on suspending him from the Commons. My colleague Heather Stewart says this will reinforce suspicions (see 9.34am) that Paterson was not really the priority for No 10. Sir Lindsay Hoyle, the Commons speaker, has criticised Kwasi Kwarteng, the business secretary, for the interview he gave this morning suggesting the parliamentary commissioner for standards should resign. (See 9.27am.) Hoyle told MPs: It’s not been a good period for the house, it’s been a very, very difficult time for all. What I would say is I do appeal to members - whether they are secretary of state or whoever - please, staff members of this house shouldn’t be named, they’ve not got the right of reply or the ability to defend themselves ... I’ve got to say please, rein in your thoughts, consider what you are doing to the individuals concerned, they also have to live through this like the rest of us. Please, consider inappropriate behaviour and start acting responsible to the position that you hold. Sir Roger Gale, a Conservative MP who voted for the amendment to shelve the suspension of Owen Paterson yesterday, has just told the World at One that, in the new vote on suspending Paterson, he will probably abstain. He said he was glad the government had taken the decision to decouple the proposal for reform of the system, which he favours, from the Paterson case. But he also said he was reluctant to vote for Paterson’s suspension because he did not believe his colleague had received a fair hearing. The Telegraph’s Tony Diver has a picture of the vandalism done to the office of the Tory MP Peter Bone overnight. Bone told MPs earlier that this was a result of his decision to vote to shelve the proposal to suspend Owen Paterson yesterday. (See 11am.) And here is a full summary of the Downing Street lobby briefing. No 10 has confirmed that another Commons vote will be held on the proposal to suspend Owen Paterson as an MP “as soon as possible”. (See 12.36pm.) The spokesman indicated government MPs would not be whipped on the new vote. Votes on standards committee recommendations are normally free votes, because they are seen as House of Commons business. The decision to whip the vote yesterday was an exception, not the norm. The spokesman was unable to say exactly when Boris Johnson changed his mind on this issue. But he said it was clear “there’s not cross-party consensus for the amendment that was voted through yesterday”. The spokesman refused to back Kwasi Kwarteng’s suggestion that Kathryn Stone should resign as parliamentary commissioner for standards. That was a matter for her, he said. He also disputed claims that Kwarteng had suggested she should resign, citing the proviso Kwarteng included in his interview (“But I’m not saying she should resign” - even though Kwarteng did seem to be saying that - see 9.27am). But the spokesman also refused to say Johnson had confidence in Stone. Asked if he did, the spokesman just said Johnson was focused on the need to include an appeals system in the process. The spokesman rejected Dominic Cummings’ claim that yesterday’s vote was intended to undermine Stone. (See 9.34am.) Asked if the vote was a pre-emptive strike against her, the spokesman said no. He also denied Cummings’ claims that Johnson had lied about the funding of his flat. The spokesman defended Johnson’s decision to take a private jet fro Glasgow to London on Tuesday night after attending the Cop26 climate conference. (See 10.13am.) The spokesman said the government was taking a lead in addressing climate change. He also said that the plane used sustainable aviation fuel, and that emissions were offset. The spokesman would not say if Johnson discussed the Owen Paterson case with Charles Moore at the dinner on Tuesday. (See 10.13am.) Moore and Paterson are very close friends, and Moore has been one of his strongest defenders in the media. The spokesman said it was a private dinner and he had not discussed it with the PM. The spokesman condemned the latest Insulate Britain protest (see 1.01pm), saying the group were causing “intolerable disruption”. Insulate Britain campaigners have been protesting outside the Houses of Parliament today. Some of them glued their hands to the road. The Downing Street lobby briefing has just finished, and the prime minister’s spokesman has confirmed that another Commons vote will be held on the proposal to suspend Owen Paterson as an MP “as soon as possible”. Jacob Rees-Mogg, the leader of the Commons, will give details of the vote in due course, the spokesman said. He said the government was decoupling the Paterson issue from the wider issue of reforming the way the Commons disciplinary process operates, and that at a later date proposals for reform would be put to a vote separately. Asked to explain the U-turn, the spokesman said the government was responding to “strong feeling” in the Commons. He went on: The amendment itself required cross-party consensus. Once it became clear that was not going to be achieved, it was necessary to look again at this and therefore separate out this individual case with a wider necessity to introduce an appeals process. Asked why No 10 did not decouple the two issues from the start, the spokesman said the government was trying to address both issues as soon as it could. I will post more from the lobby shortly. This is from Mark Harper, a former Tory chief whip. Harper was one of the 13 Tory rebels who defied the whip and voted against the Andrea Leadsom amendment yesterday. There were actually 14 full Tory rebels yesterday (if you define a full rebel as someone who votes against the whip, instead of just abstaining). Sir Peter Bottomley, the father of the Commons, abstained on the Leadsom amendment, but in the second vote (on the main motion, as amended) he voted against. Sir Keir Starmer has accused Boris Johnson of “leading his troops through the sewer”, the BBC’s Laura Kuenssberg reports. From the FT’s Robert Shrimsley David Lammy, the shadow justice secretary, has said the government’s U-turn over Commons standards is too late. The Conservative MP Angela Richardson has been reinstated as PPS (parliamentary private secretary) to Michael Gove, the levelling up secretary. She was dismissed last night from the post after she abstained last night in the vote on the Owen Paterson motion, instead of voting for the Andrea Leadsom in line with the three-line whip. In the Commons Sir Lindsay Hoyle, the Speaker, has granted an application for an emergency debate on the parliamentary standards system that will take place on Monday. The application came from the Lib Dem chief whip, Wendy Chamberlain. She told MPs: The government’s decision not just to meddle in an independent process but then to whip Conservative members to get what they wanted is one of the worst over-reaches of executive power that this house has seen in its history. Social media executives could be held criminally liable for safety breaches on their platforms within months of the online safety bill coming into effect, Nadine Dorries, the culture secretary, has said. As PA Media reports, Dorries made the disclosure in evidence to the committee considering the draft bill this morning. PA reports Dorries told the committee that she wants to accelerate the introduction of personal liability sanctions for company managers to spark a faster response to the threat of online harms. The draft bill includes personal criminal liability sanctions for executives which can be introduced two years after the implementation of the bill. However, Dorries said it was “nonsense” to give firms two years to change, confirming she was looking at “three to six months” for criminal liability to be introduced. “So, to the platforms, take note now - it will not be two years,” she told the committee. “We are looking at truncating that to a very much shorter timeframe and that’s one of the areas as secretary of state I want to go further in this bill. “I think it’s just a nonsense that platforms have been given two years to make themselves ready for what would be criminal action. “They know what they’re doing now, they actually have the ability to put right what they’re doing wrong now, they have the ability now to abide by their own terms and conditions - they could remove harmful algorithms tomorrow.” Under the current proposals, tech firms that fail to protect their users from harmful content face fines of up to 10% of their global turnover - which could run into billions of pounds for the largest platforms - as well as having access to their sites blocked. During her evidence, Dorries also criticised Facebook’s recent company rebrand to Meta and its plans to work on the virtual world known as the metaverse, saying that while its boss Mark Zuckerberg and communications boss Nick Clegg want to “take off into the metaverse” they should instead “stay in the real world”. She said: “Now I believe we heard that they’re [Facebook] putting 10 or 20,000 engineers on to the metaverse - put those 10 or 20,000 engineers now on to abiding by your terms and conditions and to removing your harmful algorithms because if you don’t, this bill will be watertight.” Dorries also said the bill was “possibly the most important piece of legislation to pass through parliament” in her time as an MP, calling it a “novel” piece of legislations that was “groundbreaking” and “extremely important”. Thangam Debbonaire, the shadow leader of the Commons, has issued a statement saying the government must schedule a vote on suspending Owen Paterson. She said: The government’s pathetic attempt to hide from their actions doesn’t fix anything. Last night, they voted to allow corruption to take place unimpeded at the heart of British politics. MPs must now vote to uphold the sanctions against Owen Paterson. Any other result will allow Boris Johnson to create one rule for Tory MPs, another for everyone else. Bryant says it was “completely inappropriate” for Kwasi Kwarteng, the business secretary, to effectively call for the resignation of Kathryn Stone, the parliamentary commissioner for standards, this morning. (See 9.27am.) He says she is very fair and very robust, and that he supports her 100%. He says he expects her to stay in post until her contract ends, in December next year. Bryant says he has long been in favour of allowing MPs to make an appeal against the punishment proposed by the standards committee. But he says it is not clear who would hear that appeal. At the Institute for Government Chris Bryant, the chair of the Commons standards committee, is now taking part in a panel discussion, as part of its one-day conference on ethical standards in government. Asked what should happen next in the Owen Paterson case, Bryant says there should be a vote in the Commons on Monday on the proposal to suspend him. He says he thinks that may be what Jacob Rees-Mogg, the leader of the Commons, was signalling in the Commons earlier, but he says he is not sure. (Rees-Mogg was being oblique on this issue.) And he says what Rees-Mogg was saying to MPs earlier was the opposite of what he said in the debate yesterday. Perhaps Rees-Mogg did not understand the motion, Bryant suggests. Here is my colleague Robert Booth’s story about the speech earlier by Lord Evans, chair of the committee on standards in public life. And here is the full text of the speech. On Sky News Sam Coates says he has been briefed that the government is now planning to get MPs to vote on a new motion on Owen Paterson, proposing that he should be suspended for 30 days (as the standards committee recommended). This time it would be expected to pass. According to the Telegraph’s Tony Diver, Paterson may have miscalculated with a hubristic media round yesterday. This seems to be a factor in No 10 deciding to cut him loose. That media round included an interview with the Daily Telegraph in which Paterson said that Kathryn Stone, the parliamentary commissioner for standards, and members of the standards committee should resign. He told the paper: Sadly they have not done a good job and come up with a rotten report which is full of inaccuracies. As far as I’m concerned, they all have to go. Chris Bryant, the Labour chair of the Commons standards committee, says parliament is in a “quagmire”. He suggests that one solutioin might be for his committee to produce a new report on Owen Paterson. He says he thinks it would say the same as the old one. He also stresses the importance of using moderate languate, and expresses his regret about what happened to Peter Bone’s office. (See 11am.) Rees-Mogg welcomes what Bryant said about the importance of using moderate language. But he suggests Bryant was not doing this himself in his Today interview this morning when he compared what happened in the Commons yesterday to something that might happen in Russia. Referring to what happened yesterday, Bryant told Today: “That is not what we do in this country, that is what they do in Russia,” he said. “It’s a perversion of justice.” Peter Bone (Con) says he is not clear what is happening to the Owen Paterson case. And he says this morning his office was vandalised because of his vote to support the government yesterday. Rees-Mogg says that, while there support in the Commons for reforming the system, there is a strong feeling in the Commons that “this should not be based on single case or applied retrospectively”. May I just reiterate what I said at the beginning of these proceedings, that while there are strong feelings on both sides of the house that there is a need for an appeal process, there is equally a strong feeling this should not be based on a single case or applied retrospectively. I fear last night’s debate conflated the individual case with the general concern, this link needs to be broken. That implies that government may revert to supporting Paterson’s suspension. Rees-Mogg says it would be “idle to pretend that there are not concerns about the [disciplinary system for MPs]”. But he says this must be done on a cross-party basis. From LBC’s Ben Kentish This is what Jacob Rees-Mogg told MPs about the partial U-turn in relation to the new committee being set up to consider reforms to the disciplinary process for MPs. I am aware that last night’s vote has created a certain amount of controversy. It is important that standards in this house are done on a cross-party basis. The house voted very clearly yesterday to show that it is worried about the process of handling these complaints and that we would like an appeals system, but the change would need to be on a cross-party basis and that is clearly not the case. While there is a very strong feeling on both sides of the house that there is a need for an appeals process, there is equally a strong feeling that this should not be based on a single case or apply retrospectively. I fear last night’s debate conflated an individual case with the general concern. This link needs to be broken. Therefore I and others will be looking to work on a cross-party basis to achieve improvements in our system for future cases. We will bring forward more detailed proposals once there have been cross-party discussions. In the Commons Jacob Rees-Mogg is now responding to Thangam Debbonaire, the shadow leader of the Commons, who asked various questions about what is happening to the review of standards. He says a committee cannot work without opposition members. (Parliament voted yesterday to set up a new committee, chaired by John Whittingdale, to review the standards system. But Labour and the SNP said they would not take up their seats.) Rees-Mogg says he hopes the opposition parties will not join in trying to set up a new system. He cites the Independent Complaints and Grievance Scheme, which was set up to consider complaints about MPs mistreating their staff, as a possible model. Jacob Rees-Mogg, the leader of the Commons, has just told MPs that yesterday’s vote mistakenly confused an individual case with the general argument about the need for reform. And he also said reforms to the disciplinary process for MPs needed to proceed on a cross-party basis. He said the new committee being set up will not consider whether the Owen Paterson case needs to be reviewed. He said the government will be bringing forward more detailed plans in future. It is not clear yet what this means for Paterson. In an interview on the Today programme this morning Kwasi Kwarteng, the business secretary, was asked by Nick Robinson if he could name a single thing that Boris Johnson has done to deliver higher integrity and probity in public life. Kwarteng replied: I could do lots of things. We had a manifesto commitment to deliver Brexit and we delivered Brexit. That was something which we promised to do and the prime minister led a government that delivered that. We’ve also made very explicit comments and commitments on climate change ... Holding yourself to manifesto commitments and delivering those commitments is, I think, a feature of integrity. Given the number of dubious promises made about Brexit, this was a reply that probably had remainers across the land hurling objects at the radio. The government won the first vote on Owen Paterson by just 18 votes yesterday. But 27 Labour MPs did not vote, and it has been said that if they had, the government would have lost. In an interview with Times Radio this morning Anneliese Dodds, the Labour party chair, said that all the MPs who did not vote had been paired, meaning that by agreement their non-vote would be matched by a Tory non-vote. She said the system is used for MPs who are unable to attend votes because they are either ill, self-isolating or have a family emergency. She went on: That’s what happened with those Labour MPs. There’s not a single Labour MP who agrees with the course of action that this government is taking. Every single Labour MP voted against who was able to, and it was only those who were unable to vote who didn’t vote. Back at the IfG, Lord Evans is asked if there should be a ban on MPs having paid jobs outside parliament. Evans says the committee has not looked at this under his chairmanship. But it has looked at it in the past, and the committee decided there could be advantages in MPs having outside interests. He says he shares that view. But what is important is that being an MP should be their main job, and they should be transparent about their interests. The Daily Mirror did not splash on the Owen Paterson vote this morning, but it carried an alternative story damaging to the PM. It says that Boris Johnson returned from the Cop26 conference in Glasgow to London by private jet on Tuesday evening - so that he could attend a reunion dinner for Daily Telegraph journalists at the Garrick club. There may be a link to the Paterson case too. One of the other guests at the dinner was Charles Moore, the former Telegraph editor made a peer by Johnson, who is a close personal friend of Paterson and who has been one of the journalists complaining most vigorously about the treatment of the M MP by the standards committee. At the IfG Lord Evans is now taking questions. Q: How damaging is the Paterson affair? Evans says you only need to look at today’s front pages (see 9.27am) to see that it is damaging. He goes on: People recognise this as an attack on standards. It’s not been presented in that way, but I think you’d have to be extremely naive to imagine that this was not a politically motivated set of decisions. And on standards issues independence is key. Nobody should be able to make their their judgments on their own case. And this is a retrograde step in that regard. Ministers and Downing Street have, of course, repeatedly denied that there was any partisan element to the vote yesterday. They are said that they were motivated by a desire to improve the process by which complaints against MPs are investigated and they have implied that the fact that this also involved shelving the suspension of Tory former cabinet minister (which it did not have to - MPs could have approved his punishment, and reviewed the system seperately) was a mere coincidence. At the start of his speech Lord Evans, chair of the committee on standards in public life, described yesterday’s Commons vote to shelve the proposed suspension of Owen Paterson for breaking lobbying rules as a “very serious and damaging moment” for parliament. He said: Yesterday’s vote on the report of the Commons standards sommittee was a very serious and damaging moment for parliament and for public standards in this country. It cannot be right that MPs should reject after one short debate the conclusions of the independent commissioner for standards and the House of Commons committee on standards, conclusions that arose from an investigation lasting two years. It cannot be right to propose an overhaul of the entire regulatory system in order to postpone or prevent sanctions in a very serious case of paid lobbying by an MP. At the Institute for Government Lord Evans, the former MI5 boss who is now chair of the committee on standards in public life, has just started giving a speech at a one-day conference on ethical standards in government. There is a live stream here. Earlier this month the committee published a report calling for rules to be tightened in various areas, including in relation to the ministerial code. But Downing Street ruled out giving more power to adviser on ministerial standards, who investigates breaches of the code. Dominic Cummings, who was Boris Johnson’s chief adviser at No 10 until November last year and who is now a vitriolic critic of his former boss, has tweeted this morning to say that he believes yesterday’s vote was intended to remove Kathryn Stone as parliamentary commissioner for standards, as Kwasi Kwarteng’s interview this morning implied. (See 9.27am.) Cummings claims that Johnson is worried that a Stone investigation into the way donations were used to fund the refurbishment of Johnson’s No 10 flat will show he broke the rules. Good morning. The news at Westminster is still dominated by the repurcussions from yesterday’s Tory vote that effectively shelved the anti-sleaze processes that have been in place for MPs since the cash-for-questions scandal in the 1990s, and the newspapers make grim reading for No 10. Here are some of the front pages. This morning Kwasi Kwarteng, the business secretary, has been doing the broadcast interview round for Downing Street and he has taken the government’s offensive against the current standards regime one step further, suggesting that Kathryn Stone, the parliamentary commissioner for standards, should resign. Stone carried out the investigation that concluded that Owen Paterson broke lobbying rules. Her conclusions were backed up by the standards committee. She also earlier this year produced a report saying Boris Johnson broke the MPs’ code of conduct in relation to the way he registered his holiday in Mustique, although on that occasion the standards committee concluded, on the basis of supplementary evidence, that Johnson was in the clear. Given that she is now considering a further inquiry into the funding of Johnson’s flat refurbishment, it is not hard to see why No 10 would want her gone – although yesterday she indicated that she plans to remain in post until her term of office is up in December next year. Asked whether Stone should resign, Kwarteng told Sky News: I think it’s difficult to see what the future of the commissioner is, given the fact that we’re reviewing the process, and we’re overturning and trying to reform this whole process, but it’s up to the commissioner to decide her position. Asked what he meant by “decide her position”, Kwarteng said: It’s up to her to do that. I mean, it’s up to anyone where they’ve made a judgment and people have sought to change that, to consider their position, that’s a natural thing, but I’m not saying she should resign. “I’m not saying she should resign,” Kwarteng claimed. But it sounded very much as if he was, and that is how Labour interpreted his answers. After the interview, Thangam Debbonaire, the shadow leader of the Commons, said Kwarteng’s comment was “appalling” and further evidence of government corruption. She said: Having already ripped up the rules policing MP’s behaviour to protect one of their own, it is appalling that this corrupt government is now trying to bully the standards commissioner out of her job. Boris Johnson must immediately distance himself from these latest attempts to poison British politics. And all decent people of all political beliefs must stand against these naked attempts by Tory MPs to avoid scrutiny of their behaviour. Here is the agenda for the day. 9.30am: Lord Evans, the chair of the committee on standards in public life, gives a speech at an Institute for Government conference on ethical standards in government. At 10.30am Chris Bryant, chair of the Commons standards committee, and Lord Pickles, chair of the advisory committee on business appointments, take part in a panel discussion. 9.30am: Ministers at Cop26 make announcements on phasing out coal. There will be full coverage on our separate Cop26 live blog. 9.45am: Nadine Dorries, the culture secretary, gives evidence to the committee on the draft online safety bill. 10am: Claudia Webbe MP is sentenced after being found guilty of harassment. 10.30am: Jacob Rees-Mogg, the leader of the Commons, takes questions in the chamber on next week’s business. 11.30am: Downing Street holds a lobby briefing. 12pm: Nicola Sturgeon takes first minister’s questions in the Scottish parliament. Also today Lord Frost, the Brexit minister, is in Paris for talks with the French Europe minister Clement Beaune. I try to monitor the comments below the line (BTL) but it is impossible to read them all. If you have a direct question, do include “Andrew” in it somewhere and I’m more likely to find it. I do try to answer questions, and if they are of general interest, I will post the question and reply above the line (ATL), although I can’t promise to do this for everyone. If you want to attract my attention quickly, it is probably better to use Twitter. I’m on @AndrewSparrow. Alternatively, you can email me at andrew.sparrow@theguardian.comClimate campaigners attending the Cop26 summit are urging Nicola Sturgeon to intervene in what they describe as intimidating and heavy-handed policing of protests in Glasgow. The open letter from the Cop26 Coalition, Stop Climate Chaos Scotland and the Climate Coalition calls on the first minister to ensure that the right to protest is upheld in advance of Friday and Saturday’s mass marches, after activists reported “numerous incidents of abuse of powers and intimidating tactics” by the 10,000 officers from forces across the UK who have been deployed daily. The signatories highlight “the disproportionately high number of officers deployed, combined with intrusive police surveillance” which has created “an atmosphere of fear and intimidation” and “unacceptable chilling effect on the right to protest”. The Guardian has heard first-hand accounts from activists of being threatened with arrest for unfurling a banner at a train station, refused a written receipt after a stop and search and prevented from joining an assembled protest because they were turned back at a police cordon. These reports stand in stark contrast to Police Scotland’s pledge before the conference of a “human rights-based approach” to policing of protest that would be “welcoming, friendly and proportionate”. Campaigners were particularly alarmed by the use of the tactic of kettling – corralling protesters for a lengthy period of time – at Wednesday’s Extinction Rebellion march through the city centre. Activists reported being refused access to water, toilet facilities and medication during the kettle. Police Scotland insisted that protesters were “contained for a short period” and this was “necessary in order to maintain public safety”, adding it was “extremely disappointing that officers were assaulted by having paint sprayed in their faces”. Extinction Rebellion Scotland have since published a video which they say shows an activist trying to use spraypaint on a building and being tackled by officers, who then arrested him for assault. There are significant concerns that the “saturation policing” seen on the streets of Glasgow so far this week will have a chilling effect on participation at the Fridays for Future school strike on Friday and the Global Day of Action on Saturday, when up to 100,000 people are expected to march through the city. Many of them will be first-time protesters and may not be familiar with the English language or Scots law. Campaigners argue that these tactics also have a detrimental impact on the community as a whole – on Tuesday, Police Scotland apologised to women in Glasgow who had to walk home in darkness on Monday night after well-lit streets were blocked off due to summit security concerns. Assistant chief constable Gary Ritchie said: “Police Scotland is a rights-based organisation that puts our values of integrity, fairness, respect and a commitment to upholding human rights at the heart of everything we do. This means that we will protect the rights of people who wish to peacefully protest or counter-protest at Cop26, balanced against the rights of the wider community.” He added that “containment” was a “permitted policing tactic where a breach of the peace is taking place or reasonably thought to be imminent”. A Scottish government spokesperson said: “The Scottish government is fully supportive of the right to protest in a peaceful and lawful manner, and welcomes all contributions on how, together, we tackle the climate emergency. Police Scotland has engaged with a wide range of activist groups in advance of the conference in order to facilitate and support their right to peaceful protest.”The average A-level grade awarded to students at independent schools this summer was an A, according to official data published by the Department for Education. The figures for last summer’s A-level qualifications confirm the rampant acceleration in grades awarded by teachers in England, replacing formal exams that were scrapped earlier this year after the government announced a second national lockdown. The collated results published by the DfE confirm that independent schools awarded top grades to their pupils at a higher rate than students achieved the last year formal exams were taken. The average grade in 2021 was an A, a full grade higher than the average of B awarded in 2019. In comparison, teachers at state-funded schools in England this year awarded B grades on average, compared with the C+ gained through exams in 2019. The DfE has said it will not publish results for individual schools or construct league tables for this year or last year, because of the unusual circumstances. But while independent schools awarded the highest average grades, several other school types showed even faster rates of grade inflation: sponsored academies, free schools and University Technical Colleges (UTCs) all showed more rapid improvement. The average rise at sponsored academies – schools that have been taken over by a sponsor or trust after poor performance – was from a C+ in 2019 to a B this year, while students at UTCs increased their average A-level grade from a D+ to a B-. The DfE said the results from 2021 were “not comparable” to 2019 or previous years. “The increases seen in the headline statistics likely reflect the changed method for awarding grades rather than demonstrating a step-change improvement in standards,” it stated. The collated GCSE results published by the government show there was less of an acceleration in grades than in A-levels. Nearly 52% of pupils gained a strong pass of 5 or above in GCSE English and maths this year, more than eight percentage points higher than in 2019 when assessment was by exams. But school leaders were concerned that even as average GCSE grades were rising, the “disadvantage gap” between pupils who had been on free school meals and their peers was continuing to widen. Paul Whiteman, the general secretary of the National Association of Head Teachers, said: “The coronavirus pandemic impacted all pupils but some were more able to continue their learning than others, and we have seen a widening disadvantage gap as a result. The government could have ameliorated some of this by acting faster to ensure all children have equal access to technology and connectivity in order to continue learning remotely. “The fundamental issues creating disadvantage must be addressed by government if we are to make a real difference in the future.”Caleb Plant usually carries himself with composure and conviction. Whether he is talking late at night on a Zoom call to me about the terrible adversity of his past life, or walking around Las Vegas this week, answering one question after another about how he feels before he faces the formidable Saúl “Canelo” Álvarez in their world super-middleweight unification bout on Saturday night, Plant has been impressive. He will defend his IBF title while trying to wrest the WBA, WBC and WBO belts away from Álvarez. The winner will become the first undisputed world super-middleweight champion in boxing history. In these last few days both men have been respectful of each other despite the constant reminders that, in September, they exchanged insults and a few blows after a face off descended into a fracas when Álvarez pushed Plant with real force. “It was normal pre-fight banter,” Plant says with a shrug. “You know how it goes: ‘I’m going to beat you. No, I’m going to beat you. Fuck you. No, fuck you.’ It seemed like he lost his cool then and I responded the way I was taught to respond. I’m a fighter.” Álvarez is widely regarded as the best pound-for-pound boxer in the world and Plant suggests the Mexican’s reputation means that “some of these guys he has fought have been coming to hand their belt over. He knows that’s not the situation with this fight. So he was trying to get me riled up. It’s boxing. How many times has it happened before? How many times is it going to happen after this? People make such a big deal out of it because it’s a headline or a way to promote your videos. He pushed me, I got one on him, he got one on me and that was it. I’ve been in worse scuffles than that. What’s the big deal?” Plant is at his most interesting when his calm resolve is set against all that he endured as a boy who grew up in poverty and desperation in Ashland City, just outside Nashville in Tennessee. He describes his childhood as “lost” and “chaotic” for his mother, Beth, had “real demons” as she drank too much and had a drug problem. His dad, Richie, who will be in his corner on Saturday night, had his own difficulties but boxing, the fighter says, “saved us. It gave us direction when we had none. My dad got this old gym and it gave him a place to go. He had grown up fighting and he liked martial arts so to have that outlet helped so much. He was full of life again.” They still did not have much money and Caleb, his sister Madeline and his dad lived in a trailer which felt like an ice-box in the winter and a tin oven in the blistering summer months. “You can use your imagination as to how it was,” Plant says of those bleak years. “There were times in the winter when we had no money for propane [gas] and we wouldn’t have heating. We’d just bundle up, put your sweats on, put your hoodie on, grab a bit of blanket and stay warm. I can still remember those days and it is a big motivation factor that I keep in mind to this day. It makes me keep on working so I don’t end up back in that situation.” What kept him going when life seemed so hopeless? “I felt like if I quit then it’s going to be like this for ever. But boxing gave me hope that if I kept at it then I can make a better life for myself. I can get the nice things in life I want – a nice home, a nice car and everything we didn’t have when I was a kid. But, just as importantly, I didn’t quit because I truly love boxing. So besides obtaining the material things that boxing can bring you, it gave me a new way of living. But of course life keeps on testing you.” Plant stresses that he is driven by the memory of both his daughter and his mother. In January 2015, his little girl Alia’s life support machine was switched off. She had a rare medical condition which caused brain damage and over a hundred seizures most days. Plant had just turned 20 when Alia was born and, 19 months later, she was gone. Then, in March 2019, two months after he became world champion, his mother’s life came to a violent end when she was shot dead by the police after she threatened an officer with a knife. “Thinking of them both every day, before every fight, drives me on. Losing both my daughter and my mother was real painful but it’s made me stronger. Fighting for their memory is a motivating factor for me.” Now in Las Vegas, a long way from Ashland City and the tragedy of his past, the 29-year-old Plant’s unification showdown with Álvarez is bolstered by his self-belief and all the work he has put in to reach this point as an undefeated world champion. “We’re not just up here keeping our fingers crossed hoping that things turn out how they should,” he says quietly. “That’s not how life works. If you want something, then you’ve got to believe it and you’ve got to feel it in your heart. But you got to work for it. You go through things in life but if you put enough work in then eventually you feel indestructible. That’s the point where I’m at in my life, where I feel like I can conquer anything and everything.” On Saturday night he has to conquer the cold ferocity of Canelo, a far more decorated world champion who is as smart as he is ruthless. But, in a poignant moment, Plant looks at me and says: “Boxing is an imitation of life. You get knocked down and you get back up. You don’t quit no matter how dark it gets, or whatever adversity passes your way. You just got to keep biting down and fighting, coming up the other side and not quitting, no matter what. Everything that happens in a fight is the same as what happens in life. So after everything I have been through I feel like I am ready. Besides my boxing ability, my skill and all I’ve studied about the sport, the things that happened in my life have prepared me for this moment.”Sixty per cent of the tiny particles polluting the air in the UK are from ammonia leaking from farms, according to research. The ammonia is released from livestock manure and urine and the overuse of synthetic nitrogen fertilisers. The gas drifts into cities and reacts with other air pollutants to form tiny particulate matter, called PM2.5, which is the deadliest form of air pollution. These particles cause £8bn a year in health damage in the UK, the scientists calculate. Globally, 39% of PM2.5 is derived from ammonia and results in $420bn (£320bn) of health damage, according to the study, published in the journal Science. Ammonia can be trapped on farms by sealing manure pits or injecting the waste under fields, and by the more efficient use of fertiliser. Such action saves £23 in health damage for every £1 spent in the UK, say the researchers, with the global cost benefit ratio being 4:1. In the past, the burning of fossil fuels by vehicles and industry produced large amounts of PM2.5 but pollution controls have cut levels significantly in developed nations. However, ammonia emissions have barely fallen in the UK since 1980. This means agriculture is now responsible for a larger share of PM2.5 in the UK. Pollution from wood burning stoves has also risen in prominence. Other nitrogen compounds, called nitrogen oxides, are emitted by diesel vehicles and damage health in two ways: as irritant gases when first emitted and then by combining with ammonia to form PM2.5. Relatively little has been done to cut ammonia emissions, meaning there are simple policies that would be far more cost-effective in reducing PM2.5 levels than further technological measures to tackle nitrogen oxides from vehicles, the scientists say. Cutting nitrogen pollution would also tackle the climate crisis, the pollution of rivers and seas, and soil acidification. Nitrous oxide is a potent greenhouse gas, causing about 6% of global heating and results mostly from the overuse of fertilisers. The researchers presented a “#Nitrogen4NetZero” proposal at the Cop26 summit in Glasgow on Wednesday, which aims to ensure cutting nitrogen gases is included in climate targets. The 2019 Colombo declaration, led by Sri Lanka and backed by the UN Environment Programme, aims to cut nitrogen waste by half by 2030 and would save $100bn (£75bn) a year in wasted fertiliser costs. “The way we use nitrogen is extremely inefficient. About 80% of the nitrogen resources [produced by humans] are lost into the environment,” said Prof Mark Sutton of the UK’s Centre for Ecology and Hydrology, a co-author of the study. The UK government is consulting on banning the use of urea in fertiliser, which emits much more ammonia than ammonium nitrate fertiliser. The Netherlands and Germany already require manure to be injected into fields rather than sprayed on the surface, but there is no such requirement in the UK. “Any farmer that can smell their manure is losing that goodness,” said Sutton. Air pollution causes at least 7 million premature deaths a year globally, making it a bigger killer than smoking, car crashes or HIV/Aids. Air pollution may be damaging every organ in the human body, according to a comprehensive global review in 2019.About half the world’s fossil fuel assets could become worthless by 2036 under a net zero transition, new research has found. A drop in demand for oil and gas will reshape the geopolitical landscape, with countries that are slow to decarbonise likely to suffer but early movers will profit. Country pledges at Cop26 could limit global temperature rise to 1.8C, according to the International Energy Agency. The figure is lower than the 2C prediction made a day earlier. However, others have warned not to get complacent with estimates. The world remains on “a 2.7 degree pathway, a catastrophic pathway,” said Selwin Hart, UN special adviser. Global carbon emissions are shooting back to the record level seen before the coronavirus pandemic, analysis has shown. Scientists said the finding is a “reality check” for the world’s nations gathered at the Cop26 climate summit. Countries have failed to adapt for unavoidable climate damage, the UN has said, despite the fact that extreme weather driven by climate breakdown is hitting the world “with a new ferocity”. Only 2% of the Great Barrier Reef has escaped coral bleaching since 1998, a study has found, dashing hopes that parts of the world’s largest coral reef system can recover. UK activist group Insulate Britain blocked Parliament Square in central London. The protest was an apparent response to critics who have accused them of targeting the wrong people. The group is calling on the government to commit to a programme to insulate all Britain’s homes. Scotland’s largest train operator, ScotRail, has said upwards of 50,000 people are expected at a Saturday protest, and warned travellers that its services in and out of Glasgow will be “extremely busy” this weekend. About 8,000 to 10,000 people would take part in Friday’s youth protests, it added. Catch up with Day 3 here.I first saw Avril Elgar on a Sunday night over 60 years ago in a television adaptation of Tennessee Williams’s play You Touched Me! I have never forgotten her performance. Her unforgettable face was as frail and as strong as breath. She remained one of my favourite actors and one of the best. We both appeared once in a mimed television production of the nativity story. Avril was very striking as an angel, at one point in my memory seeming to fly. The nativity play was repeated annually over the next few years. TV programmes then used to credit any theatre work actors were doing at the time, and so, after each showing of the nativity, the credits said, “Avril Elgar is appearing in Farewell, Farewell Eugene at the Garrick theatre” long after its run was over.A pharmaceutical company continued to insist its blood products were safe despite knowing it had used untested donors and that two people who had used the products had tested HIV positive, the infected blood inquiry has heard. On Thursday, Christopher Bishop, a former marketing manager at Armour UK, a major supplier of blood products, became the first employee of a pharmaceutical company involved in the infected blood scandal to give evidence to the statutory inquiry. There were 1,240 British haemophilia patients infected through untreated blood products known as Factor VIII, contaminated with HIV and/or Hepatitis C. Most of them have since died. Documents presented to the inquiry showed that in February 1986, Armour knew of two people who were infected with HIV, one in the UK and one in the Netherlands. In the case of the UK patient, Armour had known about the positive test in July 1985 but did not inform the Department of Health and Social Security (DHSS) until February 1986. Another document implied that Armour did not start testing donors for HIV until February 1986. Nevertheless, the same month, the company sent a document to its sales reps saying: “The thousands of haemophiliacs who needed the life-saving treatment could be confident that they were receiving safe supplies.” Jenni Richards QC, the counsel to the inquiry, asked Bishop: “On what basis could you … confidently assert that the thousands of haemophiliacs who needed life-saving treatment were receiving safe supplies?” Bishop replied that it was “based on the evidence and the science available”. The inquiry was also shown a document sent by Armour UK to haemophilia centre directors in May 1983 which stated there was “little evidence” to link its products with Aids. Asked if the wording was appropriate given concerns at the time, Bishop said it could have been improved by insertion of the word “proven” or “substantiated” before “evidence”. Also in 1983, Bishop sent a telex saying the DHSS would allow the company to “dispose” of Factor VIII manufactured before new safety measures had been introduced. He wrote that it was “clearly vitally important” to do this “as soon as possible”. Asked by Richards if this meant he was keen to swiftly sell products made before the cut-off date because of a fear the DHSS might change its mind, Bishop replied: “I don’t know, that would appear to be the indication.” Armour’s Factor VIII was withdrawn in October 1986, about a month after it emerged that two children with haemophilia at Birmingham children’s hospital had been infected with HIV. Asked by Richards whether he accepted that it should have been withdrawn earlier and whether the company could have been more “open and transparent”, Bishop answered “no” to both. The inquiry also heard that an internal Armour UK document acknowledged in 1981 that non-A, non-B Hepatitis (later named Hepatitis C) was the “most common form” of the disease in “certain plasma derivatives” and could cause chronic liver damage in up to 50% of patients whose infection was associated with blood transfusion or haemodialysis.Yorkshire have been suspended from hosting international cricket and face the prospect of additional financial sanctions following the club’s botched handling of Azeem Rafiq’s racism allegations. The England and Wales Cricket Board announced this unprecedented move on Thursday night in response to mounting political pressure, describing the issues raised by Rafiq as “abhorrent” and having led to “serious questions” about the club’s governance and management. Coming on the day that Nike became the latest and most high-profile sponsor to terminate a deal with Yorkshire, the ECB also confirmed that Gary Ballance is suspended from international duty after he admitted this week to using racist language towards Rafiq – explained as two-way verbals between friends – when the pair were teammates. Another astonishing revelation came when the former England and Yorkshire captain Michael Vaughan revealed he had been accused of racism within the Rafiq report – an accusation he strongly denied. Rafiq alleges that in 2009, when Vaughan was still a player and before a Yorkshire match against Nottinghamshire, he told Rafiq and three other Asian players as they walked on to the field together that there are “too many of you lot, we need to do something about it”. Vaughan, writing in the Daily Telegraph, said: “This hit me very hard. It was like being struck over the head with a brick. I completely and categorically deny that I ever said those words.” On a desperate day for Yorkshire, the ECB statement, which followed an emergency board meeting on Thursday afternoon, read: “As a governing body with duties to act for all in cricket, the ECB board reaffirmed its commitment to taking decisions in the best interests of the whole game. “It also agreed that sanctions including, but not limited to, financial and future major match allocations may be considered at the conclusion of our investigations. “In the meantime, YCCC are suspended from hosting international or major matches until it has clearly demonstrated that it can meet the standards expected of an international venue, ECB member and first-class county.” Next summer Headingley is due to host the third men’s Test between England and New Zealand, starting on 23 June, as well as a men’s one-day international against South Africa on 24 July. These lucrative fixtures, plus a men’s Ashes Test in 2023, could now move to other venues depending on the final outcome of the ECB’s investigation. If so, it would also see the club barred from bidding to stage the final of the Hundred, even if Headingley would continue to be the home of the Northern Superchargers team. Yorkshire’s 2019 accounts showed the club had earned just under £10.5m from international ticket and hospitality revenue, compared with just over £3m from commercial income, which would include sponsorship. The ECB statement continued: “There is no place for racism or any form of discrimination in cricket and where it is found, swift action must be taken. This matter must be dealt with robustly if the sport is to demonstrate its commitment to truly being a game for everyone. “The ECB will therefore hold YCCC to account in relation to their handling of the matter. Given recent events, it is clear there are serious questions regarding the governance and management of YCCC. The club’s failure in relation to actions and responses to their own report represent a significant breach of its obligations to the game. “The ECB board has asked the ECB executive to commission a review of Yorkshire CCC’s governance to consider whether the existing arrangements are fit for purpose. The board reiterated its unwavering commitment to ensuring that cricket is a game for everyone. Discrimination of any kind on the field of play, in the dressing room, in the stands, or in the boardroom is intolerable in sport or indeed, society. Cricket must work together to eradicate it.” Ballance’s ban represents a notional sanction, with the 31-year-old having won the last of his 39 caps in 2017. Like Headingley’s international status, his fate will instead hinge on the final outcome of the ECB’s regulatory process, something which began last week when it finally received a copy of Yorkshire’s report into Rafiq’s allegations. The focus on Ballance is something Rafiq himself is keen to move away from, however, with the former England Under-19s captain instead insistent the issues he encountered are far broader than one individual and that the club’s leadership must be held accountable. Chiefly this surrounds the club’s failure to escalate an allegation of bullying that Rafiq first raised in 2017 and then a further complaint of racism a year later. Despite the investigation confirming Yorkshire had indeed failed to follow their own procedures here, it was announced last week that no action would be taken against any current employee. Writing on Twitter on Thursday, Rafiq said: “I wanted to stress this is not really about the words of certain individuals. This is about institutional racism and abject failures to act by numerous leaders at Yorkshire County Cricket Club and in the wider game. The sport I love and my club desperately need reform and cultural change.” Rafiq, who the club admitted was the victim of “racial harassment and bullying” during his two spells at Headingley between 2008 and 2018, is due to give evidence to the House of Commons’ digital, culture, media and sport select committee on 16 November, with Roger Hutton, Yorkshire’s chair, Mark Arthur, the chief executive, and Martyn Moxon, the director of cricket, also expected to be questioned by MPs. Whether all three administrators will still be with the club when the hearing comes around remains to be seen, with the Yorkshire board due to hold an emergency board meeting about the crisis ton Friday amid the suggestion that Hutton may stand down. Hutton took charge in April last year – after the events in question – but has come under increasing internal pressure over his handling of the club’s response over the past 14 months. The DCMS committee chair, Julian Knight MP, tweeted: “The ECB’s action in taking international cricket away from Yorkshire should act as a short, sharp shock to bring the club to its senses…I imagine the members of Yorkshire CCC will be questioning why the board is still in place.” Colin Graves, the former ECB chair, is reportedly in line for a return to the club that owes in excess of £15m to a trust in his family’s name. Graves, who was previously chairman of Yorkshire from 2002 to 2015, is understood to want the report into Rafiq’s allegations made public, something that has previously been prevented by a fear of legal reprisals from individuals named within. Either way the reputational damage continues to see sponsors flee the club, with Harrogate Spring Water, Bagnalls Painting and Decorating and the furniture manufacturer JT Ellis joining Nike on Thursdayyesterday by ending commercial partnerships with the club. Leeds Beckett University has also “paused all activity” with Yorkshire pending the outcome of the ECB’s investigation into the matter, while Emerald, David Lloyd Clubs, Yorkshire Tea and Anchor Butter all ended their respective deals earlier in the week.Time’s up on Day 4. Its been a pleasure to blog the conference that will, one way or another, decide our fate. Tune in tomorrow. Here is what happened today: New research suggests about half the world’s fossil fuel assets could become worthless by 2036 under a net zero transition. A drop in demand for oil and gas will reshape the geopolitical landscape, with countries that are slow to decarbonise likely to suffer but early movers will profit. The International Energy Agency said country pledges at Cop26 could limit global temperature rise to 1.8C. The figure is lower than the 2C prediction made a day earlier. However, others have warned not to get complacent with estimates. The world remains on “a 2.7 degree pathway, a catastrophic pathway”, said Selwin Hart, UN Special Adviser. Scientists have warned of a “reality check” for the world’s nations gathered at Cop26 after they discovered that carbon emissions have shot back to the record level seen before the coronavirus pandemic. UK activist group, Insulate Britain, blocked Parliament Square in central London. The protest was an apparent response to critics who have accused them of targeting the wrong people. The group is calling on the government to commit to a programme to insulate all Britain’s homes. Scotland’s largest train operator, ScotRail, said upwards of 50,000 people are expected at a Saturday protest, and warned travellers that its services in and out of Glasgow will be “extremely busy” this weekend. Around 8,000 to 10,000 people would take part in Friday’s youth protests, it added. As Energy Day draws to a close, James Thornton, founder and chief executive of the environmental law group ClientEarth, says it’s been a disappointing one. The Irish government has unveiled its sector-by-sector climate action targets involving what environment minister Eamon Ryan said will be “the defining challenges of our time”. By 2030, it wants greenhouse gas emissions to be reduced by 51% with target reductions ranges as follows: Electricity: 62-81% Transport: 42-50% Buildings: 44-56% Industry/Enterprise: 29-41% Agriculture: 22-30% Land Use, Land Use Change and Forestry: 37-58% The cornerstone of the policy is to increase the proportion of renewable electricity to up to 80% by 2030, including an increased target of up to 5 gigawatts of offshore wind. Ryan said he thought transport would be the hardest target to meet but spoke of plans to change the entire police fleet to electric cars as a way of accelerating public attitudes to EVs. He also spoke of “district heating at scale”, with a target of providing 8% of heating in these micro-networks. Meanwhile, the deputy prime minister, Leo Varadkar, confirmed that Ireland would look at a scrappage scheme for car and van owners to achieve the target of 1m electric vehicles by 2030, something that had been ruled out previously. Ministers did not comment on a recent KPMG report that suggested more than 1m of the 6.5m cattle herd would have to be culled to meet a 30% reduction in the agriculture sector. This photo of locals in Glasglow watching a Cop26 demo march is too good not to post. Enjoy. Indigenous leaders from West Papua, home to one of the largest and most diverse rainforests, have launched the world’s first “green state” at Cop26. The contested Indonesian province declared a provisional “government-in-waiting” last year and promised to implement environmental and social protections with respect for the natural world. Today it released its Green State Vision. It includes a three-point plan to try to prevent climate collapse. The plan pledges to: Make ecocide a serious criminal offence. Restore guardianship of natural resources to Indigenous communities. Serve notice on oil, gas, mining and logging companies to adhere to international environmental standards or cease operations. Exiled leader Benny Wenda, interim president of the United Liberation Movement for West Papua and Provisional Government, said: “We are fighting for stewardship of one of the planet’s largest rainforests, a lung of the world. If you want to save the world, you must save West Papua.” Jennifer Robinson, a barrister at the UK’s Doughty Street Chambers, who helped to draft the Green State Vision, said: “Ensuring West Papua’s right to self-determination will ensure the protection of the environment and the climate by allowing the Indigenous custodians of the land to take back control, protection and management of their resources.” Hold the brakes! Moments after the International Energy Agency said Cop26 commitments could limit global temperature rises to 1.8C, another official has warned we are still on a “catastrophic pathway”. My colleague, Jillian Ambrose reports: Selwin Hart, UN special adviser and assistant secretary-general for climate change, has warned Cop delegates that the fight to limit global heating is “far from over”. “Fatih, I heard your numbers, but based on the NDCs that have been submitted, the world is on a 2.7 degree pathway, a catastrophic pathway, and therefore we are a long way away from keeping the 1.5 degree goal of the Paris agreement alive,” he said. Hart received applause as he continued. “We cannot be complacent. We cannot celebrate before we’ve done the job. We must recognise that this is a fight that we cannot afford to lose. I urge all of you to keep up the fight.” Note: This post earlier quoted the special advisor as saying the Paris agreement goal was 1.3C. It has been changed to 1.5C. About half of the world’s fossil fuel assets will be worthless by 2036 under a net zero transition, according to research. Countries that are slow to decarbonise will suffer but early movers will profit; the study finds that renewables and freed-up investment will more than make up for the losses to the global economy. It highlights the risk of producing far more oil and gas than required for future demand, which is estimated to leave $11tn-$14tn (£8.1tn-£10.3tn) in so-called stranded assets – infrastructure, property and investments where the value has fallen so steeply they must be written off. The lead author, Jean-Francois Mercure of the University of Exeter, said the shift to clean energy would benefit the world economy overall, but it would need to be handled carefully to prevent regional pockets of misery and possible global instability. “In a worst-case scenario, people will keep investing in fossil fuels until suddenly the demand they expected does not materialise and they realise that what they own is worthless. Then we could see a financial crisis on the scale of 2008,” he said, warning oil capitals such as Houston could suffer the same fate as Detroit after the decline of the US car industry unless the transition is carefully managed. The challenge is evident at the ongoing Cop26 climate conference, where some of the nations most at risk of being left with stranded assets – such as the oil and gas exporters Russia and Brazil – are likely to try to slow down the transition as they have done at previous climate meetings, while those most likely to gain – such as the fuel-importing EU – are pushing for faster action. The new paper, published in Nature Energy, illustrates how a drop in demand for oil and gas before 2036 will reshape the geopolitical landscape. Current investment flows and government commitments to reach net zero emissions by 2050 will make renewable energy more efficient, cheaper and stable, while fossil fuels will be hit by more price volatility. Many carbon assets, such as oil or coal reserves, will be left unburned, while machinery will also be stranded and no longer produce value for its owners. Read about it here: The International Energy Agency has crunched the numbers and reckons that combining the new pledges to cut emissions made by nations - most notably India - with the plan for 90 countries to reduce methane emissions by 30% by 2030 would mean global temperature rise would be limited to 1.8C. IEA chief Faith Birol announced the news in a tweet: It follows similar snap analyses of the new national pledges alone by European Union officials and University of Melbourne researchers, which both calculated a limit of 1.9C of global heating. There’s a big “if”. These temperature limits will only be realised if every nation fully implements all of their pledges in coming years and some pledges from developing countries are dependent on funding from rich ones. The limits are also short of the 1.5C target needed to avoid the worst impacts of the climate crisis. But the temperature indicated by pledges made up until COP26 began was 2.7C - a catastrophic level. A shift to 1.8C or 1.9C, if confirmed, might well meet a key goal of Cop26, which is to keep the chance of 1.5C alive. Joe Biden, who urged world leaders at Cop26 to confront the “existential threat” of the climate crisis, is increasingly viewed as something of a hypocrite by climate campaigners in Glasgow, who hit out at his US administration today. A large banner reading No New Federal Fossil Fuels was unfurled by activists outside the summit ahead of an appearance today by Deb Haaland, Biden’s interior secretary. Protestors are furious that Haaland’s department has been handing out oil and gas drilling permits at a rate of more than 300 a month, with an auction of 80m acres – an area larger than the UK – set to be leased this month to fossil fuel companies seeking to exploit the Gulf of Mexico. Separately, environmental groups ran an advert in The Herald, Scotland’s largest daily newspaper, today urging Biden to reject a slew of proposed gas pipelines and plants. Fossil fuel activity on US public lands is responsible for around a quarter of the planet-heating emissions coming from the world’s second-largest carbon polluter. “President Biden’s refusal to halt federal fossil fuel expansion is an inexcusable climate atrocity that makes a mockery of US climate goals in Glasgow,” said Ben Goloff, a senior campaigner at the Center for Biological Diversity. “We’re out of time. The president must use his executive authority to halt fossil fuel extraction on public lands, declare a climate emergency and make renewable energy available to everyone.” A collective of Indigenous elders from the Americas, called the Minga Indigena, have been holding talks, celebrations, dance and music in Glasglow this week. The only problem is that the venue and arts space they are doing it at, the Tramway, was unable to host their sacred fire overnight as they couldn’t leave it burning. A group of activists called the GalGael, who hailed from Glasgow’s anti-motorway expansion protests of the 1990s, stepped in to help last night, agreeing to host the fire at their community centre. “Delegates looking to find a bit of Glasgow not just put on for Cop26 would do well to drop in here, too,” writes my colleague, Libby Brooks. “Currently they are hosting Cop visitors who have struggled with finding affordable accommodation in a marquee behind the workshop.” Be careful what you read. Facebook was accused by researchers today of being one of “the world’s biggest purveyors of climate disinformation,” my colleague Kari Paul reports. The Real Facebook Oversight Board, an independent watchdog group, and environmental nonprofit Stop Funding Heat, analysed a dataset of more than 195 Facebook pages and groups. Researchers found an estimated 818,000 posts downplaying or denying the climate crisis. The scale of climate misinformation on Facebook is “staggering” and “increasing quite substantially”, they said in a report. Facebook has not immediately responded to a request for comment. It previously stated it continues to counteract the spread of misinformation by flagging climate information and referring users to its Climate Change Science Center, which contains data from credible sources on the climate crisis. More photos here from reporter Damien Gayle, who is in Parliament Square where an Insulate Britain protester has glued his hand to a police van. And another person jumped on top... You can read more on Insulate Britain here: Extraordinary plan being reported by Bloomberg Green. A group of scientists, engineers, politicians, and a ship captain went out in a boat to look at Manhattan Island and discuss ways of protecting it: their suggestion is a $40bn construction project to build gigantic iron sea gates to keep out the sea. Damian Carrington reports that big oil is feeling left out at Cop26, with BP’s VP for strategy, Giulia Chierchia, calling yesterday for “inclusiveness” at future UN climate summits, “especially for businesses in harder to abate sectors”. Last week Shell CEO Ben van Beurden said: “We are not represented [at Cop26]. We were told that we were not welcome, so we will not be there.” Yesterday, van Beurden raised eyebrows by claiming the company could become net zero by 2050, but would need the cash from its oil and gas business to pay for it. In October, my colleague Matthew Taylor reported that private emails from civil servants in the Cop unit showed doubts about BP’s net zero plans, with an official saying the company “[does] not currently fit our success criteria for Cop26” and another noting “it’s unclear whether [its net zero] commitments stack up yet”. The Guardian revealed in 2020 that fossil fuel firms had held a series of private meetings with UK officials in an attempt to be part of Cop26. But a Cop spokesperson later said officials from big oil could attend fringe events but would have no formal role in the summit. However, the UK government had many more private meetings with fossil fuel companies than clean energy firms between July 2019 and March 2021. Scotland’s largest train operator, ScotRail, has warned travellers its services in and out of Glasgow will be “extremely busy” this weekend because it is expecting tens of thousands of activists to join Cop protests, with long queues at stations forecast, the Guardian’s Scotland Editor, Severin Carrell, reports. ScotRail said there were estimates that 8,000 to 10,000 people would take part in Friday’s youth protests. It said “upwards of 50,000 people” would take part in the main Cop protests on Saturday, which are due to leave Kelvingrove park at 12.30 pm. Oliver Holmes here, taking over the liveblog from Bibi van der Zee. We’ve got our team on the ground in Glasglow sending updates, from Greta Thunberg walkouts to electric planes to major announcements (hint hint). If you are at Cop26, or watching from afar, you can contact me with information or suggestions at oliver.holmes@theguardian.com, or @olireports. I’m just about to hand over to my colleague Oliver Holmes, who’ll be manning the liveblog all afternoon. We’ll keep an eye on Insulate Britain, and see how much longer they stay in Parliament Square. And we’ll also carry on following energy day at Cop26, where ministers are talking about their plans and hopes for a just energy transition. Sounds as if there will be some interesting announcements this afternoon. Thanks for following along with us! Indigenous people from Alaska to Patagonia are at the Tramway on the south side of Glasgow to discuss sustainable climate solutions based on centuries of indigenous knowledge, spiritual customs and traditions. It’s an event organised by the Minga movement, an Indigenous solidarity network in the Americas who refuse to participate inside the official Cop talks and negotiations. They are aiming to call out false climate solutions like net zero and carbon markets. The climate crisis cannot be solved through further exploitation and marketisation of natural resources, they argue, as that’s what has led to the climate breakdown communities are starting to experience. More than 130 Indigenous youth and elders, from the Mixtecas of Oaxaca in southern Mexico, to Mapuches from Chile are here with the Minga collective, being hosted by local families, solidarity groups and churches. They all bring personal stories about the impact of land loss, water shortages and forced displacement, which they say will get worse if world leaders forge ahead with climate actions such as carbon capture and mass reforestation. “Putting a price on natural resources is an act of colonialism and inhumanity. But there is another way,” said Calfin Lafkenche, a Mapuche organiser. At the green zone, which is open to the public, a zero-emission “spirit of innovation” plane is on show. Rolls Royce engineers say it will fly at 300mph. This would break the record for the fastest electric plane - the current record is 213mph. This is not the actual plane but it is an exact copy. Insulate Britain blocked Parliament Square in central London this morning, in an apparent response to critics who have accused them of targeting the wrong people. Several dozen members of the climate activist group walked out into the roads around the Palace of Westminster at about 9am, gluing themselves to the ground as police quickly reacted to their protest. Insulate Britain’s campaign of disruptive road protests in and around London has now entered its eighth week. Today’s was their 19th action. They are calling on the government to commit to a programme to insulate all Britain’s homes as a first step to solving the climate crisis. However, they have been criticised for stopping ordinary people going about their business during morning rush hour, with some infuriated drivers getting out of their cars and violently clearing protesters from the roads themselves. Many have said they are not choosing the right targets. Ruth Jarman was stuck by her hand to the ground outside parliament, on her 13th Insulate Britain protest. She said: “It feels right to be here. At this point in time in history this is the place that could make the decision to save humanity and God’s creation, and at the moment it’s not making that decision, so what do you do?” As well as sticking themselves down by the hands, some protesters had stuck themselves down by their feet, to each other. One stuck himself to a police van, while another climbed on top of a police vehicle and held a banner. Among those who came to see the protest was the Tory MP Dehenna Davison. She said: “We all believe in the right to protest, but I think what this does is frustrate people going about their daily lives and actually turns people off.” In a statement, Insulate Britain said it had been one of the most successful climate campaigns yet. “Our name recognition went from zero to 77% of the public in three weeks, we have attracted enormous media interest and we have started thousands of conversations, in the press, on social media and in homes up and down the country,” they said. “Importantly, we have exposed the government’s refusal to act on home insulation as cowardly and vindictive and their refusal to protect our country and our children from the climate crisis as genocidal and treasonous.” Despite only making up about 6% of the global population, Indigenous people protect 80% of biodiversity left in the world. Guardian films have spoken to six young Indigenous climate activists from the Ecuadorian Amazon, Chad, Alaska, Sweden, Indonesia and Australia about their people and culture – and what we can learn from them about protecting our planet. Kwasi Kwarteng, the UK business secretary, is now speaking on the massive challenge that a global transition to clean power presents. “The global transition to clean power needs to progress at roughly five times the current rate,” he points out. “We don’t underestimate the scale of this challenge. But the UK’s own experience is a good model. Only nine years ago 40% of our electricity came from coal. Today it is less than 2% and we’ll phase it out completely by 2024.” “We cannot tackle climate change without revolutionising the way we power our world.” A new video of Greta Thunberg leaving a meeting on improving the integrity of the voluntary carbon market has appeared from Cop26. As the climate activist leaves, she tells those in attendance to “stop greenwashing”. Bill Winters, CEO of Standard Chartered, who attended yesterday’s meeting, has been working with Mark Carney on a task force to improve the quality of carbon credits and scale it to a $100bn-a-year market. But offsets, often used by companies to claim they are carbon neutral, have been dogged by claims they are untrustworthy and face a major credibility problem. Ahead of the meeting, Thunburg posted a “greenwash alert” on Twitter, raising concerns about the impact of carbon credits on Indigenous communities and vulnerable communities in the global south. Leo Hickman, the head of Carbon Brief, has highlighted a meeting which took place yesterday at which the director-general of the BBC said that climate change is no longer a “politically controversial” issue and pledged to increase his coverage. According to the Daily Mail, Davie said: “The overwhelming consensus is that we, as humanity, are causing global warming. There are voices on the fringes but, in my view, when it comes to due impartiality for the BBC, we are now at a point where we have consensus around that.” Twelve of the UK’s major media brands, including Channel 4, ITV, Sky and STV, have agreed to increase the amount and improve the quality of their climate change storytelling across drama, comedy and daytime programming. Cop President Alok Sharma is currently opening the Cop26 Energy day. The aim here is “to keep 1.5 alive and that means we have to decarbonise our power sectors”. “Today I think we can say that the end of coal is in sight. The progress we have made would have seemed like a lofty ambition when we took on the cop presidency …” They will publish the Global Coal to Clean Power statement today, which includes a commitment to make a just transition. It has 77 signatories, which includes 46 countries, 23 of which are making commitments on ending coal for the first time. Strictly dancer Cameron Lombard has created a dance video outside Buckingham Palace as an ambassador for Climate Actions Now. According to the website: “After experiencing first-hand the impact of climate change during his upbringing in South Africa, and fuelled by the global discussion of Cop26 and the royal family’s warnings that planet Earth is at a ‘tipping point’, Cameron is using the medium of art to inspire bold and immediate action.” Lombard is dancing to a hip-hop track written by his best friend, Shaun Musungate, a Zimbabwean refugee now living in Cape Town. European Union officials believe that pledges made at the Glasgow Cop6 summit could limit global heating to 1.9C by the end of the century, an improvement on forecasts ahead of the crucial talks. The European analysis is based largely on a pledge by India, the world’s third largest emitter, to reach net zero emissions by 2070, as well as plans set out by Korea and Brazil in Glasgow. The EU number crunching corresponds to work by researchers at the University of Melbourne, which found that if countries upheld their pledges, temperatures would probably rise to 1.9C above pre-industrial levels. The current trajectory - which depends on countries sticking to their pledges, which have been criticised for being vague or unambitious - is an improvement on the outlook ahead of Glasgow, where the EU expected a 2.2C or 2.7C rise, depending on modelling assumptions. The outlook still falls short of the Paris goal of keeping global heating to 1.5C, the threshold to avoid the most disastrous impacts of the climate crisis. EU sources are optimistic that the Glasgow Cop will keep 1.5C alive. “At the end of Glasgow, we will be able to say 1.9C is in the pocket and 1.5C is in reach,” said an EU official. For the world to avoid exceeding 1.5C, the EU is banking on China coming up with more ambitious emissions reductions plans, but does not expect that from Glasgow. More immediately, EU officials hope the US will signal an improvement on their climate finance offer to poorer nations. The US hopes to contribute $11.4bn a year by 2024 to a $100bn annual fund to help the least developed countries deal with the climate crisis and transform their economies. The EU, which has pledged $25bn a year, has said the US pledge is not generous enough. The $100bn fund was meant to be complete by 2020, but the full funds will not be available until 2022 or 2023. “There can be no stranded workers and no stranded communities,” Sharan Burrow of the International Trade Union Confederation told the Cop. Trade unions and the ITUC are totally committed to climate ambition, she said, but it must be in parallel with a just transition. “There can be no stranded worker and no stranded communities. We know there is no future for coal. That’s painful for our workers. There must be a near exit date for fossil fuels. That’s painful for our workers.” The good news, however, is that there are jobs in renewable energy. The ITUC, along with the World Resources Institute, have just released a job study called Green Advantage, which shows that dollar for dollar, investment in clean energy returns at least two jobs to one compared with fossil fuels. “The critical message is integrating the urgency of action with the just transition. It will take all of us, so lets get on the job.” Jennifer Granholm in the US department of energy is now talking about her own personal experience as governor of Michigan. “In 2009 the great recession tore through the US auto industry. Hundreds of thousands lost their jobs in Michigan, where I was governor. The pain that I saw in the eye of workers has seared my soul … I became obsessed with how we can create jobs in clean energy to diversify our economy. “And with large federal and state and private sector investment we began focusing on electric vehicles, and employment rebounded. Today Michigan is a national leader in electric vehicle manufacture. Line workers who once assembled gas-powered vehicles are now building electric trucks.” She points out that by 2030 the market for clean energy will be worth $23tn. “That’s what’s on the other side of this transition. Truly sustainable economic growth that will keep growing as other countries jump into this market.” Kwasi Kwarteng, the UK’s business secretary, is addressing the meeting about the energy transition ahead. He tells the meeting that he imagines “that the skills of the miners today will be needed to extract the mineral that will power our solar panels tomorrow. “It’s clear that to keep 1.5 in reach we ned to consign coal to history and make clean synergy our future. But there is a green industrial revolution out there within our grasp that promises huge economic opportunities for our people and our communities.” One of the great things about Cop26 is there are lots of interesting events going on in nooks and crannies of the Blue Zone in the SEC. Michelle Lujan Grisham, the governor of New Mexico, former Obama aide Paul Bodnar and the SSE CEO are on a panel discussing the energy transition this morning. “We have 80% of the technologies needed to cut global emissions by half. The hard part is figuring out how to smooth the transition out of the dirty stuff,” says Bodnar, who is now Global Head of Sustainable Investing at BlackRock. “How are you going to get all the internal combustion passenger vehicles off the road? You think you’re going to do that just by selling more EVs? No, you’re not. How are you going to get rid of the chemical plants and the cement plants and the steel mills that have technically or financially useful lifetimes left? You’re not going to do that just by building something alongside them that doesn’t emit any carbon.” Grisham, governor of one of the US’s most coal-heavy states, has signed off a plan to have a carbon-free energy network by 2045. “In our really poor rural counties, we use utility cooperatives and they don’t have access to the same capital investment and have tiny consumer markets. They still have to deliver reliable, cost-effective power.” Minister Shauna Aminath from the Maldives tells Cop: “We came to Cop because this is our lifeline. The Maldives climate and energy challenges are enormous - we depend almost entirely on imported fossil fuels for meeting our needs. The diesel costs are enormous.” “The government’s policy is to quit fossil fuels as quickly as possible and replace them with something the Maldives has in abundance - sunshine. Today 12% of our energy is coming from renewables,” but they are planning to speed up their transition to renewables, with floating solar panels all around the island. But, she said, they need finance for this. She reminded the audience: “The difference between 1.5 and 2 for a country like the Maldives is a death sentence.” Our Seascapes project has just launched the first part of a fascinating series on Blue Carbon. The ecosystems of seagrass, mangroves and salt marshes could absorb 1.4bn tons of CO2 emissions a year. But these ecosystems are some of the most threatened in the world by coastal development – damaged by farming, harmful fishing practices and pollution – so protecting and restoring them is expensive. The Cop audience at the Energy Transition discussion is hearing about the Just Energy Transition partnership with South Africa, signed this week by France, Germany, the UK and the US, along with the EU. South Africa, the largest emitter in Africa, is heavily dependent on coal. But under the deal, $8.5bn will be mobilised over the next few years to help the country transition away from fossil fuels. The partnership is regarded by Merkel, Macron, von der Leyen and Biden as an exemplary partnership that will, they hope, “be a blueprint” for other similar deals. Sharma is telling the Cop that this afternoon the Powering Past Coal coalition will announce that it now has 165 members. Global carbon emissions are shooting back to the record level seen before the coronavirus pandemic, analysis has shown. Scientists said the finding is a “reality check” for the world’s nations gathered at the Cop26 climate summit. The emissions driving the climate crisis reached their highest ever levels in 2019, before global coronavirus lockdowns saw them fall by 5.4%. However, fossil fuel burning has surged faster than expected in 2021, the international research team said, in stark contrast to the rapid cuts needed to tackle global heating. The data, from the Global Carbon Project, shows world leaders have failed to build back greener, with just a small proportion of pandemic spending going to sustainable sectors. But the scientists said hopes of keeping global heating to 1.5C remain alive if Cop26 leads to rapid global action. There’s a Che/Greta mashup on the wall in Glasgow... Good morning! It’s energy day up in Glasgow at Cop26 today; all day long we’ll be following the discussions on how to make an energy transition work, plus whatever else we can pick up. The coal deal that was announced late last night is still being picked apart. While a deal is obviously good news, it is still not entirely clear how much further this take us forward. Many of the biggest coal producing countries are not actually signed up, and it’s proving hard to pin down deadlines: the devil, of course, will be in the detail. Another emerging issue is access - a number of vital groups have been unable to attend critical meetings, there is a perpetual overcrowding problem, and we’re hearing that digital access is not much better. You can contact me with information or suggestions or your own experiences at bibi.vanderzee@theguardian.com, or @bibivanderzee.Your report (2 November) notes the rising hospitalisation rate against the drop in reported Covid cases. Could the drop result from the increased difficulty, since October, in obtaining lateral flow tests? Pharmacies no longer hand them out freely, but need an NHS number and a QR code. It would be too cynical to suggest that this has been put in place to make it look as if Covid infections are on the wane when they could well be increasing. Nadine Grieve London • Tower of Power’s Only So Much Oil in the Ground (1974) has been in my DJ set for years, but Tiny Tim’s The Other Side (1968), with its catchy chorus “The ice caps are melting”, was surely the most prescient, and bizarre, pop music comment on climate catastrophe (Letters, 2 November). Bryan Biggs Liverpool • Andy Bull asks for suggestions for a properly modern pentathlon (3 November). How about baking, carbon footprint reduction, a video shoot-’em-up game, speed dating and working from home? Tony Gregson Great Somerford, Wiltshire • John Harris (3 November) says “period” is American English. I don’t think so. In my Scottish education, which started in the 1950s, it was the standard term. We never used a “full stop”. Bob Owen Chetnole, Dorset • Can people stop going on about raspberries in November (Letters, 3 November)? I still have a clipping of my letter of 29 December 2014; then we still had raspberries. Theresa Graham Clevedon, Somerset • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Your editorial (1 November) is approving of the proposals to allow more access and reporting by journalists and bloggers of proceedings in the family courts about the neglect and abuse of children, and domestic and matrimonial disputes and conflicts between adults. There is a very thin line and very thin ice to tread between wanting more openness and wanting to safeguard children and adults from having their personal and distressing experiences told to the public at large. There is every danger that they will be able to be identified within their schools and communities, and the very personal horrors they have experienced will become public conversations and humiliations. Children and young people have been absolutely clear that this is their considerable fear. The Guardian may have confidence that the press, including those tabloids which seek and skew sensational and salacious stories, will behave responsibly. Experience suggests otherwise. Ray Jones Emeritus professor of social work, Kingston University and St George’s, University of London • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.In reviving the idea of giving everyone a personal carbon allowance (PCA), Polly Toynbee’s article (We need radical policies to reach net zero. Here’s a fairer way to do them, 2 November) fails to mention the practicalities of carbon footprinting every product and service that people buy. Despite major advances in carbon auditing since a PCA system was originally advocated, it remains very difficult to measure emissions at a product level, particularly in the case of manufactured goods passing through complex global supply networks. Also, for a PCA system to gain public confidence and legal endorsement, the carbon labelling of consumer purchases would have to be independently verified to ensure that suppliers did not under-report emissions to gain market share. This would add an extra layer of cost and bureaucracy. In an article 14 years ago (Can shopping save the planet, 17 September 2007), Marc Lynas said: “To figure out a carbon label for every product on the shelf would be a task of labyrinthine complexity and monumental cost.” Regrettably, this is still largely the case. Prof Alan McKinnon Kühne Logistics University • I am pleased that Polly Toynbee has promoted personal carbon allowances. This method of fairly distributing the burden of carbon emissions responsibilities was first put forward by Dr Mayer Hillman, and subsequently reworked as “domestic tradable quotas” by the late Dr David Fleming. It was the subject of a private member’s bill I launched in 2004. When, a year or two later, David Miliband described the idea as a “thought experiment”, I knew it wasn’t going anywhere. If he has changed his mind, that is welcome. The beauty of PCAs is that the scheme ties in perfectly with the contraction and convergence global framework, an idea that the Labour government shied away from in public, but nevertheless used to underpin the calculations behind the Climate Change Act 2008. This little piece of history tells me that politicians have to be much more upfront about the behavioural changes we need to make. Following the usual pattern, Cop26 will be followed by even faster rates of carbon emissions, despite all the wonderful blah, blah, blah and bouquet of inadequate initiatives. Colin Challen Labour MP 2001-10; founder, all-party parliamentary group on climate change • This letter was amended on 26 November 2021 to acknowledge the role played by Dr Mayer Hillman in putting forward the case for personal carbon allowances. • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Martin Kettle writes: “Just before the start of the Commons debate on Paterson, Downing Street invented a new doctrine: that an MP facing workplace discipline charges should always be entitled to an appeal” (Owen Paterson’s escape shows that the sleaze era is back, 3 November). It may be a new doctrine, but it is based on longstanding Johnsonian behaviour. The Boris Johnson-led government wishes to sanction institutionally the individual behaviour first called out by Johnson’s housemaster and classics teacher in a letter to his parents. The government acts as if both itself and MPs like Owen Paterson “should be free of the network of obligation which binds everyone else”. Anthony Lawton Church Langton, Leicestershire • While, of course, the Paterson affair taints the whole Tory party with moral bankruptcy, it is surely not irrelevant to note what its cheerleaders have in common. Jacob Rees-Mogg (Eton) defends Owen Paterson (Radley) and Boris Johnson (Eton) demands party support, while Kwasi Kwarteng (Eton) attacks parliament’s standards commissioner. Surprised? An indulged sense of entitlement will always ride to the defence of those it recognises as its own, however indefensible the case. Public school loyalty requires it. Paul McGilchrist Colchester, Essex • When Paul Dacre proved to be unappointable to Ofcom, the culture secretary said “let’s have a new interview process”. When Priti Patel was found to have bullied her staff, the PM said “no case to answer”. When Owen Paterson was found to have egregiously breached parliamentary standards, the Conservative party said “let’s have a new system”. They will say these cases are all different, but to the average voter it just looks like sleaze and corruption. Did it ever go away? No wonder the government wants to curtail judicial review. Peter Clark Burton-in-Lonsdale, North Yorkshire • MPs in parliament have been strongly advised to wear face masks to protect each other and staff members. Might I now also recommend that the mask be held securely in place by a clothes peg on the nose to protect the wearer from the foul stench of the undiluted sleaze that is permeating the House of Commons chamber. I see what Jacob Rees-Mogg really means when he describes the “convivial, fraternal spirit” among Tories. It’s code for shamelessly closing ranks and bullying doubters. Catherine Dornan Llandrindod Wells, Powys • It’s Bullingdon Club Toryism – just do what you like and smash the place up if you don’t like the rules. Claire Connor Trowbridge, Wiltshire • Courageous and principled were those Conservative MPs who defied the whip and voted against the Leadsom amendment. Boris Johnson’s U-turn (Boris Johnson makes U-turn over anti-sleaze regime for MPs, 4 November) has made the rest look cowards and fools. Do they realise it? Have their constituents noticed? Graham Webb Saint-Mandé, France • Boris Johnson should follow Owen Paterson’s example and quit politics for the sake of his family and the rest of us (MP Owen Paterson resigns from ‘cruel world of politics’, 4 November). Dominic Shelmerdine London • This page was amended on 5 November 2021. Due to an editing error in an earlier version, the placename Church Langton in the first letter was incorrectly rendered as “Church Lunatum”. • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.In New York City, the Police Benevolent Association of the City of New York (PBA) tried and failed to block the city’s vaccine mandate for all city workers. New York City police officers have been on the wrong side of public health for most of the pandemic. Like other American police unions, the PBA uses its political clout and large coffers to push regressive policies and fight any move towards an even slightly more humane justice system. In an effort to prevent another rise in Covid-19 cases, New York’s mayor, Bill de Blasio, introduced a mandate requiring all city employees to have received at least one dose of a vaccine by 29 October. Seventy-one per cent of all city officials are already vaccinated but, according to the PBA, roughly a third of uniformed police officers are not. Even optimistic assessments of the department’s vaccination rates as a whole lag behind the rates of city residents. Despite the fact that Covid-19 is the leading cause of death among US police officers, the PBA launched a lawsuit against the city to halt the mandate. A judge struck down the suit, but the PBA plans to appeal the decision. The police union loves to play the victim card and paint even its worst officers as heroes – like when it called for a slowdown strike after an officer was fired for his role in the 2014 death of Eric Garner. Yet when faced with a real threat to the lives of their members, and to the public those officers ostensibly serve, the unions’ leaders have chosen to oppose public health recommendations. While the police commissioner has at least urged officers to get vaccinated, the department and its individual officers haven’t exactly had a stellar record of behavior from earlier phases of the pandemic. In October, unmasked police officers forced a subway rider out of a station after he asked them to put on their masks as mandated by both the city’s transportation authority and the NYPD itself. This was not an isolated incident, according to the New York Times: “[t]he flouting of mask mandates by some police officers in New York City has been the subject of criticism throughout the pandemic. Face coverings have remained required on the city’s public transit and at indoor subway stations since April 2020. But many reports on social media and in local news outlets have drawn attention to instances of officers ignoring those rules.” This behavior is especially dangerous considering that officers interact face-to-face with the public on a daily basis. According to the Legal Aid Society, the NYPD illegally detained hundreds of people during the George Floyd uprising and the second surge of the pandemic. Protesters were allegedly held for longer periods of time than legally allowed, increasing their risk of contracting Covid-19 and potentially spreading it once released. One protester complained of police stuffing protesters in vans while the officers themselves were not wearing masks. The NYPD insists that these delays were not retaliatory and just another symptom of the pandemic, but the Legal Aid Society noted the similarity to a previous lawsuit over similar alleged events at the 2004 Republican national convention. In fact, the mere existence of such a large police department is a hindrance to public health. If current trends continue, the city will probably spend more than $10bn on the police department this year, including hundreds of millions of taxpayer dollars to settle lawsuits for police brutality and misconduct. In comparison, the city’s department of health and mental hygiene has a budget of $1.6bn. While city residents could have benefited from an increase in healthcare access, the city was busy maintaining the largest police department in the country, spending over $100,000 a year on average for every uniformed officer, according to Business Insider. Insider also notes that a single set of riot gear could provide personal protective equipment for 33 nurses. These numbers recall the dueling images of New York healthcare workers wearing trash bags during the earlier days of the pandemic, in contrast to the heavily armored officers sweeping through neighborhoods arresting people en masse. The NYPD spent $115m in overtime in the first two weeks of the George Floyd protests alone. And large sums of that money, in the form of membership dues and donations, find their way to police unions. Those unions shell out tens of millions of dollars on campaign contributions and lobbying, much of it to elect candidates seen as pro-police and “tough on crime”. According to Dan Quart, a New York State assembly member, the PBA has “had very significant and I would say disruptive influence in blocking so much important criminal legal reform of our criminal justice system”. Between 2015 and 2018, the union gave $78,500 to the state senate Republican campaign committee. In 2020 the union endorsed Donald Trump for re-election, its first endorsement of a presidential candidate in decades. This last fact alone speaks to the depravity of the union’s perspective and priorities. The PBA insists that the vaccine mandate will cause “chaos” – that 10,000 officers will be gone from the street, that dozens of patrol precincts will go unstaffed. This outcome seems unlikely. If it does happen, however, it may be a great experiment for the city. During their 2014 slowdown strike in response to anti-police brutality protests, officers decreased their “proactive” crime duties, cutting down patrols and only responding to active calls. The department expected the city to come crawling back in fear. But the opposite happened; a peer-reviewed study in the journal Nature Human Behavior found that residents actually reported a decline in major crime. The PBA may be setting itself up for another disappointment – and offering yet more evidence that we must defund police for the sake of public health and the public good. Akin Olla is a contributing opinion writer at the GuardianToo many people believe that the pandemic is over, England’s deputy chief medical officer, Prof Jonathan Van-Tam, warned this week. Far from it. Europe is at its centre again, the World Health Organization has said, urging governments to continue with or reimpose public health measures. The Netherlands and Belgium have already acted. But though the health secretary, Sajid Javid, predicted last month that cases here could hit 100,000 a day, he remains disinclined to take action – even as the latest Real-time Assessment of Community Transmission (React) findings, for late October, show the highest coronavirus prevalence in the UK since the React study began in May 2020. About one in 58 people tested positive – more than double September’s levels. The nonchalance of Mr Javid and his boss, Boris Johnson, is unsurprising given the government’s record. (Last month’s damning Commons report on its response stressed that it had “lacked speed in making timely decisions”: less politely, it was far too late, far too often.) But their attitude is doubtless bolstered by a drop in recorded cases over the past week. Some experts think levels may have peaked, or will do so shortly, with high infection rates among teenagers gradually leading to growing immunity. Others point out that previous half-terms saw cases fall, only to rise again, and that rates remain high. Prof Van-Tam fears that increasing numbers of deaths indicate that Covid is now penetrating older age groups, and is concerned that infections are “running this hot this early” in the season. The social and economic costs of introducing limited public health measures now are tiny compared with the effect of those that might otherwise have to be imposed later. While vaccines (and now treatments) are slashing hospitalisation and death rates, current infection levels and breakthrough cases remind us that vaccines do not stop people from catching or spreading Covid, and reduce but do not eradicate the possibility of serious health problems such as long Covid. The immuno-suppressed and others cannot be adequately protected by them. They also have waning efficiency. The government is counting on boosters, though it says its “plan B” – mandatory masking, vaccine passports and encouragement to work from home – will be introduced if the pressure on the NHS is unsustainable. The British Medical Association and NHS Confederation believe that point arrived weeks ago. Queues of ambulances are the most visible indication of the pressures. The NHS went into the pandemic under-resourced, short-staffed and exhausted. The cumulative impact has been punishing. On top of England’s current 93,000 vacancies there are also sick or isolating staff. Any further increase in Covid patients, already numbering more than 9,500, would hammer the ability to tackle the huge backlog. Why take that risk? Mandatory masking on public transport and in places such as supermarkets should never have been dropped in England and must be readopted: it is a minor inconvenience with major dividends. The government should introduce Covid passports for nightclubs and similarly crowded venues, as in Scotland and Wales. With 4.5 million eligible people yet to have a booster jab, third doses must be made more accessible, and more must be done to increase vaccine take-up across all age groups. The government must also boost the meanest sick pay in the OECD. Adopting these minimal measures now would save lives, protect the NHS and prevent the need for more drastic action later.Talks between the British and French governments to settle a post-Brexit fishing row have ended in stalemate as No 10 said it did not believe Paris would follow through on threats to slow down trade. The Brexit minister, David Frost, spent about 90 minutes meeting France’s Europe minister, Clément Beaune, in Paris on Thursday, but despite smiles for the cameras the two sides remained far apart. Boris Johnson’s spokesperson said: “We don’t believe the French are planning to move forward with the previous threats they’ve made.” Beaune, however, said France wanted to give dialogue a chance, but “the option for retaliatory measures remains open”. France and Britain are at odds over the rights of French fishers in the six to 12-mile zone around the UK shore, and Jersey and Guernsey. The dispute threatened to tip into a full-blown trade war until the French president, Emmanuel Macron, called for more talks on Monday, holding back on a threat to slow down British imports coming into France. In order to secure a fishing licence in the six- to 12-mile zone, EU boats, which are mostly French, have to prove they have worked the area in the past. British sources say they have received applications that lacked proof of previous activity. But France denied this claim: “There have been no applications made without evidence of past activity, often very detailed. We are not asking for something for nothing,” Beaune told reporters. UK sources said there had been no change in the British position and denied French claims of a deliberate move to deny French fishing crews licences. A UK government spokesperson said Lord Frost and Beaune “discussed the range of difficulties arising from the application of the agreements between the UK and the EU. Both sides set out their positions and concerns.” After the meeting, Beaune told reporters France had a problem with the British methodology: “We consider that their demands are supplementary to those in the [post Brexit trade] treaty. What we want now is a positive spirit from the British, goodwill … to accept the proofs we have provided. We want to return to the spirit and the letter of the agreement.” Although Beaune described the talks as positive, he said the British were “again asking for additional requirements and proofs to what is in the treaty”. British sources have said they are open to a range of evidence showing past activity, not only GPS data, which some smaller boats cannot provide. The British say they will accept logbooks and landing records, but that some boats have failed to provide any proof of activity. The post-Brexit trade deal agreed last Christmas Eve does not specify how fishing crews should prove their previous fishing activity. Beaune and Frost plan to speak again early next week, probably by phone. In a written statement to parliament, the government said it has granted nearly 98% of EU licence applications, but this includes all those granted to fish in the UK’s far larger exclusive economic zone, an obligation under the treaty. Under the post-Brexit trade agreement, the UK has to allow EU boats to fish in the large territorial zone, with further agreements to settle sharing-out quotas. The dispute comes amid an ongoing deadlock over the Northern Ireland protocol. Frost, who is due to meet the EU’s UK relations pointman, the commission’s vice-president, Maroš Šefčovič, on Friday, is calling for far-reaching changes to the agreement, including abandoning the oversight of the European court of justice – a red line for the EU. UK officials have insisted there is no link between the fishing row and the protocol, amid speculation Frost is seeking to use fish as leverage to obtain changes to the Northern Ireland agreement.Boris Johnson tries to depict himself as a leader like Winston Churchill. It would be more accurate to see him as a leader like the Grand Old Duke of York – no, not the current one, but the one who marched his troops up to the top of the hill and then back down again. Having gone to the extraordinary length of igniting a sleaze scandal by getting his MPs to try to save Owen Paterson from suspension and overturning the parliamentary standards regime on Wednesday, less than 24 hours later he abruptly abandoned those corrupt decisions. The result: instead of creating one debacle, Mr Johnson has now landed himself with two. Responsibility for this shambles is widely shared. Mr Paterson, who dramatically resigned as an MP on Thursday, is himself part of the problem. He showed no contrition or acknowledgment of possible wrongdoing for two years. After Wednesday’s whipped vote, he paraded across the media, once again, as the innocent victim. When his hubris caused embarrassment to other MPs, he walked away altogether. The truth is that Mr Paterson has jumped before he was pushed, because Thursday’s U-turn left him facing almost certain suspension next week. If he had behaved with an ounce of sense, not a hundredweight of pride, little of this might have happened. Conservative backbenchers, though, cannot just blame their disgrace on a lone headstrong colleague. By signing the so-called Leadsom amendment, they all brought this on themselves. That amendment, which conflated ill-judged support for Mr Paterson with an explicitly partisan attempt to stitch up a new standards system, was a piece of madness. It represented a loss of judgment on a spectacular scale. It was the result of collective stupidity, stubbornness and arrogance. It reflects especially badly on the Commons leader, Jacob Rees-Mogg, whose role was central. If anyone ought to be “considering their position” in the wake of all this, it is he. Ultimately this is Mr Johnson’s mess. The prime minister has faced more run-ins with the standards commissioner recently than any other MP. He has been investigated for nine cases of late registration of earnings, one of late registration of an interest in a property and, in July, for inadequately explaining how his Mustique holiday was paid for. Mr Johnson has little love for the commissioner, and there had been several press stories attacking her even before, amid the Tory party’s self-created wreckage, the business secretary said she should consider her position. The origins of the attempted hijacking of the standards system this week go deeper than the Paterson case. The consequences are likely to extend beyond it, too. In the short term, parliament will debate the issues again, as well as Mr Rees-Mogg’s murky role, on Monday. The verdict on the Paterson case should be completed, in spite of his resignation. In time, there may be all-party talks about useful changes to the standards system too, but after the way they were treated this week, the opposition parties are not under much obligation to hold them soon. The most important consequences, though, need to be in our wider politics. In the Paterson case, as in far too much else, Mr Johnson’s government acts as though it is entitled to do whatever it wants, without checks, balances, accountability or consequences. It is the job of the rest of us to reclaim the political system and bring these corrupting abuses to an end.