More than a fifth of girls and young women in the UK have been ‘“cyber-flashed” in the last year and a similar number have faced sexual harassment, according to a study exposing endemic internet sexual abuse. The polling of females between the age of 13 and 21 who use social media found that more than a quarter had experienced bullying and more than one in three suffered sexual harassment – behaviour against girls and women online that campaigners believe must be criminalised. The abuse – which includes 16% of girls and women facing pressure to share naked pictures of themselves – is having a “devastating impact”, according to Angela Salt, the chief executive of Girlguiding, the charity that commissioned the research. Almost all of the 13- to 15-year-old girls who experienced the problems felt negative emotions ranging from anxiety to anger, depression and fear. Those with disabilities were significantly more likely to have experienced sexist comments, bullying and pressure to share pictures of themselves compared to those without a disability. Only 15% of the 1,002 girls and young women polled last month believe social media is a safe place for them. Eva, 11, told the Guardian she was bullied over Facebook Messenger aged nine, when school friends accused her of carrying out a sexual act with boys. “I didn’t understand,” she said. “I was really confused by what they were saying”. Her mother, Emma, said she felt “physically sick” when she found the messages. Ministers are already facing pressure to toughen up online safety legislation going through parliament. MPs on the digital, culture, media and sport committee have criticised a draft bill as not “clear and robust enough to tackle the various types of illegal and harmful content on user-to-user and search services”. “Girls and young women should be able to use the internet freely, safely and without fear,” said Salt. “Sadly, our research highlights that there is still a long way to go before this is reality, which is why we are calling on the government to ensure violence against girls and women online and its devastating impact is recognised and included within the online safety bill.” MPs have called for the bill to tackle content that is technically legal, including types of online violence against and women and girls such as tech-enabled “nudifying” of women and “deepfake” pornography, either through primary legislation or as types of harmful content covered by the duties of care of service providers. It was reported this week that “cyber-flashing” – including the sending of “dick pics” – could be criminalised through inclusion in the Sexual Offences Act 2003, which means perpetrators could be included in the sex offenders’ register in England and Wales. It is already illegal in Scotland. Eva,, from Whitby in North Yorkshire, spoke about her experience because she wants other girls to know they can tell an adult if they receive anything upsetting online. As well as being accused of sexual behaviour, her classmates also told her “if we were as ugly as you we would kill our parents and kill ourselves”. “When I saw the messages I started crying,” she said. “Usually at school they were really nice and would play with me, but when we were online and I couldn’t see their faces and we were not in real life, they would always send rude messages.” She would advise anyone being sent explicit pictures “or doing stuff you don’t like” to tell an adult. “Many girls get sent these pictures or asked for pictures,” she said. “It’s nothing to be embarrassed about.” Her mother, Emma, said that rather than banning her daughter from using social media, she took a course in how apps work and schooled Eva in how to filter and block content. She said she believes more parents need to understand the technology and spend more time checking their children’s phones. Eva said she had now moved schools and was “really good friends with people who don’t bully me online”.Brexit red tape has damaged Britain’s trade with the EU and the situation could worsen unless the government works with Brussels to reduce hold-ups at UK ports, parliament’s spending watchdog has said. Only hours after Jacob Rees-Mogg was appointed minister for Brexit opportunities, a report by the cross-party public accounts committee (PAC) said border checks in place since the beginning of the year had increased business costs and “suppressed” trade with the EU. The PAC said there was a risk that the situation would worsen in September, when stricter checks are implemented by the EU and a forecast post-Covid recovery in global trade increases traffic through UK ports. Urging ministers to upgrade port systems and infrastructure, especially at Dover, the committee’s chair, Meg Hillier, said it had “repeatedly raised concerns about the impact of changes to trading arrangements on businesses of all sizes, and we remain concerned”. The warning came after a haulage industry boss said lorry drivers may have to get used to queueing for four hours at Dover on busy days. Mile-long queues of HGVs waiting to get into the crucial trade port have been a regular sight in the first weeks of 2022. Measures that force lorries to stop on the A20 to prevent Dover from becoming clogged have been implemented 20 times already this year, compared with 69 times in the whole of 2021. Rod McKenzie, executive director for policy and public affairs for the Road Haulage Association, said post-Brexit border checks “mean friction where none existed” and hauliers were becoming familiar with long delays at peak times. Under the terms of the Brexit deal negotiated by Boris Johnson in December 2020, the EU introduced full import controls in January 2022 after a yearlong transition period. The UK government intended to do the same, but has delayed three times over the last year and the PAC report said officials could not give a “complete assurance that it would not do so again”. “Much remains to be done to introduce import controls, and in particular to ensure that traders and hauliers across the 27 EU member states are ready as the controls are phased in,” the report added. As part of the upgrade, the UK must adapt port equipment and border checks by September to avoid huge disruption to holidaymakers and haulage firms when the EU switches to biometric identity checks that would force travellers to exit their vehicles. Hillier said the government claimed it would develop “the most effective border in the world” by 2025, which she described as a “noteworthy ambition”, but “it is optimistic, given where things stand today”. She added: “One of the great promises of Brexit was freeing British businesses to give them the headroom to maximise their productivity and contribution to the economy – even more desperately needed now on the long road to recovery from the pandemic. Yet the only detectable impact so far is increased costs, paperwork and border delays. “The PAC has repeatedly reported on Brexit preparedness and at every step there have been delays to promised deadlines. It’s time the government was honest about the problems rather than overpromising.” Home Office officials are in talks with the French authorities about how to operate the new controls without causing queues, but the report described them as “at an early stage”. Forecasts of the costs to businesses are expected to be lowered, though it is not clear by how much, the report said. In 2019, HMRC estimated that complying with new customs rules could cost UK and EU businesses £15bn a year. “HMRC told us in November that it had not updated its 2019 estimate, but that there are indications that the costs to businesses will be less than that estimate,” the report said. The government said it was continuing to engage with EU partners to ensure that border arrangements work.Second gentleman Doug Emhoff was evacuated from a Washington high school because of a bomb threat. The husband of Kamala Harris was at Dunbar High School in northwest DC for an event commemorating Black History Month when Secret Service agents told him to evacuate. “Mr Emhoff is safe and the school has been evacuated. We are grateful to Secret Service and DC police for their work,” Emhoff’s spokesperson said. Senate minority leader Mitch McConnell criticized the Republican National Committee’s censure of Liz Cheney and Adam Kinzinger over their work for the House select committee investigating the January 6 insurrection. Describing the Capitol attack as a “violent insurrection”, McConnell said it was inappropriate for the RNC to censure two members for disagreeing with their colleagues. “That’s not the job of the RNC,” McConnell said. Joe Biden celebrated the news that Tritium is opening a new production facility in Tennessee to build its electric vehicle charging stations. The Tritium site will bring more than 500 jobs to Tennessee, and it is expected to start production this fall. “This is great news for workers across the country, for our economy and frankly for the planet,” Biden said. “We’re seeing the beginnings of an American manufacturing comeback.” Two House subcommittees held a hearing on security threats at synagogues, amid an alarming rise in antisemitic attacks across the US. The rabbi who was held hostage by an armed gunman last month at the Congregation Beth Israel in Texas testified at the hearing. Emphasizing the importance of security trainings for Jewish community leaders, Rabbi Charlie Cytron-Walker called for increased funding for those programs to help protect houses of worship. “Every congregation needs to be prepared,” Cytron-Walker said. – Joan E Greve Bernie Sanders: We must do everything possible to avoid an enormously destructive war in Ukraine The Vermont senator writes for the Guardian’s op-ed section: Wars have unintended consequences. They rarely turn out the way the experts tell us they will. Just ask the officials who provided rosy scenarios for the wars in Vietnam, Afghanistan and Iraq, only to be proven horribly wrong. Just ask the mothers of the soldiers who were killed or wounded in action during those wars. Just ask the millions of civilians who became “collateral damage”. That is why we must do everything possible to try and find a diplomatic solution to what could be an enormously destructive war in Ukraine. No one knows exactly what the human costs of such a war would be. But there are estimates that there could be over 50,000 civilian casualties in Ukraine, and millions of refugees flooding neighboring countries as they flee what could be the worst European conflict since the second world war. In addition, of course, there would be many thousands of deaths within the Ukrainian and Russian militaries. There is also the possibility that this “regional” war could escalate to other parts of Europe. What might happen then is even more horrifying. But that’s not all. The sanctions against Russia and Russia’s threatened response to those sanctions, could result in massive economic upheaval – with impacts on energy, banking, food and the day-to-day needs of ordinary people throughout the entire world. It is likely that Russians will not be the only people suffering from sanctions. And, by the way, any hope of international cooperation to address the existential threat of global climate crisis and future pandemics would suffer a major setback. Read more: Per CNN’s Manu Raju, Hal Rogers said he apologized: Joyce Beatty, a Democratic representative of Ohio, says her colleague Hal Rogers – a Republican of Kentucky – lobbed insults and refused to oblige after she asked him to put on a mask. Beatty, who is also chair of the Congressional Black Caucus, asked Rogers to put on a mask before boarding the Capitol’s subway system. “He then poked my back, demanding I get on the train,” she said. “When I asked him not to touch me, he responded, ‘kiss my ass’,” she wrote on Twitter. Rogers is not the only Republican lawmaker to flout public health rules. Representatives Marjorie Taylor Greene and Andrew Clyde have racked up tens of thousands of dollars in fines for refusing to comply with mask mandates in the House. That’s it from me today. My west coast colleague, Maanvi Singh, will take over the blog for the next few hours. Here’s where the day stands so far: Second gentleman Doug Emhoff was evacuated from a Washington high school because of a bomb threat. The husband of Kamala Harris was at Dunbar High School in northwest DC for an event commemorating Black History Month when Secret Service agents told him to evacuate. “Mr Emhoff is safe and the school has been evacuated. We are grateful to Secret Service and DC police for their work,” Emhoff’s spokesperson said. Senate minority leader Mitch McConnell criticized the Republican National Committee’s censure of Liz Cheney and Adam Kinzinger over their work for the House select committee investigating the January 6 insurrection. Describing the Capitol attack as a “violent insurrection”, McConnell said it was inappropriate for the RNC to censure two members for disagreeing with their colleagues. “That’s not the job of the RNC,” McConnell said. Joe Biden celebrated the news that Tritium is opening a new production facility in Tennessee to build its electric vehicle charging stations. The Tritium site will bring more than 500 jobs to Tennessee, and it is expected to start production this fall. “This is great news for workers across the country, for our economy and frankly for the planet,” Biden said. “We’re seeing the beginnings of an American manufacturing comeback.” Two House subcommittees held a hearing on security threats at synagogues, amid an alarming rise in antisemitic attacks across the US. The rabbi who was held hostage by an armed gunman last month at the Congregation Beth Israel in Texas testified at the hearing. Emphasizing the importance of security trainings for Jewish community leaders, Rabbi Charlie Cytron-Walker called for increased funding for those programs to help protect houses of worship. “Every congregation needs to be prepared,” Cytron-Walker said. Maanvi will have more coming up, so stay tuned. Meanwhile, over on Capitol Hill, Senate minority leader Mitch McConnell criticized the Republican National Committee for censuring Representatives Liz Cheney and Adam Kinzinger over their work for the House select committee investigating the January 6 insurrection. At a press conference today, McConnell was asked about the censure and the RNC’s description of the Capitol insurrection as “legitimate political discourse”. “Let me give you my view of what happened January 6,” McConnell said. “It was a violent insurrection for the purpose of trying to prevent the peaceful transfer of power after a legitimately certified election, from one administration to the next.” McConnell noted that the RNC has traditionally taken the stance of supporting all members of the Republican party, even if certain lawmakers have differing views on specific issues. The reporter then asked McConnell whether he has confidence in the leadership of RNC chairwoman Ronna McDaniel, who supported the censure resolution. “I do, but the issue is whether or not the RNC should be sort of singling out members of our party who may have different views from the majority,” McConnell said. “That’s not the job of the RNC.” Mike Jordan reported for the Guardian over the weekend on the recent wave of bomb threats targeting historically Black colleges and universities: For many students and alumni of historically Black colleges and universities, the wave of bomb threats on the campuses feel like history repeating itself. “I was caught off-guard because we’re in 2022 and still facing the same problems as our grandparents and their grandparents,” said Marian Turner, an international studies major at Spelman College in Atlanta, referring to a time before the gains of the civil rights movement of the 1960s. “It just really brings to light everything that’s happening, because we’re actually experiencing it.” Turner remembers checking her email two hours before a 9 am class on Tuesday, the day Spelman and a dozen other historically black colleges, or HBCUs, received bomb threats, the second such wave targeting the schools in a month. It would have been her first day of in-person classes since the Omicron variant delayed a return to campus. She was glad campus was empty at the time of the threat, but still felt outrage, fear and even defiance. So she decided to go on campus, but ended up leaving to avoid putting herself in danger. Instead, she attended class virtually. Read the Guardian’s full report: Doug Emhoff was at Dunbar High School for an event commemorating Black History Month when he had to be evacuated from the building because of a bomb threat. It’s unclear whether the threat was specifically related to the Black History Month event, but the incident comes a week after a number of historically Black colleges and universities received similar threats. The Guardian’s Adam Gabbatt reported last week: The FBI has said a series of hoax bomb threats targeting US historically Black colleges and universities, or HBCUs, are being investigated as racially motivated hate crimes More than a dozen HBCUs reported bomb threats on Tuesday, the first day of Black history month. On Monday, six HBCUs received similar threats, forcing them to cancel classes for thousands of students. A number of HBCUs faced simultaneous threats from anonymous callers earlier in January. Katie Peters, the communications director for Doug Emhoff, confirmed that the second gentleman is safe after being evacuated from Dunbar High School in Washington. “U.S. Secret Service was made aware of a security threat at a school where the @SecondGentleman was meeting with students and faculty,” Peters said on Twitter. “Mr. Emhoff is safe and the school has been evacuated. We are grateful to Secret Service and D.C. Police for their work.” A spokesperson for DC Public Schools, Enrique Gutierrez, told the press pool accompanying Doug Emhoff at Dunbar High School that students have been sent home because of the bomb threat. “I think everyone is safe. The building is clear. But I don’t have any specific details at this moment,” Gutierrez said, per pooler Austin Landis of Spectrum News. Asked about the incident during her daily briefing, White House press secretary Jen Psaki said moments ago, “I don’t have any updates on this. We will venture to see if we can get you anything, even if it’s during the briefing.” Second gentleman Doug Emhoff was evacuated from Dunbar High School in northwest Washington moments ago, and the DC Public Schools system has said the school received a bomb threat. Emhoff was at Dunbar for an event commemorating Black History Month, and he was speaking to school leaders when a Secret Service agent appeared to tell him, “We have to go.” According to a pool report, minutes after Emhoff was escorted out, an announcement was made that teachers should evacuate the building, and reporters present for the event soon followed suit. DCPS confirmed the reason for the evacuation was a bomb threat. Asked about the incident moments ago, White House press secretary Jen Psaki would not provide any additional details. Joe Biden argued that Tritium’s newly announced production facility in Tennessee would help the US compete in the global electric vehicle market. “It’s going to help ensure that America leads the world on electric vehicles,” Biden said. “China has been leading that race up to now, but that’s about to change.” The president also gave a rare shoutout to Tesla, which he described as “our nation’s largest electric vehicle manufacturer”. Despite the White House’s focus on electric vehicles to lower US emissions, Biden has been generally hesitant to mention Tesla. Once he wrapped up his prepared remarks, Biden walked away from the podium without taking any of reporters’ shouted questions. Joe Biden celebrated the news of Tritium opening a manufacturing facility in Tennessee to produce the company’s electric vehicle charging stations. The president noted the facility would create more than 500 good-paying jobs in Tennessee, and he predicted that the plant would have a “ripple effect” for many other working Americans, as the site would rely on US iron and steel. “This is great news for workers across the country, for our economy and frankly for the planet,” Biden said. “The benefits are going to ripple to thousands of miles in every direction.” The president noted the bipartisan infrastructure law includes $5bn for electric vehicle charging stations, and his administration will announce state-by-state funding for those stations later this week. “We’re seeing the beginnings of an American manufacturing comeback,” Biden said. “This is not hyperbole. This is real. This is genuine.” Jane Hunter, chief executive of Tritium, announced her company is opening a new production facility in Tennessee to build its electric vehicle charging stations. According to Hunter, the facility is expected to begin production this fall, and she credited the Biden administration and Tennessee lawmakers for making the site possible. “With the help of the residents of Tennessee, we’ll be building our largest factory globally, right here in the United States,” Hunter said. “We can’t wait to get started.” Joe Biden’s event on bolstering America’s manufacturing sector and lowering the country’s greenhouse gas emissions has now started at the White House. Gina McCarthy, Biden’s national climate adviser, began the event by underscoring the importance of expanding the usage of electric cars, which she described as an “absolutely essential tool” in lowering emissions. McCarthy added that electric vehicles provide crucial savings for American families by reducing their use of gas, ensuring that those who do make the change to an electric car do not go back. “I just have to say, we are all charged up,” McCarthy joked. Joe Biden will soon deliver remarks on bolstering America’s manufacturing sector, as Democrats look to advance the president’s Build Back Better economic agenda. Biden’s speech will focus on his administration’s efforts to “rebuild our manufacturing to make more in America, create good-paying union jobs, and lower energy costs for Americans,” according to the White House. The secretary of transportation, Pete Buttigieg, and the secretary of energy, Jennifer Granholm, are also expected to attend the event. Stay tuned. An influential rightwing lobby group, the American Legislative Exchange Council or Alec, is driving a surge in new state laws to block boycotts of the oil industry. The group’s strategy, which aims to protect large oil firms and other conservative-friendly industries, is modelled on legislation to punish divestment from Israel. Since the beginning of the year, state legislatures in West Virginia, Oklahoma and Indiana have introduced a version of a law drafted by Alec, the Energy Discrimination Elimination Act, to shield big oil from share selloffs and other measures intended to protest the fossil fuel industry’s role in the climate crisis. A dozen other states have publicly supported the intent of the legislation. Texas has begun compiling a list of companies to target for refusing to do business with the oil industry after the state passed a version of the law last year. Top of the list is the world’s largest asset manager, BlackRock. The push to blacklist firms that boycott the oil industry follows a meeting in December between politicians and Alec, a corporate-funded organisation that writes legislation for Republican-controlled states to adopt and drive conservative causes. At that meeting in San Diego, members of Alec’s energy taskforce voted to promote the model legislation requiring banks and financial companies to sign a pledge to not boycott petroleum companies in order to obtain state contracts. The wording closely resembles that of laws drafted by Alec and adopted in more than 30 states to block support for the Boycott, Divestment and Sanctions (BDS) movement against Israel’s oppression of the Palestinians. Similar laws are also being promoted to protect the gun industry from boycotts. Full story: The new mayor of New York City caused a mix of amusement and serious consternation by comparing cheese to heroin. “Food is like a drug,” Eric Adams said on Monday. “And in fact, the studies show the same level of brain that encourages you to use drugs also addicts you to food. “Food is addictive. You take someone on heroin, put them in one room, and someone hooked on cheese, put ’em in another room, and you take it away, I challenge you to tell me the person who’s hooked on heroin and who’s hooked on cheese.” The mayor identifies as a vegan, though on Monday he admitted sometimes eating fish. The Daily News, meanwhile, cited “a source close to the mayor” when it said Adams “has been spotted chowing down on beef and chicken in addition to fish”. “Representatives for Adams did not return requests for comment on the beef and chicken details,” it said. Adams was speaking as part of an effort to convince New Yorkers to switch to a more plant-based diet. He did not say to which studies he was referring. In 2015, researchers at the University of Michigan found that cheese was among foods people found hard to give up. But the study did not merit some of the headlines it generated, among them “This Explains a Lot: Study Finds That Cheese Is Just as Addictive as Drugs” and “Headed to Roquefort Rehab: Cheese Is as Addictive as Crack Cocaine”. Predictably, the internet did not take kindly to Adams’s words. Dr Kim Sue, medical director for the National Harm Reduction Coalition and an addiction physician-anthropologist at Yale, said: “Weighing in from addiction medicine to ask [Adams] to please not make these claims about either heroin or cheese. “The stigma and moralising is rife and not useful.” Asked if she agreed with the Republican National Committee that the January 6 attack on the US Capitol was “legitimate political discourse”, a senior member of House Republican leadership repeatedly compared the deadly riot to protests, which sometimes involved violence, for racial justice in US cities in 2020. Elise Stefanik, a New York congresswoman, was talking to reporters on Capitol Hill. “As Republicans have been very clear,” she said, “we condemn the violence on January 6. We also condemn the violence on [sic] 2020, as violent criminals attacked federal buildings, including parts of Washington DC. So we have been clear in that condemnation. “House Democrats did not condemn the violence that happened all of 2020 and we believe the January 6 commission is political theater. It’s about punishing partisan opponents and not getting to the real facts, which should be how can we ensure that the Capitol complex is safe not only for those of us who work here, but for the American people to come continue to advocate for policies they believe in.” The RNC called the Capitol attack – and Donald Trump’s lies about election fraud which fueled it – legitimate political discourse last week, in a censure of two Republicans on the House committee investigating January 6, Liz Cheney and Adam Kinzinger. Stefanik was asked if such extreme rhetoric might endanger her party’s chances of retaking the House and perhaps the Senate, as it is favoured to do in November, perhaps by alienating independent voters otherwise turning against Democrats and Joe Biden. “Again,” she said, “our position has been very clear.” She then repeated the equation between January 6 and protests for racial justice. Ronna McDaniel, the chair of the RNC, has complained about coverage of the censure of Kinzinger and Cheney, saying the “legitimate political discourse” language used “had nothing to do with violence at the Capitol”. Such language was not in the formal censure. More: Here’s where the day stands so far: Two House subcommittees held a hearing on security threats at synagogues, following a series of anti-Semitic attacks across the US. The Anti-Defamation League has documented an increase in anti-Semitic incidents in recent years, with 2021 representing the highest level of such attacks since ADL’s tracking began in 1979. The rabbi who was held hostage by an armed gunman last month at the Congregation Beth Israel in Texas testified at the hearing. Emphasizing the importance of security trainings for Jewish community leaders, Rabbi Charlie Cytron-Walker called for increased funding for those programs to help protect houses of worship. “Every congregation needs to be prepared,” Cytron-Walker said. Cytron-Walker detailed the anti-Semitic views of the gunman who held him and three others hostage for 11 hours. Cytron-Walker said the attacker made comments about Jewish people controlling the government and the media, and the man believed he could wield influence by targeting the synagogue. “That was reality for him,” Cytron-Walker said. The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned. Rabbi Charlie Cytron-Walker emphasized the importance of Jewish leaders being prepared for potential attacks to ensure the safety of their community members. The rabbi noted that he has attended a number of security trainings with the FBI and local law enforcement partners, and he said Jewish leaders need to be prepared for the worst-case scenario. “What happened to us is the most recent horrible thing,” Cytron-Walker said of the hostage crisis at his synagogue last month. “But things have been happening for years. And it’s a matter of, when does that wake-up call happen?” Congresswoman Sheila Jackson Lee, a Democrat of Texas, asked Rabbi Charlie Cytron-Walker about the ideology of the armed man who attacked his synagogue in Colleyville, Texas, last month. The attacker held Cytron-Walker and three others worshipping at the Congregation Beth Israel hostage for about 11 hours before the rabbi threw a chair at the gunman, allowing the four hostages to escape. Cytron-Walker said the attacker expressed anti-Semitic views about Jewish people controlling the government and the media, and the man believed he could wield influence by targeting the synagogue. “That was his singular understanding - that idea that Jews control the world, that Jews control the media, that Jews control government, that Jews control everything,” Cytron-Walker said. “That was reality for him.” Members of the two House subcommittees hosting the hearing are now asking questions about the rising number of security threats at synagogues. Congressman Donald Payne, a Democrat of New Jersey, asked how social media has contributed to the increased number of anti-Semitic attacks in recent years. Eric Fingerhut, the president of the Jewish Federations of North America and a former congressman, acknowledged that social media has enabled extremists from across the country to communicate with each other and further enflame fringe movements. “There is no place that is immune to this danger precisely because of the threats online,” Fingerhut said. “That is the reason why we need to be protecting every single institution.” Michael Masters, the national director and CEO of the Secure Community Network, emphasized the importance of giving Jewish leaders the tools to protect themselves and members of their communities. Speaking at the House subcommittee hearing on security threats at synagogues, Masters explained how his organization serves as a liaison with federal law enforcement partners to help protect houses of worship. The Secure Community Network works with Jewish community leaders to help develop best-practice safety policies and share intelligence about potential threats. Masters’ organization hosted a training in the Fort Worth area last August, and Rabbi Charlie Cytron-Walker attended the session. That guidance proved crucial last month, when an armed gunman took Cytron-Walker and three of his congregants hostage. “Let me just say how honored I am, how moved I am to be participating in this hearing with Rabbi Charlie,” Masters said. “We teach people in our trainings to commit to action. This is what the rabbi and other hostages did on that horrendous day.” Testifying at the House subcommittee hearing, Yosef Konikov, a rabbi at Chabad of South Orlando in Florida, said his congregants often express concern about their physical safety at the synagogue. When the hostage crisis unfolded last month at the Congregation Beth Israel in Colleyville, Texas, Konikov heard from congregants who said, “Rabbi, that could have been us.” Konikov warned that anti-Semitic attacks like the Colleyville hostage crisis make his congregants more hesitant to come to the synagogue or bring their children for services. “The United States must help its citizens be protected so they can practice their religion freely,” Konikov said. “Indeed, this is a cornerstone of the founding of this great nation.” Rabbi Charlie Cytron-Walker is now delivering his opening statement at the House subcommittee hearing on the rising number of security threats at synagogues. The hearing comes one month after Cytron-Walker and three of his congregants were held hostage by an armed attacker at his synagogue, the Congregation Beth Israel in Colleyville, Texas. Cytron-Walker expressed gratitude that he had access to security trainings before the attack occurred, and those trainings enabled him to respond quickly and effectively during the crisis. The rabbi threw a chair at the attacker, allowing his congregants to escape. Cytron-Walker said more synagogue leaders need to receive similar security trainings, and he criticized the gap in funding that makes it harder for communities to access those crucial resources. “Every congregation needs to be prepared,” Cytron-Walker said. Congresswoman Elissa Slotkin, the Democratic chair of the House subcommittee on intelligence and counterterrorism, lamented the recent rise in anti-Semitic attacks across the US. Specifically addressing last month’s hostage crisis at the Congregation Beth Israel in Colleyville, Texas, Slotkin said, “This was not an isolated incident.” The Anti-Defamation League has documented an alarming rise in anti-Semitic attacks in recent years, with 2021 representing the highest level of such incidents since ADL’s tracking began in 1979. But Slotkin added that the US is “far from powerless” to prevent these attacks, and she emphasized the importance of government investments to help protect houses of worship across the country. The House subcommittee hearing on security threats at synagogues has now started, and the Democratic leaders of the two hosting subcommittees are delivering opening statements. Congresswoman Val Demings, the chair of the House subcommittee on emergency preparedness, response and recovery, warned that the US is seeing fringe extremist groups embrace anti-Semitism, resulting in dangerous attacks like the hostage crisis at the Congregation Beth Israel in Colleyville, Texas. Demings applauded Rabbi Charlie Cytron-Walker, who will testify at today’s hearing, for his “quick actions” during the hostage crisis. The rabbi grabbed a chair and threw it at the gunman, allowing his congregants to escape. Cytron-Walker is expected to soon testify, so stay tuned. Mitt Romney and his niece, Ronna McDaniel, exchanged texts after the Republican National Committee she chairs called Donald Trump’s attempts to overturn his election defeat and the Capitol riot “legitimate political discourse”. Romney, the Utah senator, 2012 presidential nominee and only Republican to twice vote to convict Trump at his impeachment trials, told reporters on Monday he “expressed his point of view”. The RNC used the controversial language in censuring Liz Cheney and Adam Kinzinger, the only Republicans on the House committee investigating January 6. Romney was one of few Republicans to scorn the move, saying: “Shame falls on a party that would censure persons of conscience, who seek truth in the face of vitriol. Honor attaches to Liz Cheney and Adam Kinzinger for seeking truth even when doing so comes at great personal cost.” But he did not mention his personal connection to McDaniel, who stopped using “Romney” in her name after Trump took over her party – according to the Washington Post, at Trump’s request. Romney also said the censure “could not have been a more inappropriate message … so far from accurate as to shock and to make people wonder what we’re thinking”. On Monday, he told reporters he and his niece had since “exchanged some texts”. “I expressed my point of view,” he said. “I think she’s a wonderful person and doing her very best.” He also said McDaniel was “terrific”. Rabbi Charlie Cytron-Walker was among the four people who were taken hostage by an armed man last month at the Congregation Beth Israel in Colleyville, Texas. The Guardian’s Edward Helmore reports: Rabbi Charlie Cytron-Walker told CBS he initially welcomed the stranger, who had been staying in a Dallas homeless shelter, and made him a cup of tea. He said the man was not threatening or suspicious at first. ‘Some of his story didn’t quite add up, so I was a little bit curious, but that’s not necessarily an uncommon thing,’ the rabbi said. Cytron-Walker said he invited Akram to join the morning service. As he turned his back to face the direction of Jerusalem, he heard the click of a gun. The hostage crisis ended 11 hours later, and luckily Cytron-Walker and the other three people at the synagogue survived the attack. Greetings from Washington, live blog readers. Two House subcommittees will hold a hearing today on security concerns at synagogues, following a series of antisemitic attacks at the houses of worship. Among those testifying at the hearing will be two rabbis: Charlie Cytron-Walker, of the Congregation Beth Israel in Colleyville, Texas, and Yosef Konikov, of Chabad of South Orlando in Florida. The hearing comes one month after a man took four worshippers hostage at Cytron-Walker’s synagogue in Texas. All four hostages luckily survived the attack, which renewed fears over the rise of antisemitism in the US. Joe Biden described the hostage crisis as “an act of terror,” saying his administration is committed to combating antisemitic attacks. “I wanted to make sure we got the word out to synagogues and places of worship that we’re not going to tolerate this, that we have this capacity to deal with the assaults on particularly the antisemitism that has grown up,” Biden said. “We are focused. The attorney general is focused. I’m making sure that we deal with these kinds of acts.” The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned.A court has released images of the injuries sustained by a police officer only moments before he shot an Aboriginal man dead. The Northern Territory supreme court has heard Zachary Rolfe, 30, shot dead Kumanjayi Walker in November 2019 while trying to arrest him at the remote community of Yuendumu, 300km north-west of Alice Springs. Rolfe’s trial, for the alleged murder of Walker, started in Darwin on Monday. On Tuesday, the court released some exhibits in the case to the media. Among the exhibits are images that were shown to the jury of the injuries allegedly sustained by Rolfe immediately before he shot Walker, a 19-year-old Warlpiri man. The court has heard Rolfe shot Walker three times after he had attempted to arrest him in relation to an outstanding warrant at Walker’s grandmother’s house in Yuendumu. The court heard Walker had been asked to put his hands behind his back by Rolfe only seconds after police entered the property. But Walker pulled a pair of medical scissors from his right pocket and brought them down in a stabbing motion into Rolfe’s left shoulder. The images of Rolfe, taken the day of and the day after the shooting, show a red wound almost directly on top of his shoulder. In court, the wound was described as a “small puncture wound”. Immediately after the stabbing, Rolfe’s colleague, Constable Adam Eberl, struggled with Walker, who was shot soon after for the first time by Rolfe, the court has heard. The first shot is not subject to any charges. Prosecutor Philip Strickland SC told the Northern Territory supreme court on Tuesday that as Eberl and Walker fell on to a mattress on the floor and continued to struggle, Eberl gained control of Walker. Strickland said Erbel was on Walker, whose right arm, which had been holding the scissors, was pinned under him. Rolfe placed his left hand on Eberl’s back, and pressed his right hand, holding his Glock semi-automatic handgun, against the left side of Walker’s body, Strickland said. Rolfe then pulled the trigger twice in quick succession. It is the second and third shots that are subject to the murder charge. If a jury finds Rolfe not guilty of murder, he faces a charge of manslaughter, and if he is found not guilty of that charge, a further charge of engaging in a violent act causing death. The police officer has pleaded not guilty to all charges. The newly released images also include a photo shown to the jury of a small room where the incident took place. It occurred immediately inside the only door to the property that was accessible, Strickland has told the court. Strickland told the court Walker was confronted by police as he walked across the room, and the stabbing occurred along the wall on the left side of the room. He said the mattress where the second and third shots were allegedly fired is on the opposite side of the room, immediately to the right of the doorway, and in the corner. On Wednesday, police officers who the court has heard were threatened with an axe by Walker during a previous attempt at arresting him, are expected to give evidence in the trial. David Edwardson QC, for Rolfe, said he would defend his actions as being reasonable and justifiable in the context of the danger faced by him and Erbel. Edwardson said Rolfe was acting in self-defence, and to defend the life of Erbel, when he fired the second and third shots, and his training had emphasised that “edged weapon equals gun”.Here’s a summary of events: Global Covid response programme ‘running on fumes’ amid budget shortfall, WHO says Canadian truckers block bridge to US as Trudeau demands end to protest Hamsters can transmit Covid to humans, data suggests Pfizer accused of pandemic profiteering as profits double France, Greece and Portugal relax Covid travel restrictions Italy to ease mask mandate in most outdoor spaces UK recorded 66,183 new Covid-19 daily cases and 314 Covid-related deaths England’s chief medical officer, Prof Chris Whitty, has written to NHS staff telling them it is their “professional responsibility” to get vaccinated Japan reported 155 daily deaths today - a new daily record Poland has pushed back indefinitely a deadline for teachers, police, armed forces and firefighters to be vaccinated because it cannot be met A quarter of British employers cite long Covid as the main reason behind long-term sickness absences, a survey has found. Hundreds of people blocked streets outside New Zealand’s parliament today to protest against vaccine mandates and pandemic restrictions, inspired by demonstrations in Ottawa, Canada The Indian prime minister, Narendra Modi, has defended his government’s pandemic response over the last two years, citing high economic growth and middling inflation Scientists in China say they have developed a new coronavirus test as accurate as a PCR that gives results within four minutes Mexico’s health ministry reported 132 more deaths from Covid-19, bringing the total number of fatalities in the country since the pandemic began to 309,884. The World Health Organization (WHO) said that the half a million Covid-19 deaths recorded since the Omicron variant was discovered is “beyond tragic”. The WHO’s incident manager Abdi Mahamud said that 130 million cases and 500,000 deaths had been recorded globally since Omicron was declared a variant of concern in late November, reports Agence France-Presse. Mahamud told a live interaction on the WHO’s social media channels: In the age of effective vaccines, half a million people dying, it’s really something. While everyone was saying Omicron is milder, (they) missed the point that half a million people have died since this was detected. It’s beyond tragic. Maria Van Kerkhove, the WHO’s technical lead on Covid-19, said the sheer number of known Omicron cases was “astounding”, while the true number would be much higher. “It makes the previous peaks look almost flat,” she said. “We’re still in the middle of this pandemic. Many countries have not passed their peak of Omicron yet.” She added she was extremely concerned that the number of deaths had increased for several weeks in a row. “This virus continues to be dangerous,” she said. A global initiative to get Covid-19 tests, treatments and vaccines to poorer nations is “running on fumes” because of a budget shortfall. According to the World Health Organization (WHO) and other aid groups, the initiative has only received 5% of the donations sought to deliver on its aims this year. Reuters reports that the Access to Covid-19 Tools (ACT) Accelerator budgeted $23.4 billion (£17.27 billion) for its efforts from October 2021 to September 2022, of which it hoped $16.8 billion (£12.4 billion) would come in the form of grants from richer countries. However, so far it has had just $814 million (£601 million) pledged, leaders of the initiative told a media briefing on Tuesday. The ACT-Accelerator hub encompasses the COVAX initiative, which has focused on equitable access to vaccines. It also involves providing tests and treatments to low and middle-income countries, as well as personal protective equipment (PPE) for healthcare workers. In addition to the WHO, the project is backed by organisations including the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations, The Global Fund, and the Bill &amp; Melinda Gates Foundation. WHO’s global ambassador for health financing and former UK prime minister Gordon Brown said: “That’s just a minuscule 5% of what we require. It is time to awaken the conscience of the world.” Bruce Aylward, a senior WHO official who acts as coordinator for the initiative, said: “The global response is running on fumes.” On Wednesday, a number of world leaders are set to support publicly the push for more funding, calling for the investment to end the emergency phase of the Covid-19 pandemic this year. A further 18 companies were given so-called “VIP lane” access in the rush to supply the UK with an adequate amount of personal protective equipment (PPE) during the first Covid-19 wave, according to a campaign group. The Good Law Project said it had been leaked information which suggested the additional firms, which are on top of the 50 acknowledged by the government, were awarded contracts worth almost £1 billion without competition. It comes after the high court last month ruled that the government’s use of a so-called “VIP lane” to award millions of pounds’ worth of contracts for protective gear was unlawful, PA Media reports. And last week, the Department for Health and Social Care’s (DHSC) annual accounts stated that £8.7 billion spent on PPE during the pandemic had been written off, with around £673 million worth of equipment found to be totally unusable. Declaring that it had discovered a further £984 million in “VIP lane” agreements, Good Law said PPE contracts worth £173 million had been awarded to Chinese suppliers which have been “linked to the Uyghur human rights abuses in Xinjiang”, while another £96 million deal was agreed with a firm that “operated out of a hotel room in Beijing”. The not-for-profit group said a Hong Kong-based firm was handed a £25 million contract in June 2020, but the details of the agreement with the UK government has yet to be disclosed. Jo Maugham, director of the project, said: “The Department of Health’s annual report revealed that of every £13 we spent on PPE, £10 was wasted. “How long must hard-working taxpayers carry the heavy burden of this government’s waste and sleaze?” Labour’s Angela Rayner said: We already know in a minister’s own words that the Government was ‘paying dramatically over the odds’ for contracts that lined the pockets of Tory donors and cronies. Today’s revelation suggests that the so-called ‘VIP lane’ for the politically connected was even bigger than they have admitted. They must now come clean and tell us the truth about these new contracts, and if ministers have misled Parliament, there must be consequences. Some of the suppliers may not have been aware they were in the “VIP lane” for PPE deals, Good Law said, and there is no suggestion of wrongdoing. A Department of Health and Social Care spokesperson said: “It is inaccurate to claim that all of these companies were referred by the High Priority Lane route. “The purpose of the High Priority Lane was to efficiently prioritise credible offers of PPE, and our efforts have helped deliver over 17.5 billion items of PPE to the frontline to protect healthcare workers during the pandemic.” The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) stands by its mask-wearing guidance for pupils aged 5-12 at public schools. CDC Director Dr Rochelle Walensky told Reuters on Tuesday: Right now our CDC guidance has not changed ... We continue to endorse universal masking in schools. She added that she is “cautiously optimistic” that Covid-19 cases will fall below crisis levels at some point, but “we are not there right now.” On Monday officials in New Jersey, Connecticut, Delaware, California and Oregon said they plan to lift indoor mask mandates for schools and other public places in the coming weeks. Walensky noted the US is currently seeing around 290,000 Covid-19 cases each day and higher rates of hospitalisation than it did during the peak of cases caused by the Delta variant in 2021. Hospital capacity is “one of the most important barometers” for whether Covid-19 should be considered a pandemic-level public health crisis, she said and right now, US hospitals remain “overwhelmed” by Covid-19 cases. Protests in Canada that have blocked a key bridge to the United States have broadened beyond their original focus on vaccine requirements, the White House said. Jen Psaki, White House press secretary said: It is clear these disruptions have broadened in scope beyond the vaccine requirement implementation. We are of course in touch with our Canadian counterparts. The busiest land crossing from the United States to Canada remained shut on Tuesday after Canadian truckers blocked lanes on Monday in protest at their government’s pandemic control measures. While traffic in both directions was initially blocked, US-bound lanes have since reopened, Windsor Police tweeted. The so-called ‘Freedom Convoy’, which is demanding an end to federal Covid-19 vaccine mandates for cross-border traffic, began blocking the streets of Canada’s capital, Ottawa, on 28 January. Since Sunday night, police have started slowly taking back control, seizing thousands of litres of fuel and removing an oil tanker truck. Ottawa deputy police chief Steve Bell said on Tuesday that police have immobilised many of the heavy vehicles taking part in the blockade. He said about a quarter of the 418 protest trucks in the downtown area have children in them, and police are concerned for their welfare in relation to cold, noise, carbon monoxide risks and access to sanitation. Canada’s public safety minister Marco Mendicino said he had been in touch with the mayor of Windsor and local legislators about the blockade at the Ambassador Bridge, connecting Detroit, Michigan, with Windsor, Ontario. He said: “We will continue to work...so that we can keep the supply chains moving across the Ambassador Bridge, as well as the wheels of our economy turning.” Canada sends 75% of its exports to the United States, and the bridge usually handles around 8,000 trucks a day. On Monday Canadian prime minister Justin Trudeau denounced the demonstrators’ tactics at an emergency debate in the House of Commons. Trudeau said: Individuals are trying to blockade our economy, our democracy, and our fellow citizens’ daily lives. It has to stop. New York is considering making outdoor dining a permanent fixture, reports Reuters. Pavement dining was first allowed in 2020 as a temporary measure to help blunt the economic fallout from the coronavirus pandemic. Restaurants were quick to set up makeshift structures, “sheds”, of plywood and plastic sheeting, and many later installed more elaborate structures, some with heaters. The New York City Council held a hearing on Tuesday to consider the plan to give permanent status to thousands of “streateries” outside of restaurants and bars. It has the support of the mayor, Eric Adams, and the New York Hospitality Alliance, an industry association. However, opponents say outside dining created unsanitary conditions, encouraged more rats, drew noise complaints in some neighbourhoods and reduced the number of available parking spaces. The Uniformed Firefighters Association has complained that the sheds have narrowed streets so much as to delay their response and prevent them from safely raising ladders to windows. The Coalition United for Equitable Urban Policy, an alliance of local businesses and residents, held a “Chuck the Sheds” protest rally over the weekend. The 51-member council body will vote on the bill at a later date if it makes it through a committee vote. Ukraine’s defence minister, Oleksii Reznikov, said he has tested positive for the coronavirus, but was continuing to work remotely, Reuters reports. In a Facebook post he wrote: “I feel good, self-isolating, but working.” Brazil recorded 177,027 new coronavirus cases and 1,189 Covid-19 deaths in the last 24 hours, the health ministry said. Brazil has registered 26,776,620 cases since the pandemic began, while the official death toll has risen to 633,810, according to the ministry. A Conservative MP has accepted it was incorrect for him to claim more people were dying in road accidents than of Covid-19, reports PA Media. Former minister Sir Desmond Swayne raised a point of order in the House of Commons to correct the record this evening. On 14 December, Sir Desmond told a debate on coronavirus restrictions: “Notwithstanding the carnage on our roads, which is certainly killing more people than Covid at the moment, some of us still decide to drive. It is a matter of opinion.” There were an estimated 1,390 reported road deaths in the year ending June 2021, a smaller number when compared to those people who died within 28 days of testing positive for Covid-19. Sir Desmond told the Commons this evening: On 14 December in a debate on the Covid regulations, I said that more people were dying in the carnage on the roads than of Covid-19. I’ve now seen the statistics, that was incorrect. I thought it appropriate to correct the record. As more of us are considering heading abroad again, travel restrictions in a number of popular tourist destinations have been relaxed. France, Portugal and Greece have each updated their entry requirements for fully vaccinated travellers, with changes coming into effect in time for half-term. Read the full report here: PA Media reports health secretary Sajid Javid has said there needs to be “more investment in staff” in the NHS. Javid was speaking during a hospital visit in east London today hours after setting out in the Commons how the NHS would tackle the backlog of care built up during the Covid-19 pandemic. Asked about what is being done to increase staff and why a workforce plan has not been published, Mr Javid said: I can not thank staff enough throughout the NHS and social care for how they have handled the huge challenge, probably the biggest in a lifetime, throughout the pandemic. They are all heroes in what they have done. There needs to be, of course, more investment in staff. The workforce is at the heart of the NHS and that is why we have seen 10,000 more nurses over the last year and 5,000 more doctors. We have got more doctors and nurses than ever before in the NHS’s history but we will continue to invest, that is also why I have asked the NHS for a long-term workforce plan. He also spoke of the Government’s commitments to tackle waiting times adding: What we have committed to is that by 2025 the NHS, in terms of total activity, will be at least 30% more a year than what it was pre-pandemic. Linda Geddes writes: Pet hamsters can transmit Covid to humans and are the likely source of a recent outbreak of the Delta variant in Hong Kong, data suggests. The research confirms fears that a pet shop was the source of a recent Covid outbreak in the city, which has seen at least 50 people infected and led to the culling of more than 2,200 hamsters. However, virologists emphasised that, although the pet trade could provide a route for viral spread, existing pet hamsters are unlikely to pose a threat to their owners and should not be harmed. Read the full report here: Maya Yang writes: An Arkansas doctor accused of prescribing ivermectin to inmates in his state without their consent has been praised by local officials for a “job well done” despite widespread outrage at his actions. In January, the Arkansas chapter of the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) sued Dr Robert Karas, the physician at Arkansas’s Washington county detention center, on behalf of four inmates who said they were given ivermectin to treat Covid-19 as a form of “medical experiment”. “Plaintiffs ingested incredibly high doses of a drug that credible medical professionals, the FDA, and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), all agree is not an effective treatment against Covid-19 and that if given in large doses is dangerous for humans,” the lawsuit said. Read more here: Ireland will resume its traditional St Patrick’s Day diplomatic blitz next month, sending 32 ministers to destinations around the world after Covid-19 kept officials at home last year. Reuters reports that successive Irish governments have used the 17 March holiday to launch trade missions and meet influential politicians. Last year the engagements were conducted virtually after a pared-back contingent travelled just as Ireland’s Covid-19 outbreak began in 2020. The 2022 programme includes a meeting with US president Joe Biden, who speaks proudly of his Irish heritage, as well as trips to eight other US cities and countries including Colombia, Chile, Lebanon and South Korea. Health secretary Sajid Javid has said that “big, bold and ambitious” targets have been included in the plans of how the NHS would tackle the backlog of care built up during the Covid-19 pandemic. PA Media reports that earlier Javid had told the Commons that this would include new targets for reducing long waits and getting people checked for illnesses more quickly. Asked about whether factors such as buildings and personnel would make the targets impractical at the moment, Javid said: I think it is right to have some targets but of course they need to be big, bold and ambitious but ones that can be met where the NHS rightly feels they are sensible targets, that is what we have today. This is a plan published by the NHS with the full support and the backing, with investment and in other ways, of the government. Some people would say ‘why don’t you have more targets for every type of procedure?’ The problem with that would be that you would have too many targets and it might hold the NHS back. Uganda is preparing legislation to make Covid-19 jabs mandatory in an effort to tackle low vaccination levels, a senior health official said. The head of the national immunisation programme, Alfred Driwale, told Reuters: It is to help prevention of a disease, it’s about prevention of deaths. Considering the impact the pandemic had on the economy this law is needed. Uganda has a population of about 45 million people but only about 12.7 million doses of Covid-19 vaccines have so far been administered, according to the health ministry. Legislation is now with parliament and the health committee is scrutinising it. Julia Kollewe reports that Pfizer has been accused of profiteering off the global pandemic, having made nearly $37bn (£27bn) in sales from its Covid-19 vaccine last year. This amount makes the Pfizer vaccine one of the most lucrative products in history – and has forecast another bumper year in 2022, with a big boost coming from its Covid-19 pill Paxlovid. The US drugmaker’s overall revenues in 2021 doubled to $81.3bn, and it expects to make record revenues of $98bn to $102bn this year. The bumper sales prompted accusations from campaigners of “pandemic profiteering”. The group Global Justice Now said the annual revenue of $81bn was more than the GDP of most countries and accused Pfizer of “ripping off public health systems You can read the full report on the Guardian below: The UK government has been accused of using coronavirus vaccine donations to developing countries to cut aid spending “on the sly”. The PA reports on analysis by the Centre for Global Development (CGD) claimed that by overestimating the cost of providing the vaccines to developing countries, the Government could reduce the amount it spent on aid by around 171 million. You can read the full report by the PA below. PA reports: Ranil Dissanayake, a policy fellow at the CGD, said the move would be “immoral” and “illogical” and claimed it would cut real spending on aid by more than the Government donated to Uganda and Tanzania combined last year. He said: “The UK has made many bad calls with its aid budget, but this one is truly scandalous: they plan to make a fiscal ‘profit’ on donated vaccines by claiming a larger ODA [official development assistance] value than we paid for them.” The UK has promised to donate 100 million vaccine doses to developing countries by June 2022, including 80 million AstraZeneca vaccines and 20 million from Johnson and Johnson. Although the price paid for the vaccines has not been published, both the British Medical Journal and the CGD have estimated the cost to the UK at three dollars per dose for AstraZeneca and between 8.50 dollars and 10 dollars per dose for Johnson and Johnson. This would give an average of around 4.40 dollars per dose donated by the UK, but proposals being discussed by major donors would allow countries to claim they cost 6.72 dollars per dose when calculating their spending on international aid. Donors argue that this better reflects the global average price per vaccine, but it is well above the level the UK is likely to have paid and would allow the Government to claim it has spent more on aid than it actually had. Dissanayake said: “It’s immoral to cut aid because we’re giving away vaccines we bought for ourselves already; it’s illogical to plan public finances to spend 0.5% of GNI of ODA and then to cut it back on the sly like this; and it’s unpopular with MPs across the spectrum. “Our global partners deserve better than these tricks to minimise our help to them.” CGD polled MPs on the subject, finding that 92% thought the UK should only claim at most the price paid for the vaccines as aid spending, rather than claiming the higher, global price. A group of 30 international development organisations have gone further, calling for plans to count vaccine donations towards aid spending to be scrapped entirely. In a statement on Tuesday, the group, which includes ActionAid, Oxfam and Save the Children, said: “These vaccine doses were never purchased in the interest of development partners and should not be counted as such. Indeed, excess purchases of doses in a context of limited global supply were directly responsible for denying access to these life-saving tools in developing countries.” They added: “Tapping into existing ODA budgets to pay for doses never originally intended for developing countries risks, in some cases, diverting funds away from other vital humanitarian and development programmes.” The Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office has been approached for comment. In the US, the Associated Press reports that fellow Republican conservatives rallied behind a Kansas physician-legislator who’s under investigation by the state medical board, and in this way advancing his measures to protect doctors pursuing potentially dangerous treatments for coronavirus and to weaken childhood vaccination requirements. The AP reports: As a Senate health committee member, Senator Mark Steffen successfully pushed a proposal that would require pharmacists to fill prescriptions of the anti-worm medication ivermectin, the anti-malaria drug hydroxychloroquine and other drugs for off-label uses as coronavirus treatments. Steffen is among the Republican-controlled Legislature’s biggest vaccine skeptics and a critic of how the federal government have handled the coronavirus pandemic. Steffen also successfully persuaded the Republican-dominated committee to add a proposal to make it easy for parents to claim religious exemptions from vaccine requirements at schools and day cares. Kansas requires children to be vaccinated against more than a dozen diseases — including polio and measles. You can read more about this story from the Guardian here: Italy has lifted coronavirus restrictions which require people to wear masks outdoors under most circumstances in response to an improving coronavirus situation, with Italy’s government also saying that they aim to raise attendance limits at stadiums. Reuters reports: Under new rules set by Health Minister Roberto Speranza, from 11 Feb until at least 31 March it will be necessary to wear protective masks only in crowded areas and at indoor public venues. Earlier, Speranza and Sports Minister Valentina Vezzali said the government aimed to steadily increase the attendance limits at sports stadiums from March 1. The ministers said in a statement that from that date they intended to raise attendance ceilings to 75% of capacity for outside stadiums and 60% for indoor ones. The limits currently stand at 50% of capacity outside and 35% inside. Italy’s rate of new COVID-19 infections and hospitalisations has been gradually declining in recent weeks, but the death toll remains stubbornly high, with between 300 and 450 fatalities on most days. The European Union’s drug regulator launched a review to evaluate whether the Pfizer coronavirus vaccine can be used as a third booster shot in adolescents aged 12 to 15, even after several countries in the region have already started such a campaign In its statement made today, the European Medicines Agency (EMA) added that a review of booster shots given to 16- and 17-year-old teenagers was ongoing. This news comes after Germany’s vaccine committee last month recommended that all children between the ages of 12 and 17 receive a booster, following the initial two-shot course, as infection rates continue to soar among youngsters in particular. Other states in the region followed suit. Reuters reports: EMA added on Tuesday that “advice on how vaccinations should be given remains the prerogative” of member states’ advisory groups. The European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) said in a separate report on Tuesday that findings so far suggest an increase of vaccine effectiveness against infection in adolescents who received a booster compared to adolescents who have recently completed the primary vaccination course. It added, however, that no data was yet available on the duration of protection from a booster dose and on the additional effectiveness against severe disease. The ECDC said 10 countries in the European Economic Area, which comprises the 27 EU member states plus Liechtenstein, Iceland and Norway, had already recommended a booster dose for those under 18 years of age. France has reported a total of 105,882 coronavirus deaths in hospital, an increase by 360 compared to the previous day, as well a 235,267 new coronavirus cases. The country has also reported 3,555 people in intensive care for coronavirus, a decrease of 67. Turkey has recorded 111,096 new Covid-19 infections in the space of 24 hours, just below the record daily high from the previous week, as well as its highest daily death toll in months, health ministry data has showed. Reuters reports that in late December, daily cases stood at about 20,000 but have since surged due to the highly transmissible Omicron variant of the coronavirus. On Friday, Turkey reported a record 111,157 infections. Data on Thursday also showed 241 people died due to coronavirus in the same 24-hour period, the highest daily toll since 3 November, while Health Minister Fahrettin Koca urged citizens to complete their vaccination and the elderly to exercise more caution. The UK has delivered a total of 52,447,403 first doses of Covid-19 vaccine, a rise of 10,106 the previous day, have now been delivered in the UK by February 7, the latest Government figures show. Some 48,617,355 second doses have been delivered, an increase of 22,861. A combined total of 37,586,043 booster and third doses have been given, a day-on-day rise of 32,627. Separate totals for booster and third doses are not available. Italy reported 101,864 COVID-19 related cases on Tuesday, against 41,247 the day before, the health ministry said, while the number of deaths rose to 415 from 326. Italy has registered 149,512 deaths linked to COVID-19 since its outbreak emerged in February 2020, the second-highest toll in Europe after Britain and the eighth highest in the world, Reuters reports. The country has reported 11.77 million cases to date. Patients in hospital with COVID-19 - not including those in intensive care - stood at 18,337 on Tuesday, down from 18,675 a day earlier. A further 314 people have died within 28 days of testing positive for Covid-19, bringing the UK total to 158,677, the government said. These figures now include deaths in England following possible reinfections of Covid-19. Separate figures published by the Office for National Statistics show there have been 182,000 deaths registered in the UK where Covid-19 was mentioned on the death certificate. There were 66,183 cases of Covid-19 reported in the UK on Tuesday, the government said, which includes reinfections in England and Northern Ireland that are more than 90 days after a previous positive test. The total is based on positive lab-confirmed PCR tests in all four nations of the UK, plus most positive lateral flow tests reported in England and all lateral flow tests reported in Northern Ireland. Pfizer made nearly $37bn (£27bn) in sales from its Covid-19 vaccine last year – making it one of the most lucrative products in history – and has forecast another bumper year in 2022, with a big boost coming from its Covid-19 pill Paxlovid, my colleague Julia Kollewe reports. The US drugmaker’s overall revenues in 2021 doubled to $81.3bn, and it expects to make record revenues of $98bn to $102bn this year. Albert Bourla, the chairman and chief executive, said that at the start of the pandemic it had “committed to use all of the resources and expertise we had at our disposal to help protect populations globally against this deadly virus”. “Now, less than two years since we made that commitment, we are proud to say that we have delivered both the first FDA-authorised vaccine against Covid-19 (with our partner, BioNTech) and the first FDA-authorised oral treatment for Covid-19,” he said. Read the Guardian report here: Spain is scrapping a mandate to wear masks outdoors, as COVID-19 infection rates drop and hospitals report lower admissions, AP reports. Mask-wearing will not be necessary outside beginning Thursday, a government spokeswoman said on Tuesday after a weekly Cabinet meeting. The rule change includes children at school during their breaks outside between classes. However, masks remain mandatory in indoor public spaces, including public transportation, and when people are unable to keep a safe distance of 1.5 metres (4 feet) between them. A decision about whether secondary school pupils in Scotland will continue to have to wear face coverings in class will be made before pupils return after the February break, Nicola Sturgeon said. The first minister said the Scottish government’s education advisory group was meeting on Tuesday afternoon to discuss the issue. Sturgeon said: The Scottish government will consider carefully any further advice that the sub-group provides, and confirm any decisions as quickly as possible and in advance of the return to school after the February break. Scotland is through the worst of the Omicron wave, the first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, has said. In a statement to the Scottish parliament, Sturgeon said: The situation now remains much more positive than it was at the turn of the year – and thanks to a combination of vaccinations, targeted protective measures and the responsible reaction of the public, it is much more positive than we feared it might be at this stage. It seems reasonable, based on the data, to conclude that we are now through the worst of this wave of Omicron. That has enabled the removal of virtually all the additional measures that we introduced in December and a return to normality in much of everyday life. We are on a good track at this stage. To stay on this track, though, continued care and caution remains necessary. While much more stable than it was, the virus is still widespread; (coronavirus rate of) one in 30 remains a high level of infection. The first minister further announced that coronavirus restrictions such as wearing face coverings in schools and shops will remain in place. Responding to research published today stating that a quarter of UK employers say Long Covid is one of the main causes of long-term sickness absence among their staff, Layla Moran MP, chair of the all-party parliamentary group on coronavirus, said: While much of the focus of the past two years has been on fighting the pandemic, the government has paid almost no attention to the severe impact Long Covid will continue to have on both people and the economy. Long Covid presents a huge workforce challenge, it is crucial that the government recognise it as an occupational disease, provide formal guidance to employers and create a compensation scheme for key workers who are unable to return to work after catching the virus protecting others. A judge in Italy ruled that blood from Covid-vaccinated donors is “absolutely safe” after anti-vaccine parents of a boy, in need of an urgent blood transfusion, had refused to receive blood for their child from vaccinated donors. Last weekend, a couple from Modena, in northern Italy, informed Bologna’s Sant’Orsola hospital that they were “adamant that our child – before undergoing a delicate heart surgery – will only get unvaccinated blood”. The hospital replied to the request with a note, saying “the surgery cannot be postponed” and that it was “necessary to proceed urgently given the severity of the boy’s pathology”. On Tuesday, a judge in Modena turned down the parents’ appeal, citing that there were “guarantees of absolute safety in using blood from vaccinated donors”. The couple’s lawyer said they may appeal, Italian news agency ANSA reported. The lawyer told ANSA that the parents had requested non-vaccinated blood for “religious reasons”. In England and Wales, people aged 80 and over are accounting for more deaths involving Covid-19 in England and Wales than at any point since December 2020, analysis shows. However, the number of deaths in the current wave of the virus remains well below levels reached during the second wave last winter. PA Media reports: Some 856 of the 1,355 of deaths that occurred in the week ending January 21 2022 and which mentioned coronavirus on the death certificate were among over-80s - the equivalent of 63.2%. This is the highest proportion since the week to December 18 2020, when it stood at 64.0% (2,115 of 3,306 deaths). The proportion had dropped to nearly half this level during the summer of 2021, dipping to 37.9% in the week to July 2 2021. It follows a period in November and early December 2021 when the over-80s and people aged 60-79 each accounted for around 43% of deaths. But a gap opened up sharply at the end of December and widened at the start of this year. People aged 60 to 79 accounted for 30.7% of deaths in the week to January 21 2022, compared with 63.2% of over-80s. The last time the gap was this wide was just before Christmas 2020, when the figures were almost identical (30.7% and 64.0% respectively). Pfizer has said that it has raised its forecast for full-year sales of its Covid-19 vaccine to about $32bn from $29bn, and said it expects another $22bn from sales of its oral antiviral pill for the disease, Reuters reports. The Scottish Conservative party is set to publish a policy paper today, with one of the main recommendations to wind down Scotland’s Test and Protect scheme. PA Media reports that the “Back to Normality” document will call for the end of contact tracing in the coming months, with funds instead redirected towards bolstering the NHS. The Scottish Tories also said the performance of Test and Protect has declined in recent months, adding that the requirement for confirmatory PCR tests after a positive lateral flow test being dropped has made the scheme “less useful”. On 5 January, the day before the change was made, the first minister Nicola Sturgeon urged Scots who receive a positive lateral flow test to report their result online to begin the contact tracing process. Dr Sandesh Gulhane, a Tory health spokesman, said: “We are urging the government to adopt a new, more targeted approach to Covid. “We would place a higher emphasis on protecting vulnerable groups and trusting the public, instead of blanket restrictions such as mandating face masks in classrooms. “One of the key proposals is replacing Test and Protect. It was incredibly useful in earlier stages of the pandemic but it has become increasingly redundant in recent months. “We are nearing the point where Test and Protect is no longer an effective use of scarce NHS resources. “As we start to move beyond the pandemic, our approach must adapt to fit the new situation.” However, the plans have been described as “reckless” by health secretary Humza Yousaf. “Call from Scot Tories to stop funding Test and Protect at this stage of the pandemic is reckless,” he said on Twitter on Tuesday. “It is a vital tool in helping us control transmission with testing vital for our future management of the virus. We would oppose any immediate withdrawal of universal testing offer.” Germany’s health minister has decried calls from the main opposition party to suspend the implementation of a Covid-19 vaccination mandate for health workers, saying this would send a dangerous signal that authorities are caving to anti-vaccine protests, the Associated Press has reported. Here is a short summary of the report, and you can find the full report here. Germany’s parliament in December approved the legislation that will require staff at hospitals and nursing homes to get immunised against the coronavirus, with the main centre-right opposition Union bloc among those supporting it. Under the new law, those workers will need to show they are fully vaccinated or have recovered from Covid-19 by mid-March. But in recent weeks, some local officials have complained that they lack the resources to implement it and the rules are unclear. On Monday, Bavaria’s conservative governor said he plans not to implement the requirement at least for now, citing concerns about worker shortages. England’s chief medical officer, Prof Chris Whitty, has written to NHS staff telling them it is their “professional responsibility” to get vaccinated. He tweeted a copy of the letter. Japan reported 155 daily deaths today - a new daily record. The country also recorded more than 100,000 new infections, a level it last hit on Saturday. Poland has pushed back indefinitely a deadline for teachers, police, armed forces and firefighters to be vaccinated because it cannot be met. Last year, the government said those workers and medics must be vaccinated by 1 March to continue in their jobs. A quarter of British employers cite long Covid as the main reason behind long-term sickness absences, a survey has found. Research by the Chartered Institute of Personnel and Development (CIPD) found that 26% of employers include long Covid as a main cause of long-term sickness absence. Hundreds of people blocked streets outside New Zealand’s parliament today to protest against vaccine mandates and pandemic restrictions, inspired by demonstrations in Ottawa, Canada. The “convoy for freedom” – formed of trucks and campervans – gathered outside the Beehive in Wellington ahead of prime minister Jacinda Ardern’s first speech of the year. Deaths involving Covid-19 in England and Wales have fallen for the first time this year, according to figures from the Office for National Statistics. There were 1,385 deaths registered in the week ending 28 January mentioned Covid-19 on the death certificate, down 7% on the previous week. The Indian prime minister, Narendra Modi, has defended his government’s pandemic response over the last two years, citing high economic growth and middling inflation. Growth is estimated at 9.2% for the fiscal year ending in March, reports Reuters, and at 8% to 8.5% for the next, following a contraction of 6.6% in 2019/20. Retail inflation is around 5.5%, within the central bank’s target of 2-6%. Scientists in China say they have developed a new coronavirus test as accurate as a PCR that gives results within four minutes. Researchers at Fudan university in Shanghai say they have a solution, in the form of a sensor that uses microelectronics to analyse genetic material from swabs. That’s it from me for today. Handing over now to Tobi Thomas. Thanks for reading. England’s chief medical officer has written to NHS staff telling them it is their “professional responsibility” to get vaccinated. Prof Chris Whitty tweeted a copy of the letter today, saying: I have written to NHS colleagues about the professional responsibility to protect patients from Covid-19. This includes getting vaccinated, as the great majority have. The letter was also signed by chief midwifery officer Prof Jacqueline Dunkley-Bent, chief nursing officer Ruth May, and NHS medical director Prof Stephen Powis. It comes after health secretary Sajid Javid told the Commons last month that ministers plan to scrap the legal requirement for frontline NHS staff in England to be vaccinated. Japan reported 155 daily deaths today – a new daily record. The country also recorded more than 100,000 new infections, a level it last hit on Saturday, reported Reuters. Poland has pushed back indefinitely a deadline for teachers, police, armed forces and firefighters to be vaccinated because it cannot be met. Last year, the government said those workers and medics must be vaccinated by 1 March to continue in their jobs. But today health ministry spokesman Wojciech Andrusiewicz said the pace of vaccination means the deadline cannot be met, reports the Associated Press. The requirement remains only in force for medical staff. Poland is undergoing its fifth pandemic wave, with 36,000 new cases and nearly 290 Covid-related deaths reported today. 57% of the population of 38 million is fully vaccinated. A quarter of British employers cite long Covid as the main reason behind long-term sickness absences, a survey has found. Research by the Chartered Institute of Personnel and Development (CIPD) found that 26% of employers include long Covid as a main cause of long-term sickness absence, reports Reuters. The study analysed 804 organisations representing more than 4.3 million employees. The CIPD said 46% of the organisations had employees that had experienced long Covid and called for employers to do more to help workers with the condition. “Long Covid remains a growing issue that employers need to be aware of, and they should take appropriate steps to support employees with the condition,” said Rachel Suff, the CIPD’s senior policy adviser for employment relations. The UK has reported nearly 18 million Covid cases in total. The Office for National Statistics (ONS) estimates that at the start of the year, 1.3 million people were living with self-reported symptoms of long Covid. The three-month election campaign for the Philippines’ presidential election started today with a raft of Covid restrictions. Candidates for president, vice-president and half of the 24-seat Senate are banned from shaking hands, kissing, hugging and tightly packed crowds, reports the Associated Press. Social media has become a key battleground for the elections on 9 May, amid fears that disinformation could intensify the race. More than 67 million people have registered to vote. Hundreds of people blocked streets outside New Zealand’s parliament today to protest against vaccine mandates and pandemic restrictions, inspired by demonstrations in Ottawa, Canada. The “convoy for freedom” – formed of trucks and campervans – gathered outside the Beehive in Wellington ahead of prime minister Jacinda Ardern’s first speech of the year, reports Reuters. Mostly not wearing masks and holding placards calling for “freedom”, the protesters said they would camp outside parliament until the coronavirus restrictions are lifted. Ardern said the protesters did not represent the views of the majority. “I think it would be wrong to in any way characterise what we’ve seen outside as a representation of the majority,” she said in a press conference. “The majority of New Zealanders have done everything they can to keep one another safe.” In her parliamentary speech earlier in the day, Ardern said the pandemic would not end with Omicron and that the country needed to prepare for more virus variants this year. Here’s more on the latest Covid announcement in Hong Kong (see also 07:58) from the Associated Press: Hong Kong’s leader announced on Tuesday the city’s toughest social-distancing restrictions yet, including unprecedented limits on private gatherings, as new daily cases surge above 600. Chief executive Carrie Lam said gatherings in private premises of more than two families will be banned starting on Thursday. Public gatherings will be restricted to two people, and hair salons and places of worship will be closed until 24 February, when the city launches a “vaccine pass” that will require people to show proof of vaccination to enter shopping malls, markets and eateries. The tightened measures come as the city grapples with a new wave of the coronavirus driven by the omicron variant. Over 600 local cases were reported on Tuesday. “I appeal to the public to join us in the fight against the virus,” Lam said at a news conference. “Please try to avoid going out as far as possible.” Hong Kong has aligned itself with China’s “zero-Covid” policy, which aims to totally stamp out outbreaks, as many other countries shift their approach to living with the virus. Authorities impose lockdowns on residential buildings wherever clusters of infections are identified, and have banned public dining after 6pm. Lam said that approach would remain in effect until vaccination rates rise. “We will continue to adhere to the current strategy of trying to contain the spread of the virus, or what we call maintaining this dynamic zero regime,” Lam said. “But when vaccination rates increase, when omicron disappears and other things happen, then of course we will continue to revisit our strategy. But nothing will change our commitment to safeguard the life and the safety of the people of Hong Kong.” Lam also announced a new round of subsidies worth 26bn Hong Kong dollars ($3.3bn) for businesses and individuals impacted by the pandemic. Those who are temporarily unemployed due to Covid will receive a one-time payment of $1,300. Frontline workers including cleaners and security guards will receive about $250 a month for five months. By Niamh McIntyre and Georgina Quach Deaths involving Covid-19 in England and Wales have fallen for the first time this year, according to figures from the Office for National Statistics. There were 1,385 deaths registered in the week ending 28 January mentioned Covid-19 on the death certificate, down 7% on the previous week. About one in nine (11.2%) deaths registered in England and Wales in the week to 28 January mentioned Covid-19 on the death certificate. This brings the overall death toll across the UK since the start of the pandemic to over 180,000. Care home resident deaths involving Covid-19 in England and Wales have also fallen slightly. There were 333 deaths in the week to 28 January, compared with 363 a week earlier. This takes the total number of care home resident deaths to almost 45,000. The Indian prime minister, Narendra Modi, has defended his government’s pandemic response over the last two years, citing high economic growth and middling inflation. Growth is estimated at 9.2% for the fiscal year ending in March, reports Reuters, and at 8% to 8.5% for the next, following a contraction of 6.6% in 2019/20. Retail inflation is around 5.5%, within the central bank’s target of 2-6%. “I want to assure everyone that while the pandemic lasts, we will protect the poor,” Modi told the upper house of parliament, and accused opposition parties of creating panic. “We have moved further on the growth path,” he said. India’s official Covid death toll exceeded 504,000 on Wednesday – a figure that some analysts say was reached last year. Modi has been criticised by the opposition for his handling of the pandemic who have cited that last year the country fell from 94 to to 101 on the Global Hunger Index. P Chidambaram, a senior leader of the main opposition Congress party, said: “Welfare has been thrown to the wind.” The world’s largest tourism operator, TUI, has reported a big loss in the last quarter but said passenger numbers have recovered significantly from the impact of the pandemic. AFP reports that Fritz Joussen, CEO of the German company, said: “The path out of the pandemic is becoming increasingly clear. Demand for travel is high across all markets.” The company expects passenger numbers for the European winter season to come in at 60-80% of pre-pandemic capacities. In the US, a white-tailed deer on Staten Island, in New York, has been infected with Omicron. It marks the first time that the variant has been reported in wild animals, reports the New York Times. The newspaper reports that the discovery could fuel fears that the deer, which can be found across the US, could become a “reservoir for the virus and a potential source of new variants”. The US department of agriculture has reportedly confirmed infections of earlier variants of the virus in 13 states including Arkansas, Maine, New Jersey and Oklahoma. Most families want masks in schools – so why did Virginia’s new governor make them optional? Melody Schreiber reports from the US: Emily Paterson was finally feeling able to relax. Her two sons were now fully vaccinated, and with mask policies in place at their school in northern Virginia she felt safe sending them every day, even as the Omicron variant surged. Then Virginia’s new governor, Glenn Youngkin, took office on 15 January of this year – and, with his second executive action, he made masks in schools optional. A Virginia judge has blocked Youngkin’s order for now, allowing school districts to continue to enforce mask mandates in schools. But the decision “immediately threw the whole state into an uproar”, Paterson said. “It felt really like a slap in the face. We felt really happy that this year wasn’t virtual, and that we could rely on our kids going back to school in person and being safe. So it was pretty shocking.” The Scottish Conservatives have called for the country’s coronavirus contact tracing system to be shut down. They said Test and Protect has been “incredibly useful” but lately has becoming “increasingly redundant”, reports the BBC. Instead, they want it replaced by a cheaper systems and the rest of funds to be distributed across the NHS. But first minister Nicola Sturgeon said testing is one of the measures that the country is likely “to ask people to follow for longest”. Hong Kong is to limit social gatherings to maximum two people and close more public spaces including churches and hair salons amid record Covid infections. Leader Carrie Lam announced today that the government will make HK$26bn available to support people, including small companies hit by the pandemic, reports Reuters. She also said that existing social distancing measures – including a ban on dining in restaurants after 6pm and the closure of gyms and cinemas – will be extended until 24 February. It comes after Lam said Hong Kong will stick to a “dynamic zero” Covid strategy to contain the virus, which she said on Monday hit a “shocking” new record of more than 600 infections (see 05:18). Scientists in China say they have developed a new coronavirus test as accurate as a PCR test that gives results within four minutes. PCR tests are seen as the most accurate and sensitive method of checking for Covid, but usually it takes several hours to get results. Researchers at Fudan university in Shanghai say they have a solution, reports AFP, in the form of a sensor that uses microelectronics to analyse genetic material from swabs. The findings were published in a peer-reviewed article published on Monday in the Nature Biomedical Engineering journal. “We implemented an electromechanical biosensor for the detection of SARS-CoV-2 into an integrated and portable prototype device, and show that it detected (virus RNA) in less than four minutes,” the paper said. The trial took samples from 33 people in Shanghai who were infected with Covid and were also tested using PCRs. Hi, I’ll be looking after the Covid blog for the next few hours. Please get in touch with any tips or suggestions: miranda.bryant@guardian.co.uk For more than a week, the centre of Canada’s capital city has been paralysed by protesters who have blockaded the downtown area with trucks and cars. City police have described the protest as a “siege” and on Sunday the mayor of Ottawa declared a state of emergency. If you’re a bit confused about how this all began and what’s it all about read on below: Get involved: As New Zealand and Australia’s Covid-19 border restrictions ease, we would like to hear from people affected - have you been stranded abroad or not been able to leave to see friends and family? Are you planning a reunion? Let us know us here: As New Zealand hits new records for daily case numbers, prime minister Jacinda Ardern has said she expects Omicron infections to start peaking in late March. The country reported 202 cases of Covid-19 on Tuesday, following several days of numbers sitting around the 200 mark – including a record 243 cases on Saturday. The past seven days are among the highest weeks of case numbers since the pandemic began. On Tuesday morning Ardern told RNZ, the national radio broadcaster, that she expected New Zealand’s cases to peak at between 10,000 and 30,000 cases a day. “It’s widely variable and ultimately the defining feature of where we will peak will be booster uptake. The more people who take a booster, the lower the likelihood of our peak,” she said. “While there’s uncertainty in case numbers, if you looked at low case profiles in a place like say South Australia and you applied that to New Zealand, you would have something like 10,000 cases a day at its peak.” Read more here: Ten million jobs in creative industries worldwide were lost in 2020 as a result of the Covid pandemic, and the increasing digitisation of cultural output means it is harder than ever for artists to make a living, a Unesco report has said. Covid has led to “an unprecedented crisis in the cultural sector”, said Audrey Azoulay, the director-general of Unesco, the UN’s cultural body, in a foreword to the report. “All over the world, museums, cinemas, theatres and concert halls – places of creation and sharing – have closed their doors … “What was already a precarious situation for many artists has become unsustainable, threatening creative diversity.” Although the cultural and creative sector is one of the fastest growing economic sectors in the world, it is also one of the most vulnerable and is often overlooked by public and private investment, said the 328-page report, Reshaping Policies for Creativity. Read more here: The Beijing 2022 Winter Olympics Organising Committee has said that a total of six new Covid-19 cases were detected among games-related personnel on 7 February, Reuters reports. No cases were found among new airport arrivals, according to a notice on the Beijing 2022 official website. All six cases were among those already in the closed-loop bubble that separates all event personnel from the public, five of whom were classified as either an athlete or team official, the notice said. That’s it from me, Helen Livingstone, today, I’m handing over to my colleague Virginia Harrison. I leave you with news that the major aluminium-producing Chinese city of Baise has reported its third straight day of rising local Covid-19 infections with the outbreak in the locked-down city likely to compound worries about disruption to supplies of the metal, according to Reuters. The city of 3.6 million in Guangxi region on the border with Vietnam recorded 64 new confirmed locally transmitted cases on Monday, the National Health Commission reported, up from 37 on Sunday and six on Saturday. Baise has already ordered residents to stay indoors when not out to buy daily necessities. Non-essential trips in and out of the city have also been banned, under tough national guidelines aimed at quickly quelling Covid outbreaks as they appear. The city has also suspended non-essential businesses, school and public transport, and delayed opening of ports of entry along its international border. Essential workers require special passes for movement within Baise. Some of Baise’s alumina production – used in the making of aluminium – has been hit by the Covid restrictions and more producers have seen transport disruptions, according to Antaike, a government-backed consultancy. Concerns about production disruptions helped lift London aluminium prices to a near four-month high on Tuesday. Nationwide, China reported 105 new confirmed cases on 7 February, up from 79 a day earlier. Excluding imported infections, 65 were locally transmitted, with Baise accounting for all but one, according to the National Health Commission, compared with 45 a day earlier. Overall, China reported 46 new asymptomatic cases, which it classifies separately from confirmed cases, compared with 51 infections a day earlier. There were no new deaths, leaving the death toll unchanged at 4,636. If you’re doing the washing up or on your daily commute and you need something to listen to, check out our Science Weekly podcast, which this week looks at the new Omicron subvariant BA.2. Canada’s public safety minister has said that US officials should stay out of his country’s domestic affairs, joining other Canadian leaders in pushing back against prominent US Republicans who have offered support for demonstrators protesting Covid-19 restrictions and have besieged central Ottawa for more than a week. Prominent Republicans including Florida governor Ron DeSantis and Texas attorney general Ken Paxton complained after crowdfunding site GoFundMe said it would refund the vast majority of the millions of dollars raised by demonstrators, Associated Press reported. The site said it cut off funding for protest organisers after determining that their efforts violated the site’s terms of service by engaging in unlawful activity. Ontario provincial premier Doug Ford has called the protest an occupation. In response, Paxton tweeted: “Patriotic Texans donated to Canadian truckers’ worthy cause.” Texas senator Ted Cruz said on Fox News that “government doesn’t have the right to force you to comply to their arbitrary mandates.” Public safety minister Marco Mendicino shot back: “It is certainly not the concern of the Texas attorney general as to how we in Canada go about our daily lives in accordance with the rule of law.” “We need to be vigilant about potential foreign interference ... Whatever statements may have been made by some foreign official are neither here nor there. We’re Canadian. We have our own set of laws. We will follow them,” Mendicino said. Many members of the GOP have made comments supporting the demonstrations, including former president Donald Trump, who called Trudeau a “far left lunatic” who has “destroyed Canada with insane Covid mandates.” Ottawa declared a state of emergency on Sunday and on Monday the mayor pleaded for almost 2,000 extra police officers to help quell the raucous nightly demonstrations staged by the so-called Freedom Truck Convoy, which has used hundreds of parked trucks to paralyse the Canadian capital’s business district. The protests have also infuriated people who live around downtown, including neighbourhoods near Parliament Hill, the seat of the federal government. “Individuals are trying to blockade our economy, our democracy, and our fellow citizens’ daily lives,” prime minister Justin Trudeau said in an emergency debate in parliament, while the protest continued outside. “It has to stop.” Trudeau said everyone was tired of Covid-19 but this was not the way. He said the restrictions wouldn’t last forever and noted that Canada had one of the highest vaccination rates in the world. “Canadians trust science,” Trudeau said. “A few people shouting and waving swastikas does not define who Canadians are.” Hong Kong’s leader Carrie Lam has said the Asian financial hub will stick to a “dynamic zero” Covid-19 strategy to contain the virus, Reuters reports, as authorities face their biggest test yet to control a record number of infections. Lam who was speaking at a weekly news briefing said she would announce further Covid restrictions later in the day after the city saw a “shocking” new record of over 600 infections on Monday. For now, Lam said, the best option was to adhere to the “dynamic zero” strategy employed by mainland China to suppress all coronavirus outbreaks as soon as possible. “We should contain the spread of the virus as much and as fast as possible,” she said. “We need your support, we need your cooperation. You only need to stay at home.” Hong Kong’s stringent coronavirus policies have turned the once top global travel and business hub into one of the world’s most isolated major cities. The economic and psychological tolls from the hardline approach are rapidly rising, with measures becoming more draconian than those first implemented at the start of the pandemic in 2020. Flights are down around 90%, schools, playgrounds, gyms as well as most other venues are shut. Restaurants close at 6 p.m. (1000 GMT), while most people, including the majority of civil servants, are working from home. Government quarantine facilities are also nearing their maximum as authorities struggle to keep up with their rigid contact tracing scheme. Many health experts have said the city’s current strategy of shutting itself off as the rest of the world shifts to living with coronavirus, is unsustainable. Doctors say mental health is suffering, particularly in families where people are earning less, or children cannot go to school due to the restrictions. The official Chinese Communist Party newspaper, the People’s Daily, said in an editorial on Monday that a “dynamic zero infection” strategy is the scientific option for Hong Kong. Hello and welcome to the Guardian’s live coverage of the coronavirus pandemic with me, Helen Livingstone. Hong Kong’s leader Carrie Lam has said the Asian financial hub will stick to a “dynamic zero” Covid-19 strategy to contain the virus a day after the city saw a “shocking” new record of over 600 infections. “We should contain the spread of the virus as much and as fast as possible,” she said. Canada’s public safety minister has said US officials should stay out of his country’s domestic affairs, joining other Canadian leaders in pushing back against prominent Republicans who offered support for demonstrators protesting Covid-19 restrictions who have besieged central Ottawa for more than a week. Here’s what else has been happening over the past 24 hours: In the UK, MPs from all sides have angrily rounded on Boris Johnson and accused him of whipping up political poison after the Labour leader, Keir Starmer, was set upon by protesters who accused him of protecting the paedophile Jimmy Savile. Johnson provoked widespread fury last week when he falsely suggested Starmer had protected Savile during his time as director of public prosecutions. Sweden will lift its travel restrictions for foreign nationals travelling to Sweden from Nordic countries and the rest of the European Union and European Economic Area from Wednesday, the government has announced. The German government is working on plans to relax coronavirus restrictions after the peak in new cases has passed, most likely by the end of February. Australia will open its border for fully vaccinated tourists and all visa holders on 21 February, almost two years after borders were first closed. Democratic leaders in the US Congress are holding a moment of silence on Monday to commemorate the 900,000 American lives lost to the Covid-19 pandemic. Turkish prosecutors have issued an arrest warrant for former Olympic swimmer Derya Buyukuncu over tweets appearing to express relief that president Recep Tayyip Erdogan tested positive for Covid-19. The number of positive Covid-19 cases in the English Premier League, the most watched sports league in the world, has doubled in a week to 22 cases, but with a far higher number of tests being carried out. Hong Kong has reported a record 614 cases and many of its residents have begun to crowd supermarkets in an effort to stock up on food and other necessities. One vegetable vendor told Reuters supplies had dropped by 30%. Prof John Bell, an Oxford scientist who worked on the AstraZeneca vaccine, has accused scientists and politicians of having “probably killed hundreds of thousands of people” by damaging its reputation.The recent decision to make rapid antigen tests tax-deductible, rather than free, will deliver nothing to low-paid essential workers and big savings to high-income earners. How very Morrison government. While a part-time cleaner working in the aged care sector will probably receive zero benefit from tax-deductible RATs, someone earning $200,000 a year would get $9.40 back on a $20 test. In short, if someone is below the income tax threshold (as many part-time and young workers are) there is literally no benefit in something being made tax-deductible. And while ordinary employees will have to prove that their employer required them to buy the tests, the millions of small business owners, sole traders and contractors among us will be spared the red tape. While it may seem outrageously contradictory for the prime minister to make RATs cheaper for those who earn the most and no cheaper for those who earn the least, in reality it’s a defining pattern of his term of office. Take the stage 3 tax cuts due to commence in 2024. Regardless of the result of this year’s election, the government’s lasting gift to those earning over $200,000 a year will be a windfall of over $9,000 a year. Those earning less than $45,000 will get nothing. Not a cent. According to Treasury the annual cost of the stage 3 tax cuts will be over $15bn a year from 2024, rising to more than $30bn a year by 2031. To put that into perspective, total commonwealth spending on aged care is around $24bn this year. And according to the Parliamentary Budget Office, about 75% of that windfall will flow to the top 20% of income earners. But while giving the biggest discounts on RATs to the same group who get the lion’s share of the stage 3 tax cuts reflects a consistent set of political preferences, it also represents a deeply flawed understanding of basic economics. The whole point of putting a price on something is to ration it, and the whole point of subsidising something is to encourage its use. That’s why we don’t charge people for bowel cancer screening, breast cancer screening or cervical cancer screening. Morrison knows that, and he also knows that the case for providing free RATs, as opposed to tax deductions for high-income earners, is even stronger than the case for cancer screening. While early cancer screening saves lots of lives and lots of money, the benefits of early cancer detection flow mainly to one person, while the benefits of early Covid detection flow to all the people who don’t get a contagious – often deadly – disease. Charging people to detect Covid early is like charging firefighters for using water during bushfire season. It’s not equitable to make people who are trying to help others pay a price, and it’s not economically efficient either. Just as increasing the price of cigarettes will lead to a reduction in smoking, charging $15 or more for RATs led to a significant reduction in testing, and in turn a significant increase in the number of cases, hospitalisation and deaths. While someone earning $4,000 a week can probably meet the cost of a $15 RAT without too much pain, that’s not true for someone earning $400 a week and, in turn, paying no income tax. Low-income earners are more likely to be young, more likely to work in retail, and more likely to spread Covid than older and higher-income Australians. The main reason the Morrison government didn’t provide free RATs over summer was simple: there weren’t enough of them. Due to a catastrophic failure to plan, even with high prices the supply of tests over summer didn’t come close to meeting the demand once Covid was free to rip. Making them free would have only made the lines longer and the government’s failure to plan clearer. The recent announcement that RATs would be tax-deductible is as inequitable as it is inefficient. The gap between those with the most and those with the least isn’t growing due to a scientific law of economics – it’s being driven wider by a decade of policy choices. It’s wasn’t “market forces” that decided to cut the after-tax price of RATs for high-income earners, while doing nothing to help low-wage workers, just as it wasn’t market forces that decided to give a $9,000-a-year tax cut to those earning over $200,000. These were political choices made by our government. Are these the choices we want our government to keep making? That final decision will be made by voters in a few months’ time. • Richard Denniss is the chief economist at independent thinktank the Australia Institute and recent author of Big: The Role of the State in the Modern Economy. Twitter: @RDNS_TAIThe deaths of thousands of fish in the Parramatta River triggered by low oxygen levels in the water is being investigated by the New South Wales environmental regulator. The Environment Protection Authority said it was examining two fish kill events, one last week at Haslams Creek, which flows into Homebush Bay, and the other at Rydalmere on Sunday. Thousands of dead fish have been observed along the riverbanks. The events were likely due to natural causes, the EPA said, with preliminary investigations suggesting Sunday’s fish kill was due to storm runoff. High intensity storms result in large amounts of organic matter – such as twigs and leaves – being washed into waterways. An EPA spokesperson said this, combined with elevated water temperatures, had likely triggered a drop in oxygen. Officials were collecting water samples and water monitoring was set to continue. The spokesperson said it was distressing to see a significant number of fish had been killed and a variety of species were affected. Flood waters north of Menindee Lakes, which experienced mass fish kills in 2019, have also prompted authorities to warn there could be further fish deaths in coming weeks. Stuart Khan, the director of the graduate school of engineering at the University of New South Wales, said there was widespread concern about deoxygenated water in the Darling River and there was little that could be done to stop those floodwaters from arriving at Menindee Lakes. He said the weather would play a role because heat, and warm water temperatures were more likely to contribute to fish deaths. “DPI [the NSW Department of Primary Industries] is already preparing people,” he said. “It’s overland flow of water across the floodplains, particularly floodplains that might not have flooded for some time. “They build up all manner of biomass, sticks and leaves.” Khan said in areas such as the Parramatta River there was more that could be done to manage stormwater. He said if cities were designed to have more pervious surfaces – such as grasses, soils or permeable pavements – it could slow the pace of such events because water would infiltrate soils first before running off into waterways. “In a city, it is particularly at least a consequence of our own urban design,” he said. “The big problem is sudden influxes of water which comes from having lots of concrete.”The paddock-to-plate business model and short supply chains have allowed small-town retailers to sidestep most of the shortage problems faced by the large supermarkets. Despite being an abattoir town, Tamworth has suffered meat shortages the same as everywhere else in Australia, something not lost on consumers – or employees of the supermarkets. Tamworth local butcher Paul Avery, of Ford’s Butchery, hasn’t just survived during the shortages, but thrived over the past two years, picking up new customers as the shortages hit, many of whom have stuck around. Avery’s small shop saw an increase of customers as meat cabinets in supermarkets started running bare. “That happened when the pandemic started,” Avery said. He estimates that maybe 20% of the customers who were refugees from the supermarkets during the shortages have stayed. In fact, the demand is such that he has had to cut back on supply to some of his restaurant customers just to maintain stocks for his shop. Avery raises “every piece of beef” sold under his Mountain View brand that passes over his counter at his acreage just 15 minutes away from the shop, a move that was originally done to ensure quality, as well as a bit of a nod to the traditional country butcher. “Every small-town butcher used to have his own farm, his own chiller, and kill his own,” Avery said. His lamb comes from a farm 32km north, in Bendemeer, from a farmer he knows and deals with personally. Sign up to receive Guardian Australia’s fortnightly Rural Network email newsletter Tamworth is a major centre for meat processing. Teys Australia, Thomas Foods International and Baiada Poultry all have major processing facilities in the town. Paradoxically, Avery’s animals are slaughtered in Binnaway, two hours away, because the bigger processors based in Tamworth do not process small numbers of stock. Avery prefers heifers over steers, as he believes swapping carcass yield for tenderness is a worthy trade-off. While larger supermarkets have had to grapple with the shortages of meat and other staples, smaller retailers with close contact with their suppliers have gained an advantage during Covid-induced shortages. ‘Very active in sourcing’ Amber Brown, the manager of Calala’s IGA supermarket, has been surprised at the amount of shortages the major supermarket chains have been experiencing, citing the store-level control she has over sourcing that Coles, Woolworths and Aldi supermarkets do not have. “We’ve got a lot of people out there on the ground sourcing products,” Brown said. Calala IGA is part of a small network of about 14 IGA stores run by Carlo Cavallaro, which Brown believes is small enough to still be flexible to rapidly adapt to changes. Calala IGA has its own employees at a store level sourcing products, something larger supermarkets deal with at a higher level at the corporate headquarters, allowing Brown to adapt immediately to shortages that are specific to her store. “We’ve got a produce specialist, we’ve got a meat specialist, we’ve got a deli specialist. “They’re very active in sourcing: ‘If we can’t get something from this supplier this week, we suggest you go through this other supplier.’ “I don’t believe the majors have that flexibility. I think your majors are very structured.” The Cavallaro IGA group operates a wholesale warehouse out of Avro Street in Tamworth, which it uses to service its surrounding stores. This facility includes a butchery and meat packing facility that has allowed it to keep meat on shelves – something that was an issue during the busy Christmas barbecue season for the major retailers. Statements issued by Coles and Woolworths both cited the challenges of Covid and the staff shortages brought on by the pandemic. A spokesperson for Woolworths stated the company worked with partners in Tamworth to complete the first steps of meat processing for beef and lamb cuts, before they were sent to a specialised facility to be cut and packaged. “Over the last month, grocery supply chains have been severely impacted by Covid-related absenteeism, reducing the capacity of meat processors, distribution centres and transport networks,” the spokesperson said. In a statement, Coles said recent increases in Covid case numbers in the community had required more people to isolate, which had impacted the availability of labour throughout the food supply chain in New South Wales. “At a time when inventory levels were already reduced in the post-Christmas period, our distribution centres are receiving fewer inbound deliveries and we have fewer team members available to process and dispatch stock to our stores,” the statement said. Sign up for the Rural Network email newsletter Join the Rural Network group on Facebook to be part of the communityAt least 32 people have taken up New Zealand’s euthanasia services since the country legalised the practice three months ago, according to the Ministry of Health. The country’s End of Life Choice Act came into force in November, after years of activism by euthanasia campaigners and being ratified by referendum. Sixty-five per cent of voting-age New Zealanders voted in favour of legalising assisted dying, joining just a handful of countries that allow it. At the time the process was legalised, New Zealand officials were uncertain how many people would take it up. In written statements, the ministry of health has said “the number of people that may seek assisted dying is expected to be small”. They noted that in comparable overseas locations where assisted dying was legal, it made up between 0.3% and 2% of all deaths. Due to New Zealand’s relatively strict criteria, they also expected almost two-thirds of applications to be turned down. “Based on overseas experiences, the ministry estimates up to 950 people could apply for assisted dying each year, with up to 350 being assisted to die,” they said. In some countries, the number of people taking up euthanasia services started slowly and soared over time. Figures from Switzerland, for example, have shown that the numbers of people who underwent assisted suicide rose steadily year-on-year, from 187 in 2003 to 965 in 2015. In the Netherlands, which has some of the most liberal euthanasia and assisted suicide laws, they make up 4.4% of the total number of deaths. According to the 2017 Regional Euthanasia Review Committees, there were 6,585 cases of voluntary euthanasia or assisted suicide that year. To be eligible for assisted dying services in New Zealand, patients must meet a series of strict criteria, assessed by two doctors. They must be a New Zealander, over 18 years of age, have a terminal illness likely to end their life within six months, be experiencing “unbearable suffering that cannot be relieved”, be competent to make the decision, and be experiencing advanced stages of irreversible decline in their physical ability. Health practitioners can also opt out of providing the service. Other countries where euthanasia is legal include Belgium, Luxembourg, Canada and Colombia. This story has been updated to reflect the most recent data from New Zealand’s Ministry of Health, as of 7 February. A previous version stated at least 28 people had taken advantage of the assisted dying laws – the lower number was due to a lag in ministry reporting.Tipping points could be identified and triggered to deliver fast action to tackle the climate crisis, according to an analysis led by an academic at Exeter University. Early subsidies and mass production rapidly crushed costs to leave solar and wind energy as the cheapest power in much of the world and electric cars are now accelerating towards mass adoption, while Greta Thunberg’s solo protest sparked an influential global campaign. However, researchers have said a further “dramatic acceleration of social change” remains necessary. Their study examines how small interventions, once triggered, can grow into systemic changes. Rather than focusing directly on cutting emissions, this approach leads to green choices becoming the most attractive. The scientists also said the approach could dispel feelings of helplessness about complex global challenges, stressing that big changes could start in small groups. The pursuit of tipping points has already been taken up by world leaders representing two-thirds of the world’s economy. More than 40 countries announced at Cop26 in December that they would coordinate investments and align standards to set off tipping points. Prof Tim Lenton, at the University of Exeter, who led the study, said: “The only way we can get anywhere near our global targets on carbon emissions and biodiversity is through positive tipping points. “People, whether they’re business leaders, policymakers or whatever, know what needs to change. The question is how? It’s starting to happen, but it’s not going quick enough. The complexity [of the climate and ecological crises] can be paralysing,. I wanted to show that, if you understand the complexity, it can open up windows of opportunity to actually change things.” The analysis, published in the journal Global Sustainability, analyses the range of preconditions needed for tipping points, for example the plunging cost of LED light bulbs, and how tipping points can be triggered, for example through communication as shown by the change in attitudes to single-use plastic after the television show Blue Planet II. The study combined theories of critical mass, social contagion, economies of scale, and others, with knowledge of how changes in policy, investment and social attitudes had promoted change. For example, people putting solar panels on their roofs has been shown to grow across communities from small initial groups via social contagion. Public investment and new policies can be important, such as the carbon price and renewables subsidies that led to coal power being rapidly phased out in the UK, ahead of the government’s target date. Private investment can be powerful too, such as that in solar panels that enable a huge scale-up in production and helped costs fall 90% in a decade. The researchers also highlight desirability, linking the success of the Toyota Prius to its uptake by influential celebrities in Hollywood. Technological innovation is often involved, and Lenton said the new techniques now being used to produce plant-based alternatives to meat, or culturing meat in reactor vessels, may mean that this sector was approaching a tipping point. Social change could grow very fast, the researchers said, sometimes starting from an individual such as Thunberg. “These changes often start with small groups of people with a big idea,” Lenton said. Electric car sales have passed a tipping point in Norway, with 65% of new cars battery powered. The main reason was tax breaks making the purchases attractive, but Lenton pointed out this began with the purchase of an electric Fiat Panda in 1989 by members of the pop band A-ha. They successfully campaigned for the registration tax to be waived, repeatedly refusing to pay road tolls while driving around Oslo with fellow activists from 1990 onwards. The authorities eventually capitulated and the waivers then applied to all electric cars and, as more models became available, sales took off. However, tipping points are not the norm, Lenton said, so identifying those that could be tipped with a little pressure would be valuable. Physical systems approaching tipping points, such as the north Atlantic Gulf Stream, can be identified by analysing how long it takes to revert to its current normal state. As a system becomes less stable, it takes longer to revert to its initial condition after being disturbed. Lenton and colleagues are working to see if similar indicators can be seen in social systems. For example, seeing an increase in size and duration of spikes in social media attention for a particular climate solution, for instance electric car adverts, could indicate that the point where a small push could cause a big change is getting closer. Lenton said further research was needed to identify exactly how to trigger tipping points: “I feel we’ve identified the cooks, and probably a lot of the ingredients, but have not quite got to the point where we’ve got a definitive recipe for how to bake the cake. But hopefully, there’s quite a few recipes available and we’ve made a decent stab at it here.” This article was amended on 10 and 15 February 2022 to correct when the electrified Fiat Panda was imported to Norway; it was 1989, not 1995. Caption wording has also been changed because it suggested that the red Fiat was the car bought by the Norwegian campaigners; rather, it was an example from early 1989 of the same model in white that they imported in November 1989.Mitch McConnell criticized the Republican National Committee for censuring Representatives Liz Cheney and Adam Kinzinger over their work for the House select committee investigating the January 6 attack on the Capitol, which he characterized as a “violent insurrection”. The Senate minority leader said it was not the party’s place to single out members over their views. Speaking with reporters outside Senate Republicans’ closed-door weekly lunch, McConnell rebuked the RNC for its characterization of the deadly riot at the Capitol as “legitimate political discourse”. “Let me give you my view of what happened on 6 January,” McConnell said. “It was a violent insurrection for the purpose of trying to prevent the peaceful transfer of power after a legitimately certified election, from one administration to the next.” Asked whether he had confidence in the leadership of the RNC chairwoman, Ronna McDaniel, who supported the censure resolution, McConnell said he did. “But the issue is whether or not the RNC should be sort of singling out members of our party who may have different views from the majority,” McConnell said. “That’s not the job of the RNC.” His use of the word “insurrection” – the act of rising up against established authority – is significant. Many in his party have insisted that it was not an insurrection, downplaying the attack or trying to portray it as a peaceful protest. A few prominent Republicans have pushed against the RNC’s decision to censure the two GOP members of the House committee investigating the attack. Mitt Romney, a Republican senator of Utah and McDaniel’s uncle, told reporters that the censure “could not have been a more inappropriate” message from the party. McConnell, who blocked initial efforts to create an independent, bipartisan commission to investigate the January 6 attack, has signaled that he sees the party’s focus on defending Donald Trump and the insurrection his supporters staged following the 2020 elections as a distraction. He and some fellow Republican lawmakers have aimed to shift the focus to the midterm elections this year. Maine senator Susan Collins said rioters who “broke windows and breached the Capitol were not engaged in legitimate political discourse” and characterized time “spent re-litigating a lost election or defending those who have been convicted of criminal behavior” as a wasted opportunity to focus on the midterms when the Republicans have a chance to re-take a majority in congress. But other Republicans have stood by the RNC’s move, with House minority leader Kevin McCarthy telling CNN that the censure was meant to condemn the committee’s questioning of conservatives “who weren’t even here” when the attack occurred. The Associated Press contributed reportingLithium prices have “gone ballistic” as surging electric vehicles sales worldwide create massive demand for the critical component of lithium-ion batteries. According to figures from Benchmark Mineral Intelligence (BMI), the price of the lithium-rich raw material spodumene rose 478.3% between January 2021 and January 2022. In January alone the price of spodumene jumped 45.5% to US$2,400 a tonne, up from $1,650 in December. Similar price rises were recorded for lithium carbonate and hydroxide – refined lithium at different stages of purity – over the past year. BMI is forecasting the price will continue to increase for at least the next six month off the back of massive demand for battery cells. In January the consulting firm McKinsey predicted the market for lithium batteries would grow to at least $360bn by 2030, with growth averaging 20% a year until the end of the decade. But some analysts have sounded a note of caution as lithium pricing can be volatile – demand can grow quickly but new mines open and increase supply, dropping the price again. Tim Buckley, an energy transition analyst and director of Clean Energy Finance, says demand for lithium is likely to remain high. “It’s unsustainably high – it’s gone ballistic. It’s just brilliant to watch – the world’s transforming before our eyes,” Buckley said. “Nothing excites financial markets more than a 500% increase in prices.” Buckley, an early investor in lithium, said while a range of factors were at play in creating the situation – including a labour shortage at key mine sites in Western Australia as a result of the pandemic and supply chain issues – it was surging demand for EVs in China that was the main driver. He said this marked a “structural change” in the global economy and any future price correction would not be as severe as “cyclical” corrections in the past. After slowing at the outset of the pandemic, electric vehicles sales have come roaring back in European and Chinese markets. Although growth in the US has been slow, China alone recorded a 154% increase in the number of electric cars sold in 2021, with 3.3m in total. China is also responsible for processing most of the world’s lithium, meaning a fall in prices may come as geopolitical tensions push countries to look for alternative supplies. But Buckley said it will take time for these new sources to come online, while the global push to “electrify everything” and reach net zero by 2050 meant demand would stay high. Opportunities for Australia He said the situation represents an opportunity for Australia, whose key exports – iron, coking coal, liquefied natural gas and thermal coal – are heavily exposed to decarbonisation efforts. In a sign of where things are going, French steel giant ArcelorMittal and German steel company Salzgitter AG in the last fortnight separately announced billions of dollars in new investment in electrifying their operations Australia stands to gain by supplying lithium for the production of electric vehicles, although it faces competition from the “lithium triangle” of Bolivia, Chile and Argentina. Processing this material to varying degrees of purity close to its source may offer a chance for Australia to edge out its competitors, with some companies already heading in that direction In 2019 Wesfarmers sold its three coal mines and sunk new investment into the Mt Holland lithium mine and Kwinana refinery in WA. There was a setback for Rio Tinto when the Serbian government revoked its licence to develop the Jadar lithium mine after protests and a diplomatic stoush with the Australian government. But Buckley said the trend – and the opportunity – is clear. “The value of lithium companies listed on the ASX is multiples of the coal sector. If we can be not just a quarry to China, Japan and Korea, and do value-adding, that is a huge structural shift,” Buckley said. “If you just leave Gina and Twiggy to dig up the minerals without value adding, Australia is going to be worse off.”Ghislaine Maxwell’s lawyers once again called for the temporary sealing of legal arguments involving the juror who might not have disclosed childhood sexual abuse during jury selection. “With the constitutional right to a fair trial at stake, it is of paramount importance for the court to ensure the integrity of any fact-gathering process that may take place so that the inquiry is safeguarded and can uncover the truth of what happened,” her attorneys said in a letter Tuesday. Maxwell was convicted on 29 December of sex trafficking and related counts for facilitating Jeffrey Epstein’s sexual abuse of minor girls, some as young as 14. Epstein, a financier and convicted sex offender, was arrested in July 2019 for sex trafficking teen girls. He killed himself about one month later in a Manhattan jail while awaiting his trial. The new filing is among ongoing legal exchanges over the juror. Juror 50, whose name is Scotty David, sat for interviews where he publicly alleged that he was sexually abused as a child. David claimed that he told other jurors about this abuse – enabling them to view things from a victim’s perspective. David’s comments about possible prior abuse prompted questions because then-prospective jurors completed questionnaires during the selection process – which asked about sexual abuse. David claimed that he did not recall the question about abuse but maintained he had answered every question honestly. After David’s interviews, prosecutors asked the judge, Alison Nathan, to investigate his statements; Maxwell’s legal team swiftly requested a hearing and new trial. Maxwell’s attorneys filed their detailed arguments for a new trial under a seal. They had also submitted their argument for sealing under wraps, but Nathan decided on 26 January that it must be posted openly to the docket. As such, Maxwell’s lawyers filed their argument for sealing publicly on 1 February, claiming that unsealing these detailed arguments before there is a decision about retrial “will provide a roadmap of the defense’s examination of Juror 50 and will allow him to plan out and tailor his responses, or even potentially spoliate evidence, to paint himself and his conduct in the best light possible”. They also said that Maxwell “seeks only a temporary sealing to protect the integrity of any fact-finding process ordered by the court”. Prosecutors said in 5 February court papers that these documents should be public, writing that “the defendant has not justified her sealing request”. The new filing from Maxwell’s lawyers relates to prosecutors’ response paperwork “in opposition to [her] Motion for a New Trial.” Maxwell’s attorneys also want Nathan to keep those documents temporarily under wraps. “The absence of this temporary safeguard will contribute to further obstruction of the truth-seeking process, compromising any factual inquiry ordered by the court, and jeopardizing Ms Maxwell’s legitimate opportunity to establish why a mistrial should be granted to vindicate her constitution right to a fair trial,” they said. Information and support for anyone affected by rape or sexual abuse issues is available from the following organisations. In the US, Rainn offers support on 800-656-4673. In the UK, Rape Crisis offers support on 0808 802 9999. In Australia, support is available at 1800Respect (1800 737 732). Other international helplines can be found at ibiblio.org/rcip/internl.htmlTraffic has ground to a halt at the busiest border crossing in North America, as Canadian truckers and others angry with vaccine mandates spread their protest beyond Ottawa. Trucks started blocking the Ambassador Bridge linking the cities of Detroit and Windsor late on Monday, closing down traffic in both directions. On Tuesday, entry to Canada remained blocked while US-bound traffic slowed to a crawl. Each day, 8,000 trucks normally cross the bridge, which handles about 27% of trade between Canada and the US. Protesters also targeted another major border crossing in Coutts, Alberta. Canada’s capital city remained blockaded by hundreds of vehicles from the “freedom convoy” while protest organizers called for a meeting with all federal political leaders – except the prime minister, Justin Trudeau – to find a “peaceful resolution” to the crisis. Ottawa police said on Tuesday that 23 arrests had been made in relation to the “unlawful demonstrations”. Ottawa deputy police chief Steve Bell told reporters that police had immobilized many of the heavy vehicles taking part in the blockade. He said about a quarter of the 418 protest trucks in the downtown area had children in them, and police were concerned for their welfare in relation to cold, noise, carbon monoxide risks and access to sanitation. On Monday Trudeau repeated his calls for an end to the protest, saying: “Individuals are trying to blockade our economy, our democracy, and our fellow citizens’ daily lives. It has to stop.” Addressing the House of Commons , the prime minister recognized that “this pandemic has sucked for all Canadians” and that “everyone is tired of having to wear masks and having to follow health restrictions,” but he noted that Canada had one of the highest vaccination rates in the world and implored his compatriots to continue listening to science. “Those who are shouting at others because they’re wearing a mask do not define what it is to be the majority of Canadians,” he said. Only around 15% of the country’s truckers are unvaccinated and public health measures have been broadly supported. But the convoy protest has attracted a wide range of support from anti-government and fringe groups. The federal public safety minister, Marco Mendicino, said that after days of disruption and harassment including loud and persistent horn-honking, Ottawa residents feel like hostages in their own homes. “While everyone believes in the right to free speech, this convoy has crossed the line of acceptable conduct toward fellow Canadians many, many times,” said Mendicino. He called for unity among parties on applying the rule of law. Several prominent members of the opposition Conservatives have expressed support for the protest. “There should be no differences across political parties in the way that we are dealing with this moment. It would be a terrible precedent to say that if you show up in the nation’s capital with heavy equipment and blockade the capital city that you can force reckless change in our public policy,” Mendicino said. On Tuesday, a member of Trudeau’s own party said that protesters had “legitimate concerns” and that the government had erred in its handling of them. “I fear that this politicization of the pandemic risks undermining the public’s trust in our public health institutions,” said the Liberal MP Joel Lightbound. The federal emergency preparedness minister, Bill Blair – who is the former chief of the Toronto police service – said federal, provincial and municipal leaders were working together to coordinate a response. “It is well past the time to bring this protest to an end,” he said. On Monday, an Ontario court judge approved an injunction sought by local residents to stop the honking for 10 days. But loud honking could be heard after the judgment was handed down, including from big rig trucks stationed directly in front of parliament. Tom Marazzo, an acting spokesperson for the convoy, said on Monday that the protesters wanted to go home but would not leave until the “job is done”. The initial motivation for the convoy was an announcement last year that truckers crossing the US-Canada border would need to be fully vaccinated against Covid-19. But the protesters’ demands have grown to an end for all vaccine mandates, and even the toppling of the Trudeau government. “I apologize if I’m bashing the guy [Trudeau] but honestly, from my assessment he’s got a .22 caliber mind in a .357 world,” said Marazzo a software developer and former member of the Canadian military. “Put us at the table with somebody who actually cares about Canada,” he said. The message from the Ottawa protesters has spread across the country and to the United States, where similar convoys are expected to arise. Late last week, Ottawa police said that the crowdfunding for the Canadian convoy had amassed considerable funding support from US individuals and groups.The nomination of Jane Campion for best director at the 2022 Academy Awards – her second, following her 1994 nomination for The Piano – is more noteworthy for what it says about the institution than for its validation of the 67-year-old director, absent from feature film-making for more than a decade. To date, only two women – Kathryn Bigelow and Chloé Zhao – have ever won best director. If that sounds unreasonable, consider this: in 93 years, just seven women have even been nominated for the award – Lina Wertmüller in 1977 (for Seven Beauties), Campion in 1994, Sofia Coppola in 2003 (for Lost in Translation), Bigelow in 2010 (for The Hurt Locker), Greta Gerwig in 2018 (for Lady Bird), Emerald Fennell in 2021 (for Promising Young Woman) and Zhao that same year, victorious with Nomadland. For the first half-century of the awards, double-X chromosomes and the ability to successfully oversee a motion picture were apparently believed to be irreconcilable. (Something to consider the next time the rightwing media complains about Hollywood’s liberal bias.) Yet Campion owes her career to Europe, not the US. Unusually for an Anglophone film-maker, she’s very much a creation of the Cannes film festival. Championed by one of its scouts, the late Pierre Rissient, and enthusiastically welcomed by former festival director Gilles Jacob, her first short film, Peel, premiered there in 1982 and won the short film Palme d’Or. Two further shorts, Passionless Moments (1983) and A Girl’s Own Story (1984), each screened in the festival’s Un Certain Regard section, and by 1989, she’d graduated to Competition with her debut feature, Sweetie. Just four years later, she became the first female film-maker to win the Palme d’Or, for The Piano. In 2014 Campion was invited to chair the festival’s jury, and at that year’s closing ceremony, when the then-83-year-old Jacob presented the award for the Camera d’Or, he invited her to stand beside him at the podium. “Jane,” he said quietly, “you know what you mean to me.” This could seem anecdotal, but what Cannes did with that early endorsement proved foundational in two ways. Firstly, it bolstered Campion’s faith in her own artistic sensibility. “When I went to Cannes,” she told Richard Peña, program director for the Film Society of Lincoln Center. “I thought, ‘Oh, I can go on doing this.’” And secondly, it helped reintroduce antipodean cinema to the wider world, giving it a profile lacking since the early-70s heyday of the Australian New Wave. That she was a woman in what was then (and many would argue, still remains) a male-dominated enclave, only added to her mysterious sense of otherness. It’s worth noting that when she did win the Palme d’Or – which she shared with Chen Kaige for Farewell My Concubine – she was one of only two women among the 23 film-makers in Competition. (The other, oddly enough, was another Australian: the now much-missed Laurie McInnes.) Campion has, in short, had to fight for a seat at the table. Yet somehow she has managed to achieve it without sacrificing any of the qualities that make her unique. It’s all too easy, in all this reverent talk of her achievements, to overlook what a genuinely odd film-maker Campion is. Her fascination with aberrant behaviour, with the tactility of objects, with fetishistic tokens, is entirely her own. Hers is an unabashedly sensual cinema, impressionistic and frequently ambiguous – and the results are rewarding and frustrating in equal measures. Hollywood and Campion, therefore, were always going to be a difficult match. And after meeting the industry very much on her own terms with The Piano, she then attempted, with various degrees of success, to conform to the template of Respected Commercial Film-maker. Her 1996 film The Portrait of a Lady, based on one of Henry James’ best-loved novels and boasting some A-list stars (Nicole Kidman, John Malkovich, John Gielgud), looked at face value to be a classy high-lit adaptation à la Howard’s End or The Age of Innocence. In fact, it was a feverish deconstruction, almost postmodern in its treatment of character and incident. Some of it worked, much of it didn’t – but the sheer audacity of her approach is hard to deny. In the Cut, made seven years later, was even stranger. Adapting an erotic thriller by Susanna Moore, Campion twisted the material into ever-more-unconventional shapes, abstracting the narrative and ignoring genre conventions in order to better interrogate power dynamics in heterosexual relationships, and examine the sometimes murky nature of consent. The result, however, delighted almost no one – watching, you get the sense that she considered herself better than the material – and its commercial and critical failure marked the end of her initial flirtation with Hollywood. On the face of it, The Power of the Dog looks like an outlier in her filmography: an American sort-of western (never mind that it was shot in her native New Zealand) and her first film with male protagonists. In fact, it feels entirely congruent with the others. Campion’s worldview is reflexively feminist, however much she might deny the affiliation (“I dislike club mentality of any kind, even feminism,” she told director Katherine Dieckmann back in 2012, “though I do relate to the purpose and point of feminism”), yet she specialises in creating distinctly anti-feminist worlds for her characters to inhabit. Early colonial New Zealand, 1880s Rome, rural Montana in the 1920s … none of these milieus are exactly sympathetic to the cause of gender equality. Nevertheless, Campion’s heroines – and her (anti-)heroes – occupy them, and attempt by way of design and simple persistence to bend them to their will. One can hardly put much faith in the Oscars to get things right: this is, after all, the august body that pronounced Green Book the finest film of 2018. And the best director category remains very much a lottery: that Kenneth Branagh should be nominated for Belfast while first-timer Maggie Gyllenhaal goes unrewarded for The Lost Daughter (in my opinion, a better film than The Power of the Dog, and an even stronger display of directorial prowess) seems to me little short of science-fictional. But whatever the result on 27 March, the tide has turned. There’s no shortage of gifted female film-makers working right now, in the US, Europe, across Latin America and the Middle East. And one way or another, they all owe Campion a debt. The door was closed for too long, and she – talented and raw-nerved, impatient with conventional pieties – helped kick it open.Claims that another Chinese tech worker has died after excessive overtime has reignited debate over the industry’s “996 culture”. The company denied that it overworked the employee, but said it would pay more attention to the health of its employees. The 25-year-old reportedly died in hospital soon after he was taken to hospital from his home on Saturday afternoon. The video platform Bilibili, where the man was employed as a content auditor, said company representatives went to the hospital to assist and then notified his family. Bilibili released an internal memo rejecting claims the employee – who reportedly died of a brain haemorrhage – was overworked. It said the man had worked from 9.30am to 6.30pm for the past week, with no overtime. But reports of his death by a workplace blogger on Monday renewed heated discussion about a toxic overtime culture dubbed “996” – referring to an expectation that employees, especially in the tech industry, work from 9am to 9pm six days a week. The expectation has in the past been promoted by high-profile figures including the Alibaba founder, Jack Ma. A hashtag related to the man’s death and including the allegation of overwork trended on Weibo, receiving hundreds of millions of views, including accusations the government had not done enough to address the problems in the year since a spate of high-profile deaths linked to overwork in 2020. “Don’t work hard regardless of the cost. There will be no impact on the company without you. But if you are gone, your mother will have nothing,” one Weibo user commented. “The main reason is the government has been ignoring this. It is quite normal for big companies employees to work for 12 hours,” another said. It also prompted posts by people who said they worked for the company claiming they had worked 12-hour overnight shifts across last week’s lunar new year holiday. Others claimed they found it difficult to claim back accumulated leave before it expired. “At Bilibili, even if you have annual days off, they wouldn’t really let you go. And there is no pay for overwork,” said one. Another added: “Our work intensity is like this: if you work the night shift, it is from 9pm to 9am. Bilibili requires us to work during the spring festival. A lot of people have left.” Bilibili’s statement had urged people to pay attention to their health, and use paid sick leave or communicate with supervisors if they felt unwell. It said it had established a company team to cooperate with police inquiries and to assist the family. Following extensive online discussion, Bilibili released a second statement, saying its senior executives had consulted with the man’s family and would make company changes. “First, the company will make the greatest efforts to expand the recruitment of auditors, and recruit 1,000 more people this year. Second, the company will pay more attention to the physical health of employees,” it said, listing increased physical examinations and the establishment of an onsite mental and physical health clinic. Additional reporting by Xiaoqian Zhu.A former soldier scheduled to give evidence against SAS veteran Ben Roberts-Smith is seeking to pull out, prompting claims in court that Roberts-Smith’s barrister spoke to a senior lawyer who then contacted the secret witness. In a dramatic turn in the case on Wednesday morning, lawyers for the newspapers defending a defamation claim from Roberts-Smith told the federal court two critical witnesses had been contacted by lawyers, allegedly after Roberts-Smith’s barrister Arthur Moses SC contacted another senior barrister to express concerns the witnesses’ interests were not being properly protected. The witnesses – former soldiers known in court documents as Person 56 and Person 66 – had agreed to give evidence for Nine newspapers. Person 56 has an application before the court to be excused from a subpoena to give evidence, citing medical grounds. Nicholas Owens SC, acting for Nine newspapers, on Wednesday said “through means unknown” the two SAS soldiers had been “placed in contact” with new lawyers after Moses contacted another Sydney lawyer. Owens told the court: “We have become aware that recently Mr Moses has made contact with Mr Phillip Boulten … and we understand that Mr Moses expressed to Mr Boulten concerns that the interests of Person 56 and also 66 may not be being properly protected in relation to [them] being subpoenaed to give evidence in these proceedings.” Owens raised the issue of how the witnesses’ identities became known to the new lawyers. He told the court “there is, of course, a prohibition on the true identity of Person 56 and Person 66 being made known to anyone” apart from authorised legal representatives. The new lawyers, Owens said, were not authorised representatives. “There was an agreement by Person 56 to both speak to us and not oppose any application by us to call him to give evidence in the proceedings,” Owens said. But he said after contact from those lawyers “Person 56’s position has changed”. Owens said the initial contact with the witnesses occurred “without the knowledge of … [the soldiers’] retained defence-approved lawyers”, who were only subsequently made aware of the contact. Owens told the court on Wednesday morning: “Mr Boulten and Mr Hodges are meeting with Person 66 today.” Lawyers for the newspapers sought, and were granted, leave to file subpoenas to two lawyers, Phillip Boulten SC and Peter Hodges, seeking documents relating to any contact with the soldier witnesses. Roberts-Smith has been issued with a notice to produce “evidence of communications between those groups of people and these two witnesses about their participation in the proceedings”. They are required to respond by Thursday afternoon. Neither Boulten nor Hodges responded to queries from the Guardian. It is not suggested they have engaged in any wrongdoing. Roberts-Smith is suing the Age, the Sydney Morning Herald and the Canberra Times for defamation over a series of reports he alleges are defamatory and portray him as committing war crimes, including murder. The newspapers are pleading a defence of truth. Roberts-Smith denies all wrongdoing. According to the newspapers’ defence, Person 66 was an SAS soldier on Roberts-Smith’s patrol during an operation in Syachow in 2012. He had not killed a person in combat prior to the mission. The defence alleges that during the mission, two captive and unarmed Afghan men – referred to in court documents as “PUCs” (persons under control) – were taken out of the compound where they were being held and brought to a nearby field. There Roberts-Smith allegedly ordered Person 66 to shoot them: an order with which Person 66 complied. The bodies of the two men were then allegedly photographed with “throw-downs” – weapons and military paraphernalia placed on the bodies – to give the appearance the men were killed lawfully in combat. The defence claims Roberts-Smith later allegedly told other soldiers he had “blooded” the rookie soldier. He denies the allegation. The defence says Person 56 was a member of Roberts-Smith’s SAS patrol during a mission in the village of Darwan in Uruzgan province, on 11 September 2012. It is alleged that on that day Roberts-Smith took a handcuffed non-combatant, a farmer named Ali Jan, and forced him to kneel on the edge of a 10 metre cliff, before kicking him off. Ali Jan was then shot dead and his body dumped in a field, the newspapers say. Roberts-Smith has consistently denied the newspaper’s account of Ali Jan’s death, telling the court the man purported to be Ali Jan was a “spotter” – a forward scout who reports soldiers’ movements to insurgents – who was shot after being discovered hiding in a cornfield. He says the man was in possession of a radio and was a legitimate military target. In court, Roberts-Smith’s lawyers have previously opposed Person 56 being allowed to testify, suggesting the soldier had done a deal with the newspapers to only talk about specific issues. The newspapers deny any such deal but say they expect the witness to object if asked about matters other than Darwan. Soldier witnesses have consistently applied for, and been granted, certificates of immunity against self-incrimination during the trial. A still-serving SAS soldier, Person 14, currently being cross-examined, told the court he met with journalist Chris Masters in Canberra in 2018 and discussed his military service, including a 2009 operation on a compound called Whiskey 108, the site of one of the central allegations against Roberts-Smith. He also told the court he spoke with Masters and fellow journalist Nick McKenzie at a subsequent meeting in 2018. He told the court he does not recall any of their discussion in that meeting. Moses called in court for the journalists to produce any notes or recordings of those meetings. Person 14 was accused by Moses of fabricating evidence to the court that Roberts-Smith acted outside the laws of war during their deployments in Afghanistan. “You’re making this up aren’t you?” Moses said. “No,” the witness replied. The trial, before Justice Anthony Besanko, continues.I grew up in Sydney’s western suburbs during the 80s, a knockabout kid who was always a bit worried and generally a bit of a worry. My worry – to the point of fear – was that I could not see myself, let alone express myself, in a way that I knew to be real, and that in any sense – at that time – was acceptable. The Catholic schools, particularly the all-girls high school I attended, saw me as an outlier – certainly not acceptable to God – which meant I saw myself even more as a problem. It took another 15 years for me to finally figure out that I didn’t have a problem at all, I was just trans. The torment and distress I suffered through could have been avoided, if only more of the grown-ups around me knew that diversity is not only amazing, but an attribute of positivity and strength. Tuesday was my 43rd birthday, and today my life is beyond my wildest dreams. I live authentically and don’t for one second regret or lament those days of chaos. They made me who I am and gave me a drive and passion to fight for a world where no one else must suffer for being themselves. Tuesday was also the first of the remaining 10 sitting days of federal parliament. Among the torrent of birthday wishes, I was greeted with the news that some of our representatives had decided it was the best use of their time to debate why gay kids should not be kicked out of religious schools (being bullied out remains fine). However, trans kids can get the boot, and don’t deserve – or get – any protections at all. I’m taken back to the years of the marriage equality fight and the final weeks of deals done to get it across the line. Those final months of the “no” campaign were not about trying to stop marriage equality, but were about setting the scene for what was to follow. This religious discrimination bill is one such deal and it feels like payback time. These days we can look to the work done by exceptional researchers all over the world to tell us that marriage equality and equal rights for all is good for our health and wellbeing, and that kids from queer families do just as well, if not better, than their peers from non-queer families. The literature for trans kids is clear on this too. There is a growing body of evidence that tells us that when trans young people are supported, affirmed, and able to live as who they are, at home, at school, and in the community, their mental health improves substantially. It improves their quality of life, increases social cohesion, and lowers the future public health burden that results from these early years of trauma. At this point though, trans young people – binary and non-binary – are among the most vulnerable people in our community. In the largest Australian survey of LGBTQA+ young people aged 14-21, 71% of trans respondents reported considering suicide in the last 12 months, and 14% had attempted suicide in the same period; 38% reported having attempted suicide at some point in their life. The proposed amendments to the religious discrimination bill sanctions the bullying, vilification and hate speech that is happening today against some of the most at-risk members of our communities – young people who need support, care and affirmation, not stigma, discrimination and unstable schooling environments. While it is fantastic to see moves to protect sexuality diverse young people from discrimination, these protections will not ensure support and affirmation of these vulnerable kids; they merely prevent their expulsion. They do not uphold their right to a supportive environment within the school. Many trans people also have diverse sexualities. These laws do not adequately protect our communities, nor do they capture the intersections of our communities, including where members of our communities hold religious beliefs. These laws are not created in a vacuum. Right now, young trans people around Australia are seeing the news and hearing that they are not worthy of protection. I encourage you to stay bold and courageous, stand up for trans people, many of whom live in your community, who are your colleagues, neighbours, friends and family members. Just like everyone in this country, we deserve protection under the law. Please don’t forget that trans people are not an ideology; we are real, and we are someone you know. • In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In the UK, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123. Other international suicide helplines can be found at befrienders.org Teddy Cook is ACON’s acting director of community health and wellbeing and vice-president of the Australian Professional Association for Trans HealthMajorities across Europe think Russia will invade Ukraine in 2022 and believe both Nato and the EU should stand by Kyiv, according to a study whose authors suggest the crisis could end up dramatically changing the way Europeans view their security. “The data suggests something of a geopolitical awakening in Europe,” said Mark Leonard, director of the European Council on Foreign Relations (ECFR), which carried out the polling in seven countries, accounting for two-thirds of the EU’s population. “EU states have been portrayed as divided, weak and absent on Ukraine, but European citizens are united: they agree Vladimir Putin may pursue military action, and that Europe, together with its Nato partners, should ride to Ukraine’s aid.” The study’s authors said the survey showed there was “no longer much truth in the cliche that Europeans believe war is unthinkable and take peace for granted. They perceive their world as being in a prewar rather than postwar state.” The polling, carried out in late January, showed that majorities in six of the seven countries surveyed believed Russia would invade Ukraine during the course of 2022, with those nearest to Europe’s eastern border generally most convinced. Finland (44%) was a slight outlier, but elsewhere 51% of respondents in France and Italy, 52% in Germany, 55% in Sweden, 64% Romania and 73% of those in Poland said they thought a Russian invasion was likely this year. Majorities in all seven countries saw Nato and its 30 individual member states as the main defenders of Ukrainian sovereignty, but also clearly felt the EU bore a strong responsibility to come to Ukraine’s defence in the event of Russian aggression. In Finland, 56% of respondents felt the EU would be well positioned to come to Ukraine’s aid and 59% thought Nato would. Elsewhere, the figures were: 53% and 55% for France; 47% and 50% for Germany; 64% and 67% for Italy; 80% and 79% for Poland; 57% and 63% for Romania; and 61% and 64% for Sweden. Asked who they most trusted to protect EU citizens’ interests if Russia did invade Ukraine, at least half of those surveyed in each country – rising to more than 60% in Poland, Sweden, Italy, and Romania – said they trusted the EU. In two countries, Sweden and Finland, trust in the EU was even greater than in Nato. Trust in Washington as being equally committed to defending EU citizens’ interests was markedly lower, with more respondents in all countries bar Poland and Romania saying they trusted Germany more than the US. Even in Poland, Nato (75%) and the EU (67%) were seen as more reliable than the US. “While most Europeans still trust Nato to defend Europe, ‘Nato’ is no longer just another name for ‘the US’,” the authors said. “Europeans trust Nato to protect their interests more than they trust the US to do so.” The study also proves “Brexit means Brexit”, they said: despite London’s “much-publicised show of solidarity with Kyiv”, few saw a role for the UK. Only in Poland (66%) and Sweden (52%) did majorities feel Britain should come to Ukraine’s aid. The study also showed Europeans were prepared to accept significant, potentially long-term threats as a result of defending Ukraine, including the possible arrival of large numbers of refugees, higher energy costs, economic coercion, cyber-attacks and the threat of Russian military action. Respondents in Poland, Romania and Sweden were more likely to say that coming to Ukraine’s aid was “worth the risk” of all these possible consequences, with 53% of those surveyed in Poland in particular saying that supporting Ukraine was even worth the risk of possible military action aimed at their country. Perhaps critically, however, citizens in France and Germany were the least willing to bear any of these potential burdens – suggesting they believed the possible costs of doing so may outweigh the rewards, the report’s authors said. Majorities in all countries apart from Sweden (47%) said energy dependency was the biggest single challenge from Russia’s stance towards Ukraine, a view that was most pronounced in Poland (77%). Putin may be surprised to see that many Europeans “would see another Russian invasion of Ukraine as an attack on not just a neighbouring country, but on the European security order itself”, the authors concluded. “And it is striking that so many respondents – from north, south, east, and west – think this order should be protected.” With some clearly less willing to bear the cost than others, “the way Europeans deal with the next few weeks will be pivotal to the future of European security”, they said.The Pakistani-Afghan border, running along Britain’s colonial-era Durand Line, is a centre of the increasing tensions between Islamabad and the Taliban, with a rise in attacks since the group came to power in Kabul. Five Pakistani soldiers were killed on Sunday at a north-western border post in Khurram district by militants inside Afghanistan in an attack claimed by the Pakistani Taliban, Tehreek-e-Taliban-Pakistan (TTP). After a ceasefire between the group and the Pakistani government collapsed within weeks, the Pakistani foreign minister, Shah Mahmood Qureshi, said Islamabad had told the Afghan Taliban leadership it considered TTP as a test case of its ability to control militants. “If the Taliban can’t address concerns of Pakistan, then who would trust them and their promise of cutting ties to al-Qaida and other such groups?” he asked. Pakistan previously clashed with the US-backed Afghan government over the border – which Afghanistan has never formally accepted – leaving many soldiers dead, so when the Taliban captured Kabul in summer 2021 it was celebrated in Pakistan by the prime minister, Islamist political parties and retired military officers. The Taliban’s return to power was seen as an opportunity for Pakistan to regain influence and also as a strategic victory over Delhi. The author and analyst Zahid Hussain, however, said the Afghan Taliban would not crack down on TTP bases in Nangarhar province, east of Kabul. “In the beginning, Pakistani authorities believed the Taliban would serve Pakistan’s interests and [not] allow militants to use its soil against Pakistan. But it does not seem to be the case any more,” he said, adding that the extremists were emboldened by the Taliban’s victory in Afghanistan and aspired to do the same in Pakistan. Pakistan started fencing the porous border in 2014 to contain cross-border terrorist attacks and smuggling. It says it has fenced more than 90% of the border, but Hussain said militants were able to enter Pakistan and carry out attacks where the border remained unchecked and unfenced. In at least three separate incidents, Talib fighters have been seen breaking the fencing and threatening Pakistani soldiers in border areas. In one widely shared video from 19 December, a Talib commander in Nangarhar is heard saying to Pakistani soldiers: “If you come a step further, I will fight you here. We are happy to fight you.” A similar incident was recorded last year on 30 December in Nimruz, a province in south-west Afghanistan. The Taliban’s defence ministry spokesperson said in a video posted to Twitter in January that Pakistan had no right to fence the border and divide ethnic Pashtuns living on either side. Amid mounting clashes and tensions on the border, Pakistan’s national security adviser, Moeed Yusuf, visited Afghanistan for two days on 29 January. Both countries announced plans to form a high-level committee to address the issue. Drawn by the British empire, the 2,640km (1,640-mile) land border between Afghanistan and Pakistan has been perpetually disputed. Abubakar Siddique, an author and expert on Pakistan and Afghanistan, said that after the Taliban – an Islamist group – seized power, many in Pakistan thought they would not behave as an Afghan nationalist group. He said people were wrong to make such an assumption. “The anti-Pakistan sentiments are high in Afghanistan because of Islamabad’s perceived role as a main driver of instability. In addition, no Afghan government has ever formally accepted the Durand Line as a permanent border, which remains a highly emotional issue,” he said. “Their actions along the Durand Line aim at gaining domestic legitimacy. The Taliban also want to do away with the almost universal perception that they are a Pakistani proxy group.” The Taliban are not only seeking domestic legitimacy amid a humanitarian crisis – a more porous border benefits their financial interests. A Pakistani government official posted on the Afghan border anonymously told the Guardian that “as many of the areas have been fenced, we have seen a decrease in human and drug smuggling. Of course, the Taliban benefit from these illegal businesses and now the smugglers use different routes where there is no fencing.”Amid the swirl of friendships and interests involved in the Justin Langer fiasco, at least one thing unifies us all: whatever you think of their behaviour, it’s always mesmerising to watch the golden generation go. Evidently, they’ve still got it. Their public defence of Langer, their friend and teammate, after he chose to depart as coach rather than accept a six-month contract extension, has even left current players in awe . “Shows why they were so fucking good!” one said. “They stick together and look after each other.” Yes, the player is nameless. Why would any rational being risk incurring the ire of these guys? It’s true: they do look after each other. If you squint and listen hard enough, the shrill tones provide windows and echoes to what opponents faced back in their day, especially when things got tight. Former Test captain Steve Waugh, the author of modern cricket’s greatest euphemism, “mental disintegration”, decried Cricket Australia CEO Nick Hockley’s “buzzwords” in his justification for CA’s position on Langer on Instagram. Another Test captain, Adam Gilchrist, replied underneath, “Nicely said skipper.” Damien Martyn noted that the current team “better keep winning”. Langer’s former opening partner Matthew Hayden, who once said that cricket “has got such a huge role to play in terms of [the] stability of mankind”, referred to sitting Test skipper Pat Cummins’ comments before Langer’s departure, in which he said a review of Langer’s performance was fair, as “garbage”. The image is clear. Cummins is the new bat, he’s run-out the best player, and the cordon’s going to let him know. It has been spellbinding to witness the public criticism – direct and implicit – from some of the past generation. But it’s instructive, too. Waugh and his contemporaries were the busiest manufacturers of the branding and mythology behind Baggy Green Inc. They are the arch custodians. The keepers of the flame. All self-appointed. As arguably the most successful team to ever play the game, it may well be they are convinced of the primacy of their views on all related matters by extension. As the contemporary embodiment of everything that made the baggy green great, at some level they may feel a move to reject Langer is a move to reject their group. There is a certain sadness to this. With Langer around, the team was still theirs. But the sun rises and the sun sets. Power is hard won, especially when wrested from this mob, as former oppositions will attest. They have been ferocious in public, even though some have been sending altogether more friendly messages to players in private, which is curious. Much as people protest that they simply don’t like the way Langer’s departure played out, it could also be argued that there was never going to be a dignified way to move on from Langer, who had doggedly set out his stall for a dynastic reign. Chairman of Selectors George Bailey on Tuesday encouraged former players to “reach out and get a good understanding of what’s happening.” Perhaps the golden generation don’t want to know. Cricket Australia is complicit. This is not the first time they’ve leveraged brand over substance. And to this end, Langer did exactly what he was there to do. Following the sandpaper scandal, he was co-opted by CA as a PR tool to rebuild the team in his image. His pure coaching credentials were moderate, and at best a secondary consideration. The soft power of aura and memory were greater sales tools than hard skills of coaching and education. Safety sells, and so does nostalgia. Think Steve Waugh on the balcony at Lord’s in 2019, Ricky Ponting the same. This stuff isn’t limited to cricket. In a piece for the Guardian last October about Manchester United’s own crisis, Barney Ronay wrote after a 5-0 thrashing that then-coach Ole Gunnar Solksjaer was “a manager in the job because of heritage power and brand-maintenance”. Some would argue that so too was Langer. His appointment was partly a brand play, and one only needs to watch Amazon’s The Test to understand the centrality of Brand Langer to Australian cricket at that time. In a moment of crisis, leveraging Langer – who tells us he is synonymous only with “honesty, respect, trust, truth, performance” – was the most effective antidote available for Cricket Australia to continue selling the game. Sadly, actual cricket coaching is missing from much of this conversation. It remains an amorphous, nebulous thing in this sport, jolting loosely according to the whims and style of the candidate in question. Langer approached the job like he did as a player, attempting to transplant his grit and single-mindedness, with mixed success. Despite Cummins’s magnanimity toward Langer’s “tweaks and changes”, those who argue Relaxo-Langer 2.0 took them to a new level at the T20 World Cup and the Ashes are misguided. The “back seat” was imposed on him, not chosen by him. The team’s subsequent success is correlated, and though many see this episode as a car crash, a larger car crash awaited were he retained. At its base level, the argument to retain him runs like this: “how can a team want to sack a coach when they’re winning?” But instead of a rhetorical dunk, maybe the authors might try, in good faith, to answer the question.The last and longest-lasting berry crop has sustained some stupid and resourceful birds all through the winter. At least this wood pigeon acts stupid; standing there on the lawn for three minutes or maybe more, allowing every stealth hunter in the neighbourhood an unhurried approach and a long, lingering appraisal of its chances. I’m beginning to think the bird might be sick, when the pigeon rouses itself, waddles a few steps like a shopper laden with too many bags, pauses and cocks its head. It waddles a few more steps and tips its eye to the sky. Only then can I see that it’s actually looking hard at the fence, assessing the ivy for the ripeness of its fruit. That silly plod has blinded me to the pigeon’s shrewd opportunism. All through the cold months, little gangs of wood pigeons have embarked on lightning raids into these slow-release plants. The berries of ivy, Britain’s only evergreen liana, darken into black maturity at widely differing rates, depending on location. Meanwhile, the pigeons watch from the roofs and treetops for the right moment to drop. In early December, a dozen or so flapped into a sun-kissed west-facing hedge for an orgiastic plucking party. And a six-pack descended again just before Christmas to plunder another “best not eaten before” stand looking south. I’ve not seen other birds feeding on ivy this winter, even though it’s the best harvest in my memory. Either ivy berries taste awful, are a last resort, or pigeons are first to the feast. A startle of white, a semaphore flash. The bold bars on my hitherto grounded pigeon’s raised wings draw in three others before it has even alighted on the ivy. Stretching for the nearest hanging fruit, it combines a gymnast’s grace with a bouncer’s weight. The thin bough bows, and the bird counteracts its sagging fortunes by turning wings into arms, fanning them out on both sides, holding position, spreading its weight. Pluck, pluck, pluck, for just a few seconds, and then the quartet disperse. The birds are gone and berries remain. Thousands of them, all green, starved of sunlight on a north-facing fence, and maturing oh so slowly.The New South Wales Treasury sent 1,000 pages of documents to the state’s auditor general in the early hours of Christmas Eve, on the same day she was due to sign off on the government’s finances, according to a damning new report. The NSW opposition has called for people within the state’s Treasury to lose their jobs after the auditor general, Margaret Crawford, accused the department of an “unnecessarily obstructive and difficult” bid to withhold key information about a controversial $40bn rail corporation late last year. In her report into the state’s finances, released on Wednesday, the auditor took the dramatic step of slapping Treasury with an “extreme risk finding” to “significantly improve governance processes to ensure complete and timely sharing of information”. It is the second damaging report from the NSW auditor’s office in two days, after Tuesday’s report into the government’s Stronger Communities Fund found 96% of $252m in grants had been distributed in Coalition-held seats. On Wednesday, Crawford detailed events leading up to her long-awaited signoff of the state’s finances on Christmas Eve after a three-month delay caused by her concerns surrounding the controversial Transport Asset Holding Entity (Tahe), which holds $40bn in NSW rail assets. Last month the Guardian revealed Crawford had warned that the government could be forced to spend another $4.1bn over the next decade to address “significant uncertainties” in relation to Tahe. Crawford said that during the long negotiation over the state’s audits between July and December, Treasury provided the auditor with “late, unsophisticated, and inaccurate forecasts” that “sought to support the desired outcome of higher projected returns” from Tahe. “This process of seeking ordinary representations from NSW Treasury’s management, that all key documents were made available to audit, was unnecessarily obstructive and difficult,” she wrote in the report. “Before management signed the representation to declare they had shared all relevant information, they shared at least a further 34 megabytes of data, or 23 reports (1,023 pages), with the Audit Office, around midnight, the morning of audit signing.” Crawford also revealed how she had considered taking the unprecedented step of issuing a qualified audit over the state’s finances until the government agreed to provide $1.1bn in additional funding to pay for a huge increase in fees paid to Tahe for access to the state’s rail assets. The increase was confirmed in a heads of agreement deal signed on 18 December 2021 between Tahe and its “customers”, the state’s rail networks. Labelling Treasury’s disclosures as “inadequate”, Crawford’s damning report said the challenges in completing the audit had been “extraordinary” and had “tested the constructive partnership between the Audit Office and NSW Treasury”. “Our assessments were hindered by errors and omissions in information and models provided by NSW Treasury to demonstrate expected returns from Tahe, as well as a lack of timeliness and completeness in their responses to requests for documentation to support NSW Treasury’s proposed accounting of government’s contributions to Tahe,” she wrote. Labor’s shadow treasurer Daniel Mookhey labelled the report the “most severe lashing of any government I’ve ever read”. “It’s clear that government and Treasury were engaging in misleading and deceptive conduct as they raced to stop the Tahe from detonating the state’s budget,” he said. “The tactics of withholding information, and providing the auditor general with misleading answers are despicable. “Those responsible need to lose their jobs. The premier, the treasurer and the Treasury all have serious questions to answer about the integrity of their actions in the Tahe saga.” The government established Tahe in 2015 as a way of transferring the state’s $40bn of rail assets out of the hands of the transport department and into a state-owned corporation. The decision had significant benefits for the government’s bottom line. Because Tahe could lease the state’s rail assets back to service operators such as Sydney Trains, the government could classify funding to the corporation as “equity injections” which did not have a negative impact on the budget. But under accounting rules, Tahe was required to show both that the entity remained entirely independent of the government and that it would turn a profit. In November, the auditor said “significant accounting issues” remained with the body, and delayed signing off on the state’s finances. While the government has trumpeted her unqualified audit, Crawford again warned of significant uncertainties to the government’s budget bottom line because much of the $5.2bn needed to fund the Tahe over the next decade has not been signed off in the budget. A parliamentary inquiry into Tahe is set to resume on Thursday, with the chair, Greens MP David Shoebridge, saying the auditor’s report had cut through the “smoke and mirrors” presented by Treasury. “Just over a month ago the premier and the now former treasury secretary was telling parliament and the public that the concerns over Tahe’s finances were unfounded,” he said. “Today we know that the concerns are worse than we could ever have suspected.” The treasurer, Matt Kean, has been contacted for comment.South Korea’s government is under mounting pressure to crack down on cyberbullying after the apparent suicides of an athlete and YouTube influencer who were relentlessly abused online. Kim In-hyeok, a professional volleyball player, was found dead at his home in Suwon, last week, a day before the death of Cho Jang-mi, a popular live streamer better known as BJ Jammi. Kim had received a barrage of hateful comments over his appearance and speculation about his sexual identity. The 27-year-old, who played for Daejeon Samsung Fire Bluefangs, reportedly left a note that contained “pessimistic” reflections on his life, according to South Korea’s Yonhap news agency. Cho, a YouTube influencer who also had a huge following on the game-streaming platform Twitch, had been suffering from depression following more than two years of sexually derogatory comments and claims that she hated men, according to a social media post by a member of her family. Her death triggered calls for strong punishments against fellow YouTubers and commentators who posted rumours and hateful comments directed at Cho, who was 27. A petition on the website of the presidential Blue House had attracted more than 150,000 signatures by Tuesday. Although the global reach of South Korean pop culture is often a cause for celebration, at home, the combination of celebrity obsession and high rates of digital connectivity has been blamed for a number of celebrity suicides in recent years. The suicide in 2019 of the singer and actor Sulli sparked anger over the failure of management agencies to protect their stars from “toxic fandom” and demands for government action against bullying on popular internet portals where users were able to comment anonymously. Her death prompted web portals Naver and Daum to close comments sections for sports and entertainment stories, but online abuse remains a problem on social media sites such as YouTube and Instagram. “More people are suffering depression and mental difficulties because of online hate speech. It is a problem that can destroy a person’s life,” Kim Tae-yeon, a lawyer specialising in defamation and cyberbullying cases, told Yonhap. Cyberbullies who once abused victims on South Korean sites have simply turned to global social media platforms, knowing that they will be harder to identify. As a result, police have struggled to bring prosecutions, despite a rise in the number of reported cases. “Even if offenders are caught, they usually end up with light penalties such as fines,” Kim said. Kim In-hyeok had publicly complained about the online abuse he received and addressed speculation about his sexuality and use of cosmetics. “I have never worn makeup, I don’t like guys, I had a girlfriend and I never appeared on an adult film,” he posted on his Instagram account last August. “People who have no idea who I really am send countless direct messages and post spiteful comments whenever I play a game. It’s really hard to bear all that. Please stop.” In 2019, Cho was accused of making a gesture in one of her videos that indicated she hated men. Her mother, who monitored online comments directed at her daughter, committed suicide soon after, according to reports. • International helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org. In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is at 800-273-8255 or chat for support. You can also text HOME to 741741 to connect with a crisis text line counselor. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14.When Sue Gray pointed to dysfunction in Downing Street as one cause of the party culture that had developed in No 10 during the pandemic, Boris Johnson told MPs: “I get it, and I’ll fix it.” But Tuesday’s mini-reshuffle, promoting ultra-loyalist MPs who have battled to save the prime minister’s skin in recent days, and creating the post of “Brexit opportunities minister”, hardly gave the impression of a fresh start. Taken together with allegations about the lobbying efforts of his new director of communications, Guto Harri, the shake-up has perpetuated the sense that Johnson values loyalty above all else – and takes at best a relaxed approach to propriety and “chumocracy” in government. All the moves at cabinet level involved middle-aged white men, causing the overhaul to be described as a “he-shuffle”. Mark Spencer, the widely criticised chief whip whose team has been accused of threatening to cut resources from rebels’ constituencies, will now be leader of the House of Commons – a role that involves overseeing aspects of the parliamentary standards system. The Conservative MP William Wragg has said whips’ alleged threats “would seem to constitute blackmail” and has discussed them with the Metropolitan police. Spencer has also been implicated in claims by the former transport minister Nusrat Ghani that she was told her “Muslimness” had been a problem after she was sacked in 2020. Spencer has admitted being the whip whose alleged comments Ghani was referring to – though has insisted he did not make them. A Cabinet Office investigation is under way but no terms of reference for it have been published. Far from Johnson sidelining Spencer while these contentious claims are examined, he has handed him a more public-facing role, speaking for the government once a week at the dispatch box, at business questions – a platform his predecessor, Jacob Rees-Mogg, has used to advance his views on a range of subjects in recent years. Michael Ellis, the paymaster general who has been willing to defend Johnson robustly in the Commons in recent weeks, received a promotion, taking on some Cabinet Office responsibilities as well. And Spencer will be replaced as chief whip by Chris Heaton-Harris, part of a core team of Johnson loyalists who have operated as a “shadow whipping” operation in recent days in an attempt to prevent 54 no-confidence letters being submitted by their increasingly restive colleagues. As Downing Street aides prepared for the reshuffle, they were forced to field questions about Harri’s lobbying efforts and past business activities – after he kicked off his tenure with the reassuring message that Johnson is “not a complete clown”. Minutes were leaked to the Sun showing Harri asking Johnson’s former chief of staff Edward Lister which departments he should “nudge” on behalf of the Chinese tech firm Huawei, which was eventually excluded from key parts of the UK’s telecoms network from 2020. Harri, like Lord Lister, worked with Johnson in city hall when he was London mayor. No 10 said all guidance was adhered to by government officials. Johnson has long been dogged by allegations of conflicts of interest, from taking his “friend” Jennifer Arcuri on trade missions when he was mayor, to soliciting the funding of the Tory donor David Brownlow for his costly refurbishment of the Downing Street flat. Johnson subsequently repaid the donation from his own pocket, but Brownlow secured a meeting with Oliver Dowden, who was then the culture secretary, to discuss his pet project, a new “great exhibition”. Harri arrived in Downing Street on Monday promising to share out mineral water in place of the “excessive consumption of alcohol” condemned in Gray’s report. But there has been precious little evidence yet of a new, more sober approach to government taking root in No 10.BP is just the latest major oil company to provoke political outrage after reporting its highest profits since 2013, fuelled by a year of record-breaking energy market prices that are adding to the UK cost of living crisis. But the perception that BP has profiteered from the energy crisis has another dimension compared with similar accusations levelled against its peers. The company’s decades-long ties to the Kremlin, and its stake in Russia’s state-backed oil firm Rosneft, has raised concerns that BP has benefited financially from its alliance with Russia even as western powers threaten sanctions in response to its actions on Ukraine’s border. BP owns almost a fifth of Rosneft, reflecting the company’s deep, and at times troubling, legacy ties to Russia. In BP’s latest set of annual results the state oil company contributed $2.7bn in underlying profit to BP’s bottom line last year, up from just $56m the year before, or just over 21% of its bumper $12.8bn profit for the year. BP is also continuing to benefit from Moscow’s political manoeuvres, which have helped to ramp up global energy prices in recent months. Under the leadership of former BP boss Bob Dudley, the oil firm set up a joint venture, TNK-BP, alongside a string of Russian oligarchs in 2003. It was dissolved 10 years later to form Rosneft, but not before Dudley was forced to flee Moscow in 2008 after an “orchestrated campaign of harassment” by Russian state agencies. BP has nonetheless retained a 19.75% stake in the business, which is now run by Igor Sechin, a close ally of President Vladimir Putin, as well as seats on the board. This is despite a series of diplomatic rows between Moscow and the west in recent years and threats of economic sanctions, over a range of flashpoints including Georgia, Crimea and eastern Ukraine. The ties have been tested on climate grounds too after BP set out some of the most ambitious decarbonisation targets of any major oil company, while admitting they will not extend to their Rosneft stake. BP chief executive Bernard Looney, the architect of its low-carbon ambitions, said on Thursday that the Rosneft alliance remains in place despite the fresh threat of sanctions against Russia by the EU and the US as the Kremlin flexes its military muscle on the border with Ukraine. Global oil prices climbed by more than 50% last year to highs of $86 a barrel in October, before surging to seven-year highs of over $93 a barrel earlier this week amid fears that Russian forces amassed on the border of its western neighbour may move ahead with an invasion despite warnings from western powers. The rising oil price is likely to put major fossil fuel companies on track for further bumper profits in the current financial quarter. They have also benefited from record gas market prices across Europe, which were ignited by a global gas squeeze and enflamed by a slowdown of Russian gas flows into Europe before winter as tensions with Kyiv began to mount. “Russia is a large member of the energy system,” Looney told Bloomberg TV on Tuesday. “We avoid the politics, that serves us well in many countries around the world.” If sanctions were imposed on Russia then BP would comply, he added, “but for now, there is no change.” If Looney plans to avoid getting involved in politics, Russia’s energy industry may not be the easiest place to be in the year ahead.The actual Brit awards ceremony has changed its complexion over the years: from the old-guard backslapping of the 80s to the boozy chaos of the 90s and early 00s. Today’s offering is slickly professional – hipper than it once was, less tone-deaf when it comes to representation, but not a hair out of place to the point of seeming faintly uneventful, unless you count the sight of Anne-Marie falling over, or the sound of Ed Sheeran gamely attempting to turn Bad Habits into a metal anthem with the aid of Bring Me the Horizon: even the person in charge of the mute button for swearing had an easy night. There was a lot of talk from host Mo Gilligan about hedonistic behaviour, but not many actual signs of it. Nor did anyone attempt to say anything controversy-stirring or political. This year, the onus appeared to have shifted slightly again. In what was clearly an attempt to attract a younger audience – an audience that don’t watch music shows on television – there were categories voted for by fans via TikTok; elsewhere, there were “afterparties” starring tweenage favourite PinkPantheress on gaming platform Roblox and the unmissable opportunity to buy Brits-related NFTs. But none of this seemed to alter the awards themselves. As usual, the winners were easy to predict. Adele won all but one of her categories, a turn of events you could have seen coming from a mile off given that her latest album, 30, became the biggest-selling album of 2021 in the US and the UK, and her single Easy on Me topped the charts in 27 countries. Olivia Rodrigo was US pop’s multi-platinum breakout star of 2021: clearly she wouldn’t go home empty-handed. Perhaps it was surprising that the relatively leftfield Wolf Alice walked off with best British group, but then again, their only competition came from rappers D-Block Europe; London Grammar’s most recent album underperformed; so did Coldplay’s, at least by Coldplay standards; Little Mix, meanwhile, are going “on hiatus” (ie splitting up). The TikTok voting system didn’t seem to change much either: anyone expecting the video-sharing platform’s youthful audience to turn things on their heads and bring to the Brits a raft of new stars hitherto unnoticed by anyone under the age of 21 was out of luck, or hadn’t accounted for the fact that the platform’s youthful audience could only vote for pre-selected nominees. Perhaps Sam Fender’s deserved win in the alt-rock category had something to do with his single Seventeen Going Under’s vast popularity on TikTok, where it soundtracks videos of users relating stories of overcoming abuse. But he would have won anyway: a powerful, working-class voice, willing to take genuine lyrical risks, his work is potent, moving and refreshing. Indeed, the fact that you could have guessed most of the winners in advance wasn’t a reflection on the quality of the winners. If there was something odd about Little Simz winning best new act 11 years after she released her first mixtape, her authentically show-stopping performance underlined that her fourth album, 2021’s Sometimes I Might Be Introvert, was one of last year’s highlights: the sight of her mum collecting the award with her was really moving. One of its producers was Inflo, who also worked on Adele’s 30, and his best producer gong is richly warranted. Sault, the publicity-shy musical collective he helms, have released a succession of fantastic albums that are high water marks for British soul music and among the best records released in any genre in recent years. (In another sign of a great producer, Adele credited him with changing her life “not just with my music, but with me as well”.) Nevertheless, it’s clear that the Brits is developing an issue keeping up with an increasingly fast-paced and divided pop world: there’s a noticeable disjuncture between what’s currently happening in the singles chart – dominated by a new wave of UK rappers and pop-dance hits – and what was on offer tonight. How it overcomes this and avoids the kind of slow slide into irrelevancy that dogged it during the late 80s remains to be seen.For so many years, I lived as if I didn’t have a body. Childhood abuse meant mine was a conquered land, a place that had been pillaged and vanquished from the very start. Thirteen years ago, I found out I had stage 3b/4 uterine cancer. I discovered it late and by the time I did a tumour the size of an avocado already occupied my uterus. It had busted through my colon. I did not know it or feel it. This sent me off on a quest, travelling the world in search of answers, asking women everywhere: when did you leave your body? Who owns your body? What space is your body allowed to occupy? How has your body been hurt, changed or refused by the government, your job, the supreme court, white supremacy, climate catastrophe, poverty, police violence, settler colonialism, transphobia, imperialism, capitalism? Women’s bodies are forever under threat. On alert. Ducking. Crouching. Hiding. Making themselves smaller, less obvious. Waiting for the insult. Guarding against the unwanted touch. The grab. The punch. The rape. The murder. How does your body fight back? When does your body rest? Nurses are expected to sacrifice their bodies for those who refuse to wear masks. Restaurant workers are forced to take down their own masks, risking sickness and death, so the unmasked customer can decide if their face is pretty enough for a lousy tip. Californian farm workers’ bodies are assaulted so routinely, while harvesting fields, that they have nicknamed them field de calzón, or “field of panties”, because their underwear is ripped off them when they are raped. Black women’s bodies are shot by police in their beds, in their cars, for a traffic violation in front of their child, on a “wellness check”. The wrong body in the wrong house. Afterwards, even their stories and names are disappeared. Speak her body, say her name. The body of a girl child sold by her parents to an old man in Herat, Afghanistan, to keep her starving family alive. The body of another girl sold online for the price of a mobile phone, and another, sourced by a British socialite for her rich, sadistic boyfriend, who serves the child’s body to his luminous circle of the depraved. Women’s bodies, carrying the memories of trauma, predisposing them to cysts and tumours, bumps, lumps and sickness, long after the damage is done. Women’s bodies always serving, feeding, bathing, holding, carrying and nurturing other bodies, never having time to think about their own. Women’s bodies hated for their “perfection”, for their “imperfection”; hated for being too thin, too fat, too round, too flat. Hated because they can do all that and make you feel all that. But bodies are now remembering, reattaching, returning, becoming bodies for the first time. The burning from daddy’s unwanted fingers shoved inside at five now becoming word, becoming fire, the language of purpose, of power. Bare-breasted bodies in the streets pushing back against femicide. Indigenous women’s bodies on horseback and in kayaks, protesting over pipelines about to spill oil. Fist-raised bodies pressed up against rows of erupting police. Bodies rising: my body, my choice. Differently abled bodies occupying the corridors of Congress. Enraged bodies smashing the steel doors of a factory where their sister and brother workers needlessly died. Women’s bodies, unapologetically alive, freeing the beauty and birdsong inside, no longer captive or denied, but becoming one surging body, sweeping in other bodies as they rise. V (formerly Eve Ensler) is a playwright, activist and the founder of One Billion Rising, a global protest campaign to end rape and sexual violence against women (cisgender, transgender, and those who hold fluid identities that are subject to gender-based violence). This year’s campaign, Rise for the Bodies of All Women, Girls and the Earth, takes place on (or around) 14 February. It invites survivors and their allies to “rise politically, outrageously, artistically – through dance, art, marches, ritual, song, spoken word, testimonies, and other ways that best express your outrage, your resistance and your vision of a world without violence”. • In the UK, the NSPCC offers support to children on 0800 1111, and adults concerned about a child on 0808 800 5000. The National Association for People Abused in Childhood (Napac) offers support for adult survivors on 0808 801 0331. In the US, call or text the Childhelp abuse hotline on 800-422-4453. In Australia, children, young adults, parents and teachers can contact the Kids Helpline on 1800 55 1800, or Bravehearts on 1800 272 831, and adult survivors can contact Blue Knot Foundation on 1300 657 380. Other sources of help can be found at Child Helplines InternationalReddit and Twitter users in the UK could be required to submit details of their passport or credit card as part of the government’s proposed age verification rules for pornography. The two sites are among the few mainstream social networks that continue to host large quantities of explicit adult material. Ministers said that social networks “where a considerable quantity of pornographic material is accessible” will have to conform to the same age verification rules as other commercial pornography websites. This could leave Twitter and Reddit facing a choice of either verifying which British users are over 18 or finding a way to remove adult material from their services in the UK. Neither site currently has substantive age checks to access adult material. Pornography has been increasingly pushed off mainstream social networks. Facebook and Instagram have strict bans on pornography, while Tumblr removed all adult material from its service in 2018. The proposed law will see individual British internet users required to hand over a form of identification – such as a passport, driving licence or credit card – to an age verification provider, which would then tell a website hosting porn that the user is over 18. Outlets that fail to prove they have robust age checks could be fined 10% of their global revenue by the media regulator Ofcom, or risk being blocked altogether by British internet service providers. According to industry sources, the big fear among major porn sites is what happens if they comply with the law but smaller sites remain online without age checks. Iain Corby of the industry group the Age Verification Providers Association said that if the policy was poorly enforced by Ofcom it could punish pornography websites that comply with the law. “You stop going to PornHub, then you go to XHamster, then you go to the next down the list. Whatever you think of those sites they do tend to have some standards. You are driving people to sketchier sites,” he said. The cost of age verification is about 15-20p a person for websites. The pseudonymous sex blogger Girl on the Net said that the proposals could impact smaller websites: “The government proposes this every few years or so and it’s always unworkable, affecting smaller producers while benefiting bigger players in the market.” Past industry estimates put the likely number of British online porn users at 20-25 million – around a third of the UK population. The idea of putting mandatory age checks on porn websites, in an attempt to make it more difficult for under-18s to access adult material, has been floating around UK government circles for almost a decade. It became Conservative policy in the run-up to the 2015 general election, but despite passing the relevant legislation the original proposals collapsed amid legislative oversights and issues around its implementation. Alastair Graham, the boss of age verification company AgeChecked, said that building trust with users about how their data is handled would be key to ensuring widespread take-up. “Our approach is to not know who our customers are. We want to do verification and confirm someone is old enough to get on to a site but we don’t create a database of people’s names and details on our platform,” he said. “Even more importantly, the adult sites have no access to that personal information. The goal is to recognise an individual without knowing who they are.” He argued the current system where it is easy for children to view pornography is no longer acceptable: “Currently we’re doing nothing. Doing something to protect children, if not all children, has to be better than where we are now. The internet was designed by adults for adults.”Boris Johnson was criticised for making arch-loyalist Mark Spencer leader of the House of Commons on Tuesday, despite claims he told former minister Nusrat Ghani her “Muslimness” had contributed to her sacking. Spencer was moved aside as chief whip in a mini-reshuffle as Johnson sought to restore discipline to his fractious party and reward Tory MPs who have helped him protect his position through the partygate scandal. But as compensation, the longtime loyalist, who was involved in Johnson’s leadership campaign in 2019, was handed the prestigious title of leader of the Commons. Conservative whips under Spencer’s leadership have been implicated in threatening potential Tory rebels with funding cuts for their constituencies and with stories about their personal lives being fed to the media – tactics Conservative backbencher William Wragg has likened to “blackmail”. Ghani alleged last month that when she lost her job as a transport minister she was told that her “Muslimness” had been raised as a problem at a meeting in Downing Street. Spencer voluntarily identified himself as the person Ghani made the claims about, saying they were “completely false” and defamatory. His Labour shadow, Thangam Debbonaire, said the appointment was “completely inappropriate”, adding: “This is just the latest in a long line of appointments that demonstrates this government’s complete disregard for standards in politics.” Johnson’s shake-up also saw Jacob Rees-Mogg shifted from leader of the Commons to a new role of minister for Brexit opportunities and government efficiency – which allies said would be “very policy-heavy”. Tory rightwingers, including former Brexit minister Lord Frost, have been urging Johnson to push ahead with deregulation and other policies aimed at demonstrating the benefits of leaving the European Union. Senior backbencher Bernard Jenkin, chair of the House of Commons liaison committee, warned on Tuesday that his colleagues want Johnson to show evidence of significant change. “He’s got to sort this out. We’re interested not in the optics, in some impression of a reset, we’re looking for a change in the capability and the character of the government, so that we can have confidence that nothing as clumsy and mortifying as this ‘partygate’ episode could ever happen again,” he said. Chris Heaton-Harris, formerly Europe minister in the Foreign Office, takes over as chief whip from Spencer. Heaton-Harris was a key member of a parallel parliamentary organisation advising the prime minister amid his recent woes. Heaton-Harris was accused of “McCarthyite” behaviour when he was universities minister after writing to vice-chancellors to demand a list of tutors lecturing on Brexit. Stuart Andrew, who was deputy chief whip, is moved to be minister for housing in the Department for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities. Andrew becomes the 11th housing minister in 12 years, a continual churn that housing groups have argued means the sector is not properly considered by government. The changes come amid a wider shake-up of the team around Johnson, as the prime minister seeks to reassure mutinous Tory MPs worried about alleged lockdown-breaking parties that are being investigated by police. Last Thursday, four senior No 10 aides quit or were pushed out: Johnson’s longstanding policy chief, Munira Mirza; Dan Rosenfield, his chief of staff; Martin Reynolds, his principal private secretary; and his director of communications, Jack Doyle. While Mirza’s departure was a surprise – her resignation letter condemned Johnson for falsely linking Keir Starmer to the failure to prosecute Jimmy Savile – the other three had been tipped to leave amid the fallout from the party claims. Barclay will lead efforts to integrate his department with a new Office of the Prime Minister and liaise with backbenchers over areas such as future policy. In place of Doyle, Johnson appointed Guto Harri as director of communications, a role he held for Johnson when he was mayor of London. Mirza was swiftly replaced by Andrew Griffith, a former investment banker and Sky executive who entered parliament in 2019. The internal reshuffle has faced some criticism. Some Tory MPs from northern “red wall” areas were critical of Griffith, who represents a safe seat in West Sussex, being handed a role shaping new government ideas.One in five applicants to the white supremacist group Patriot Front claimed to hold current or former ties to the US military, according to leaked documents published and reviewed by the Southern Poverty Law Center and alternative media collective Unicorn Riot. Some 18 out of the 87 applicants, or 21%, said they were currently or previously affiliated with the military. One applicant, who claimed to be a former Marine, also said he currently worked for the Department of Homeland Security, according to the SPLC’s Hatewatch, a blog that tracks and exposes activities of American rightwing extremists. A white supremacist and neo-fascist hate group, Patriot Front emerged as a rebrand of the neo-Nazi organization Vanguard America in the aftermath of the 2017 Unite the Right rally in Charlottesville, Virginia. According to the SPLC, the Patriot Front “represents one of the most prominent white supremacist groups in the country” and is led by Thomas Rousseau, a 23-year old man based in Dallas, Texas. “A nation within a nation is our goal. Our people face complete annihilation as our culture and heritage are attacked from all sides,” Rousseau once said. In January, Unicorn Riot published over 400 gigabytes of data that included “ostensibly private, unedited videos and direct messages [that] reveal a campaign to organize acts of hatred while indoctrinating teenagers into national socialism (Nazism),” the journalist collective said. Group members and applicants expressed an open admiration for Nazi ideologies, with the latter expressing various motivations for joining the group. One applicant, who said he lived in San Diego, claimed to be a current DHS employee and told Patriot Front he was inspired to join after he “found out about the Jews while in the marines”. Another applicant used derogatory language about LGBTQ+ people and said he “first saw” them during his time in the military. Someone else from Salt Lake City said he “shifted focus and questioned things” after his second deployment and went from being a Republican to joining the far right. Applicants also touted their various skill sets, including “great land-navigation, great physical fitness, able to clear rooms” and “basic medical training”. Others said they had been “trained in firearms”. One claimed to train people in “marine corps martial arts” and said he was the leader of the Kansas Active Club, an affiliate of the Rise Above Movement, a Southern California-based SPLC-designated hate group. In addition to alleged military affiliations, the leak also revealed that the group targets minors. According to Unicorn Riot, Patriot Front recruits “members through the internet who are still legally minors, indoctrinating them with white supremacist ideology and even encouraging them to lie to their parents so the group can transport them across state lines for fascist events”. Patriot Front’s official policies require members to be at least 17 and a half years old, but it “goes by a case by case basis” with certain members being below that age. In the past year, there has been growing concern surrounding the far-right radicalization of current and former military members. More than 80 defendants charged for their affiliation with the deadly January 6 riots have been found to have ties to the military, with most being veterans. Last March, the Pentagon released a report that cited domestic extremist groups posing an increasing threat to the military by attempting to recruit service members and in certain situations join the military to gain combat experience. “Military members are highly prized by these groups as they bring legitimacy to their causes and enhance their ability to carry out attacks,” the report said. “In addition to potential violence, white supremacy and white nationalism pose a threat to the good order and discipline within the military,” it added. In October, a House panel convened to discuss ways to address veterans being increasingly targeted for recruitment by extremist groups. “They provide them with a tribe, a simplistic view of the world and its problems, actionable solutions and a sense of purpose, and then they feed these vulnerable individuals a concoction of lies and an unrelenting narrative of political and social grievance,” retired Marine Lt Col Joe Plenzler said at the panel. A study last year by the Center for Strategic and International Studies found that in 2020, 6.4% of all domestic terror attacks and plots were committed by active-duty or reserve personnel, up from 1.5% in 2019 and none in 2018.The stereotype about Los Angeles sports fans is that they only love their teams when they’re winning. For decades, this hasn’t been much of a football town. “It was never cool to be a Rams fan growing up in LA,” said Ryan Nixon, 40. “It was like this safe team your grandparents liked to watch.” The Rams only had one winning season as Nixon was a kid, and then the team decamped to the other side of the country. This week, they have a chance to once again win over the city that loves winners, with a story so corny it could be nominated for an Oscar. The Rams are back in their old hometown after a long and dramatic absence, one that was prolonged for years by the machinations of rival team owners. But even after the team moved back to the city from St Louis in 2016, there was plenty of skepticism about what it would take to make the city care much about its football franchise. A whole generation of local kids younger than Nixon had grown up without any hometown allegiance, as the Rams played, increasingly poorly, in St Louis. The city had done without an NFL team for 20 years, and there were superstar basketball players, a beloved baseball team and high-quality college football to keep Angelenos’ loyalties tied up. Did it really need the NFL? Some old-school Rams fans never forgave the team for its departure. ‘When they moved, that was my first experience with the whole ugly side of sports, the strictly-business, money-dominates-everthing-else of sports,” said Ryan Jones, a basketball writer who grew up in Orange county. “That there were LA fans that stuck with them was wild to me. Why would you have a sense of loyalty to a team that essentially abandoned you as a fan?” But other original Los Angeles Rams fans kept their faith, even during the team’s long 20 years wandering in an NFL desert. “I think Rams fans are very emotional fans. All football fans are emotional, but you have to have an emotional attachment to this team because of the fact that they’ve moved and the fact that you’re always taking some type of berating from other fans,” said Christian Duguay, 52, who provided a photograph of himself in Rams gear at around age five as proof of his longstanding commitment. Many longtime Rams fans inherited their allegiance to the team from their families, and stayed loyal, even in the absence of regular wins, even when the team left the city. As a kid, “I cried when my team lost, so I cried a lot of times,” said Manuel De La Rosa, who grew up in suburban east Los Angeles in the 70s, the son of even-more-original Rams fans, who had cheered on the team since it arrived from Cleveland in the late 1940s. Michael Johnson, a Rams fan since the 70s, regularly saw groups demonstrating with “Bring Back the Los Angeles Rams” signs and banners outside other Los Angeles sporting events by 2012 or 2013. “I was very enthusiastic, very hopeful,” Johnson said. “In my heart of hearts, I really believed that one day they would come back.” By January 2016, with the team’s potential return imminent, hundreds of Rams fans demonstrated outside the Coliseum stadium to demand the team’s return. “It was like a supermodel leaving you,” one mournful 70-year-old Rams fan told the Associated Press, describing the tragedy of the St Louis move. Out of a Hollywood script Sunday’s hometown game gives the Rams a chance to win the Super Bowl in a storyline that seems too good to be true. They’re led by a boy wonder coach, Sean McVay, who was 30 when he became the youngest head coach in NFL history. It’s their first season with fans allowed inside a palatial new stadium. The team’s new home – courtesy of their laconic billionaire owner, Stan Kroenke, also known as “Silent Stan,” that came with a price tag of more than $5bn. The team endured a Covid-19 outbreak in December, with as many as 29 players out of the game on the Covid-19 list at one time, ESPN reported. “If it was a Hollywood script it would get tossed out because no one would believe it,” the team’s chief operating officer, Kevin Demoff, told reporters last week. Demoff’s comments suggested the team owners felt the Rams were on the brink of “supersizing” their local fan base, the LA Times reported. But Demoff also sounded a note of caution: “We still have to go accomplish the last step for all of that to actually come to fruition.” “It’s weird to see that the Rams have become the cool LA team, and to see all the celebrities at the game. It’s weird to see everyone rooting for them,” Nixon said, especially for old-school fans like him who were “there in Anaheim in the 80s putting up with teams that were just terrible”. “I’m stoked for my little billion dollar team,” he added. “It’s just odd to see them embraced.” It’s not just that the Rams are winning more, Nixon said. It’s also that they’re providing fans with a more glamorous experience, including a stadium that the head of the Dallas Cowboys said last year needed to be so “ iconic” it was “like Mt Rushmore”. “LA is that town: it’s showtime,” Nixon said. “You want somewhere to go to be seen, to have a spectacle and to get a show, and I think with the new stadium they’ve done that.” Meanwhile, the role the Rams used to play of the Los Angeles NFL team few Angelenos care about, is being filled by the Los Angeles Chargers, who moved from San Diego in 2017 and share the Rams’ SoFi stadium as the decidedly less-popular team. As a former San Diego resident, “I know how strong the Chargers fandom is. I can’t imagine what they’re going through,” Nixon said. “I feel bad that they’re here,” Duguay said of the Chargers. “I think the Rams have a chance to really be a symbol of the city.” The Rams’ Hollywood storyline does come with a risk: if they lose after all the buildup, their rise to true Los Angeles popularity may slow down, though it won’t stop altogether. “I always tell people, when the Raiders had their first year in Los Angeles, they won the Super Bowl. That’s why you have so many Raiders fans [here],” De La Rosa said. For the Rams faithful, the potential thrill of a Rams win, in their home stadium, after decades of exile, is hard to overstate. “My son is getting married in two days,” Johnson said. “Short of that: the birth of my child, watching my son get married, or being married myself, I can’t imagine a bigger thrill in my life.”Why are the most extreme Tory MPs so influential? The European Research Group pressed for the hardest of Brexits, and the government gave it what it wanted. A similar faction, the Covid Recovery Group, lobbied for the removal of public health measures, and again succeeded. Now the Net Zero Scrutiny Group, featuring some of the same characters, demands the abandonment of effective climate policy, and is clearly gaining ground. Why? Because the Conservative party has long been drawn towards its extremes. It is pulled this way by the gravitational force of dirty money. This is a result of the pollution paradox. The paradox proposes that the most antisocial commercial interests have the greatest incentive to buy political favour, otherwise they would be regulated out of existence. So politics comes to be dominated by them. The Conservatives shamelessly court dirty money, and dirty money is ripping this country apart. It wants to tear away regulation and restraint. As politicians roll over, they expose us to repeated crises. Last month, the UK government overrode the Welsh government to permit the massive extension of a coalmine. This will produce 40m tonnes of coal: in other words, it’s almost 15 times bigger than the proposed new mine in Cumbria. Yet the media, perhaps because so many English journalists struggle to locate Wales on the map, has scarcely mentioned it. Also in January, the government approved a new oil and gas field called the Abigail. Last week, it overruled the local authority to force through an extension of Bristol airport. Far be it from me to accuse this upstanding administration of insincerity, but you could almost imagine that its commitments at the climate summit last November did not mean what they appeared to mean. The central claims of the Net Zero Scrutiny Group are nonsense. Energy bills are increasing not because of feeble green levies, but because the global price of fossil gas has boomed. On Tuesday, BP posted profits of £9.5bn. Last week, Shell announced that it had made £14.3bn. They are likely to rake in even more this year. In the middle of the climate summit in November, the chief executive of BP boasted that his company is “a cash machine”. This is what you are paying for when your bills rise. In the UK, these companies have been granted a licence to print money. For the past three years, Shell and BP have paid no corporation tax on the oil and gas they extract from the North Sea and no production levies either. In other words, they have been given these resources by the government. Whoops, I mean paid to take them away. Over the same period, they have been granted reliefs on the taxes they didn’t pay of almost £400m. This is because they can claim the cost of decommissioning their rigs and platforms against their nonexistent tax bills. But decommissioning should have been priced in when the contracts were signed. It’s a classic case of private profits, public liabilities. After being paid to take the gas away, these companies sell it back to us at mind-boggling prices. What is the best way of avoiding the ruinous costs of fossil gas? Insulating our homes and switching to new energy sources. As an analysis by Simon Evans at Carbon Brief shows, the scrapping of green policies by successive Tory governments has added almost £2.5bn to the UK’s energy bills. This expensive vandalism includes junking energy efficiency grants, banning new onshore windfarms and abandoning the zero carbon homes plan. A recent study shows that homes in the UK lose heat, on average, three times faster than homes in Germany. Part of the reason is that the number of homes installing cavity wall insulation fell by 97% after David Cameron scrapped the grant scheme. In a recent article in the Times, the chair of the Net Zero Scrutiny Group group, Craig Mackinlay MP, claimed that onshore wind power costs twice as much as gas and has been “rising steadily for the last decade”, while offshore wind costs three or four times as much. These claims are flat wrong. Government estimates show that gas costs twice as much as onshore wind power, and one and half times as much as offshore wind. Nor is this crisis, as some Tory MPs maintain, anything to do with a lack of domestic supply. As fuel bills soar, exports of gas from the UK have risen. Their claims to care about people struggling with rising energy bills look to me like blatant opportunism. The website They Work for You shows that the most prominent member of the group, Steve Baker MP, has consistently voted for a reduction in welfare payments. But as soon as the interests of fossil fuel companies are threatened he becomes Robin Hood. In an article in the Sun last year, owned by that lifelong champion of poor people, Rupert Murdoch, Baker lamented that green policies would “leave Britain’s poorest out in the cold”. He railed against the imposition of costs on working families by “elite policymakers who govern our lives”, of which he is the very model. If he really cares about costs being dumped on working families by elite policymakers, perhaps I could draw his attention to Brexit. Its price tag, according to one calculation, will by 2050 be 20 times greater than the cost of net zero. Yes, that Brexit, which Baker, as the former chairman of the European Research Group, was so determined to take all the way. Of course, the costs of decarbonisation should not be borne by the poor. But there is no need for them to be. A windfall tax on the profits of fossil fuel companies is just one of the simple and progressive measures that could pay for the refurbishment, insulation and new heating systems that so many homes desperately need. But guess whose political philosophy forbids such distributions of wealth. George Monbiot is a Guardian columnistThree Iranian refugees are facing deportation from Turkey after taking part in a demonstration against Ankara’s withdrawal from the Istanbul convention on violence against women. Lily Faraji, Zeinab Sahafi and Ismail Fattahi were arrested after attending a protest in the southern Turkish city of Denizli last March. A fourth Iranian national, Mohammad Pourakbari, was detained with the others, despite not attending the protests, according to Buse Bergamalı, their lawyer. Hundreds of protesters across Turkey have faced brutal responses from local police for participating in demonstrations against Turkey’s withdrawal from the convention, which aims to combat violence against women by supporting survivors of abuse. “They were taken from their homes because they joined in the Istanbul convention protests,” said Bergamalı, adding that the four were arrested after police photographed them at the protests and identified them. The four were later charged with “disturbing public order”, and “participating in unlawful demonstrations”. Turkish authorities ruled earlier this month that the group could be deported, after they lost their appeal against a deportation order issued last April. Bergamalı said three of the group had been granted conditional refugee status, making it illegal to return them to Iran. “However, there is no indication in the court decision that these people cannot be sent back to Iran,” she added. The order to deport the group comes amid rising concern over Turkey’s treatment of Iranian dissidents and asylum seekers in Turkey, who number at least 24,300, according to the UN high commissioner for refugees (UNHCR). An estimated 67,000 Iranian citizens live in Turkey, with numbers reportedly rising in recent years as some flee persecution while others look to avoid US sanctions on Iran by buying property and claiming Turkish citizenship. Bergamalı said the four Iranians she represents have been fighting to remain in Turkey, even as conditions for Iranian citizens worsen. “They are fighting for their lives,” she said. “They came to Turkey to survive. They’re trying to stay here so as not to die.” Iranian dissidents in Turkey have increasingly raised the alarm that they are no longer safe in a country formerly regarded as a safe haven. In 2020, an Iranian feminist activist, Maryam Shariatmadari, was briefly detained by police in Denizli, after fleeing Iran two years earlier after protesting against being forced to wear a hijab. Turkish authorities initially said Shariatmadari had been arrested because her visa had expired and she could be deported to Iran, where rights groups said she faced torture or even the death penalty. After a public outcry, Shariatmadari was allowed to renew her Turkish visa and released. Eleven Iranian citizens, including a former employee of the Iranian consulate in Istanbul, are on trial for involvement in the murder of Masoud Molavi Vardanjani, an Iranian dissident in Turkey known for his social media posts criticising corruption within the Islamic Republic. Vardanjani was shot dead on the street in Istanbul in 2019.The number of UK households classed as destitute could rise by nearly a third to more than 1 million this spring after the government adds an increase in national insurance to the wider cost of living squeeze, a thinktank has warned. The National Institute of Economic and Social Research (NIESR) urged ministers to reconsider the tax increase after it said destitution – which it defines as an inability to buy basic essentials – could increase by 30% in the next financial year if households are faced with a combination of rising inflation, higher bills and a greater tax burden. In a report that accused the government of “powering down, not levelling up”, the thinktank said cost-of-living pressures were hitting the lowest-income households hardest, as they spend a greater proportion of their income on food and fuel. It pointed out that those households were “heavily concentrated in some of the most economically deprived areas of the country, including parts of the north-west, Wales and pockets in London and the south-east”. The NIESR said the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, should also increase government spending in his forthcoming budget to boost investment and allow public services to cope with higher inflation, leaving the Bank of England greater scope to tackle rising prices by increasing interest rates. Jagjit Chadha, the NIESR director, accused the government of prematurely withdrawing its Covid-19 support measures, arguing that it limited the central bank’s ability to tackle rising prices. He said Bank officials were forced to maintain ultra-low interest rates to prevent bankruptcies and hardship among poorer households when financial protection should be the Treasury’s job. “The government has chosen to tighten primarily through fiscal policy, leaving monetary policy lagging the inflation cycle. This policy sequencing is the wrong way round,” he said. Sunak is due to present new budget forecasts to parliament on 23 March. The NIESR kept its growth forecasts largely unchanged from its last projections in November but revised up the outlook for inflation, which it expects to peak at 7% in the three months to June before returning to its 2% target in 2024. Last week the Bank raised its main interest rate to 0.5% in the first back-to-back rate rise since 2004 and signalled further increases this year to above 1%. The NIESR said it expected Britain’s economy to grow by 4.8% this year – stronger than the 3.75% forecast by the Bank last week – before slowing to 1.3% in 2023 and 0.9% in 2024. In a blow to the Treasury, the thinktank estimated that British economic output in 2025 would be 4% lower than forecast just before the Covid-19 pandemic. This estimate of the scarring to the economy is higher than the 1% estimated by the Bank, though lower than the 12% decline after the 2008 global financial crisis. The number of UK households living “in destitution” rose from 0.7% of all households in 2019 to 1.5% in 2020 – based on the income components of the widely recognised Joseph Rowntree Foundation definition of destitution. According to the JRF, destitution means going without the essentials individuals need “to eat, stay warm and dry, and keep clean”.Asleep, head tucked beneath his wing, the duck flicked one eye open from time to time, checking the skies for danger. When that came, in the shape of a low-flying peregrine, he and the rest of the flock hardly reacted. Perhaps they knew the falcon was not in hunting mode – or maybe they are so used to raptors nowadays they simply no longer bother to respond. Moments later, he awoke, revealing his full splendour. A drake pintail (Anas acuta), the epitome of elegance, showing off his chocolate-brown head, clotted-cream belly, dove-grey flanks and the long, pointed tail that gives the bird its name. There were at least a dozen pintails on the lagoon at Catcott Lows, a Somerset Wildlife Trust reserve. They were accompanied by other “dabbling ducks”: teal, shoveler, gadwall and hundreds of wigeon, sleeping or feeding right in front of the hide. Visiting birders tend to ignore these ducks, in favour of more exotic species such as egrets and cranes. Yet if you take time to peer through a telescope, you’ll notice astonishing colours and markings. The vermiculation – wavy black stripes – of the gadwall, the purplish-green sheen on the shoveler’s head, and, best of all, the blue-green eye-patch of the teal – the only British bird to lend its name to a colour. And the pintail – now awake and feeding – surely the most striking of all.Almost a third of bus services in England could be axed within weeks if the government does not make “critical decisions” to extend emergency funding, bus operators have warned. Bus services were supported by grants during the pandemic when customers were advised to avoid unnecessary travel, but funding is due to expire on 5 April, with passenger numbers still only about 70% of pre-pandemic levels. Operators normally have to give a minimum six weeks’ notice of route closures, meaning that many are already having to decide which will not be viable in the spring, when the Bus Recovery Grant payments end. The Confederation of Passenger Transport, which represents the industry, said it expected to have a £350m “funding gap” next year, with operators also facing higher costs, especially in staffing, where a driver shortage has led to large wage increases. Graham Vidler, chief executive of the Confederation of Passenger Transport, told a House of Lords committee hearing on Tuesday: “The consequences could be that bus operators are forced to reduce services by about 30%. “The decisions that government makes in the coming weeks are really critical. If they are to provide a short-term, limited extension of the grant, it will allow the industry to recover. “If the government steps away, not only will it undermine the ambitions set out in the national bus strategy, but in future to stay on track to achieve net zero they are going to have to rebuild those bus services again which will cost more money and be harder to attract passengers who have formed new habits.” Phil Southall, managing director of the Oxford Bus Company, told the hearing that numbers had been recovering after the pandemic, but added: “The ‘avoid public transport’ messaging has left a legacy.” Southall said that while the government had promised a £3bn investment in buses through funding for regional improvement plans, which would become available to councils and the industry from October, there was now £1.2bn available and the funding was oversubscribed. “At the moment we have this gap, where we’ve got a bit of a cliff-edge, potentially looking at service reductions, which we’re trying to do everything we can to avoid,” he said. “We need that extra time to generate the patronage back.” In private, other operators were more blunt. One, who requested not to be named, said companies had faced long delays in receiving promised Covid payments from the Department for Transport, adding: “The policy and administration is in chaos. Trust in the DfT is extremely low. The bus sector is hurtling towards disaster.” The driver shortage, which intensified during the latest Omicron wave of the pandemic, was already affecting many bus services with frequent cancellations. But operators have warned that the financial situation is likely to mean more widespread route closures – in rural areas and also cities where cash-strapped urban transport authorities have to fund fixed-cost transit systems such as the Tyne and Wear Metro. The operator Go-Ahead has revealed initial cuts to routes, some serving deprived communities on the edge of Newcastle and north Tyneside. South Yorkshire’s mayor, Dan Jarvis, on Tuesday wrote to bus operators First and Stagecoach to appeal to them to reconsider planned cuts to services and fare increases, which he said was “strategic shortsightedness of the worst kind”. However, he said he recognised the “genuine pressures” facing the industry, adding: “The government’s failure so far to extend Covid support for bus services is utterly reckless.” A DfT spokesperson said: “The government has provided unprecedented support to over 160 operators to keep services running during the pandemic, and we’re working closely with the sector to understand the potential challenges and possible mitigations once it ends in April.” The spokesperson said that more than 90% of recovery grant payments had been processed and the department had paid out more than £186.6m in Covid-related support to the sector between November and January.The New South Wales premier, Dominic Perrottet, has questioned the need for the federal government’s religious discrimination bill, saying the proposed laws could cause more problems than they solve. Perrottet’s comments came a day after Victoria’s premier, Daniel Andrews, revealed his government was already seeking legal advice on how to ensure existing state laws would be protected if the federal bill passed into law. If passed, the federal legislation would override existing anti-discrimination legislation across all eight states and territories. Federal Labor on Wednesday agreed to move substantial amendments to the government’s bill but pass it in the lower house, setting up a potential Senate standoff over the protection of LGBTQ+ students and statements of belief months out from the federal election. Asked at a press conference if religious schools should be allowed to expel transgender students, Perrottet said he did not see why the federal government’s bill was needed. “I’ve made it very clear that I don’t believe legislation in this space is necessary and I think it can end up creating more problems than it’s attempting to solve,” he said. On Wednesday, Andrews said he agreed with moderate federal Liberal MP Bridget Archer, who had announced she would vote against the bill. “She spoke about the fact that she was very concerned about arrangements in Canberra overriding state law – that didn’t make any sense to her,” Andrews said. “I absolutely agree. We made election commitments. We’re just delivering the things that Victorians voted for. And that’s what’s been important to me. And we will always fight to do that.” Last year, Victoria’s parliament passed the equal opportunity (religious exceptions) amendment bill, which prevented government-funded religious bodies from refusing services to people based on their sexual preference or gender. The law also banned religious schools from sacking or refusing to hire staff based on their sexual orientation or gender identity, although an exception remained for when it was critical to the job in question, such as the hiring of a religious studies teacher. ‘Eroding existing protections’ Liam Elphick, a discrimination law expert at Monash University, said the government’s legislation, if passed as it currently stands, would be the first time in 50 years that a federal law has explicitly weakened state and territory discrimination protections. He said the legislation included two provisions – clauses 11 and 12 – that could be used as federal defences to trump anti-discrimination legislation across all eight state and territories. “The statement of belief override would grant people of faith a positive right to make discriminatory and derogatory statements, eroding existing protections for women, LGBTIQ+ people, people with disabilities, and those of minority faiths,” he said. “The religious schools override would reverse new laws in Victoria that provide strong protection for teachers and staff, allowing religion to be used as a guise to discriminate against them.” On Wednesday LGBTQ+ advocate Rodney Croome said he would hand back his Order of Australia medal if the bill was passed into law. Croome, who led the campaign to decriminalise homosexuality in Tasmania in the 1990s, wrote that the proposed bill targets Tasmania’s Anti-Discrimination Act in several places. “The federal government is punishing Tasmania by attempting to knock us down to the level set by states with the worst anti-discrimination laws,” Croome wrote. A Tasmanian government spokesperson said the state continued to “strongly advocate” against any weakening of its anti-discrimination legislation but would not respond to questions about possible legal avenues it may take if the bill passed. The Australian Capital Territory’s chief minister, Andrew Barr, said the ACT would also consider its legal options if the legislation passed. Barr did not rule out a high court challenge but said it was unlikely the state would pursue that legal avenue without the support of other jurisdictions. Queensland is awaiting the outcome of a review of its Anti-Discrimination Act by the state’s Human Rights Commission, with a final report due in June. But the attorney general, Shannon Fentiman, and the education minister, Grace Grace, have both publicly expressed concerns that the proposed legislation could override Queensland’s anti-discrimination laws. Western Australia is also awaiting an independent review by the state’s Law Reform Commission of its Equal Opportunity Act that includes interrogating how the proposed law would interact with the legislation. A South Australian government spokesperson did not respond to questions about what legal avenues it would take if the legislation passed, but said it would continue to “monitor any impacts” on state laws. Wednesday’s comments were not the first time Perrottet – a proud Catholic who has in the past voted against decriminalising abortion – has questioned the motivations behind the religious freedoms bill. Appearing on Sky News after the bill was introduced to federal parliament in November, the NSW premier said governments should refrain from attempting to legislate “freedom”. “We haven’t needed it for over a hundred years, why now?” he said.Nurses across New South Wales have overwhelmingly voted to walk off the job amid growing anger at staffing levels in the state’s hospitals, with more than 97% supporting a motion to hold the first statewide strike in almost a decade when NSW parliament resumes next Tuesday. The industrial action – the largest by nurses across NSW since 2013 – will come just days after the resumption of non-urgent elective surgery, which had been paused to free up staff during the Omicron wave. While a minority of the more than 200 branches of the NSW Nurses and Midwives Association had yet to vote on Wednesday, the union’s general secretary, Brett Holmes, told Guardian Australia about 97% of the more than 10,000 nurses who had voted on the motion so far were in favour of the strike action. “Frankly, our members are very conscious that in November the premier made a decision to proceed with opening up no matter what,” he said. “He kept saying our health system was passing the test and our members were saying no, it’s not. He caused untold levels of anger among our members by telling people that it was all OK and going well. From our members’ perspective, that was so disrespectful and so tin-eared to what was really happening in our health system.” The decision of thousands of nurses to strike next Tuesday comes as part of a long-running call for the government to introduce minimum staff-to-patient ratios like those in Victoria and Queensland. They have also called for an increase in salaries above the 2.5% wage cap introduced by the NSW government several years ago, in response to the burden placed on staff during the Covid-19 pandemic. Holmes said while nurses would retain “life-preserving care” in hospitals, some non-urgent elective surgery could be delayed by the strike. “Hospitals have already had to cope with thousands of nurses in Covid-19 isolation so, you know, it’s not exactly outside of their current experience,” he said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning While different union branches have voted for different actions, some of Sydney’s major hospitals have voted for extended walk outs. Westmead hospital staff voted to walk out for 12 hours while staff in Blacktown, in the city’s west, plan to leave their jobs for eight hours. On Wednesday, Royal Prince Alfred hospital staff voted to take “up to” 24 hours’ action but have yet to decide how long to stay off the job. The NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, dismissed calls for staffing ratios similar to the policies in place in Victoria and Queensland. “The advice that I’ve received is that there are substantive challenges to that and it hasn’t actually worked so well in other states,” he said. He said he would support nurses’ rights to industrial action but did not want to see a year of rolling strikes. “What I want is reasonable, robust discussions to get outcomes. Let’s not play politics. We don’t want to get back to the old union games.” The NSW opposition leader, Chris Minns, called on the state government to give a Victorian government-style surge allowance boost to nurses, who he described as the “heroes of the pandemic”. “It’s a payment that would go directly to nurses, paramedics, doctors, those who worked in the allied health professions in our public hospitals [who] have done it very tough over the last seven to eight weeks,” he said. “It would go some way to showing our nurses and our frontline workers how much we appreciate them, how much we know they put on the line.”A viral open letter from a member of Facebook group, HK Moms, marked something of a shift in public opinion. The group is the type not usually preoccupied with the city’s political upheavals, but the letter revealed a limit had been reached. Addressing Carrie Lam, Hong Kong’s chief executive, it accused the government of holding its citizens hostage with new Covid measures – the toughest restrictions since June 2020. “You have tried for two years, and failed. When will you stop holding the citizen of this once Asia’s city hostage? When does the goalpost stop moving further and further away every time we get closer? When do we say enough is enough Carrie Lam?” On Wednesday announced a third consecutive record day, with 1,161 new confirmed cases and about 800 preliminary positives. The figure doubled Tuesday’s, which in turn had doubled Sunday’s. In response, from Thursday Hongkongers will be subject to intense social restrictions including limits of two people gathering in public, or two households in private. There were some exemptions for carers and tradespeople, but the city was warned that authorities have strong contact tracing mechanism, and would be watching. The government also added religious premises, shopping malls, department stores, supermarkets, markets and barbers or hair salons to the forthcoming compulsory vaccine pass system, and doubled the financial penalties for non-compliance with compulsory testing orders. Hair salons and religious venues will be shut for at least two weeks. Photos on social media showed queues out the door of one barber. “We are now facing the most dire situation,” Lam said on Tuesday. “We have seen a surge in the number of confirmed cases and some are worried the real number would be beyond thousands each day.” The new rules add to existing measures which has already seen much of Hong Kong largely shut down, just as other countries – including those which had also once chased zero-Covid – begin to open. It also coincides with some fresh food shortages related to border closures and Covid cases among truck drivers who bring produce in from China to the import-dependant market, leading to stressful scenes, reports of panic buying, and inflated prices. On Tuesday Lam conceded people felt the strategy known as “dynamic zero” came at a “great economic and social price”. “But I would like to make it clear, people’s lives and health, and for the local medical system not to collapse, these are more in line with Hong Kong’s public interest.” Hong Kong’s battle with Covid has been more successful than many other nations – it has recorded about 17,800 cases and 213 deaths – containing several major waves of outbreak and often bringing the number down to zero. But the tough methods have also drawn extensive complaints for frequent changes to unnecessarily convoluted rules, sudden blanket travel bans, occasional bouts of illogicality or farce like the closure of beaches or the mass cull of pet hamsters, and instances of failure or incompetence, like the overwhelming of the Penny’s Bay quarantine facility. The fact that this all kept continuing even as vaccination rates increased, treatments improved, and the world began to reopen to itself began to grate. “We have done all you ask,” the HK Moms letter said. “We sat quietly as mental health takes a toll, as families are torn apart and as businesses close down because it is all in the hope of China reopening our borders,” it said. Reopening borders to mainland China has community support, according to recent polling. But Beijing will not give the go-ahead unless Hong Kong can reach and maintain zero-Covid. Despite rising public anger, Lam is sticking to dynamic zero, a containment strategy with the constant goal of reaching zero cases. Health experts have said the method, of quickly controlling outbreaks and then relaxing once it’s done, is uncontroversial as long as it works. “The zero-phase is not too bad apart from for people who have to travel,” said Prof Ben Cowling, an epidemiologist at the University of Hong Kong, said. “The problem is if Hong Kong can’t sustain zero Covid what’s going to happen. If this outbreak gets bigger and bigger, what’s next? That could take a long time and there are costs in those measures.”Mega Mansion Hunters 10pm, Channel 4 “We are literally turning estate agency on its head,” says Tyron Ash, a sports car-driving property mogul who likes to celebrate megabucks deals by yelling, “Fuck you!” and giving the middle finger to thin air. We’re immersed in the rivalries of his agents, as they battle for commission, engage in Selling Sunset-esque squabbling and utter dense, Apprentice-style braggadocio. Who will ultimately succeed in selling the £5m Surrey mansion? No one with a sense of modesty. Alexi Duggins We Are England 7.30pm, BBC One Week three of these regional films focuses on entrepreneurs: we meet photographer Conor McDonnell (Leeds), who revisits the people and places that shaped his career; and 22-year-old Jake (Norwich), who left school with two GCSEs and now turns over £2m at his recycling business. Ali Catterall The Bay 9pm, ITV Morecambe Bay brings a fresh wave of drama this week, though this time it’s personal for DS Townsend, who’s on the hunt for her missing son. Things get worse when her ex husband turns up. Meanwhile, the team investigates Saif’s ever-murkier murder, which currently hinges on a fixed boxing match. Henry Wong The Fast and the Farmer-ish 9pm, BBC Three A slightly bizarre series hosted by Tom Pemberton in which tractor-heads compete in wheel-spinning, diesel-spewing challenges including the Bog Run (racing a tractor through a bog) and the X Tractor (driving a tractor in an X shape) in the hope of being crowned the UK’s best tractor team. Imagine a mixture of Scrapheap Challenge, It’s A Knockout and Clarkson-era Top Gear. Phil Harrison The Mind of Herbert Clunkerdunk 10pm, BBC Two Spencer Jones’s surreal comedy comes to an end tonight, as Herbert jigs with glee at the news of a theatre audition, ponders an anniversary present and performs pop-rap about being followed by fluffy monsters. He dresses up as a tooth, dons fake eyeballs and plays a tiny pink keyboard: intensely strange business as usual, then. AD Martin Fishback 10.15pm, BBC Two Creating a genuinely funny sitcom by porting a Twitter profile on to TV is no mean feat. All the more reason to enjoy the accomplished 15-minute comedy debut for the character of Martin Fishback – a brashly egotistical ex-Colgate employee turned terrible crime writer. It’s part exposition of his dreadful detective, Roger le Carré, part enjoyable family comedy. AD Film choice The King’s Man (Matthew Vaughn, 2021), Disney+ The first of Matthew Vaughn’s Kingsman movies was an unexpected treat; a big, fun, surprisingly moving Marvel-does-Bond rollercoaster. Interest waned, however, with 2017’s Kingsman: The Golden Circle, a film so incoherent it appeared to have been assembled at speed by idiots. The newest offering, The King’s Man, is something of a soft reset. It’s a prequel, charting Ralph Fiennes’ Zelig-style journey through the events that led to the first world war. There’s a lot of fun to be had spotting all the real-life historical figures dotted throughout the mayhem – Rhys Ifans, for one, appears to be having the time of his life as Rasputin. A ridiculous Kingsman v Hitler sequel awaits. Stuart Heritage Live sport Premier League Football: Aston Villa v Leeds 7pm, BT Sports 1. From Villa Park. Man City also play Brentford at the Etihad Stadium at 7.15pm on BT Sports 2. Live Winter Olympics: Mixed Doubles Curling Final 1pm, BBC Two. One to look out for: Scottish curlers Jen Dodds and Bruce Mouat will attempt to turn their world mixed doubles title into an Olympic gold. Coverage of the whole event runs throughout the week.Top story: Old chums to the fore Hello and welcome again to the Guardian morning briefing with me, Warren Murray. Boris Johnson is being criticised for giving a plum appointment to arch-loyalist Mark Spencer despite claims, which he denies, that he told the former minister Nusrat Ghani her “Muslimness” had contributed to her sacking. Spencer has been moved aside as chief whip in Johnson’s mini-reshuffle but as compensation receives the prestigious role of leader of the House of Commons. He is replaced as chief whip by Chris Heaton-Harris, part of a team of Johnson loyalists who have operated a “shadow whipping” operation to prevent 54 Tory no-confidence letters being submitted against the prime minister. Heather Stewart and Peter Walker write this morning that the mini-reshuffle, promoting ultra-loyalists who have battled to save the PM’s skin, evidences little in the way of Johnson “fixing it” as he promised to do about dysfunction in Downing Street. “Taken together with allegations about the lobbying efforts of his new director of communications, Guto Harri,” our political team write, “the shake-up has perpetuated the sense that Johnson values loyalty above all else – and takes at best a relaxed approach to propriety and ‘chumocracy’ in government.” Jacob Rees-Mogg, the former Commons leader, has been made minister for Brexit opportunities. On that topic, the public accounts committee says in a timely report that Brexit red tape has damaged Britain’s trade with the EU. It calls on the government to work with Brussels to reduce hold-ups at UK ports. * * * Tory grouping ‘fights net-zero plans’ – A group of Conservative politicians and their allies are attempting to derail the government’s green agenda, leading climate scientists claim. The Net Zero Scrutiny Group (NZSG) has gained widespread media coverage in the past month, attempting to link the government’s net zero agenda to the cost-of-living crisis and calling for cuts to green taxes and an increase of fossil fuel production. Michael Mann, one of the world’s leading authorities on the climate and author of The New Climate War, said the group appeared to be attempting to drag climate policies into a culture war, which he described as a “dangerous new tactic being used by those opposed to addressing the ecological emergency”. The 19 Conservatives confirmed to be in the group say they do not dispute climate science or the need to decarbonise. * * * Midweek catch-up &gt; More than a fifth of girls and young women in the UK have been ‘“cyber-flashed” in the last year, while a similar number faced sexual harassment and 16% were pressured to share naked pictures of themselves, a study has found. &gt; Canadian truckers and others angry with vaccine mandates have brought cross-border traffic to a halt at the Ambassador Bridge linking the US city of Detroit with Windsor in Ontario. &gt; A day before a mass school shooting in Michigan, the mother of the alleged shooter, Ethan Crumbley, sent him a text asking if he had showed teachers a “pic of your new gun”, an investigator has testified. Jennifer Crumbley and her husband, James Crumbley, are facing possible trial for involuntary manslaughter. &gt; Defence lawyers for Ghislaine Maxwell who are challenging a juror’s impartiality in her sex trafficking conviction have sought a temporary seal on legal arguments about the matter. * * * Europeans ready to oppose Russia – Majorities across Europe think Russia will invade Ukraine in 2022 and believe both Nato and the EU should stand by Kyiv, according to polling for the European Council on Foreign Relations. Its director, Mark Leonard, said the data suggested a “geopolitical awakening” among EU citizens themselves at a time when EU states were being portrayed as “divided, weak and absent on Ukraine”. There was high trust in the EU and Nato to protect Europe from the Kremlin’s aggression, but less trust in the US, while few saw a role for the UK despite London’s “much-publicised show of solidarity with Kyiv”. * * * Warning over bus route cuts – Almost a third of bus services in England could be axed within weeks if the government does not extend emergency funding, operators have warned. Pandemic support for bus routes is due to expire on 5 April, with passenger numbers still only about 70% of pre-pandemic levels. Operators normally have to give a minimum six weeks’ notice of route closures, meaning that many are already having to decide which will not be viable in the spring. A DfT spokesperson said: “We’re working closely with the sector to understand the potential challenges and possible mitigations once it ends in April.” * * * Brit awards – Adele was the runaway winner at this year’s female-dominated Brits, taking home the prizes for artist of the year, album of the year for her fourth record, 30, and British song of the year for its lead single, Easy on Me. Dua Lipa won the fan-voted prize for best pop/R&amp;B act, Lipa’s fifth Brit. Ed Sheeran won none of his four categories but was given the new songwriter of the year prize. In the ceremony’s first year without gendered categories, women and female-fronted acts dominated proceedings, winning 10 out of 15 prizes. The British categories were completed by two first-time winners. Wolf Alice took best group, and independent London rapper Little Simz, AKA Simbiatu Ajikawo, was named best new artist. British singer Becky Hill won best dance act, and best hip-hop/grime/rap act went to Dave. Leading the international awards, Billie Eilish took home best artist. All the recipients are listed in our report from Laura Snapes. Today in Focus podcast: Cancelled citizens The UK government has long held the right to deprive British people of their citizenship. But in the past 20 years, its use of those powers has dramatically accelerated. Lunchtime read: ‘We are happy to fight you’ The contested Pakistani-Afghan border has become a centre of increasing tensions. After the Taliban recaptured Kabul, there was a ceasefire with an initially receptive Pakistani government. But it collapsed within weeks, and on Sunday five Pakistani soldiers were killed in an attack claimed by the Pakistani Taliban, known as TTP. Pakistan has put fences on the porous border and wants the Taliban to crack down on TTP bases inside Afghanistan. The Taliban refuse to recognise a fenced border that both divides ethnic Pashtuns and hampers the militant group’s lucrative and illegal cross-border activities. In one widely shared video a Talib commander is heard saying to Pakistani soldiers: “If you come a step further, I will fight you here. We are happy to fight you.” Sport At the Winter Olympics, favoured Mikaela Shiffrin of the US team has made a shock exit from the women’s slalom. In snowboard cross, Team GB’s Charlotte Bankes has set the second-fastest time in qualifying. Plenty more action to come – keep up at our live blog. Eddie Howe welcomed five new signings to Tyneside last month but, impressively as three of them performed in the 3-1 defeat of Everton, Newcastle’s manager received a reminder that a player he inherited remains the brightest light in his attacking firmament. Jarrod Bowen of last season might not still have been on the pitch. It is not that his 68th-minute strike – the difference between West Ham and Watford on an otherwise nondescript night – was particularly late. But if there was a criticism that could be levelled at the forward it was his lack of endurance; Bowen completed 90 minutes eight times in 2020-21. Eddie Jones says he has “no regrets” about any of his tactical decisions last Saturday and insists that England dominated the Calcutta Cup game in Edinburgh despite Scotland’s 20-17 victory. Jimmy Anderson and Stuart Broad face the prospect of their record-breaking Test careers coming to an abrupt end after England responded to the winter’s Ashes mauling by dropping eight players for next month’s Caribbean tour. Business BP’s chief executive has dismissed rising calls for a windfall tax on fossil fuel companies to help UK households weather the record surge in global gas prices after his company made profits of £9.45bn last year. In China, tech company Bilibili has promised change after an employee died on Saturday, reigniting a debate about the sector’s notoriously tough overwork culture, known as “996” – 9am-9pm, six days a week. The FTSE100 is set to lift 0.45% this morning while the pound will buy you $1.356 and €1.186. The papers The Guardian’s splash today is “Tory MPs accused of trying to drag climate fight into new culture war”. Judi Dench is pictured as one of the Oscar nominees. The i has “Cost of living crisis: extra 1m UK children set to go hungry”. Our own story this morning says the number of UK households classed as destitute could rise by nearly a third to more than 1 million this spring after the government adds an increase in national insurance to the wider cost of living squeeze. “We’ve got more cash than we know what to do with” – that’s the Mirror on BP raking it in “while families face poverty”. Of that the Financial Times says “BP rejects calls for windfall tax” – well they would, wouldn’t they – “as profits hit 8-year high of $12.8bn”. “Waiting lists will rise, no matter what, says Javid” – that’s the Telegraph, and the Mail asks “Is that all we get for £12bn?” which is the raising from the national insurance hike. “Shocking – 10m missing out on NHS care” – the Express says 10 million “hidden” patients are set to join waiting lists. “Tories push PM to act faster on waiting lists” is the Times’ version. The Metro has “Wag war gets ugly” about Rebekah Vardy’s court case against Coleen Rooney. Sign up The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekendGet outside With the leaves of unusual plants laced with frost, ponds frozen to glass and rows of evergreens creating a Narnia vibe, formal gardens can be their most enchanting in winter. Follow a trail through 170 holly trees at RHS Rosemoor (£13 adult, £7 child) in Devon, or see a fantastic collection of towering conifers at Ardkinglas Woodland Garden (£5 adult, £2.50 child) near Loch Fyne in Argyll. Warm up in an indoor tropical garden such as the Tropical House and domed Great Glasshouse at the Botanic Garden of Wales (£12.50 adult, £6 child) in Carmarthenshire, which also has a newly restored Regency landscape of waterfalls, bridges and paths, and a Fairy Wood of tiny houses and toadstools to explore. The Scottish Snowdrop Festival encourages visitors to admire carpets of the dainty buds in gardens across Scotland. Among them the Logan Botanic Garden in Dumfries and Galloway – usually known best for its exotic plants such as gunneras and tree ferns – runs Snowdrop Sundays throughout February; or join a candlelight snowdrop walk on 27 February at the Teasses Estate in Fife (£30 per car of up to five people). South of the border in Northumberland, children can help plant 100,000 snowdrops at Wallington, a National Trust house, bringing their own trowel to help gardeners in the woods. Out in the wild, keep a lookout for interesting winter fungi such as King Alfred’s cakes, the firestarting fungus used since the stone age – and find out more about fungi and the world beneath our feet at RHS Wisley in Surrey (£16 adult, £8 child) where there are special half-term activities until 27 February. In North Yorkshire, people can take part in The Wild Watch nature survey in Nidderdale, joining walks and nature groups or just keeping an eye out for hedgehogs and owls. Sports days If your kids have been enjoying the Winter Olympics or were inspired by British slalom skier Dave Ryding’s first ever UK Alpine World Cup win, head to a dry-ski slope for a taste of downhill the old-school way. Dave learned his turns at the scenic Pendle Ski Club (£10 adult, £7 junior) in Lancashire’s Ribble Valley, but there are dozens all over the country, see skiclub.co.uk for a list. Or find somewhere to try the more sedate Olympic sport of curling at trycurling.com. Take a different tack at Woodmill Activity Centre outside Southampton, with kayaks and canoes to rent (from £14 an hour) and two-for-one tutored 90-minute Discover Archery sessions (£11pp). Do some science For an alternative approach to thinking about space, Liverpool Cathedral will be transformed for an immersive evening art experience, Space, The Universe and Everything, (18-27 February, £8 adult, £6 child) using displays of lights, projections and sound produced through collaboration between sculptor Peter Walker and composer David Harper. The planetarium of Glasgow Science Centre (£12 adult, £10 child) hosts a show about aliens and life beyond Earth, from 12-14 February, and has workshops, a Science Show Theatre and an Imax cinema. At Manchester’s Science and Industry Museum (free, book ahead) kids can join activities relating to the body (12-27 February) for a new exhibition Cancer Revolution: Science, Innovation and Hope, and on 23 February meet scientists working in STEM. In Edinburgh, stuffing yourself with chocolate could passably be justified as genning up on science – a 90-minute tour of The Chocolatarium (£19.50 adult, £12 child), reveals the tree-to-bar process, with tastings along the way. Explore history Winter can make spending time at an ancient stone circle or sacred monument feel particularly poignant. Absorb the atmosphere with a dawn or dusk visit to a neolithic site, such as the 5,000-year-old tomb Bryn Celli Ddu on Anglesey; the cairns and standing stones of Kilmartin Glen, Argyll, or the largest stone circle in the world, Avebury, Wiltshire. Discover what life in an iron age roundhouse was like at the Crannog Centre near Loch Tay in Perthshire, or explore the Tudor and medieval open galleries lining Chester’s central streets with a new downloadable audio tour, Discover the Rows. Through half-term the National Trust runs events at most properties, such as Gruesome Graves Tours at Sutton Hoo (£14 adult, £7 child) in Suffolk, exploring the estate’s Anglo-Saxon royal burial site – with costumed volunteers bringing the era to life. Meanwhile the London Transport Museum (£15 adult, child free) celebrates generations of people from the Caribbean who shaped London’s transport history at a new exhibition from 11 February. After dark As it still gets dark early, this break is a chance to give children a taste of the excitement of going out after nightfall. Spectra: Aberdeen’s Festival of Light (10-13 February, 6.30-10pm, free) features interactive sculptures, architectural projections and experimental music across central city streets. Similarly, Love Light Norwich (17-19 February, 5.30pm-10pm, free) has projections and performance art through the city centre, while near Bristol, the Victorian Gothic National Trust house Tyntesfield launches a new fire and light trail (11-27 February, £16.50 adult, £12 child). On the Isle of Wight, the Robin Hill parkland attraction (£20pp) continues to celebrate Chinese New Year from 18-26 February, with large-scale inflatable characters, lights and a dragon procession. Or take a flask of something hot and delicious to go nightwalking in one of the country’s many Dark Skies sites, whether it’s the Davagh Forest in Northern Ireland’s Sperrin mountains in County Omagh or Minniglow burial mound in the Peak District. Go Stargazing is a good source of events and locations. Meet furry friends For a treat, how about going on an alpaca or llama walk? Lead the way at Almond Valley heritage centre (£40 per family to walk two, plus admission of £11 adult, £9 child) in West Lothian, which also has a museum, adventure play and farm animals. Or book a stroll with Lakeland Llama Treks (from £25pp) near Penrith in Cumbria. Meet otters at Dartmoor Otters (£9 adult, £7 child) in Devon, or visit regular farm animals at a free city farm such as Stonebridge City Farm in Nottingham, or Bristol’s Windmill Hill City Farm or south-east London’s Woodlands Farm Trust. Feel the love As Valentine’s Day falls during many schools’ half-term, ignore their cringes to check out some romantic poetry in one of the country’s great libraries, such as The National Poetry Library in the Royal Festival Hall in London or Manchester’s Poetry Library. Shakespeare’s Globe in London has a live, hour-long storytelling of Romeo and Juliet suitable for 5-12s (18 February-16 April, tickets £15pp), or older ones might be up for watching a screening of Royal Ballet’s Romeo and Juliet on 14 February, at Cineworld cinemas nationwide (£18 adult, £15 child).The government’s withdrawal of the Domestic Renewable Heat Incentive (DRHI) at the end of March is going to penalise people like me whose projects have been delayed by Covid and supply chain shortages. In 2020, work was due to start on energy-saving renovations to our house, including a £22,000 water-source heat pump. We’d budgeted around the estimated £4,400 a year for seven years from the DHRI. The pandemic pushed back the start date to January last year. Supply chain issues and Covid caused further delays, and it’s unlikely the system will be certified by 31 March. IA, Bath, Somerset The DRHI gives householders quarterly payments, over seven years, for every kilowatt hour of renewable energy produced. The deadline for applications was originally March 2021. In March 2020, at the start of the pandemic, the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (BEIS) announced it would extend it by a year, but it could not, then, have predicted the full impact of Covid, coupled with the fallout from Brexit, on supply chains. There must be many others, like you, who began installations in good time to qualify, but who have been caught out by the turmoil. Householders whose installations do squeak through in time may still not be eligible because of the certification process. BEIS says that the year-long extension was to mitigate the effects of the pandemic. “The scheme will be succeeded by the boiler upgrade scheme (BUS), to provide grants of up to £6,000 for the installation of clean-heat technologies. If consumers are unable to apply to the DRHI before its closure, they may be eligible for BUS grants.” This is good news for those who can’t afford to replace their boilers, because it provides up-front funding, although the £450m pot will only cover 90,000 homes. However, it’s small comfort to those who have nearly completed an installation in the expectation of far bigger subsidies. Environmental campaigners have criticised the government for short-changing households doing their bit to cut carbon emissions. “The government is sending all the wrong signals,” says Doug Parr, Greenpeace UK’s policy director. “While end dates for government-backed schemes do need to be set, arbitrary deadlines, during a post-Brexit pandemic, are unhelpful. “New schemes offering the same level of funding to DRHI applicants should be available, and homeowners who missed out on the DRHI, through no fault of their own, should be top of the list for BUS grants.” Email your.problems@observer.co.uk. Include an address and phone number. Submission and publication are subject to our terms and conditionsI have been on a lot of miserable flights in my lifetime but one of my worst plane experiences is the Screechy Recorder Incident of 2012. It was exactly what it sounds like: a small child seated in my general vicinity played the recorder very loudly for what felt like several hours. Even with headphones on I could feel the screech-screech-SCREEEECH penetrate my skull. The recorder is an instrument of torture, simple as that. Even the most talented musician cannot make it sound pleasant. And, reader, this child was not a talented musician. Looking back at that flight I am amazed the kid stepped off that plane unscathed. Nobody got up and ripped the recorder from her hands (although, I’m not going to lie, I certainly thought about it). Nobody got into a violent altercation with her parents. Nobody had a meltdown. Everyone just gritted their teeth and ignored what was happening. I have a feeling that things might have unfolded rather differently if the recorder incident had taken place more recently: thanks to the pandemic, a lot of people seem to have forgotten how to control themselves when stuck in a small space with strangers. Last year was a record year for air rage: there are normally around 100-150 reports of air rage on US airlines each year but in 2021 there were more than 5,700. And 2022 is off to a pretty belligerent start: at least two flights in January had to turn around because of unruly passenger behaviour. What do we do about all these angry passengers? Well, Ed Bastian, the CEO of Delta Air Lines, wants to put them on a nationwide no-fly list. While airlines already have lists of passengers who are banned from flying with them, Bastian wants to go further and merge these lists so that passengers banned from one carrier will not be allowed on board any US commercial air carrier. On Monday, the US transportation secretary Pete Buttigieg expressed support for this proposal: “I think we need to take a look at it,” Buttigieg told CNN. I have a lot of sympathy for beleaguered plane crew. But a federal no-fly list for unruly passengers is a civil liberties nightmare. The fact that Buttigieg is even vaguely entertaining such a terrible idea is alarming. Just look what has happened with the US’s no-fly list for suspected terrorists: the American Civil Liberties Union has gone to court against the government several times because innocent people have been placed on that list with zero information as to what got them on it, or how to get off it. Call me a bleeding heart liberal but I tend to think that putting people on opaque lists that curtail their freedom with no due process is generally a bad thing. If you want to punish unruly flyers, just stick them in cattle class on an overnight flight with a kid playing the recorder. Believe me, that is punishment enough. Arwa Mahdawi is a Guardian columnist“I don’t have any dreams for the future because every dream depends on money,” says Resham, a 45-year-old from Banke, a district in Nepal bordering the Indian state of Uttar Pradesh. “Time is passing and I’m getting older. Whatever comes my way, I will face it and go ahead with life.” Last year, Resham returned to Nepal after spending 10 years working at Supermax, a company producing medical gloves in Malaysia. In October, the US banned imports from Supermax based on evidence “that indicates the use of forced labour”, and the month after, Canada terminated its contracts. The UK, meanwhile, has named the British subsidiary of Supermax as an approved supplier in a new £6bn contract for gloves for NHS workers. Like hundreds of thousands of Nepali workers, Resham travelled to Malaysia in search of a decent salary to send home. But after a decade, he returned with nothing. “It’s nice to be back with my family, but I worry about how to face my responsibilities,” says Resham, who needs to pay for his two teenage sons to finish their secondary education. A judicial review of the UK government’s contract award has been filed by Wilson Solicitors, the firm representing a group of workers, and co-claimants the Citizens, a media nonprofit that has investigated UK government contracts awarded through the pandemic. Nusrat Uddin, a partner at Wilson Solicitors, says: “This case is believed to be the first of its kind in the sense that it’s challenging the UK government’s own due diligence in relation to the products they are procuring, and how the processes they have in place adhere to legislation they have enacted themselves.” In 2015, Supermax was awarded part of a £320m to £375m contract to supply gloves to the NHS. In April 2020, the company then won an individual contract for £311m, awarded without tender due to emergency pandemic regulations. Criticisms of the company’s labour standards were well known when, in December 2021, they won a share of the £6bn NHS Supply Chain framework agreement. “It’s not fair,” says Saroj*, 27. “Instead of supporting these Malaysian companies, the UK should support workers who say they have been abused in the past and are being abused currently.” Resham and Saroj are among six former Supermax workers from Nepal interviewed about their time working in Malaysia. The men are mainly from rural areas and grew up in farming communities. Most did not finish or attend school due to their families’ financial situations. They travelled to Malaysia to provide for parents, siblings, spouses and children. But the repatriated workers allege they experienced poor working and living conditions at Supermax, including abuse, detention and salary deductions. Without access to their passports, and on reduced salaries, with debts to recruitment companies, most had no choice but to stay. When he was younger, Resham worked as a police officer in his village, but resigned after his family was violently targeted due to his position during the Maoist insurgency in Nepal. This led him to seek work abroad, eventually choosing Malaysia after a recruitment company told him that the “pay, weather, culture and working environment is good”. According to a 2017 report by Amnesty International, many Nepali migrant workers become “trapped in a vicious cycle of debt and exploitation”, with two-thirds of those surveyed paying excessive or illegal recruitment fees. Dil, a 32-year-old former worker from Nepal’s hilly Dhankuta district, describes how he felt Supermax was a difficult place “to talk with anyone or form friendships”. He says workers at the firm were “fired and abused” for raising concerns or making small mistakes, such as going to the toilet without a pass. Dil was fined four times for “not having a proper haircut”. According to Resham, after “official deductions” for food, accommodation and bills, as well as “unofficial deductions”, such as the haircut fine, he would be left with about £130 each month – well under half of his salary. As well as salary cuts, Resham claims he experienced detention and physical assault for speaking out about conditions, such as the low-quality food, the cost of which was deducted from their salaries. “As I’m speaking right now, it feels like I’m talking about a bad dream,” says Saroj, who tried to get sent home from Supermax by staying at his hostel rather than going to work. “I thought it was better to go back to Nepal instead of working at a company that was abusive and gave a very small income,” he claimed. Saroj says that as he was not working, he wasn’t allowed meals supplied by the factory. At the time, factory meals were automatically deducted from workers’ salaries, limiting their access to food. His friends snuck him some food, but his plan of being sent home failed. He says the company “said I would only be allowed food if I start working again. So I finally decided to rejoin the job”. Due to the pandemic and rising demand for gloves, working days at Supermax increased from 12 to 14–15 hours and workers were not allowed to travel home easily, Sitaram, 36, told the Citizens. “They held our passports forever … I definitely consider their behaviour to be forced labour,” claimed Sitaram, who was unable to go home when his father died last year. “After I requested for urgent repatriation, they suspended me and kept me at the hostel for one month without any salary,” he claims, adding that as part of Hindu culture he needed to be at the funeral as his father’s only son. “The company always used the pandemic as an excuse to hold us, I think, because if we went back, their workforce would be reduced and they wouldn’t be able to produce the gloves,” alleges Resham. “We completely appreciate that there is a global pandemic and there is an increased demand for PPE gloves,” says Uddin. “However, this government has championed itself as being world-leading in the fight against modern slavery, so that same government should surely be ensuring that the products that they are buying to protect their own citizens and medical staff are not being made by putting those across the other side of the globe in dire conditions.” After bans by the US and Canada, independent audits by those countries are being carried out at the Malaysian facilities. Earlier this month, Supermax announced that it was reimbursing recruitment fees to former workers, improving conditions and raising its minimum wage. Wilson Solicitors’ judicial review application states that in September 2021, “NHS Supply Chain received a detailed summary of evidence underpinning growing concerns about Supermax.” After the US decision to ban imports from Supermax, the company gave assurances to the UK that “three audits of its factories were under way and that the results could be provided”. Yet “inexplicably” the UK did not wait for the audits’ findings, finalising its assessment and awarding Supermax the contract. Supermax was approached for comment on this article on 1 February but did not respond. Two days later, the repatriated workers interviewed for this article were contacted by an affiliate of Supermax with an offer of compensation. In a statement on 8 February confirming that compensation would be paid, Supermax said it was setting up “a sinking fund to ensure that it remediates these former workers and all other eligible workers according to the revised eligibility criteria for remediation”. The statement said the company had “implemented a one-off RM5,000 [Malaysian ringgit] ex gratia payment to all its workers and shall add a further element of interest on the amount of past recruitment-related fees and costs paid by workers”. Reports from workers on the current conditions at the factory are mixed. Some claim that those who complained about conditions during an audit three months ago have received death threats from a Supermax supervisor. But one former worker, Jugal, 30, says that friends who remain at the factories are “happy because so many things have improved”, such as workers being allowed to bring their phones into the factories and eat their own food, as well as not having their salaries deducted. A spokesperson for NHS Supply Chain told the Guardian: “We take any allegations of this nature very seriously and do not hesitate to investigate claims made against manufacturers. A proper due diligence process is carried out before awarding any suppliers on to our frameworks and we follow the highest legal and ethical standards. We cannot comment further at this stage due to the ongoing legal proceedings.” * Some names have been changed to protect identities This story was published in collaboration with media nonprofit the Citizens. John Lubbock and Uma Bista contributed to reporting Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:On day two of a protest against New Zealand’s Covid-19 policies on Parliament’s grounds in Wellington, the stamina and consensus of the crowd was fraying. On Tuesday, thousands arrived in convoys from across the country, but by Wednesday just a few hundred were left, despite pleas from protesters on social media for the crowd to “hold the line”. Perhaps it is because the list of complaints is extensive – there are signs about the vaccine mandates and restrictions for the unvaccinated, signs blaring vaccine disinformation, conspiracies that Covid-19 is a “plandemic”, worries about gene therapy manipulation of children, accusations of media corruption, claims of iwi (tribal) groups selling out, and requests to save a Northland oil refinery from closure. Cars are scrawled with imported causes and slogans: “We stand with Ottawa”, referring to the Canadian protests against vaccine mandates and “drain the swamp”, a catch-cry of Donald Trump’s presidency. In October, the government released a new “traffic light” system for Covid management, including a legal framework for vaccination mandates that could affect around 40% of the workforce. The new rules loosen almost all restrictions for the fully vaccinated, but require vaccination certificates for entry into many businesses and for workers in public-facing roles like education, nursing, police and hospitality. A protester stands on Parliament’s steps with a wall of masked police officers behind her and urges unity through a microphone. “Let’s remember why we are all here,” her voice echoes across the crowd, “the mandate”. Her own crowd boos and heckles her. “Don’t yell at me,” she pleads, before getting off. In front of the woman, the grounds look like a small music festival. Roughly 50 tents are erected – people are picnicking, others are hula-hooping, children are playing. A convoy of Winnebagos, caravans and cars clog the streets around Parliament’s grounds. A singer dedicates a song to spirits and faeries, another raps about New Zealand being an apartheid state. A group of children perched on a fence yell: “Got a vaccine pass? shove it up your ass!”. As some speakers preach for peaceful, respectful protest, three others attempt to break through the police barricade and are arrested – just hours after Parliament’s Speaker of the House, Trevor Mallard, issued the crowd with a trespass notice. Others, wielding signs of love and unity, tell journalists they should be executed. A message scrawled in chalk on Parliament’s forecourt reads “Hang ’em high”, next to a smiley face. “Remove your mask,” a man demands, as I walk through the crowd. When I say I would like to keep it on, he immediately asks if I’m from mainstream media. I reply that I am and he says “don’t twist the truth just because you’re on the government dollars”. He is not the only one demanding I remove the mask. ‘Pretty antisocial and pretty abusive’ Across the road, at the Backbenchers pub, the staff are on high-alert. On Tuesday, they were forced to shut just 15 minutes after opening for the day, after protesters started hurling abuse. “This is the most significant and volatile protest in 30 years,” its general manager and chef, Alistair Boyce, says. “There’s an inherent anger and feeling of injustice and overt intimidation that I’ve never witnessed before.” Usually protesters vent their anger at government, Boyce says, but this time it was turned against the restaurant, which is abiding by mandates and guidelines, including mask-use, vaccine passport scanning and limited gathering sizes. “We’re trying to operate the mandate as the government has required, so we were threatened and victimised.” Staff were told they were Nazis and violating human rights. Boyce is sympathetic to the protesters’ concerns about the mandates, and would also like to see them removed, but adds he cannot support “the anarchy and the mob rule” of the crowd. “We’re a divided country turning on itself.” Late on Wednesday afternoon, the crowd is slowly thinning and the mood is more subdued – less anarchist uprising; more picnic in the park. And while consensus among the protest group is looking shaky, there was unusual consensus from the other side of the barricade: Parliament. Not a single politician met the protesters. The prime minister, Jacinda Ardern, said on Wednesday that New Zealanders had a right to protest. “But New Zealanders also have the right to be vaccinated and the right to be kept as safe as possible in a pandemic and that’s exactly what we’re focused on – and that’s what the vast majority of New Zealanders are doing.” National party leader Christopher Luxon strained to pinpoint exactly what the protest was about. “I think there’s a range of protests out there, it’s very confusing to work out what it is. Essentially I think it’s not fair … when you’re impinging on others’ freedoms as they are, by blocking roads and making it difficult to get to and fro from work – that’s not what it’s about. “I appreciate that there’s a range of views, but bottom line what we’re seeing there is pretty antisocial and pretty abusive.”The Tasmanian government’s back-to-school Covid packs have been mocked after primary schoolchildren were sent comically large adult surgical masks. Parents have been assured smaller sizes will be available at primary schools upon request after many took to social media posting pictures of the over-sized masks covering the entire faces of young children. “A perfect fit, protects the nose, mouth, eyes and probably the ears too,” one person commented on social media. “My granddaughter in grade five got adult masks too, and how long are five masks going to last?” another person posted. “It’s a joke really.” Amy Pennicott tried an adult face mask on her young child and said it was simply unfeasible for her to wear it in or outside the classroom. “My daughter is 10, 11 in June, and it’s clearly way too big,” she said. “The adult masks definitely are not alright for children.” A spokesperson from the Department of Education confirmed one size of surgical masks – the adult size – was included in the student Covid care packs distributed to families ahead of their return to school. “However, where that size of mask does not fit the student at primary school, there is a supply of smaller masks available at schools to ensure they are accessible for all students who want to wear them given they are not mandatory,” the spokesperson said. “While mask wearing is not mandatory in primary schools, primary schools across Tasmania have received a supply of more than 600,000 junior surgical masks if a child chooses to wear one and does not have their own.” Visitors to schools are required to wear face masks at all times but masks are only mandatory indoors for students aged over 12 years. Shadow education minister, Josh Willie, said the government was “gaslighting” Tasmanian families by suggesting there were thousands of junior surgical masks available while only distributing adult ones. “It’s like something out of ‘Yes Minister’,” he said. “The idea that they’re the best because they cover the whole face.” Willie acknowledged face masks were optional for children under 12 in Tasmania but said it remained a “perplexing and terrible look”. “My son is in the public system, he received an adult mask in his pack and I’ve been contacted by a lot of parents in the same situation,” he said. “I’ve been informed schools have junior surgical masks that just haven’t been provided.” A survey conducted by the Australian Education Union (AEU) found of its members, just one in five teachers felt safe to return to school in Tasmania and 20% were satisfied with the Tasmanian government’s Covid plan. AEU Tasmania president, David Genford, said the state government had failed to address safety measures ahead of schools returning this year. “The reality is, not enough has been done in our schools to protect students and teachers against the threat of Covid-19,” he said. “The government has had weeks to improve its Covid Return to School plan, but instead we’ll see students return to classes … with unacceptable, bare-minimum safety measures in place.” Minister for education, Sarah Courtney, has been overseas on leave. She contracted Covid while in France last week and is expected to return to work from Thursday 10 February.After months of speculation, this week finally gave us some answers, the 2022 Oscar nominations revealing some surprises among the easy-to-predict pack. Jane Campion’s queer psychodrama The Power of the Dog was the big winner, with 12 nominations, a richly deserved haul for a film some wondered might be a little too alienating for the Academy. But the unusual and unsettling film proved popular, along with Dune, Belfast and West Side Story, dominating categories that had little room for filler. In a competitive year, there was no room for these Oscarbait also-rans: The Last Duel Making two considerably scaled films during the pandemic that were also considerably rather good was an achievement Ridley Scott deserves some sort of honorary Oscar for – an achievement made all the more impressive given the overall shoddiness of so many Covid-era offerings. But while sleek melodrama House of Gucci might have been more commercially lucrative and more prominent during awards season (but not with the Academy, more on that later), it was his ambitious and knotty epic The Last Duel that deserved more recognition. A complex attempt to correct an egregious historical injustice, the film subverted the sexism that so often dominates films of that ilk and elicited A-game performances from Matt Damon, Adam Driver, Jodie Comer and Ben Affleck, who was criminally nominated for a Razzie for his role. The Academy sadly remained as uninterested as audiences. Dear Evan Hansen It was a worryingly rocky year for musicals at the box office, with In the Heights and West Side Story hitting a bum note with audiences although both were at least warmly received by critics, the latter going on to score eight Oscar nominations. Left out in the cold by all though, was poor Dear Evan Hansen, the Tony-winning play that became a Razzie-nominated movie, a spectacular fall from grace for a project once primed for big things. The writing was on the wall, and all over Twitter, ever since the first trailer dropped with twenty-something star Ben Platt’s unsettling high school get-up an object of mass ridicule and things only worsened on release when the film surrounding him was unveiled as similarly off-key. The Unforgivable Netflix might have picked up multiple nominations for The Power of the Dog, The Lost Daughter and Don’t Look Up but there was, deservedly, no Academy love for its drab Sandra Bullock vehicle The Unforgivable, a misfiring remake of a British miniseries. The actor, a winner in 2010 and a nominee in 2014, went for the well-worn de-glamming route, playing a woman just out of prison after being convicted of murder, but like her last Netflix film Bird Box, she had to settle for stats over statuettes. It was a monster hit for the streamer (Bullock is now the only woman with two films in their all-time top 10 most watched) but critics and voters wisely turned their noses up. House of Gucci There were a number of audible gasps yesterday as the nominations were announced (No Negga! But Buckley! And Drive My Car!) but easily the biggest shock of the morning was the lack of Lady Gaga, a star who’d remained one of the major best actress frontrunners for the entirety of the season. Her performance in House of Gucci had been somewhat divisive (although not as much as co-star Jared Leto’s) as was the film itself and the Academy ultimately decided against it, bar a token nomination for makeup and hairstyling. Twitter raged but Gaga remained ever-professional, wishing all nominees the very best via Instagram. It was the second snub of the year for Ridley Scott but this one was at least moderately successful at the box office. Joe Bell It was a good year for Monsters and Men director Reinaldo Marcus Green. His Richard Williams drama King Richard maintained strong awards buzz from its Telluride premiere right up to the big announcement, scoring six nominations including one for best picture. But as one surfed the highs, his other 2021 film skirted the lows, another well-intentioned star-led biopic, this time about the devastating true story of Joe Bell, the father of a gay teen who killed himself. Premiering at the virtual Toronto film festival back in 2020, the film was met with lukewarm reviews and faded from there, a tiny release with little to no marketing attached earlier this year. Star Mark Wahlberg, who gives one of his best ever performances, was perhaps hoping for a redemption arc that never came. Cyrano The pandemic hasn’t been kind to director Joe Wright, who last summer saw his starry thriller The Woman in the Window offloaded to Netflix, where it became a giddily mocked hate-watch, recently nominated for a number of Razzies. He also used the time to retell the much-told tale of Cyrano, ambitiously shooting a big and brash musical at the height of Covid’s second wave in Italy. Reviews were mostly positive, if a little muted, after its premiere at last year’s Telluride film festival and for a while, star Peter Dinklage’s name was part of the best actor conversation. But the film emerged with just one nod for costume design, despite superficially ticking a number of Oscar-friendly boxes, ending up as yet another movie musical performed to an empty theatre. The Tender Bar It’s been a while since George Clooney has seen himself a part of the Oscar race, an absence that’s not been down to a lack of trying. While the two-time winner (as supporting actor for Syriana and producer for best picture winner Argo) has mostly retreated from acting, he’s made a concerted effort to cement his status as a film-maker instead. But his more recent work hasn’t made much of an impact from The Monuments Men to Suburbicon to The Midnight Sky and now The Tender Bar, a sentimental adaptation of Pulitzer-winner JR Moehringer’s memoir. Ben Affleck, starring as JR’s uncle and surrogate father, picked up a Golden Globe nod but the film was rejected entirely by Oscar voters and met with a shrug from critics. Respect The music biopic, one of the most repetitive and genuinely exhausting genres in Hollywood, still continues to impress Academy voters bringing mostly undeserved awards attention to recent films like Bohemian Rhapsody, The United States vs Billie Holliday, Judy and Ma Rainey’s Black Bottom. But this year, former best supporting actress winner Jennifer Hudson couldn’t jimmy her way up into the best actress category with her role-of-a-lifetime work as Aretha Franklin in Respect. The passion project, which Hudson was picked for by Franklin herself, was criticized as being a little too formulaic on release and voters decided to ignore the film entirely.Grace Tame has said in a speech to the National Press Club that she received a “threatening” phone call from a senior member of a government-funded organisation warning her not to criticise the prime minister, Scott Morrison, on the eve of last month’s Australian of the Year awards because there was “an election coming soon”. Tame, who attracted criticism from some commentators for her negative body language during an Australia Day reception with Morrison at the Lodge in late January, declined on Wednesday to name the organisation or the person who allegedly made the call in August. The 2021 Australian of the Year said the caller told her “you are an influential person” and that “[Morrison] will have a fear”. “And then it crystallised, a fear – a fear for himself and no one else,” Tame said in her press club speech on Wednesday. “A fear he might lose his position or, more to the point, his power.” She said the intimidatory behaviour felt familiar to her as a survivor of grooming by a paedophile teacher. “I remember standing in the shadow of a trusted authority figure, being threatened in just the same veiled way.” “I remember [her assailant] saying: ‘I will lose my job if anyone hears about that, and you wouldn’t want that, would you?’” The revelation came during a joint address to the press club by Tame and former Liberal party staffer Brittany Higgins. The social services minister, Anne Ruston, later told Sky News an investigation was under way into Tame’s claim. A spokesperson for the prime minister said the first time Morrison became aware of the claim was at the press club. They added: “The prime minister has not and would not authorise such actions, and at all times has sought to treat Ms Tame with dignity and respect.” The spokesperson said while Tame had declined to identify the person “the individual should apologise”. They characterised the intervention as “unacceptable”. Tame later said on Twitter: “Scott conducting an investigation into who made the phone call is THE VERY SAME embedded structural silencing culture that drove the call in the first place and misses the point entirely.” The National Australia Day Council, which coordinates the awards, later said it had contacted Tame for further information. It canvassed personnel who spoke with Tame over the past year “none of whom had interactions ... that would be considered ‘threatening’ as the 17 August conversation has been described,” the council said in a statement. In her speech, Tame said her objectives as a public survivors’ advocate were clear. She said she wanted “an end to the darkness, an end to sexual violence” and “a better future for all of us” which would be driven by “unity and truth”. She said some members of the media sought to project conflict on to her advocacy, in the process ignoring a record of “frank, productive meetings with politicians on all sides at both the state and federal level”. Tame said she had entered the public arena “because I made a conscious decision to stand up to evil, and I have been calling out injustice ever since”. “To retreat into silence now would be hypocritical.” She said she was prepared to put her reputation on the line, because “when we act with integrity, the tide rises with us”. “I would rather go down as a disappointment to an institution than sell out as a pandering political puppet to the corrupt forces that coercively control it,” Tame said. “If you don’t take a strong stance to condemn abuse, you enable it.” Wednesday’s press club event followed a statement of acknowledgment in the parliament on Tuesday. Morrison, along with other political leaders, apologised for the “terrible things” that happened in parliamentary workplaces and acknowledged a culture of bullying, abuse, harassment “and in some cases even violence” had built up over decades. The statement was the first recommendation of a landmark review by Australia’s sex discrimination commissioner, Kate Jenkins, into federal parliament’s culture. The review, which recommended a significant overhaul of regulations and practices, found one in three staffers interviewed had been sexually harassed. The Jenkins inquiry was established after Higgins alleged she was raped by a colleague after hours in a ministerial office in March 2019. Higgins said on Wednesday she chose to speak out “because the alternative was to be part of the culture of silence inside Parliament House”. She said she wanted the next generation of staffers to work in a better place. Addressing some of the moments where Morrison faced significant criticism for his handling of the allegation, Higgins said she didn’t want the prime minister’s sympathy as a father. “I wanted him to use his power as prime minister.” Morrison did not attend Wednesday’s press club event. The Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, was in attendance. Later, in question time, Labor targeted the government over its response to Kate Jenkins’s Respect at Work report and its commitment to the national plan to end violence against women and children. Albanese called for Morrison to adopt “firm targets” in its plan to end family violence. In response, Morrison said that the government was committed to targets that were “set out collectively and agreed together” and pointed to $2bn in funding towards women’s safety committed since 2013. “So we will be working continually through that cooperative … multipartisan process, and supporting that national plan in a way that no previous government has,” Morrison said. “And we will continue those investments because they are getting those results.” The Labor MP for the seat of Lilley, Anika Wells, asked Morrison why the government had not adopted a recommendation from the Jenkins review for a positive duty on employers to prevent sexual harassment in the workplace. After Morrison said that the government had implemented 42 of the 55 recommendations made in the Jenkins review, Labor again challenged the government on its decision not to accept that key recommendation. The communications minister, Paul Fletcher, said that “no recommendations have been rejected” and work was under way on the recommendations that had not yet been implemented, including on the positive duty requirement. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Questions relating to the Gaetjens review, which was tasked with examining the government’s response internally to Higgins’s rape allegation, were met with a warning from the new Speaker, Andrew Wallace, about the potential for parliament to prejudice a criminal trial. “It’s natural that members might take a special interest in a criminal matter that relates to the parliament or the parliamentary precincts, nevertheless, such an aspect does not relieve us of our responsibilities,” the Speaker said. “I would therefore remind all members to exercise the rights they have as members responsibly, in order not to risk prejudicing any court proceedings.” Additional reporting by Australian Associated PressThe Conservatives’ birthday gift to the BBC, which is 100 this year, turns out to be culture secretary Nadine Dorries’s promise to abolish the licence fee, the funding mechanism that has allowed it to flourish as an independent institution beloved, trusted and envied across the world. Reading David Hendy’s The BBC: A People’s History in light of this latest attack on the corporation is a sobering experience. The author himself clearly feels the clouds gathering, and at times cannot banish an elegiac tone from his prose. Hendy’s stated aim is a kind of history from below: a counterpoint to Asa Briggs’s magisterial five-volume account of British broadcasting history to 1974, which occasionally gave the impression that the story of radio and TV consisted largely in calm, besuited bigwigs gliding through boardrooms and Whitehall, setting policies and initiating parliamentary committees. Hendy, rather, wants to give a place to the people who actually did the work: what historian Raphael Samuel called “radio’s penny-a-liners, the freelance playwrights and scriptwriters, scraping a living in the republic of letters, the foreign correspondents, the old soaks at Bush House, gathered from the four corners of the world”. At times, Hendy succeeds magnificently. The picture he draws of the BBC during the second world war, for example, is full of the atmospheres that make Penelope Fitzgerald’s Human Voices, her novel of the blitz-struck Broadcasting House, so compelling. He brings the reader an unforgettable vignette, for example, concerning one Mary Lewis of the “duplicating section” – an all-female department in charge of typing and Roneoing all manner of paperwork. As it happens, Lewis spent 38 years at the BBC, finishing up in a senior position as head of pay policy. Here she is, though, as a young woman, on fire-watching duty with her pals, passing the time by doing a bit of stapling. It’s about 10pm, but the phone rings. A senior colleague asks if anyone’s free to do some work. She tells him the department’s closed, but if he wants, she can probably oblige. Understanding that the job is confidential, she extracts herself with difficulty from her friends, and is handed a document to type and run off. It turns out to be “the actual instructions for D-Day”. The landings will take place the very next morning. She is rewarded for her work with two eggs. And there must be a BBC drama – in tone somewhere between Operation Mincemeat, The Hour and W1A – in the extraordinary story of the coded messages that were slipped into wartime foreign-language services. If some kind of communication had to be got through to occupied Poland, for example, an officer from the Polish army-in-exile would turn up at the BBC just before the news, using the name “Peter Peterkin” and brandishing a record to be played on that’s night bulletin. It was not an infallible system. Once, the producer simply forgot to play the record. On another occasion, a BBC worker unfamiliar with the importance of the system lectured the Polish officer on the frivolity of playing music when there was so much news to report. Sometimes, programme assistants would decide the track specified was too scratchy to be played, and choose another. Thus “the wrong bridge would get blown up in Poland”, as one BBC employee recalled. There are some sobering sections on the BBC’s early attempts to include Black and Asian perspectives, including the melancholy tale of the Black poet and literary publisher Una Marson, who became a BBC producer in the 1930s. She clearly withstood terrible racism. (“Quite frankly I wouldn’t let anybody speak to me in the way Una does, and certainly not a coloured woman,” one colleague complained.) Eventually, suffering from what were described as “delusions” of persecution, Marson was diagnosed with schizophrenia and the BBC paid for her passage back to Jamaica. Hendy does not hesitate to meditate, either, on what now seems like an unthinkably cloth-eared, not to say cruel, position on The Black and White Minstrel Show, which, with its blacked-up performers, ran for two decades until 1978 – a fact that seems incredible until one considers just how racist a country Britain was, and how counterintuitive it would have seemed to the BBC to cancel what was a hugely popular programme, despite the petition against it organised by the Campaign Against Racial Discrimination. “Coloured people”, wrote the director general’s chief assistant, should “for Heaven’s sake shut up”. He was replying to a 1967 letter from the BBC’s chief accountant Barrie Thorne, one of the very few internal voices who showed strong opposition to what he described as an “underlyingly offensive” show. Hendy’s bottom-up approach stutters slightly when he tackles the postwar era. It is as if the BBC becomes so big, so inchoate, and so various in its competing cultures and multifarious activities that he seems slightly to lose sight of Samuel’s “penny-a-liners”. The brief time we spend with foreign correspondent Allan Little in the first Iraq war, for example, or Bridget Kendall in Moscow in 1991, is tantalising rather than especially revealing. He is so eager to show us the depth of the opposition to the corporation under Margaret Thatcher, and to run us through the scandals that have beset the BBC in recent years, that the granular texture of the earlier part of the book is somewhat smoothed out. Nevertheless, these sections do much to demonstrate the strength of the forces ranged against the BBC – and to show what an incredibly fragile position this much loved, much criticised organisation occupies in Britain’s divided polity. Charlotte Higgins’s This New Noise: The Extraordinary Birth and Troubled Life of the BBC is published by Faber. The BBC by David Hendy is published by Profile (£25). To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Amazon’s Prime Video streaming service has struck a record-breaking deal to lease space at Shepperton Studios in the company’s first long-term commitment to making TV programmes and films in the UK. The company’s multimillion-pound deal with Shepperton, home to productions ranging from Alien to Mary Poppins Returns, will see it join its rival Netflix in having an exclusive contract at the Surrey studio as the streaming wars continue to fuel a race for space to ensure that productions can be filmed without delays. While details of the deal have not been disclosed, it is understood that Amazon’s lease is for well over 10 years – longer than similar deals struck by Netflix and Disney, which has secured space at Pinewood Studios, the parent of Shepperton – which makes it the biggest vote of confidence to date in the UK’s booming £6bn TV and film production industry. “Shepperton has long been synonymous with top-tier television and movies and we’re proud that it will be home to many [Amazon] Prime Video productions in the years to come,” said Jennifer Salke, the head of Amazon Studios, which started filming productions in the UK in 2016 with The Grand Tour, from the ex-Top Gear hosts Jeremy Clarkson, James May and Richard Hammond. Amazon said that the next two years were expected be its busiest yet for UK-made productions, with Shepperton due to come online in 2023 when an expansion of the site is complete. The company would not say whether Shepperton would play a major role in the shooting of the eagerly anticipated Lord of the Rings adaptation, after the surprise decision to shift filming of the second series from New Zealand to the UK. While Bray Film Studios and Bovingdon Airfield have been chosen as initial production facilities when filming begins this spring – between them, the locations have been used by productions including Fast &amp; Furious 6, Justice League, Rocketman and Mamma Mia! – regions of the UK including Scotland are hoping to benefit from the big-budget series seeking to ape the New Zealand settings of the Peter Jackson trilogy. For Pinewood, which has spent more than £1bn expanding its studio capacity since 2014, its bet on the streaming-fuelled demand for shooting facilities is paying off. “It is superb for us,” said Paul Golding, chairman of Pinewood Group. “There are essentially five studios out there today with the guarantee, clear visibility and capacity of their production slate to enter into long-term contracts, and we now have deals with three of them.” The other two – the Batman-maker Warner Bros and Universal, home to the Fast &amp; Furious franchise – have their own facilities at Leavesden near Watford and the soon-to-open Sky Studios Elstree in north London. Pinewood and Shepperton will have grown from 29 sound stages across 100 hectares (250 acres) to 63 across 202 hectares (500 acres) when the latest investment programme is complete. “That is not the end of it,” said Golding, who said Pinewood had consent for a further 65 hectares (160 acres) to be developed. “It is a ringing endorsement of not just Pinewood, but also the UK film and TV industry.”SpaceX will lose up to 40 of the 49 Starlink satellites it launched last week as the result of a geomagnetic storm, the company has announced. Elon Musk’s firm launched the satellites into low-Earth orbit on 3 February from the Kennedy Space Center in Florida, but 80% of them are now expected to burn up instead of reaching their intended orbit. “Unfortunately, the satellites deployed on Thursday were significantly impacted by a geomagnetic storm on Friday,” SpaceX said in a statement. “These storms cause the atmosphere to warm and atmospheric density at our low deployment altitudes to increase.” The speed and severity of the storm resulted in an “atmospheric drag” that was up to 50% higher than during previous launches, it said. Geomagnetic storms are the result of interactions between solar wind – a stream of charged particles from the sun – and Earth’s magnetic field. Though the satellites were commanded to “take cover from the storm” by flying “edge-on (like a sheet of paper)”, they failed to carry out the manoeuvres required to reach their required orbit. “Up to 40 of the satellites will re-enter or already have re-entered the Earth’s atmosphere,” the firm said. “The deorbiting satellites pose zero collision risk with other satellites.” The Starlink satellites are designed to disintegrate upon re-entering Earth’s atmosphere, the company said, “meaning no orbital debris is created and no satellite parts hit the ground”. SpaceX has already launched 2,000 Starlink satellites and has permission from US authorities to send up 12,000 in total. The network has drawn growing concern from astronomers, who fear a “megaconstellation” of tens of thousands of satellites could blight the night sky and also hamper scientists’ ability to study the distant universe. Josef Aschbacher, head of the European Space Agency, said in December Musk was “making the rules” in space, and called for coordinated action from the European Union to ensure that SpaceX’s satellite internet constellation did not prevent other countries from launching their own satellites. In the same month, China accused the US of ignoring international treaty obligations after two “close encounters” in which the Chinese space station was forced to manoeuvre to avoid collisions with Starlink satellites.A police officer who was threatened with an axe by Kumanjayi Walker told the Warlpiri man’s family that if he did the same thing to another officer “he might get shot”, a court has heard. The court has also heard that three days later, Walker used a pair of surgical scissors to stab constable Zachary Rolfe, who shot him dead. Rolfe is on trial in the Northern Territory supreme court for the alleged murder of Walker. He has pleaded not guilty to that charge and two alternate charges, and is arguing his actions were reasonable and justifiable in the context of the danger faced by him and a colleague. On Wednesday, the court heard from two police officers who had attempted to arrest Walker at the remote community of Yuendumu on 6 November 2019, several days before Walker’s death during the attempted arrest involving Rolfe. Walker, 19, was wanted by police for removing an electronic monitoring device and escaping a residential alcohol treatment facility the previous month. Senior constable first class Christopher Hand gave evidence that he and his colleague, Senior Constable Lanyon Smith, had not expected Walker to be armed when they attended a property known as House 577. Walker’s partner Rickisha Robertson lived at the house with her family and Walker often stayed there, Hand said. After the officers found Walker in a bedroom and told him he would be arrested, he charged at them with a small axe or tomahawk, before dropping it on the front porch and fleeing, the court heard. Hand agreed that after chasing Walker through a section of scrubland known as the men’s area, where Warlpiri men performed ceremonies, he returned to the house and spoke to Lottie Robertson, Rickisha’s grandmother. He agreed with defence counsel David Edwardson QC that in a conversation with Robertson about what Walker had just done he told her: “next time he does that, he might get shot”. But Hand told the court that immediately after that he said “in Alice Springs. Like, community policeman are different to town policeman”, which was meant as a reference to how police in remote Indigenous communities operated. “It’s a different way of policing on Indigenous communities,” Hand said on Wednesday. “We always like to be as non-violent as we can with arrests, because we have to live in those areas, in those communities, and we’re trying to build partnerships. “Obviously if force needs to be used, we use it.” Hand agreed with a suggestion by Edwardson that he considered the arrest to be relatively stock standard. He told the court he knew Walker had a criminal history, but did not consider him to be dangerous, and did not check Walker’s file on the NT police case management system, nor formulate an arrest plan. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Hand, who has been a police officer for more than 25 years and worked extensively in remote communities, said neither he or Smith shouted any verbal commands to Walker. He said that training also included the phrase “edged weapon equals gun”, but there were a range of other factors that had to be considered before an officer drew their weapon, such as whether they were prepared to fire it, and the distance from the offender. Hand agreed with a question put by Edwardson that he froze during the incident, that he was not proud of freezing, and that his first thought was, “shit, I’ve got to get out of here”. Smith, the other officer present during the incident said in his evidence on Wednesday that he had worked for two years before the incident in Yuendumu, and believed he had a good working relationship with most of the 600-800 people who lived there. He did not consider drawing his weapon during the incident because of a combination of factors, including that he and Walker knew each other and he had dealt with him before, and the presence of other people in the house. But he agreed with Edwardson that immediately after the incident, when he and Hand were walking back towards the house after abandoning the chase for Walker, he told his partner he was stuck in the corner during the attack and “I just begged for mercy basically”. Despite this, he said he never thought he would be harmed, partly because in his experience it was common for Warlpiri men to use a show of force as a demonstration to their families that they would protect them. “Everything was processing extremely fast in a short period. I had adrenaline going through me, but I didn’t feel that he was going to hurt me. “It was more of an intimidation to get out of the room … Kumanjayi, being a Warlpiri man, it was more of a show to his partner, who was in the room, and his family. But he just wanted to get away.” Prosecutors told the court in opening submissions that Rofle became aware of the axe incident on 7 November 2019, and was logged on the NT police case management system as having accessed footage of it at least 15 times before his deployment to Yuendumu on 9 November 2019. About 7.20pm that day, Rolfe shot Walker three times after attempting to arrest him at Walker’s grandmother’s house in Yuendumu, the court has heard. Walker had been asked to put his hands behind his back by Rolfe. But instead Walker pulled a pair of medical scissors from his pocket and brought them down in a stabbing motion into Rolfe’s left shoulder. Rolfe’s colleague, Constable Adam Eberl, struggled with Walker, who was shot soon after by Rolfe, the court heard. The first shot is not subject to any charges. Prosecutor Philip Strickland SC told the Northern Territory supreme court on Tuesday that as Eberl and Walker struggled on a mattress on the floor, Eberl gained control of Walker. Strickland said Erbel was on top of Walker, whose right arm, which had been holding the scissors, was pinned under him. Edwardson said the defence disputes Erbel had control of Walker at the time. Rolfe walked across the room, placed his left hand on Eberl’s back, and pressed his right hand, holding his Glock semi-automatic handgun, against the left side of Walker’s body, Strickland said. Rolfe then pulled the trigger twice in quick succession, in what Strickland said on Monday was known as a “double-tap” designed to ensure maximum damage. It is the second and third shots that are subject to the murder charge. Edwardson said Rolfe would defend his actions as being reasonable and justifiable in the context of the danger faced by him and Erbel. Edwardson said Rolfe was acting in self-defence, and to defend the life of Erbel, when he fired the second and third shots, and his training emphasised that “edged weapon equals gun”. The trial before Justice John Burns continues.“What is the latest that two goals have been scored in a game for a team to come from behind to win?” Andrew Brinkhurst tweeted after Tottenham turned a 95th-minute 2-1 deficit around at Leicester. “Apart from a game with a huge amount of injury time, there can’t be many later?” “I have a great example from 2002,” writes Alan Gibbs. “At that time I was studying in Nottingham, and so rarely got to see my team, Bristol City, but in November they played at Mansfield, a short trip up the A60. It was 1-1 at half time and then Christian Roberts put City ahead 2-1 before the game lurched in Mansfield’s favour. They soon equalised and then, following the award of a penalty, there was a multi-player fracas which resulted in the sending off of a Mansfield defender. The penalty was saved, but the rebound scored, and they scored again soon after. “It remained 4-2 until the 87th minute, by which time a good number of City fans had already left – but then we got a penalty. Brian Tinnion scored it, but the score remained 4-3 until the 95th minute, when Leroy Lita flicked in to make it 4-4. We were still celebrating when, now in the 96th minute, Roberts smashed in the winner from just outside the penalty box. I told myself after the match that I’d probably never see a more exciting game, and I haven’t in the nearly 20 years since.” Also of note is the dramatic contest between Pohang Steelers and Gangwon FC in Korea’s K-League back in 2019. Pohang were 4-0 up after 70 minutes and still 4-2 up going into the 92nd, at which point Gangwon made it 4-3. The equaliser came in the 94th with the winner in the 96th. The latest comeback we can find, however, doesn’t pass the final clarifier of the question and remains somewhat shrouded in mystery. Here’s Sebastian Hughes, writing to the Knowledge in 2011 … Who were ‘The South Coast Team’? “I was unpacking some deliveries at our shop which arrived in an old copy of the Sun sport pages from about 2010,” begins Warwick Bassett. “In the results, there was a team by the name of ‘The South Coast Team’. Does anyone have any idea who they are or were?” It transpires the mystery team was none other than Southampton. Aaron Grierson takes up the tale. “In 2010, Southampton, then in League One, barred all photographers from newspapers and news agencies from their home games. They instead licensed exclusive rights to a photographer, who would give syndication rights to the Digital South agency. This led to fears that Digital South would avoid taking or publishing images that were negative for Southampton – for instance, a Saints player getting sent off. “The Sun began referring to the club only as ‘The South Coast Team’ (or ‘Opposition’) in response to the move. The Bournemouth Echo used photos from the 80s to supplement their match reports. Others used cartoons to represent the action, while the Swindon Advertiser used Subbuteo reconstructions. By September 2010 Southampton mostly reneged on their ban and allowed a few more photographers inside, although oddly they still seemed to have a vendetta against the Daily Echo, who were still barred from games as late as November.” Thanks also to Steve Williams for providing more info on the Sun’s stance, and a report from, er, the Guardian. Most Os in a game “When Morocco played against Comoros, it occurred to me that this might be the highest ever number of Os in a first-class fixture (six, three each),” suggests Daniel Marcus. “Can anyone come up with more?” Let’s begin with another example from the Africa Cup of Nations, courtesy of Richard Booth. “Afcon also supplies an answer: in 2017, the Democratic Republic of Congo beat Morocco 1-0 (a total of seven Os between them).” Rob Hamilton offers up a six-O fixture from League One – Fleetwood Town v Northampton Town in League One last January. “Appropriately enough, it finished 0-0.” Philip Platts can go one better with a historical name. “Bournemouth and Boscombe Athletic played Brighton and Hove Albion and Northampton Town in the 1923-24 Third Division South.” That’s seven Os in both fixtures, but here comes Rob again … “Wootton Bassett Town renamed themselves Royal Wootton Bassett Town in July 2015, to give them five Os in their name. In the level-nine Hellenic Premier Division they played Wokingham &amp; Emmbrook for an eight-O match. They had another in the FA Vase in 2020-21, against Stonehouse Town in the second qualifying round.” But wait, Philip Platts isn’t finished. “Collingwood Warriors played one season in Australia’s top tier, the now-defunct NSL, in 1996-97 – where they played Wollongong Warriors.” So that’s a top-flight eight-O fixture to go with one in the English ninth tier. Woo hoo! Knowledge archive “What is the coldest recorded temperature that a football match has been played in?” wondered Stephen Robbins in 2010. We couldn’t find a definitive answer for this one but earlier that month Rosenborg – who play in Trondheim, Norway – hosted Bayer Leverkusen in a Europa League tie. The temperature had plunged below -14C by the time the match had kicked off. We’ll forgive players for wearing mittens on string for that one. Meanwhile former Morton striker Marko Rajamaki criticised the SFA for the rash of postponements during a cold snap in Scotland and said: “There’s a league club, RoPs, in Lapland, where it gets down to -30C. But they have access to a full-sized indoor training pitch so they can still work.” Finally, Football’s Strangest Matches by Andrew Ward provided this chilly anecdote: In December 1891 Blackburn travelled to Burnley to take on the Clarets in freezing temperatures and heavy snow. They might have wished they hadn’t bothered – Rovers were 3-0 down inside 25 minutes. Half-time couldn’t come quickly enough, but after the break the visiting team failed to appear on the field. Blackburn eventually re-emerged, a few fisticuffs followed and soon after all the Blackburn players bar goalkeeper Herby Arthur left the field. Burnley attacked, were, unsurprisingly caught offside and after a lengthy spell of time wasting by Arthur, referee JC Clegg abandoned the game. Rovers late apologised, saying their players had been numb with cold and couldn’t continue. 2022 update! A new contender for the title of “football’s coldest match” came this month when the US welcomed Honduras to Minnesota and -16C temperatures. “It was freezing,” said Christian Pulisic afterwards, not unreasonably. Can you help? “The other day, the Wordle answer was MOUNT, which got me thinking – is Mason Mount the only footballer (present or former) whose first and second name are recognised five-letter words in the dictionary and therefore legitimate potential answers in Wordle?” asks Joe Hutton. “What are the highest-profile examples of players who have failed a medical and then gone on to have long and successful careers?” poses Crispin Leyser. “Now that some leagues allow five substitutes in a match, has a sub ever come as a sub for a sub for a sub … for a sub?” wonders Terence Fitzgerald. • Mail us your questions or tweet @TheKnowledge_GU.When I was diagnosed with HIV just over 25 years ago, I was given eight years to live. HIV was tearing the gay community apart and my diagnosis was almost a relief after a decade trapped in a cycle of sex, shame, fear and regret. The situation seemed hopeless for me and for my friends. Miraculously, treatments that worked were finally found the very year of my diagnosis, meaning I’ve lived to do so many things I never thought I would. I’ve turned 40 and 50, and will turn 60 and 70. That medical breakthrough in 1996 meant an HIV diagnosis was no longer a terminal one, but rates among gay men remained disproportionately high and stigma rife. Until, that is, we had the tools necessary (thanks to medical breakthroughs) to effectively prevent HIV transmission and set about ensuring they were used by those most at risk. And that impact is being felt and changing lives. Now, 49% of new diagnoses in England are among straight people (with an almost even split between men and women), compared with 45% for gay and bisexual men. This is the first time in a decade that new diagnoses among heterosexuals are higher – marking a clear change in the shape of the domestic HIV epidemic. A change that must influence our response – and quickly – to ensure the government makes good on its commitment to ending new HIV cases by 2030. Because continuing to solely target those traditionally most at risk won’t work. Thankfully, this isn’t about a huge spike in HIV diagnoses among heterosexuals. Instead, it’s primarily the result of a sharp, sustained drop in diagnoses among gay and bisexual men with a 71% fall since 2014. This shows what is possible. And, as someone who has received that life-changing HIV diagnosis, I understand the immense value of every transmission halted. It’s worth noting that this shift is a true change in the epidemic rather than one manufactured such as that of Covid-19 lockdowns and resulting drops in testing. There was a 7% fall in HIV testing by gay men in sexual health clinics in England in 2020, but HIV testing rates in heterosexuals dropped by a third. This makes the news of a higher number of HIV diagnoses in heterosexuals than gay men even more significant. The turnaround in fortunes coincides with three big changes for HIV in the UK in the past decade. First, we are increasingly getting better at HIV testing and offering free kits that can be ordered online and done at home. We used to wait weeks for test results – now it can be as little as 15 minutes. Second, the HIV prevention pill PrEP (pre-exposure prophylaxis) is highly effective at protecting against HIV. It is widely used by gay men but far less so by other groups. Finally, we now treat people living with HIV as close to their diagnosis as possible. Early diagnosis and access to effective treatment means the virus is quickly suppressed to “undetectable” levels, meaning zero risk of passing the virus to sexual partners. For example, I have 100% confidence that I can’t pass on HIV to my husband, and he does too. The targeted work focusing on at-risk groups – including gay men, as well as those of black African heritage and some in the trans community – is working. But the figures show that this must be continued and expanded. The figures on late diagnoses are particularly sobering: 51% of women, 55% of heterosexual men and 66% of those aged 65 and over were diagnosed at a late stage, which is after damage to the immune system has begun. This compares with just 29% among gay and bisexual men. We need to test more people more often and in more places – regardless of gender, sexuality, ethnicity or anything else. Currently, hundreds of thousands of people are leaving sexual health clinics without testing for HIV. That needs to stop. On World Aids Day, the government announced £20m of new funding to bring in opt-out HIV testing in emergency departments in areas with the highest prevalence of HIV. At King’s College hospital in London, they’ve made 116 new diagnoses via opt-out HIV testing in the emergency department over the past five years. Those diagnosed this way were more likely to be women, heterosexual and of black ethnicity, compared with people diagnosed in the hospital’s sexual health department. A key reason this approach is so effective is that many people at risk of HIV will never go to a sexual health service, which is why we need to offer testing in “non-traditional” settings. Plus, offering an HIV test to everyone normalises it and reduces the stigma: you’re not being singled out because of your sexuality or ethnicity. Free postal HIV tests should also be available across the country all year round – and not just for National HIV Testing Week, which began on Monday. Alongside testing, the PrEP prevention pill must quickly be made available outside sexual health clinics, including pharmacies and GP surgeries, to benefit more people. To contextualise the size of the challenge, just 4% of those on NHS England’s PrEP trial didn’t identify as a gay or bisexual man. We also need to ensure that all healthcare professionals have a solid baseline knowledge of HIV, which I know from personal experience is all too often not the case. For example, if someone is presenting with symptoms of a compromised immune system (such as thrush or cold sores), we need GPs to recommend an HIV test for a white heterosexual grandmother just as they might for a gay man. HIV is a unique health challenge and remains one of the most stigmatised health conditions. I was in my mid-20s at the height of the Aids crisis and saw the darkest of days first-hand. I attended the funerals of friends in their 30s, and witnessed the vilification of my community in the media. Now the HIV epidemic in the UK is, overall, a good news story. We have highly effective ways of preventing, testing for and treating it. Someone diagnosed today should have a normal lifespan thanks to effective treatment, which will also prevent HIV being passed on. But public perceptions haven’t shifted in line with medical progress. And this is a huge problem – not just because it affects the lives of those of us living with HIV who have to endure the stigma, but because it makes so many too scared to test. Put simply: we won’t end new HIV cases without also ending the stigma. And not ending new HIV cases when we have the tools available is completely unacceptable. Ian Green is chief executive of the Terrence Higgins TrustIf there is a story that encapsulates Albert Adomah’s affection for Queens Park Rangers, then the time he was spotted in KFC wearing a home shirt freshly bought from the club shop while on the books of Middlesbrough takes some beating. It caused a slight stir but the reality was rather more innocent. He occasionally drove into training at Boro in QPR colours and once, after playing in a game between the teams, the winger seized a golden opportunity to add to his prized collection of shirts. “I waited in the tunnel and got about seven or eight tops,” Adomah says, smiling. “Even when I was at Aston Villa, living in Birmingham, sometimes I would go out on the street in my QPR shirt. I’m supporting my team. I’m just a normal supporter supporting the team that I love. Why not?” It is the kind of authentic outlook that has cemented Adomah’s reputation as one of the game’s warmest personalities. His infectious nature was evident after QPR’s last game, a 4-0 victory over Reading that extended their unbeaten league run to six matches, when he jived on the pitch in front of fans with Jude the Cat, the club mascot. “I just thought: ‘Let me do a little dance with him and put a smile on his face,’ because he is always putting smiles on children’s faces. When I was younger I used to see him doing what he was doing, throwing shapes and messing to keep the young ones entertained. I thought I would do a little cameo with him. He actually made me famous …” Adomah breaks into laughter. An endearing, down-to-earth character who has not forgotten his roots as a semi-professional at Harrow Borough, for whom he played while doing an NVQ in painting and decorating, he smiles as he explains the Only Fools and Horses-inspired “Uncle Albert” nickname that has stuck since he signed for Bristol City from Barnet. In the sitcom, the high-rise flats behind Ashton Gate doubled up as Nelson Mandela House. “Another reason is Albert is an old name and people used to call me ‘Uncle Uncs’ because of the way I used to behave for my age. I’d never get into any silliness or any banter. I would keep myself to myself. Very professional, let’s put it that way.” QPR could leapfrog second-placed Blackburn with victory over Boro on Wednesday. Last month Adomah made a record 456th Championship appearance, more than any player since the second tier was rebranded in 2004. His journey has taken him from amateur football in Chiswick with Old Meadonians to the World Cup with Ghana in 2014, and he is determined to build on his two top-flight appearances, for Boro in 2016-17. The 34-year-old has a pair of white boots, worn against Swansea last month, decorated with a hand-painted portrait of his children, Faith, Noah and Samuel, wearing QPR kits. “I think I’ll probably get another pair made if we end up in the play-offs. If not, then hopefully in the Premier League.” Another burst of laughter. Adomah moved to west London in his early teens and, despite growing up following Manchester United, would organise tournaments with friends and play on a pitch in the shadow of Loftus Road. “That is when I thought: ‘I need to support a local side.’ As youngsters, we all dreamt of playing for our local professional club. I wasn’t playing for an academy team. You think: ‘It would be nice to play for QPR.’ Fulham, Brentford and Chelsea were nearby but QPR was the closest and most of my friends supported QPR.” One of those friends was Dean McKee, who died aged 28 in April 2020 after contracting coronavirus. McKee, an avid QPR supporter and wordsmith whose poem “Born Blue and White” has been played before home matches for the past three years, grew up with Adomah less than a mile from QPR’s ground. Adomah dedicated his first goal for the club – a 90th-minute winner at Watford last February – to McKee and unveiled an undershirt bearing the words “RIP Dean McKee”. “Every game I think I put pressure on myself to score because I really wanted to score a goal just for him. He was the only person I was thinking about every time I went on the pitch. When I scored that goal against Watford, it was like ‘yes’, I just knew it was for Dean. When I heard the news I was in shock, in disbelief. It was heartbreaking.” Adomah remembers ribbing McKee for supporting QPR as a boy – “I can recall myself saying: ‘Why don’t you support a team that wins trophies?’” – but soon joined him after another friend who worked as a steward at Loftus Road delivered on his promise to get him a QPR shirt. It was signed by Kevin Gallen and Paul Furlong, now the Under-23s manager at QPR, who Adomah would later play alongside at Barnet. “One of my heroes,” he says. “He came in on loan when he was 40. I don’t even think I told him I was a QPR fan … I’ve still got that shirt in my collection.” Adomah, out of contract in the summer, is living his boyhood dream. “I say to people: ‘I came, I saw, I’m playing … and I’m still supporting,’” he says, smiling. “I even joked with [QPR’s director of football] Les [Ferdinand] saying: ‘If you guys give me a lifetime contract I’ll sign it straight away.’ He just laughed and said: ‘Are you coming for my job next then?’ If it is meant to be, then it is meant to be.”A billionaire donor to the Conservative party has suggested that Boris Johnson should resign, saying that the prime minister was “past the point of no return”. John Armitage, co-founder of the hedge fund firm Egerton Capital, who has given £3.1m to the Conservatives, including more than £500,000 since Boris Johnson entered No 10, told the BBC he thought leaders should leave if they lose their moral authority. He added: “I find the lack of honour inherent in modern politics incredibly distressing.” Armitage said he had told the Conservatives he would not be giving the party any more financial support as things stood. The financier has also given much smaller amounts of money to Labour, made individual donations to the former Labour MP Frank Field, and contributed to the remain campaign in 2016. A Conservative spokesperson told the BBC the government remained “fully focused on delivering for the British people”. Armitage’s intervention comes after a torrid period for Johnson with an investigation by the senior civil servant, Sue Gray, into parties held at Downing Street and Whitehall during Covid lockdowns finding “serious failures of leadership”. A police investigation is looking at the most serious allegations within the “partygate” scandal and in the meantime Johnson has endured a series of resignations from senior officials, some of which he has sought to replace. Armitage told the BBC global challenges to the west required ‘‘very serious, engaged politicians with a sense of purpose”. “Politicians should go into politics to do good for their country,” he added. “That is the overwhelming reason to be in politics. I don’t think it’s about your own personal sense of getting to the top of a snakes-and-ladders game.” Asked by the BBC’s political editor, Laura Kuenssberg, if Johnson was “past the point of no return”, he replied: “Well, personally yes.” On Wednesday, the health minister, Ed Argar, indicated Johnson would not apologise to Starmer for his remarks about Jimmy Savile, despite the Labour leader being harassed by a mob of conspiracy theorists near parliament on Monday, some of whom yelled “paedophile protector” at him. Asked if the Johnson would say sorry for the jibe, Argar told Sky News: “The prime minister … has been very clear – he’s clarified what he was talking about. “I know colleagues of mine have been on (and) had this conversation with you in recent days. He’s clarified that he was talking about Sir Keir in the context of his leadership role at the CPS. Just as, quite rightly, Sir Keir holds him to account for his leadership role over the government. “That doesn’t mean personal responsibility for individual decisions, but that’s the context, and the prime minister has clarified that. And I’ll be honest with you, I suspect that’s what you will hear from the prime minister later.”Anthony Albanese has warned if the religious discrimination bill is not fixed it will “drive us apart”, signalling Labor will insist on amendments to prevent religious vilification, discriminatory statements and protect LGBTQ+ students. Debate on the bill resumed on Wednesday evening after Labor caucus agreed not to oppose it in the House of Representatives, although the opposition will seek amendments in both houses, setting up a possible standoff with the government. After Scott Morrison urged the Coalition to vote together on the bill, Liberal MP Warren Entsch revealed on Wednesday he would not oppose it, claiming parliament needed to “bank the successes” of improvements to the bill despite his remaining concerns. The House will sit late on Wednesday to deal with the bill. The government still faces substantial opposition to the bill, with Liberal Bridget Archer, independent Helen Haines and Centre Alliance’s Rebekha Sharkie indicating they do not support it in its current form. Liberal MP Trent Zimmerman confirmed that he would vote against the government in favour of amendments on the statements of belief clause and to give broader protections for LGBTQ+ youth. Labor and several of the government’s own members have been galvanised by the Morrison government revealing it will protect gay students from expulsion – but not other forms of discrimination – without protecting trans students at the same time. Zimmerman said the parliament could not send a message by “omission” by moving to fix sexuality discrimination but not gender identity discrimination. “I could not live with myself if I didn’t seek to address those issues.” Labor is confident it can make changes in the Senate to protect LGBTQ+ students and neuter the controversial statement of belief clause, which protects religious statements even if they offend, insult or humiliate others on the basis of protected attributes. Labor will also attempt to ban vilification on the grounds of religion. The opposition has resolved to “insist” on any successful amendments until Liberal MPs help pass them in the lower house or Scott Morrison withdraws the bill. But Albanese indicated in caucus a further meeting could reconsider in the event of an impasse – leaving a pathway to pass the bill before the 2022 election. In parliament, Albanese described the bill as “flawed”, warning that although he supports prohibiting discrimination on the grounds of religion “I don’t support doing it at the expense of increasing discrimination against others”. Albanese noted that Scott Morrison had given him a commitment to prevent “any form of discrimination against a student on the basis of sexuality or gender identity”, which he said the bill does not do. If Labor’s amendments are passed in the House or Senate “we will insist on them”, Albanese said, and if they are not accepted “this bill is not good enough”. Entsch said he didn’t believe the bill was necessary and still had “concerns with a number of elements”. He said a government amendment to prevent expulsion of gay students “is far too narrow”. But Entsch said despite his first instinct to reject the bill outright, he now wants to “bank the successes” of improvements to the bill, such as the removal of the Folau clause and the conscientious objection clause. Earlier, in caucus, the Labor MP Josh Burns moved to oppose the bill in the lower house if amendments are unsuccessful, supported by a large group of MPs including Louise Pratt, Alicia Payne, Ged Kearney, Peter Khalil, Brian Mitchell, Peta Murphy and Kate Thwaites, but was defeated on the voices. Khalil and Murphy told parliament they did not support the bill in its unamended form, with Murphy describing the Labor amendments as “essential”. In caucus, the shadow cabinet, including Chris Bowen, and MPs Julian Hill and Stephen Jones spoke in favour of passing the bill in the House, expressing concerns that voting the bill down would give Scott Morrison a political wedge to campaign on and that hastening the bill to the Senate could speed up amendments to improve protections. Anne Aly spoke from her experience as Muslim woman about the need for religious discrimination protections to pass. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning In a statement the shadow attorney general, Mark Dreyfus, said Labor “supports the extension of the federal anti-discrimination framework to ensure that Australians are not discriminated against because of their religious beliefs or activities”. Dreyfus said the bill had “some big flaws that Labor will seek to change through amendments in the parliament, and, if we are unsuccessful, in government”. Dreyfus said Labor also supported “removing discrimination against teachers while recognising the right of religious schools to give preference to hiring school staff of their own faith”. No immediate amendments were promised for teachers, as Dreyfus indicated Labor would seek to legislate in government after the Australian Law Reform Commission review. LGBTQ+ lobby, Equality Australia, said the Labor amendments “won’t fix everything”, but amending the statements of belief clause would “would ensure existing protections for LGBTIQ+ people, women and people with disability are not undermined”. The National Catholic Education Commission praised Labor for accepting the right of religious schools to give preference to hiring school staff of their own faith. The government has a narrow window to pass the bill. The Senate sits on Thursday but is occupied by estimates hearings next week, with only a few days in the March budget sitting before a May election. Earlier on Wednesday Sharkie told the lower house she could not support the bill which would “privilege some” while causing “a number of disadvantages to others” including women, people with disabilities, LGTBQ+ people, and those relying on other anti-discrimination laws. Sharkie noted the bill would allow religious institutions to “take secular dollars and create an exclusive club on the grounds of religious belief” by discriminating against staff on the basis of faith. Haines said she could not support the bill which was “not just a shield against discrimination on religious belief – it also creates many swords”. Haines said she was particularly concerned about the statement of belief clause, which she called a “monumental steam-roll of our anti-discrimination laws”. Haines committed to “reassess this bill if it comes to the House in a better form” after Senate amendment, but warned “it will take a lot” to win her support. Haines said the government amendments to the Sex Discrimination Act do not provide enough protection for LGBTQ+ teachers and students, because religious schools would still “proactively” be able to discriminate with the exception of expelling gay students. The Greens have already promised wider changes including immediately banning discrimination against LGBTQ+ school staff and students.China and South Korea have become embroiled in a cultural appropriation row after a woman appeared at the opening ceremony of the Beijing winter Olympics wearing traditional Korean dress. The Chinese embassy in Seoul defended the decision to include a participant wearing hanbok, describing her as a representative of the country’s dozens of ethnic groups. Her appearance sparked anger among many South Koreans, who denounced it as another attempt by China to claim parts of Korean culture – including its national dish, kimchi – as its own. The embassy described the woman as a member of the joseonjok – an ethnic minority with roots in Korea – who took part in the Games’ opening ceremony among more than 50 other representatives of ethnic groups in China. “It is their desire and right for representatives of each ethnic group in China to attend an international sports competition and the major national event of the Beijing Winter Olympics, wearing their traditional costumes,” an embassy spokesperson said in a statement, according to the Yonhap news agency. The spokesperson said China “respected” Korean historical and cultural traditions, and called on South Koreans to “respect the emotions” of China’s ethnic minorities. China is home to about 2 million ethnic Koreans, half of whom live on the Chinese side of the North Korean border. They are a recognised minority group whose language and culture are granted official protection. The embassy’s explanation is unlikely to quell anger in South Korea, where politicians said that the incident could fuel anti-Chinese sentiment. Lee Jae-myung, who is running in March’s presidential election for the ruling Democratic party, wrote on Facebook: “Do not covet (our) culture. Oppose cultural appropriation.” Lee So-young, a Democratic party MP, said: “This is not the first time China has introduced Korean culture as if it were its own. If the anti-China sentiment of the Korean people becomes stronger by leaving this issue as is, it will be a big obstacle when conducting diplomacy with China in the future.” Relations between the two countries soured in 2017 after South Korea approved the deployment of a US missile defence system to deter threats from North Korea. China, however, said the Terminal High Altitude Area Defence (Thaad) deployment would upset the regional security balance as it could be used to penetrate its own territory. China banned groups traveling to South Korea – a popular destination for Chinese tourists – and shuttered dozens of stores operated by the South Korean supermarket chain Lotte Mart over supposed fire safety violations. Lotte Mart exited the Chinese market the following year. Christopher Del Corso, the chargé d’affaires ad interim at the US embassy in Seoul, appeared to side with his host country in the hanbok row. “What comes to mind when you think of Korea? Kimchi, K-pop, K-dramas … and of course Hanbok,” he tweeted on Tuesday, accompanied by the hashtag #OriginalHanbokFromKorea and a photograph of himself wearing the garment. In 2020, the countries’ netizens clashed over the provenance of kimchi, a dish regarded as an essential part of the Korean diet. The exchanges came after a Chinese pickled vegetable dish called pao cai received certification from the International Organisation for Standardisation (ISO). That status, the Chinese state-run Global Times newspaper reported, was an “international standard for the kimchi industry led by China”. The Beijing Games have so far been a frustrating experience for South Koreans, who reacted with fury after two of their short track speed skaters, Hwang Dae-heon and Lee June-seo, were disqualified during their semi-finals in the men’s 1,000m on Monday for rule violations. Their disqualifications meant two Chinese athletes progressed to the final, with the host country winning gold and silver. Park Joo-min, a ruling party MP, said the Olympic organisers should be “ashamed of themselves” for turning the Games into a “local Chinese event”, while his colleague Kim Yong-min said the “biased rulings damaged the spirit of the Olympics as well as our athletes”, according to the Korea Times. The Korean Sport and Olympic Committee said it would file an appeal with the Court of Arbitration for Sport “to formalise the injustice of this decision”. “We plan to do our best to prevent injustice from happening to our athletes in the international ice skating and sporting communities,” it said in a statement.“Baiana, at the service of the Brazilian WNT and Arsenal.” This is Rafaelle Souza’s bio on Instagram. The first word means that she was born in the state of Bahia, in the northeast of Brazil. “I will always be baiana in the first place. Anything else comes after that,” she tells the Guardian. As a proud baiana, she is only too happy to talk about the talent that has come from the state; birthplace to stars such as Bebeto, Dida, Dani Alves, Formiga and Sissi. “I think players from Bahia have a special spice.” The state’s size is equivalent to France. Rafaelle was born 30 years ago in a small town called Cipó, with a population of 17,000. “There was not much to do there, so all I had was to play football with the boys,” she says, recalling the days when she used to run around barefoot until late hours, just for fun. “That is one of the reasons I love football so much. My parents, even with all the prejudice from our neighbours, always supported me and let me play.” Years later, when Rafaelle was 15, she began to play professionally for São Francisco do Conde, a small football team in Salvador, the capital of the state. That was when she first thought football could be her profession. She thrived despite the club having little in the way of resources and the fact that she had to get used to wearing boots for the first time. She compares her life story to other players from the northeast region, such as Marta, born in the neighbouring state Alagoas. “We were never handed things out easily. It was always harder for us,” she says. Brazil is an unequal country, and even now, the women’s game is developing faster than ever in the southeast while still struggling in northern regions. “We have so much talent that we send many players to the women’s national team, but we don’t have as many resources or opportunities to be seen.” Even after 11 years living in other countries, Rafaelle always makes sure to spend holidays with her family in Brazil. Living in Europe, a little closer to home, she has a special baiana with her in London. Rafa’s mother, Graça, is with her in the UK and spends her time visiting landmarks and cooking while her daughter is at work. And it doesn’t matter that Arsenal have the best nutritionists at Rafaelle’s disposal – her mum’s food is always special. “She already made me a moqueca [traditional fish stew from Bahia, cooked with dendê oil and coconut milk]. We are planning to cook a stroganoff. If she could stay here forever, I would love it,” Rafaelle adds. Before moving to England, Rafaelle graduated as a civil engineer at the University of Mississippi, in the United States, and played for six years in China, at Changchun Dazhong. “I always say that my time playing for São Francisco changed my life, because I moved from Cipó to Salvador. Then, when I moved from Salvador to the US, I got my university degree, saw the football culture there, and learned English. It helped me a lot.” She was the first foreign woman to sign for a club in China. However, because of the pandemic, she was suddenly unable to return. She spent a little over two months playing for Palmeiras, and was able to see the changes in the Brazilian women’s game. “We have room for improvement but we took a great step from when I was 15. I think I could go back to play in Brazil, but now is just not the right time.” Like many other footballers, Rafaelle’s career has been full of both good and bad. She had one of the best moments of her life in April 2018, when Brazil won the Copa América – a title they will defend this year in Colombia, which would guarantee them a place at the 2023 World Cup. However, after that, she lived through some of the most challenging times: in December that year she suffered a cruciate anterior ligament injury and was forced to stop playing for nine months. “I think the footballer’s career always has its ups and downs. [An injury like that] doesn’t just mess with my physical health, it also messes with me psychologically.” Years later, another blow: during the Tokyo Olympics last summer, she missed the final penalty in a shootout against Canada that saw Brazil knocked out of the Games at the quarter-final stage. “I keep in my head that I did my best in every game, and ended up failing in that particular time, but it wasn’t something that will taint or erase my work in the Seleção.” Now Rafaelle prepares for a series of decisive games as Arsenal fight for the WSL title, are in the fifth round of the FA Cup and face Wolfsburg in the quarter-finals of the Champions League. She was also called up by the Brazil manager, Pia Sundhage, to play in the four-team Tournoi de France from 16-22 February. “My experience can help a lot,” she says. “Especially during this transition period, when many things still need adjusting.” She wants to use her football experience to become a leader in the Seleção and add her name to women’s football history at Arsenal. And even though she wants to move back to Bahia one day in the future, she is really happy with life in London right now: “I think I made the right choice.” Get to know the players in England’s top-flight better with our WSL player in focus series. Read all our interviews here.It is a cold January morning and mist hangs over Windermere like a thick wool blanket. The lake looks to be asleep. The researchers that have gathered on its shores to sample the water peer into the distance and decide that visibility is too poor to take the boat out today. Unpredictable weather is one reason lake ecology during the winter has been poorly studied until recently. Dr Stephen Thackeray, a lake ecologist at the UK Centre for Ecology &amp; Hydrology (UKCEH) and project leader of the Cumbrian Lakes Monitoring Platform, says there also used to be a preconception that not much was happening during the colder months. “For a long time, it was assumed that it was just a really quiet time with muted ecological activity. But studies over the past 10 years have shown that actually there’s more going on than we originally thought.” A lot of attention has been paid to how rising temperatures are bringing forward the start of spring – a phenomenon known as “season creep” – and its resulting “phenological asynchrony”, which puts animal and plant species out of sync with others on which they rely. However, the length and temperatures of the winter period are also ecologically important. Growers know that some trees need a certain number of “chill hours” for flowers, fruit and nuts to form properly, for example, while freezing temperatures can curb the spread of particular diseases. Less is known about what happens during winter in freshwater ecosystems, which are fragile and contain many imperilled species, and how they are being affected by the climate crisis. That is something that the UKCEH researchers want to rectify. Every fortnight they go out to monitor four lake basins in the Lake District – north and south Windermere, Esthwaite Water and Blelham Tarn. On Windermere, they carry out the work in a boat named after John Lund, who started observing the lake in 1945 because he was interested in the seasonal growth of algae. “I think it’s fascinating that you start gathering data about these places for a reason, without realising that sustained monitoring will allow you to answer different questions later on,” says Thackeray. “John was really interested in the dynamics of a particular group of algae called diatoms. But to understand how the algae grow and the lake generally is changing, we also have to look at the physics, the chemistry, [and] different components of the food web.” Although they cannot visit their usual sampling sites today, Dr Glenn Rhodes, a microbial ecologist, and field instrument technician Gareth McShane demonstrate the specialised tools for examining the lake. They drop a probe to measure water temperature at different depths and lower a white disc until it can no longer be seen to gauge how deep light can penetrate. Water samples will be sent off to test the acidity, concentrations of oxygen and nutrients, and the volume of phytoplankton and zooplankton. Rhodes pours a seemingly clear sample of water into a plastic bottle, which on closer inspection is seen to have tiny creatures wriggling around in it, among them crustaceans such as Cyclops and Eudiaptomus that graze on algae. “It’s appreciated more and more that important things happen in the winter, that organisms aren’t all completely inactive,” says Thackeray. “Many species do have dormant stages and slow down when it’s cold but they still have populations that tick over through the winter months. So as those conditions become warmer, those populations can develop more rapidly earlier in the year.” Helped by Lund’s long-term records, these observations are building up a detailed picture of how the lake is changing. Winter temperatures have risen more on average than those during the rest of the year, and the summer starts earlier and finishes later. Rising temperatures can influence water temperature, boost algal growth and cause fish to spawn earlier. How the layers of water of different temperatures mix is also changing, so that they are settling down, or becoming physically “stable”, earlier in the year, which can have far-reaching effects on a lake’s ecology. “The really important thing is that all these species are changing in different ways, and they all depend on and interact with each other. So changes in the lake early in the year have a kind of memory effect that passes through the subsequent seasons. And the knock-on effects are at different timescales for different species,” says Thackeray. These climate-related impacts are compounded by local environmental stresses that affect most of the UK’s freshwater ecosystems, such as sewage pollution and agricultural runoff. Extreme weather events, such as storms or floods, also have an impact by mixing up the layers of water. “The increase in extreme events due to climate change has the potential to erode the stable water structure of the lake. The water at the bottom is colder, it has a different chemistry, and it can get pushed down the lake. It’s a big growth area in our area of research.” In colder countries, research is being done into declining ice cover, which has a significant impact on how lakes function. One paper described lake ice as “one of the world’s resources most threatened by climate change”. This kind of work presents considerable logistical, methodological and safety challenges, but lake researchers are increasingly using tools such as satellite imagery and environmental DNA to develop their understanding of what happens over the year. There will always be a role for getting out on the water and gathering data, says Thackeray, but the possibilities are huge. As we walk around Windermere’s shores, I wonder what the lake might look like in January several years from now. “At the moment we cannot say with total confidence what future freshwater winters would look like,” says Thackeray. “However, we are already seeing evidence of winter-time cyanobacteria [blue-green algae] scums … and further warming could make such events more likely. “Furthermore, the progressive loss of cold winter conditions could negatively impact coldwater fish species like Arctic char. Their eggs are particularly sensitive to water temperature and do not survive well under warmer conditions.” Does it matter? “It’s a really complex picture. You can argue that the lake has value in itself but ecological processes can also influence things like water quality. It all depends on how we use the lake and what we value in it.” Find more age of extinction coverage here, and follow biodiversity reporters Phoebe Weston and Patrick Greenfield on Twitter for all the latest news and featuresAustralia’s Test captain, Pat Cummins, has broken his silence on Justin Langer’s resignation, defending his teammates against former players who criticised the handling of the head coach’s departure and asserting the need for a “more collaborative approach”. In a long statement issued before offering further clarity in a press conference on Wednesday afternoon, Cummins thanked Langer for his “significant” legacies and said his often-cited “intensity drove a better team culture and higher team standards”. “Justin has acknowledged that his style was intense. And it was,” Cummins wrote. “He has apologised to players and staff for his intensity. I think the apology was unnecessary. Because the players were OK with JL’s intensity. “It came from a good place – his fierce love of Australia and the baggy green – something which has served Australian cricket well for three decades. It’s what makes him a legend of the sport.” Speaking to media shortly afterwards, the fast bowler said Langer “tweaked his coaching style the last six months” since last year’s crisis meeting and “did a really, really good job”. However, he said the playing group had questioned whether these changes were feasible in the long term and sensed “now is the right time for a different direction”. “I think this group looking forward, a few things through the review process we really wanted and found important to get the best out of our players is I think the players benefit from a more collaborative approach,” Cummins said. “A big theme this summer was to be more calm, more composed. That’s been the feedback from the players, staff and Cricket Australia that’s the direction we want to take the team.” He also said he did not believe Langer would be surprised by this player feedback over a long period. “It’s difficult. Really difficult. I think being in a public role is always going to come with some commentary and scrutiny around the coaches,” he said. “I know cricket Australia wanted to run a thorough process and give it its due course. “Of course, I think especially JL, he felt at the end of it, he hasn’t been fairly treated. That’s not on. And I hope we can learn from that. I’d say I don’t think he should be surprised by it. It’s been two years of evaluations.” In his statement, Cummins said Cricket Australia had made a “brave call” in only offering Langer a short-term contract extension but clarified the playing group would have accepted whatever decision the governing body made. He also directly addressed former players who have spoken out in support of their former Test teammate and friend. “Finally, we are custodians of cricket, with one very big thing in common: our first duty is to Australian cricket, which is bigger than any one of us,” he said. “I take this responsibility seriously. I live and breathe it. We also have a duty to our mates. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “Many former players have reached out to me and silently offered me their advice which is welcome. Some others have spoken in the media – which is also welcome and comes from a love of the game and their support of a mate. “To all past players, I want to say this: Just as you have always stuck up for your mates, I’m sticking up for mine. I’m looking forward to speaking with the media today before training.”Never mind new animals: Ella Baxter’s debut novel looks at first to be a very familiar creature. Main character Amelia (surname Aurelia, a piece of whimsy explained by her taking her stepdad’s surname) is one of those fictional young women who lives in between the morbid and the erotic. She has outrageous sex to swallow her ineffable sadness, and though she’s from Australia rather than Ireland, she could have stepped from the pages of a Sally Rooney novel. When we first meet her, she’s in bed with a man she barely knows: “We both watched patiently as he prodded my vagina with his hangnailed finger, and we took turns sighing mid-thrust.” She cajoles him into growling “I will ruin you” at her during intercourse, and after he has reluctantly provided satisfaction, she kicks him out and starts arranging her next hookup. In the morning, she’s ready for her job as a mortuary makeup artist, painting the dead into a simulation of their living selves. The sex is, she tells us, a salve for some injury: “Most nights I find myself trying to combine with someone else to become this two-headed thing with flailing limbs, chomping teeth and tangled hair. This new animal. I am medicated by another body.” We learn that her friend recently killed himself. And then her mother dies too – suddenly, accidentally, while Amelia is out having weird sex with another stranger. Amelia decides she cannot attend her mother’s funeral and, without informing either her brother or stepfather, does a flit to Tasmania, where her birth father is. And what would she do here apart from seek more obliterating sex? “I’m going to have a wonderfully shocking time,” she announces, though the “wonderful” part fails to emerge. She goes to a fetish club with a self-confessed sadist, and when being bullwhipped on a stage doesn’t resolve her “particular mother-shaped wound”, she tries being a domme instead, disastrously. Both these interludes are written with unsparing bathos. Amelia dispassionately observes a group in the kink club “engaging in what looks like sexual parkour”. “Do you love this?” she demands of the unfortunate sub on the receiving end of her debut domming performance. “It’s all right,” he says, noncommittally, having been peed on. Baxter finds bleak comedy in these settings, and uses Amelia’s adventures to explore the strange landscape of 21st-century sexuality: a world where any sex you want is available at a sanitised swipe, where the comfort of another body comes at the end of a cold negotiation, where “consent” and “control” are safety rails that could fall away any second. “This is my choice,” she tells her sadist through gritted teeth, only goading him to hurt her more. It’s hard, though, to reconcile Amelia’s innocence in her BDSM encounters with the person we know her to be in her hookups. Surely a young woman who chews through men and their boundaries the way we see her doing at the start would have at least a passing acquaintance with the mores of the fetish world? And it seems unlikely that someone who makes multiple pickups a night would have never encountered at least one honest-to-goodness danger before the bullwhipper. If her naivety seems excessive, so does her exposure to mortality. The death of her friend is strangely superfluous, seemingly introduced only to forewarn us that Amelia applies promiscuity to her traumas the way a firefighter applies an axe to a burning building. Her job seems all too much like a convenient way to facilitate this sort of commentary: “The deceased are beyond beautiful, but only because they are so empty of worry.” It’s as though Baxter doesn’t quite have confidence in her own creation, and so loads up the backstory. It’s an unnecessary worry. Amelia makes sense on her own terms, as a young woman negotiating the sexual settlement. Baxter is a sharp observer, and seems to have the Didion knack of getting close to a subject without surrendering her scepticism. New Animal is a little unformed – if Amelia’s art is a metaphor for the novel, then the blusher still needs some blending – but there’s a winning talent here. • New Animal by Ella Baxter is published by Picador (£14.99). To support the Guardian and the Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply. • This review was edited on 9 February 2022, to correct that it’s Amelia’s friend who dies, not her stepbrother.Towards the end of last month, a convoy of Canadian truckers and their supporters set off from Vancouver to Ottawa, in protest against rules requiring any lorry drivers arriving from the US to be fully vaccinated against coronavirus. Having since ground Canada’s capital to a halt, the truckers have quickly become a symbol for a hotchpotch of far-right views and conspiracy theorists, and a cause célèbre for populists internationally. Our big story this week asks whether this could be a defining moment for Canada’s right. Then David Smith considers how the US anti-vaccine movement – linked with funding for the Canadian protest – is taking over the Trump-supporting Republican base. In the UK, a scandal-ridden Boris Johnson somehow continued to cling to power and was, as Jonathan Freedland notes, willing to reach for Trumpian lows of misinformation in his fight. Meanwhile Rowena Mason and Heather Stewart profile the prime minister’s wife, Carrie Johnson, who it has been claimed yields more influence over her husband’s decision-making than many inside No 10 would like. Guardian foreign correspondent Andrew Roth has tracked the movements of Russian personnel and materiel close to the border with Ukraine and found out what the residents of cities such as Voronezh think of the influx of tanks on their streets. Look out for some great feature reads in the magazine this week. Philip Oltermann delves into the workings of a poetry club for members of the East German secret police. Were they studying more than just iambic pentameter? Then, in the Culture section, Steve Rose tracks the rise of media streaming giant Netflix over the past decade and asks whether it can stay at the top for another 10 years. Get the Guardian Weekly magazine delivered to your doorThe spy agency Asio has warned more “angry and alienated Australians” could turn to violence after being exposed to “an echo chamber” of extremist messaging, misinformation and conspiracy theories during the coronavirus pandemic. The Asio boss, Mike Burgess, said on Wednesday the pandemic had sent online radicalisation “into overdrive” and he noted a “deeply distressing” trend of children – some as young as 13 – being radicalised online and in school. “As a nation, we need to reflect on why some teenagers are hanging Nazi flags and portraits of the Christchurch killer on their bedroom walls and why others are sharing beheading videos,” Burgess said in a speech on Wednesday night. In his annual threat assessment speech in Canberra, Burgess also disclosed that Asio had “recently detected and disrupted a foreign interference plot in the lead-up to an election in Australia”. He said the nation needed to be on guard against foreign interference in 2022 given a federal poll was looming – and he said foreign spies were attempting to cultivate government employees via social media. ‘Pathway towards violence’ Burgess said during the Covid pandemic isolated individuals spent more time online where they were “exposed to extremist messaging, misinformation and conspiracy theories” without some of the circuit breakers of everyday life. “In some cases, it accelerated extremists’ progression on the radicalisation pathway towards violence,” he said. Burgess said Asio had produced an assessment in 2007 warning that a future pandemic would result in increased anti-government behaviour. “We have certainly seen that with Covid. While Asio’s overall terrorism caseload has decreased since this time last year, there’s been a distinct increase in radicalisation and specific-issue grievances,” he said. “Some Australians believe the government’s approach to vaccinations and lockdowns infringed their freedoms. And in a small number of cases, grievance turned to violence.” Burgess said examples were “the violent incidents at Covid-related protests fuelled by anti-vaccination, anti-lockdown and anti-government agendas”. “We have also seen threats against public office holders, an attack on a vaccination clinic, and several physical assaults on healthcare workers. We assess that these tensions and the associated possibility of violence will persist.” While lockdowns and mandatory quarantine requirements were being eased, the Asio chief said, vaccination requirements for some types of work and travel would “continue to drive anger, uncertainty and fear within a small section of society”. This group viewed the restrictions “as an attack on their rights, the creation of a two-tier society and confirmation of their perceived persecution”. Burgess said his intelligence agency “does not have any issue with people who have opinions they want to express” – as that was a critical part of a vibrant democracy – but its concern was “where opinions tip into the promotion of violence, or actual acts of violence”. He stressed the vast majority of people who chose not to be vaccinated would not engage in violence and the vast majority of protestors were not violent extremists, but he added: “Asio’s focus is on a small number of angry and alienated Australians.” ‘Cocktail of fears, frustrations and conspiracies’ Burgess last year dumped terms like rightwing extremism and Islamic extremism in favour of new umbrella categories “ideologically motivated violent extremism” and “religiously motivated violent extremism”. Burgess said on Wednesday the behaviours in response to Covid lockdowns and vaccinations were “not specifically left or rightwing” but rather “a cocktail of views, fears, frustrations and conspiracies”. Individuals who were willing to support violence in this context were “best and most accurately described as ideologically motivated violent extremists”. “Some of the alleged violent acts at the recent Old Parliament House protest are a case in point,” he said. “The individuals involved were driven by a diverse range of grievances, including anti-vaccination agendas, conspiracy theories and anti-government sovereign citizen beliefs.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Burgess said Asio expected to “see more of this behaviour in Australia in the medium term” with protests driven by diverse specific-issue grievances to be part of the security environment for the foreseeable future. “In some cases, protesters will advocate the use of violence, and in a smaller number of cases, they may use violence,” he said. Many of the actors were “newcomers” so it was harder for Asio to “get a sense of what is simply big talk – and what is genuine planning for violence”. He said the most likely terrorist attack scenario in Australia over the next 12 months continued to be a lone-actor attack. While Asio did not believe the Taliban takeover of Afghanistan had increased the immediate terrorist threat to Australia, the agency was concerned that in the longer term violent extremists “from our region” may travel there for militant training. Alarmingly, Burgess said, the number of under-18s being radicalised was increasing. He said children as young as 13 were embracing extremism, both religiously and ideologically motivated. “At the end of last year, on average, minors represented more than half of our priority counter-terrorism investigations each week.” He said Asio and law enforcement were not the answer to stopping teenage radicalisation – “we do not belong in the classroom” – and urged parents, schools, clubs and community leaders to step in early if children were acting out of character. Election plot Burgess was vague when describing the target of a recently disrupted foreign interference plot in the lead-up to “an election” in Australia. He would not identify which jurisdiction “because we are seeing attempts at foreign interference at all levels of government, in all states and territories”. But Burgess said the case “involved a wealthy individual who maintained direct and deep connections with a foreign government and its intelligence agencies”. The goal, he said, was “secretly shaping the jurisdiction’s political scene to benefit the foreign power”. “The puppeteer hired a person to enable foreign interference operations and used an offshore bank account to provide hundreds of thousands of dollars for operating expenses,” Burgess said. The employee, he said, “began identifying candidates likely to run in the election who either supported the interests of the foreign government or who were assessed as vulnerable to inducements and cultivation”. Burgess said the puppeteer and the employee “plotted ways of advancing the candidates’ political prospects through generous support, placing favourable stories in foreign language news platforms and providing other forms of assistance”. He said the political candidates had no knowledge of the plot. Asio intervened because of the “deliberate deceit and secrecy about the foreign government connection” and ensured “the plan was not executed and harm was avoided”.Grace Tame and Brittany Higgins wield considerable cultural power. When the National Press Club agreed to host the duo for a joint address on Wednesday, there was a stampede for tickets. The event was a sellout. Tame, the former Australian of the Year and survivor advocate, and Higgins, the Liberal staffer who triggered parliament’s #MeToo reckoning, did not mince words. Here are some key highlights. 1. An unwelcome August phone call Tame, who fought for the right to tell her own story, knows how to hold the attention of a room. On Wednesday, she revealed she had received a “threatening” phone call from a “senior member” of a government-funded organisation who asked her not to reflect negatively on the prime minister “with an election coming soon”. In the context of Tame being roasted for giving the prime minister, Scott Morrison, some robust side eye at a function at the Lodge in January, this anecdote was quite the mic drop. Wednesday’s claim triggered an immediate investigation by the government, and a statement from Morrison’s office that the prime minister would not (and had not) authorised any intervention of that nature. Journalists, being journalists, wanted more information. Tame didn’t intend to elaborate. In response to the inevitable who, what, when, where inquiries, she said: “I reckon if I was willing to name either, I would have put them in the speech.” Can you tell us what you said back to that person? “Nope. Doesn’t matter now, does it?” 2. Don’t be Scott Tame and Higgins fielded a number of questions about whether they planned to enter politics, or enter the election campaign fray. The answer was no. Higgins said in tribal terms she was “stateless”. Tame said the former Labor leader Kim Beazley “did try to sway me”. At one point, she also winked at the Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, who was watching on in the audience. But it was still no. She said: “I feel like I can achieve more change outside of politics”. Tame was asked whether she could nominate some things that Albanese could do better, “and what would it mean if Australians chose to vote Scott Morrison back in?” Tame waited for half a beat before returning serve. “All Anthony would have to do is none of the things that Scott’s done.” 3. It wasn’t a march for language Higgins spoke of her determination to drive change. She referenced the public rallies last year – women marching for justice around the country. “Last year wasn’t a march for acknowledgment,” Higgins said. “It wasn’t a march for coverage. It wasn’t a march for language. It was a march for justice. And that justice demands real change in our laws, as well as in our language, in our national culture, as well as our national conversation. That starts with the prime minister – yes, some of his language last year was shocking and, at times, admittedly, a bit offensive. But his words wouldn’t matter if his actions had measured up. Then, or since.” Higgins said that Morrison’s comments after her allegation of sexual assault became public last year, that his wife had encouraged him to think about his own daughters, were misplaced. “I didn’t want his sympathy as a father. I wanted him to use his power as prime minister. I wanted him to wield the weight of his office and drive change in the party and our parliament, and out into the country. And one year later, I don’t care if the government has improved the way that they talk about these issues. I’m not interested in words any more. I want to see action.” 4. Is sorry the hardest word? On Tuesday, the presiding officers and political leaders acknowledged the pain of many former political staffers subjected to bullying, harassment, and worse. Given she had been the catalyst for that parliamentary apology, how did Higgins feel when that moment ultimately came? “It was deeply emotional in the way that I wasn’t anticipating and I think being in that room, kind of, made all the difference … It made it so much more tangible to not see these people as, you know, flattened characters on a TV screen like I have watched most of this year play out.” 5. He’s built like a … you know During a question about whether cultures with consequences made people safer, one journalist referenced a question she’d previously asked Morrison about what had done to make parliament safer today than it was 12 months ago. Tame’s brow furrowed. “I do love the part where you asked the prime minister if he thought it was a safer workplace. You know, because he’s about six foot three, in my understanding, he’s built like a – you know! Probably a bit safer for him.” 6. What about every other workplace in the country? Higgins has been the catalyst for reform of the toxic workplace culture in Parliament House but as she asked on Wednesday – what about the rest of the country? Higgins noted the government was following the advice of Australia’s sex discrimination commissioner, Kate Jenkins, when it came to workplace reform in the parliament. But the government had ignored Jenkins’ advice to impose a positive duty on employers to keep their employees safe from sexual harassment. “I’m shocked that that was not more of a flashpoint moment for people,” Higgins said. Imposing a positive duty “would have impacted every single working woman in the country, and we just kind of let that moment slide by without thinking”. 7. Aspirational statements won’t cut it Higgins also took aim at the national plan to reduce violence against women – at one point holding a direct eye-line with the Liberal ministers who were its architects. “The national plan doesn’t aim low,” she said. “Unfortunately, its aims are so lofty and vague that it’s impossible to disagree with and equally difficult to examine … But the question is – how will they be achieved? “That is, unfortunately, where the draft plan has lost its way. Instead, it is largely a collection of statistics describing the problem, filled with warm sentiments and platitudes attached to noble outcomes which lacks the promised learnings from the past decade towards a future free from violence against women and children, and clear targets to that end. Without clearer action and firm targets, there can be no accountability.” 8. Is parliament doing enough to protect the rights of vulnerable people? Tame and Higgins were asked about the current parliamentary debate about religious discrimination. Was enough being done to protect the rights of LGBTQ+ students? Tame was short and sharp. “No,” she said. “Why does one group of people have more of a right to be themselves than another – that’s what I have to ask the government.” Higgins was worried about the well being of young people. “I can’t even imagine how they’d be feeling having to listen to all this play out right now.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning 9. I really have nothing to lose Tame gave a sharp summary of what it is like to be commodified by the media; what it’s like to have your objectives lost in translation. “Certain members of the [media] have consistently labelled me as politically divisive, failing to mention that I spent most of last year having frank, productive meetings with politicians on all sides at both the state and federal level. So, after a year of being re-victimised, commodified, objectified, sensationalised, delegitimise, gaslit, thrown under the bus by the biased mainstream media – despite my inclusive messaging – I would like to take this opportunity to take a glass of water, and remind you that I really have nothing to lose.”Scott Morrison has goaded Labor into an election contest over character, after the opposition questioned the prime minister’s trustworthiness in the wake of a series of damaging text messages. Morrison, who has faced a torrid start to the parliamentary year overshadowed by questions about his character, was challenged in question time on Wednesday about a text message sent by the deputy prime minister, Barnaby Joyce, and a separate text exchange between a Liberal minister and the former New South Wales premier Gladys Berejiklian. Joyce’s message for former Liberal staffer Brittany Higgins branded Morrison as a “liar” and a “hypocrite”, while Berejiklian allegedly called the prime minister a “horrible person” and questioned his focus on political point scoring during the bushfires in 2019-20. Also on Wednesday, Labor’s deputy leader, Richard Marles, asked Joyce to confirm he had served with Morrison for 15 years in parliament including six in the cabinet, and therefore “knows what he’s talking about, doesn’t he?” Joyce, who publicly apologised for the text message and offered Morrison his resignation, said he had a good working relationship with the prime minister, listing their cooperation “defending the nation”, building dams and inland rail, and dealing with “one of the greatest pandemics of modern times”. “Our working relationship has made sure we have kept this nation safe,” Joyce said. The Labor MP for the seat of Eden-Monaro, Kristy McBain, seized on the text exchange with Berejiklian and an unknown Liberal minister, with one message sent while fires ravaged her electorate in southern NSW. According to the leaked text messages, the former NSW premier allegedly said of Morrison: “Lives are at stake and he is obsessed with petty political point-scoring.” “Why was the prime minister obsessed with political point-scoring during the bushfires and why didn’t he just do his job?” McBain asked. The manager of government business, Peter Dutton, attempted to disallow the question, saying it was based on “an unsubstantiated media gossip speculation piece”. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “This is not a document that can be referred to, or a statement that can be referred to, and certainly it is not within the prime minister’s responsibility to respond to gossip, and it should be ruled out of order on that basis,” Dutton said. However, the new speaker, Andrew Wallace, ruled the question in order. Morrison sought to downplay the message, saying Berejiklian “did not confirm any such statement at all”. “This is what we have become used to from the opposition in putting these matters forward. It’s not about policy,” Morrison said. “If the leader of the opposition wants to have a character contest with me, bring it on.” The treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, sought to return fire on the Labor leader, despite a ruling from the speaker that a question about “alternative approaches” did not allow “carte blanche to undertake a gratuitous character assessment”. Frydenberg said the “biggest risk to the economic recovery” underway in Australia was the leader of the opposition, and attacked Albanese’s record supporting various tax policies while in government. “Somebody who has never held a treasury portfolio, somebody who attacks tax cuts for families as being for the top end of town … and a leader of the Labor party too weak to stand up to the unions and the Greens,” Frydenberg said. The increasingly personal attacks in parliament come as the Guardian Essential poll shows the Coalition lagging behind Labor 46% to 47%, with 8% of people undecided. Morrison’s approval ratings have plummeted over the past year, but he is still narrowly seen as the preferred prime minister over Albanese. Speaking to the coalition party room on Tuesday, Morrison urged unity on the proposed religious discrimination bill in the lead-up to the election, appealing for MPs to “come together”. “I’m going to lead, and I’m asking you once again to follow me to an election victory,” Morrison said. Albanese said on Tuesday the Coalition did “not deserve a second decade in office”. “I know they’re distracted by their internal hatreds and feuds, [but] the problem isn’t that. The problem is that because of that, their distractions, their dishonesty and their disunity is stopping them looking after the interests of Australians.”Merger talks between the mutual insurer LV= and Royal London have broken down. It is the second time within two months that a deal to buy the 178-year-old firm, originally known as Liverpool Victoria, has collapsed. LV=’s members blocked a planned takeover by the US private equity firm Bain Capital in December, when they rejected the year-long campaign by the company’s board to secure backing for its preferred bidder. LV= began discussions with its fellow mutual Royal London at the start of the year. However, the company said in a statement to the London Stock Exchange that it had “become clear to LV= that our different mutual models mean such a merger would not be in the best interests of LV= members”. Seamus Creedon, LV=’s interim chair, said: “The strength of LV=’s business performance over the past 18 months combined with its operational progress has strengthened the board’s belief in, and commitment to, the continuation of our status as an independent mutual.” Creedon said LV= had heard what its members had said “about the importance of mutuality and the continuation of the LV= brand”. The company said it had a strong capital position, was trading well and would update its members on its business strategy “shortly”. LV=’s announcement that talks had ended came just days after a boardroom clearout, after the failure of the mutual’s management to gain member approval for the controversial sale of the company to Bain Capital for £530m. Members rejected the deal, which would have ended LV=’s member-owned status. The company said on Monday its chairman Alan Cook – who had come in for heavy criticism over the demutualisation plan – would step down, replaced on an interim basis by Creedon, a non-executive director at the firm. Three other directors will also leave, although LV=’s chief executive Mark Hartigan remains in place. Royal London had had its sights on a tie-up with LV= for some time, after LV=’s management chose to proceed with talks with Bain instead, and even proposed an “early three-way discussion” between Royal London, Bain and LV=, if it looked like LV= members would reject the Bain deal. In the event, Royal London waited in the wings while the LV= and Bain drama played out. It put forward an unsolicited offer for LV= in December, which was rejected, but then entered talks with its fellow mutual in the new year. Barry O’Dwyer, the group chief executive of Royal London, said: “Our offer to preserve LV=’s mutuality through a merger with Royal London was based on an understanding that LV= did not have a viable future as an independent company. For Royal London’s customers and members, nothing changes.” Royal London said it planned to share “a substantial level of profits” with its eligible customers in April, as usual.With that, we will wrap up our live news coverage of the day. The House of Representatives is still sitting late to finalise the religious discrimination bill package – which included an impassioned speech by the Liberal MP Trent Zimmerman in which he expressed his concerns about his government’s own bill. He said he wanted to indicate he would cross the floor to support Labor’s amendments to the bill – noting specific concerns with aspects of the legislation regarding transgender children and the scope of the statement of belief clause. Zimmerman said: “I could not live with myself if I didn’t seek to address those issues. We will still have all the news on the religious discrimination bill – just not in the blog. These were the day’s news developments: Anthony Albanese has warned if the religious discrimination bill is not fixed it will “drive us apart”, signalling Labor will insist on amendments to prevent religious vilification, discriminatory statements and protect LGBTQ+ students. Meanwhile, the New South Wales premier, Dominic Perrottet, has questioned the need for the federal government’s religious discrimination bill, saying the proposed laws could cause more problems than they solve. Grace Tame has said in a speech to the National Press Club that she received a “threatening” phone call from a senior member of a government-funded organisation warning her not to criticise the prime minister, Scott Morrison, on the eve of last month’s Australian of the Year awards because there was “an election coming soon”. The spy agency Asio has warned more “angry and alienated Australians” could turn to violence after being exposed to “an echo chamber” of extremist messaging, misinformation and conspiracy theories during the coronavirus pandemic. Asio boss Mike Burgess also described the target of a recently disrupted foreign interference plot in the lead-up to “an election” in Australia. A police officer who was threatened with an axe by Kumanjayi Walker told the Warlpiri man’s family that if he did the same thing to another officer “he might get shot”, a court has heard. Nurses across NSW have overwhelmingly voted to walk off the job amid growing anger at staffing levels in the state’s hospitals, with more than 97% supporting a motion to hold the first statewide strike in almost a decade when NSW parliament resumes next Tuesday. A former soldier scheduled to give evidence against SAS veteran Ben Roberts-Smith is seeking to pull out, prompting claims in court that Roberts-Smith’s barrister spoke to a senior lawyer who then contacted the secret witness. Thanks for following along, we’ll be back to do it all again tomorrow. Independent MP Rebekha Sharkie: After extensive consultation with colleagues across the political spectrum, I will support both the government and Labor’s proposed amendments to the religious discrimination package but cannot vote to pass the bill. It is my belief that the government’s amendment to section 38 is both meagre and inadequate. And while the opposition’s proposal represents a modest improvement, it does not do enough to protect teachers and contract workers from being subjected to discrimination on grounds of their sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, marital or relationship status or pregnancy. So, while I support these amendments as improvements on the original legislation, I still cannot support the bill’s passage. Instead, I am preparing my own amendment which would delete section 38 in its entirety. In his annual threat assessment speech in Canberra tonight, the Asio chief, Mike Burgess, disclosed that his agency had “recently detected and disrupted a foreign interference plot in the lead-up to an election in Australia”. He said the nation needed to be on guard against foreign interference in 2022 given a federal poll was looming. He would not identify which jurisdiction “because we are seeing attempts at foreign interference at all levels of government, in all states and territories”. But Burgess said the case “involved a wealthy individual who maintained direct and deep connections with a foreign government and its intelligence agencies”. The goal, he said, was “secretly shaping the jurisdiction’s political scene to benefit the foreign power”: The puppeteer hired a person to enable foreign interference operations and used an offshore bank account to provide hundreds of thousands of dollars for operating expenses. The employee, he said, “began identifying candidates likely to run in the election who either supported the interests of the foreign government or who were assessed as vulnerable to inducements and cultivation”. Burgess said the puppeteer and the employee “plotted ways of advancing the candidates’ political prospects through generous support, placing favourable stories in foreign language news platforms and providing other forms of assistance”. He said the political candidates had no knowledge of the plot. Asio intervened because of the “deliberate deceit and secrecy about the foreign government connection” and ensured “the plan was not executed and harm was avoided”. The spy agency Asio has warned more “angry and alienated Australians” could turn to violence after being exposed to “an echo chamber” of extremist messaging, misinformation and conspiracy theories during the coronavirus pandemic. The Asio boss, Mike Burgess, said on Wednesday the pandemic had sent online radicalisation “into overdrive” and he noted a “deeply distressing” trend of children – some as young as 13 – being radicalised online and in school. Burgess, in a speech on Wednesday night, said: As a nation, we need to reflect on why some teenagers are hanging Nazi flags and portraits of the Christchurch killer on their bedroom walls and why others are sharing beheading videos. In his annual threat assessment speech in Canberra, Burgess also disclosed that Asio had “recently detected and disrupted a foreign interference plot in the lead-up to an election in Australia”. He said the nation needed to be on guard against foreign interference in 2022 given a federal poll was looming – and he said foreign spies were attempting to cultivate government employees via social media. Read more: For those just tuning in to our blog, the House of Representative has agreed to sit late to finalise the religious discrimination bill package. Earlier this evening, the opposition leader, Anthony Albanese, warned if the bill was not fixed it would “drive us apart”, signalling Labor would insist on amendments to prevent religious vilification, discriminatory statements and protect LGBTQ+ students. If you’re keen to get up to speed on what’s happened today in relation to the religious discrimination bill, Guardian Australia’s Paul Karp has filed this report: After Scott Morrison urged the Coalition to vote together on the bill, the Liberal MP Warren Entsch revealed on Wednesday he would not oppose it, claiming parliament needed to “bank the successes” of improvements to the bill despite his remaining concerns. The government still faces substantial opposition to the bill, with Liberal Bridget Archer, independent Helen Haines and Centre Alliance’s Rebekha Sharkie indicating they do not support it in its current form, and Liberal Trent Zimmerman reserving his position. The House of Representatives has just agreed to sit late to finalise the religious discrimination bill package, by agreement between the government and Labor. There are 24 speakers on the last list I’ve seen for the religious bills, which could be up to six hours of debate, before amendments are voted on and the final bill. Hopefully speakers don’t use their full 15 minutes. It’s important for the government to get through this if it wants a genuine chance to pass the bill in both houses before the election. The Senate sits Thursday, but then is in budget estimates next week, back for budget day, two more days of estimates, and by then the election should be called. The independent MP Zali Steggall is speaking against the religious discrimination bill, describing it as legislation designed “to score political points” and warning of the possibility Labor could “roll over” for political reasons. Steggall said the core of the bill – the prohibition on discrimination on the ground of religion – is “sound” and “not up for debate”. She said: It would’ve been so good if this bill stops there. But unfortunately it goes on to sanction discrimination ... It goes beyond a shield, it’s weaponising, legalising the right to discriminate. Steggall said the parliament should “not be codifying the right to discriminate” against 30% of the population (LGBTQ+ students), suggesting she will go for Labor’s amendment to the Sex Discrimination Act. Steggall expressed condolences to Labor’s Stephen Jones on the death of his nephew, and thanked the Liberal MP Bridget Archer for her speech expressing concerns about the bill. Almost three quarters of voters in the four byelections taking place in New South Wales this Saturday want it to become legal for terminally ill people in the state to end their life, with polling showing frustration at the premier and opposition leader for opposing the laws. Voluntary assisted dying laws exist in other states but NSW is yet to pass such legislation, with a polarising bill passing the NSW lower house late last year with a raft of amendments, however it still needs the approval of the upper house before it becomes law. The premier, Dominic Perrottet, and opposition leader, Chris Minns, voted against the bill in the lower house. Ahead of the byelections in Willoughby, Bega, Monaro and Strathfield, polling carried out on behalf of advocacy group Go Gentle Australia has found that voters in the seats overwhelmingly support the laws – a sentiment that transcends political allegiance. The poll found that 72% of respondents support voluntary assisted dying laws, with 69% wanting to see the laws passed through the upper house without any further delay. Additionally, 63% of voters said they were more likely to support the leader of a political party who “puts aside personal beliefs to vote in accordance with community sentiment”. About 74% of voters want terminally ill people in NSW to have the same rights as Australians in other states. Andrew Denton, founding director of Go Gentle Australia, said “community support for voluntary assisted dying legislation in NSW has never been stronger and transcends political divides”. He added: People expect their elected representatives to offer the same protections for terminally ill people in NSW that are available in every other state. This means passing the law – already debated and voted through the Lower House with a thumping majority – without delay and without amendments. The message to Upper House MPs is clear: Don’t play political games. The people of NSW must not be left behind.” Former Victorian government minister Adem Somyurek’s motion to refer Labor’s “red shirts” scheme to the Ombudsman has passed state parliament’s upper house after a Labor MP crossed the floor to support it. Kaushaliya Vaghela, a close ally of Somyurek, now faces suspension from the Labor party for breaking its rules after she crossed the floor to support the motion. It carried 19 votes to 17. It means Victoria’s Ombudsman, Deborah Glass, has been asked to reconsider the “red shirts” scheme, with a view of referring it to the state’s anti-corruption watchdog. In 2018, Glass found 21 Labor MPs had misused almost $400,000 worth of taxpayer funds to pay for campaign work, in what is now referred to as “red shirts”. Labor repaid the money and all MPs involved were cleared of any criminal activity. Somyurek, who quit the Labor party after it moved to expel him following allegations of branch stacking, claimed Victoria’s premier, Daniel Andrews, facilitated the scheme. Somyurek, under parliamentary privilege, said: He was desperate. He did something well beyond what he should have. He crossed the line. He designed this system. He told me personally that you’ve got to take part in this process.” He said he was “very scared” of the motion passing. “I’ll be going home and not being able to sleep at night. But there’s a principal on the line.” Last year Vaghela admitted her own husband may have been performing factional work out of electorate offices including Somyurek’s. She was dumped by the Labor party during preselection late last year. The anti-corruption investigation into Somyurek is ongoing. A spokesperson for Glass said the parliament “can refer any matter to the Ombudsman to investigate”. “Should the Ombudsman receive a referral, she will determine how any investigation will be conducted and will report to Parliament in due course.” A government spokesperson said “anything referred to the Ombudsman is a matter for her”. The Liberal MP, Warren Entsch, has been on a journey with the religious discrimination bill - but appears to have watered down his initial dissent to the point he thinks parliament should “bank the successes” and vote it through. Entsch said:”There is no way, in good conscience, I can vote for legislation that strips people of religious rights or any other rights as well. It’s the right of all Australians not to be discriminated against, including on grounds of faith.” Entsch said he had long advocated for the rights of LGBTQ+ Australians and has “concerns with a number of elements” with the bill. He said: Quite frankly I don’t believe the bill before the house is necessary. There has been a lot of focus from what I can see on gay and gender diverse adults. A lot of these issues won’t be able to be addressed through this bill, but through the Sex Discrimination Act.” Entsch said his first instinct was to reject the bill outright, but now says he wants to “bank the successes” of improvements to the bill, he cites removal of the Folau clause and the conscientious objection clause. Entsch said he still has concerns with the statements of belief clause, but by improving the SDA it could address these concerns. Entsch said government amendments to prevent expulsion of gay students “is far too narrow”. Entsch notes the attorney general has agreed to broaden the scope of the Australian Law Reform Commission review to all forms of discrimination against LGBTQ+ children. Entsch said to reject the bill will prevent “capturing the positives we have achieved” and a future government may not step in to protect gay kids which is odd, because this is now bipartisan between the major parties - the only disagreement is whether to do MORE to help LGBTQ+ children. Entsch concludes he will not be blocking the bill, and acknowledges this will disappoint some. Grace Tame has responded to the government launching an investigation into her claims of a “threatening phone call” from a “government-funded agency”, tweeting that the probe “misses the point entirely”. “Stop deflecting, Scott. It’s not about the person who made the call. It’s the fact they felt like they had to do it,” she tweeted on Wednesday evening. Social services minister Anne Ruston and prime minister Scott Morrison’s office both said they were unaware of Tame’s claims before she included it in her National Press Club speech this afternoon. “My understanding is that no one else in government was aware of that until that time,” Ruston told Sky News. “Obviously it is an unacceptable thing for any agency that is funded by government who is seeking to do that, to anybody. “I think we need to find out the circumstances around exactly what’s happened and transpired here but obviously the consequences need to match up with the action that’s been taken.” Grace Tame, responding to the news that the government will investigate her claim that a “senior member of a government funded organisation” called her asking her not to criticise Scott Morrison. She tweeted: Scott conducting an investigation into who made the phone call is THE VERY SAME embedded structural silencing culture that drove the call in the first place and misses the point entirely. Stop deflecting, Scott. It’s not about the person who made the call. It’s the fact they felt like they had to do it.” Anthony Albanese says the government’s bill does not even prevent people being subject to vilification on the basis of their religion, religious dress or activities. Albanese said: The bill does not prevent a Muslim woman being abused in the street for being a Muslim, or a Hindu man for being Hindu.” Albanese says the government changes “barely amends the Sex Discrimination Act”, and Labor will push for fuller protections, with a simple amendment to delete section 38(3) in full “to remove discrimination against all children, whether gay or lesbian, bisexual, transgender”. He said: All children should have a right to be who they are - and there are consequences for not doing that.” Albanese said Labor recognises religious institutions’ right to preference members of the same faith, but it will need to be “carefully considered” by the Australian Law Reform Commission, so Labor will make amendments to protect teachers in government, because rights conflict. Albanese references Stephen Jones’ impassioned speech last night about the suicide of his nephew and his fears for his son, and Bill Shorten’s concerns for people with disability. He said: We have an opportunity here to bend the arc of moral progress ... To fix this flawed legislation.” Albanese said the bill - if not amended by the House or Senate - “will only succeed in driving us apart”... “We must change this bill, all Australians deserve nothing less.” Anthony Albanese is giving a speech on the religious discrimination bill, which he has described as “flawed”. Albanese said: The idea there has to be a conflict between the rights of children, and people with disabilities who would be potentially hurt from this bill and people of faith who would be protected is a false dichotomy - we surely should be able to do both. Enhancing protections against discrimination without increasing discrimination against others.” Albanese said that’s what all faith groups he’s met wanted out of the bill. He complains that Labor has had just 24 hours to see the full bill, and states and territories whose laws have been overridden weren’t consulted at all. Albanese said: This bill seeks to pit those groups against each other, I seek to defend all of them. We need shields from this legislation, not swords.” Albanese is now getting on to instances of religious discrimination, people denied employment, abused, having their houses attacked for having a shrine out front - explaining why he wants increased protections for religious people. He said: I don’t support doing it at the expense of increasing discrimination against others.” Albanese is quoting Scott Morrison’s correspondence to him committing to prevent “any form of discrimination against a student on the basis of sexuality or gender identity”, which he says the bill does not do. Albanese says if any of Labor’s amendments are passed in the House or Senate “we will insist on them”, and if they are not accepted “this bill is not good enough”. Nurses across NSW have overwhelmingly voted to walk off the job amid growing anger at staffing levels in the state’s hospitals, with more than 97% supporting a motion to hold the first statewide strike in almost a decade when NSW parliament resumes next Tuesday. The industrial action – the largest by nurses across NSW since 2013 – will come just days after the resumption of non-urgent elective surgery, which had been paused to free up staff during the Omicron wave. While a minority of the more than 200 branches of the NSW Nurses and Midwives Association had yet to vote on Wednesday, the union’s general secretary, Brett Holmes, told Guardian Australia about 97% of the more than 10,000 nurses who had voted on the motion so far were in favour of the strike action. Holmes said: Frankly, our members are very conscious that in November the premier made a decision to proceed with opening up no matter what. He kept saying our health system was passing the test and our members were saying no, it’s not. He caused untold levels of anger among our members by telling people that it was all OK and going well. From our members’ perspective, that was so disrespectful and so tin-eared to what was really happening in our health system.” Guardian Australia’s Michael McGowan and Tamsin Rose have filed this report: The PM’s inability to answer what a loaf of bread costs may have been a hot topic last week, but politicians are still tripping up on the question. Well, sort of. Rewind to last year, when Labor senator Kristina Keneally announced she would be switching chambers at the next election – she was preselected to run for the safe Labor seat of Fowler in western Sydney, parachuted in ahead of local lawyer with Vietnamese heritage Tu Le. The electorate boasts a significant Vietnamese community, and the preselection of Keneally – who did not live locally – attracted criticism. Well, this week Keneally appeared on the Betoota Advocate’s podcast, and copped this curly question: Host: “...I’m going to finish this interview now with potentially your bread and milk moment.” Keneally: “Well, I don’t eat bread, so.” Host: “Well, you’re lucky because the cuisine we’re about to talk about doesn’t involve that much gluten. Lastly, Senator Keneally, can you please tell us the key ingredients in the iconic Vietnamese cuisine known as Gỏi Cuốn?” Keneally: “No, I can’t.” Host: “Rice paper rolls, ladies and gentlemen!” Pauline Hanson has told The Australian that One Nation will vote against Labor’s amendments to the religious discrimination bill, and in favour of the bill - despite earlier threats not to vote for government bills. Hanson reportedly said: I challenge Anthony Albanese to have the courage of his convictions and move Labor’s amendments in the lower house instead of relying on the Senate to do the dirty work for him ... I’ve been assured by senior religious leaders that these students [LGBTQ+] are not expelled by religious schools. Labor’s amendments are a solution looking for a problem which doesn’t exist.” Hanson reportedly said One Nation would support the bill “despite its lack of support for my Covid-19 discrimination bill” because “it is consistent with our fight to protect the democratic rights and freedoms of the Australian people discarded or ignored during the Covid-19 pandemic”. Speculation that official interest rates are going to rise isn’t just a plaything of investors. They’ve been pencilling in the first move by the RBA by June to 0.25%, and a further percentage point of increases in the cash rate by December. Anyway, that expectation is starting to spread to consumers, and dimming their confidence, if the latest Westpac-Melbourne Institute survey is any guide. Their gauge of consumer sentiment fell by 1.3% to 100.8 in February from 102.2 in January, with family worries about rising costs a drag on confidence. Rising petrol prices were one factor, but so was the growing view that interest rates will be on rise. The ‘finances vs a year ago’ sub-index dropped 9.2% (more than reversing the surprise 7.5% advance in January) while the ‘finances, next 12 months’ sub-index extended its decline by 1.5% to be down by 4.3% since December. Westpac said: The proportion of respondents expecting an increase in mortgage rates over the next 12 months lifted from 55% in January to 66% in February with over one in four consumers now expecting rates to rise by more than a percentage point. This is the most pessimistic consumers have been about the interest rate outlook since August 2011, although on that occasion, rate hikes actually failed to materialise.” Let’s see if they materialise this time around. Another aspect might be the realisation that wage rises aren’t going to keep up with consumer prices. I explore in some detail here why those hoping for incomes to keep pace with inflation and then some might again be disappointed. Labor MP Peter Khalil – one of the opposition MPs who supported an unsuccessful caucus motion to oppose the government’s religious discrimination bill if his party’s amendments are unsuccessful – has accused Scott Morrison of “weaponising this bill for political purposes”. Khalil, speaking to ABC TV, said the bill “should be done in a bipartisan manner”. As a party, Labor have announced that if their amendments are not successful in the lower house, they will seek to amend the bill in the Senate. Khalil said: I want my Liberal colleagues on the other side who have good conscience of this matter, have been on the public record, to support these amendments.” Liberal MP Dave Sharma – who has been vocal in his hesitations with the bill – is appearing on the ABC panel with Khalil, and was asked if he’ll support Labor’s amendments. He said: Having not seen the amendments I certainly wouldn’t make a commitment on them, and like with every piece of legislation, I’ll study quite closely but I’m also very conscious that I’m a member of the Liberal party. I was elected as part of the Liberal party, and I was elected on a platform of supporting a religious discrimination bill. So I’m not going to give you a straight answer today. I have got concerns [about the bill]...I would like to find a way to make sure those concerns are addressed.” A Japanese tourist crossing South Australia’s Nullarbor plain by bicycle took his own life, a coroner has ruled. The body of Katsushi Ohata has never been found after his personal property was recovered in March 2015 near the Southern Ocean about 50km west of Nullarbor, reports AAP. He had last been seen about 10 days earlier in Ceduna where he bought a bike while spending several nights in a cabin at a caravan park. Deputy state coroner Anthony Schapel said the evidence presented to his inquiry supported a conclusion that the 51-year-old had taken his own life. Items at the scene included $4,420 in cash along with credit cards in Ohata’s name, which had been cut up, and other personal possessions. Schapel said it was “fanciful” to suggest that someone else may have been involved or that Ohata had faked his own death. He found “on the balance of probabilities” Ohata killed himself. * In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. The federal government is already investigating Grace Tame’s claim that a “senior member of a government funded organisation” asked her not to criticise Scott Morrison, according to social services minister Anne Ruston. Morrison’s office has called on the unnamed person involved to apologise. Tame told the National Press Club that she got a “threatening phone call” from someone in August last year. Several journalists asked for further information following her speech on Wednesday afternoon, but Tame declined to share more details. Tame said the person who called her had said “You are an influential person. [Morrison] will have a fear”. Ruston told Sky News that the government was investigating. A spokesperson for the prime minister called the incident “unacceptable” and maintains any such phone call was not made with their knowledge. The spokesperson said: The first the PM or PMO (prime minister’s office) became aware of that allegation was during today’s Press Club speeches. The PM has not and would not authorise such actions and at all times has sought to treat Ms Tame with dignity and respect. Ms Tame should always be free to speak her mind and conduct herself as she chooses. The PM has made no criticism of her statements or actions. While Ms Tame has declined to name the individual, the individual should apologise. Those comments were not made on behalf of the PM or PMO or with their knowledge. The PM and the government consider the actions and statements of the individual as unacceptable.” Porsche driver Richard Pusey is back behind bars after he was charged with four new offences, reports AAP. The 44-year-old was arrested at Kurunjang in Melbourne’s west on Tuesday and charged with two counts of using a telecommunications device to menace and two counts of committing an indictable offence while on bail. The charges came after an investigation into separate incidents from November last year and earlier this week, police said. Pusey faced Sunshine magistrates court on Wednesday and did not apply for bail. He is expected to reappear before the same court on 22 February. Victoria Police officers Lynnette Taylor, Kevin King, Glen Humphris and Josh Prestney were struck and killed by a truck while impounding a Porsche driven by Pusey in April 2020. More than 1,500 people gathered at Docklands stadium last week to honour the four officers. The tragedy marked Victoria Police’s single greatest loss of life with the truck driver responsible jailed for 22 years. An interesting thread: In Western Australia, there are 14 new locally acquired cases of Covid-19, and 80 among overseas and interstate travellers. In case you missed it, you can watch video footage from Brittany Higgins and Grace Tame’s National Press Club address here: Thanks to Tory Shepherd for bringing us the news so far today. You now have me, Elias Visontay, taking the blog through the rest of the day. I’m just going to backtrack to defence minister Peter Dutton’s earlier remarks. He said: If you’re worried about where China is and where Russia is, if you’re worried about the Ukraine, if you’re worried about the geopolitical circumstances, Mr Speaker, in this world, if you’re worried about the uncertainty in the Indo-Pacific, you wouldn’t vote for Labor at the next election. So aside from the obvious sabre-rattling on national security, my colleague Daniel Hurst points out that it’s “Ukraine” not “the Ukraine”. “The Ukraine” is offensive, and it harks back to when Ukraine was part of Russia. Ukraine’s declaration of independence does not use the “the”. There you go, and that’s today’s question time done and dusted. Labor’s Kristy McBain is asking about those other texts, where a mystery minister and former NSW premier Gladys Berejiklian were disparaging about prime minister Scott Morrison. (Earlier today I would have bet Labor would focus on aged care this QT). Leader of the house Peter Dutton calls it unsubstantiated gossip. (Insert barney emoji). Morrison says if the leader of the opposition wants to have a character contest, “bring it on”. Labor’s Richard Marles outlines those texts from deputy prime minister Barnaby Joyce that referred to prime minister Scott Morrison as a hypocrite and a liar. The Speaker says “liar” is unparliamentary and asks if Marles wants to rephrase the question. Now we’re back to the house leaders having a barney. It’s Tony Burke v Peter Dutton. (I’m starting to wish I had a “barney” emoji I could just insert when they start.) And now back to Marles, who asks whether Joyce “knew exactly what he was talking about”. Joyce takes the opportunity to reel off a bunch of the government’s accomplishments, from battling the pandemic to defending the security of the nation. He said: As I work with this prime minister, and I believe that he is quite obviously the better choice for the next election, to take Australia into a time [where] we have so many geopolitical issues, and we need a competent hand to be able to guide this nation through something that will be an incredibly complex time ... I absolutely stand by this person. This is a great prime minister doing a great job. After quite a long lecture from Speaker Andrew Wallace (he said he’s done his homework and the orders do not “give the member answering the question cart blanche to under take a gratuitous character assessment”), Frydenberg returns to... undertaking a gratuitous character assessment. The treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, asked about the government’s economic recovery, is rolling out a bunch of past, present and imaginary future greatest hits that Labor may or may not take on tax. Carbon taxes, inheritance taxes, unicorn taxes and many more. “Every day that we have been in government, we have been looking for opportunities to cut taxes,” Frydenberg said. Seems like an appropriate time to revisit this fact check on which party taxes more. The Speaker is threatening to boot out opposition members who are putting out a “wall of noise”. He says it’s hard to pick the culprits because they’re wearing masks. Labor’s Catherine King is asking about what the prime minister’s office knew, and when, about Brittany Higgins’ alleged rape. (This is the subject of the Gaetjens inquiry.) Speaker Andrew Wallace is reminding the chamber about the responsibility to choose words about criminal matters carefully to avoid potential (legal) consequences. Morrison says there is an assumption that the inquiry has reached a conclusion, and says “any further comment on the inquiry could be prejudicial to these proceedings”. Some lovely pics here from Mike Bowers: Independent MP Andrew Wilkie has asked about waiting time blowouts in Tasmania’s health system. The health minister, Greg Hunt, says the federal government has significantly increased funding to Tasmanian hospitals, “a doubling of funding and beyond in our time on our watch”. He also says opposition claims there are not enough ventilators in Australia are “false”. Labor MP Anika Wells has asked why the federal government didn’t implement the recommendation from the Jenkins review to impose a duty on employers to safeguard their workers. Morrison said: 42 of the 55 recommendations of the Respect@Work report are fully implemented and are fully funded with over $60 million in commitment, and work is underway on all of the recommendations. An unsavoury ending to the extraordinary Press Club speeches from Grace Tame and Brittany Higgins, with a small number of anti-vaccine protesters deciding to picket outside the building towards the end of the event. Around 30 protesters – several wearing the Australian flag as capes or waving their “red ensign” flags – stood outside the National Press Club, some singing songs in opposition to vaccine mandates. Several black Comcars were parked at the area, ready to ferry politicians from the speech back to Parliament House. The protesters quickly moved on, and voiced plans to then head next to The Lodge. It’s unclear why they decided to come to the Press Club in the first place, but some demonstrators had attempted to picket outside various radio and TV stations across Canberra earlier on Wednesday. Albanese’s first question, sparked by Brittany Higgins and Grace Tame, is whether the government will adopt firm targets to end violence against women and children. Scott Morrison says the government is funding the national plan, including $1.2bn as a “down payment”. He’s listing a range of other measures the government is taking – it’s sounding a bit like the women’s statement in the budget, where everything that even tangentially affects women gets shoehorned in. He says: We will join all others in this place in ensuring that we have targets set out collectively and agreed together. More importantly than that, [we are] putting in place the funding as we have demonstrated as government when first elected, and even in our most recent budget to ensure the federal government is doing its part to end violence against women and children in this country. Labor leader Anthony Albanese says Grimes “was one of the key reasons Australia managed [the AIDS crisis] so much more humanely than so many other countries”: I believe our response was the best in the world. And countless lives were saved ... Don was too much of a realist to believe in utopia, but he believed in a better Australia. May his children Roger, Jan, Jenny, Sally and Ben, feel consoled by the knowledge that Don used his life to make such a positive difference. May he rest in peace. Scott Morrison is giving a condolence motion for former Labor senator Don Grimes at the beginning of question time. The prime minister says Grimes implemented asset tests for the pension, established the Disability Advisory Council, and saved untold thousands of lives through taking action on AIDS. He says: Don Grimes was a very practical man. A man of great consequence. His family and party can be proud of his contribution and we think his family especially for his great service to our country. On behalf of the government I extend to his children, Roger, Jan, Jenny, Sally and his wider family, condolences of the government from the Parliament and the gratitude of the Australian people. May he rest in peace. A Victorian parliamentary inquiry is set to investigate the influence of the far-right in the state, following a push by the Greens. The Legal and Social Issues Committee on Wednesday confirmed they will hold an inquiry exploring: The rise of far-right extremist movements in Victoria. Their methods of recruitment and communication. How the pandemic has affected the growth of far-right extremism in Victoria. The risks their plans and actions pose to Victoria, especially to Victoria’s multicultural communities. The violent potential of these movements, including the potential for targeted violence against politicians and public figures. The links between far-right extremist groups, other forms of extremism, radical populist right and anti-vaccine misinformation groups. What steps need to be taken in Victoria to counter these far-right extremist groups. Leader of the Victorian Greens, Samantha Ratnam, said the pandemic had exacerbated far-right groups’ influence in the state: There should be no place for far-right extremism in Victoria. Yet at the beginning of last year, we saw white supremacists openly gathering in regional Victoria. And throughout the pandemic, we’ve seen these groups play into the genuine fears and anxieties of Victorians in an attempt to mobilise and grow their movement. Our inquiry will investigate the rise of these movements in Victoria and what we need to do to counter them, for the safety of all Victorians, especially multicultural communities. History has shown us what happens when we don’t act quickly. The committee will report back to parliament by 31 May. Independent MP Helen Haines was in the lower house earlier explaining that she can’t support the religious discrimination bill, explaining it is “not just a shield against discrimination on religious belief – it also creates many swords”. Haines said she was particularly concerned about the statement of belief clause, which she calls a “monumental steamroll of our anti-discrimination laws”. She said: It’s a step too far. I acknowledge there are some safeguards, such as the statement having to be made in good faith, but it is unclear to me how far this rollback will go. Haines commits to “reassess this bill if it comes to the house in a better form” after Senate amendment, but warns “it will take a lot” to win her support. Haines said the government amendments to the Sex Discrimination Act do not provide enough protection against LGBTQ+ teachers and students, because they will still “proactively” be able to discriminate with the exception of expelling gay students. Gambling harm is being overlooked in police investigations and coronial processes in possible cases of suicide, and tighter regulation is needed in Australia – including a ban on gambling advertising – to help prevent gambling-related deaths, a new report has found. The paper, Gambling and Suicide Prevention: A road map for change, released by Suicide Prevention Australia and Financial Counselling Australia today, draws on personal testimony from families who had lost loved ones to suicide, from those who have experienced gambling-related harm, and consultation with state coroners and members of the police force, as well as banks, gambling companies, counsellors and more. Lauren Levin, director of policy and campaigns at Financial Counselling Australia, said: Every gambling financial counsellor I speak to knows of people who had taken their lives because of gambling. I quietly heard the same from those working in the gambling industry. We all know that it’s happening, but no-one talks about it. Often the grieving families bear the burden of society’s shame and keep the deaths quiet. But the shame is not theirs. The shame rests on those that allow Australia to have the highest rate of gambling losses per capita in the world without proper gambling regulation. The report calls for police and coroners to “consciously look for problematic gambling as a contributing factor” in their investigations of an unexplained death, and to change their systems to record that information. Banks should also act to reduce gambling harm, including banning debt-funded gambling (with credit cards, for instance), and gambling companies themselves should establish “proactive harm minimisation, staff training and operational protocols”, the report says. An urgent review into current gambling regulation and the establishment of “a coherent, adequately funded, national regulatory structure” is necessary – including a ban on gambling advertising, Levin said. Advertising is a major contributor to gambling harm. People trying to stop can’t get away from it. Children and young people are getting damaged from the normalisation of gambling. It has to stop. We did it with tobacco. We need government to step up. The fix is not a bit of tinkering. The fix is a cohesive gambling harm prevention plan. The gambling suicide problem is not going away. It is growing. We are calling on our political leadership to commit to a comprehensive gambling plan before the election, and beyond. Lives literally depend on it. • In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14 and Gambling Helpline is 1800 858 858 And that is the end of a very intense National Press Club address from Brittany Higgins and Grace Tame. There was a lot of emotion, and a lot of laughter, and we just skimmed the surface here. The marvellously incisive Katharine Murphy is sure to bring a deeper understanding. Now, stay tuned for question time! Higgins says the independent complaints process that has been introduced in parliament would have helped her, but still doesn’t go far enough: I think it would have been helpful for me in my circumstances, as ministerial staffer, but I’m cognisant at moment it is very limited. It is only for serious complaints or what is deemed by a certain small team as serious complaints and it’s not an all-of-parliament mechanism. So it is still quite limited in scope. Higgins is asked how she felt during yesterday’s parliamentary apology. She says: I felt an enormous moment of grief, obviously. I was quite emotional, and upset. But I recognise the significance and the importance of it. So I was grateful in the moment that it was happening. I was grateful that it was happening with multi-party support. Tame says she is hopeful other states and territories will follow the ACT and introduce affirmative consent laws: The Grace Tame Foundation is actually launching a campaign, we’re calling it Stop Romanticising Child Abuse and the ACT introducing this reform is sort of the start of the ball rolling really and it’s not a huge reform to achieve. It’s quite simple. And we can, I suppose, use federalism to our advantage in that it creates competition with the jurisdictions, you know, one does something and all the other jurisdictions go, ‘Oh, crap, we’d better do that too’. Another moment that gets a laugh from the audience. Higgins and Tame are asked how the Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, could do better than the prime minister. Tame says: All Anthony would have to do is none of the things that Scott’s done. Higgins won’t “cast aspersions” on the prime minister about who knew what, and when. She adds she doesn’t have a lot of faith in the Gaetjens review to provide answers. An optimistic reporter asked Tame if she would name the person or the organisation who was behind that threatening phone call. Tame has been very animated, very facially expressive. She clowns around with a faux-earnest look and says: I reckon if I was willing to name either, I would have put them in the speech. Higgins says quotas would make a “significant difference” in politics. She says: I would encourage every woman who is interested in policy or national debate to get involved, because I fundamentally believe, post-Jenkins review, that it will be a safer workplace, but not only that, it is the most incredible job you will ever have. And Tame says she won’t go into politics, because she thinks she can achieve more from the outside. Higgins “just can’t see it”, but repeats that it’s an incredible job. Asked whether parliament is doing enough to protect gay, lesbian and trans students, Tame asks: Why does one group of people have more of a right to be themselves than another? Higgins says: It’s a deeply triggering and difficult time for them ... So I can’t even imagine how they’d be feeling having to listen to all this play out right now. Higgins is asked about former Liberal staffer Rachelle Miller’s story. She says she saw a lot of herself in the story: It was this retraumatising thing, this idea that these women were letting down the team, and this frenetic gossip that went around the building ... it deeply impacted me. [That] is why I think I am here today, because of the bravery of those women coming before me – 100%, I heard you. Julie Hare from the Australian Financial Review notes that few men are in the room, or asking questions. She asks if that’s a sign that men see sexual abuse as a fringe issue. Higgins said men might feel uncomfortable around the issue, and agrees that to an extent it might be seen as a female issue. Tame says when she first started talking about child sexual abuse, it was often men she was speaking to: Men are not the enemy. It is abuse of power. It is behaviour. It is behaviour, that is the enemy. Tame and Higgins are asked, in the context of a looming election, which party would be better for women, and whether either of them would be on the campaign trail. Katharine Murphy says Tame then winked at the Labor leader, Anthony Albanese ... Tame is asked about her response to that phone call she talked about earlier. (And she’s doing a very exaggerated version of the side eye that attracted so much attention.) She’s asked why she chose to tell that story now. “I act with integrity,” she says. “It doesn’t matter now.” Higgins is asked about those texts that the deputy prime minister, Barnaby Joyce, apologised for (which Joyce had asked be forwarded to Higgins). She says there was a nuanced conversation about her alleged rape, and that the important thing was the implication that the prime minister didn’t know about the allegations. Journalist Laura Tingle asks Higgins and Tame what they want the major political parties to address in the election campaign. Higgins said a key recommendation from the Jenkins review has been overlooked: We saw the Kate Jenkins Respect@Work report, and we shot down the positive duty which would have forced employers to actually take, you know, have a responsibility for the safety of their employees from sexual harassment. And that was just something that was blown away and noted. But it’s never been brought up again. We talk extensively about the Jenkins review, but what about every other workplace in the country? And so I’m shocked that that was not more of a flashpoint moment for people to go, “This isn’t just about parliament, this isn’t just about the gallery within Parliament House.” Tame agrees, saying you can’t “cherry-pick” from the report. Someone calls out: “Grace Tame for PM”. “Noooooooo,” she responds. Katharine Murphy says that, like Higgins, Tame “looks directly at the most senior women in the government as she critiques taxpayer-funded programs”. Tame specifically talked about the nation’s planned $90b submarines, and contrasted that to the relatively meagre amount being spent to prevent violence against women and children. Tame says: In 2019, the federal government announced it would spend just $2.8 million over a 3-year period, delivering a sexual and domestic violence prevention education program in schools called Respect Matters. But in reality, less than half of that amount was given, without explanation. As my friend Shanna Bremner, found of EndRape on Campus in Australia pointed out, there’s around 4 million students enrolled in schools across the nation, according to the ABS. So, from 2020 until 2022, if you divide the $1.36 million they actually gave by 4 million students, it works out that the federal government had planned to spend 11 cents per student per year on prevention education. Tame is finishing up with three key asks: The first is for a government that takes the issue of abuse in all its forms seriously. The second is for the implementation of adequate funding for prevention education to stop these things before they even start. The third is for national, consistent, structural change. Tame calls for the crowd to make some noise, and they oblige – and then some. It’s another standing ovation, as Tame and Higgins prepare to take audience questions. Interesting. Tame tells the crowd: I received a threatening phone call from a senior member of a government-funded organisation, asking for my word that I would not say anything damning about the prime minister on the evening of the next Australian of the Year Awards. Then I heard the words, ‘with an election coming soon ...’. And it crystallised a fear – fear for himself and no one else, a fear he might lose his position or, more to the point, his power. Sound familiar to anyone? Well, it does to me. I remember standing in the shadow of a trusted authority figure, being threatened in just the same veiled way. I remember him saying: “I will lose my job if anyone hears about that, and you would not want that, would you?” What I wanted in that moment is the same thing I want right now, and that is an end to the darkness, an end to sexual violence, safety, equity, respect, a better future for all of us – peace, a future driven by unity and truth. Katharine Murphy says one of the most interesting element of this address is how Tame and Higgins are reflecting on the impact of their own commodification: These women are both acutely conscious of how to use their power as advocates, and also the limits of the ecosystem that amplifies their words. It’s hard to convey just how comprehensively Tame is commanding this platform. (We’ll take you back to the National Press Club in a second). Labor caucus has concluded. Guardian Australia understands Labor will move its religious discrimination amendments in the House of Representatives but Labor will not oppose the bill in the house if these are unsuccessful. This was the recommendation of the shadow cabinet. Then, Labor will seek to amend the bill in the Senate. If the Senate amends the bill, Labor says it will “insist” on its amendments, and keep sending the bill back to the House until it agrees. However, other participants have said Labor reserve its rights about what to do if the House doesn’t agree - and Anthony Albanese promised another caucus meeting if this impasse develops. So we could see an impasse between the two houses - and Labor won’t say if it will fold, there will have to be some further process to decide what to do. Guardian Australia understands that Labor MP Josh Burns moved for Labor to oppose the bill in the House if amendments weren’t carried, but the motion was defeated on the voices. Ten or more MPs spoke in favour including Alicia Payne, Peter Khalil, Brian Mitchell, Peta Murphy, and Kate Thwaites. In favour of passing it through the House (if amendments were not passed) were: Chris Bowen, other shadow cabinet ministers, Stephen Jones and Julian Hill. This was not a left-right divide, MPs in this side were concerned to prevent giving Scott Morrison a political wedge to campaign on, and others argued the sooner the bill comes to the Senate the sooner beneficial amendments could be made. The amendments are: To amend section 38(3) of the Sex Discrimination Act to protect students from discrimination on the grounds of gender and sexuality Amend the statements of belief clause so it can’t override state laws Prohibiting discrimination in provision of aged care services Banning vilification on the grounds of religion. During the meeting, we got mixed messages on whether teachers would be protected, but Labor’s shadow education minister, Tanya Plibersek, has suggested they will: Tame says many people already know her story: I was targeted, stalked, isolated, groomed, and repeatedly raped as a minor ... Child sexual abuse is the epitome of evil. It is also disturbingly common. Perpetrated not by monsters on the fringes of society, but by everyday citizens, hiding in plain sight. One in six boys and one in four girls is abused before their 18th birthday. We tend to think of child sexual abuse in terms of physical acts but in reality it is mostly invisible, characterised by calculated, insidious, systematic psychological manipulation that leaves its survivors with lasting internalised complex trauma. Trauma that is not only reinforced by negative social attitudes, but also, ironically, by the very systems and institutions, the structures designed to protect us, to bring justice – like the courts, like the press. Such is the vicious cycle, or rather, tangled web, of abuse culture, and thus we see the effects of abuse persist long after abuse itself stops, and wherever they can, abuses will turn its survivors and their supporters against each other. One of the key objectives of perpetrators and their defenders is to maintain control of the narrative by denying, twisting or completely rewriting the truth. As a result, survivors remain trapped in a seemingly inescapable estate of repeated self-justification. By design, those who are already exhausted and traumatised to become exponentially so. Taking more power in the process. Our pain is their strength. But by the same token, our strength is their pain. The higher we rise, the hideout they try to regain control. Why, just the other day, someone online called me a horrible, horrible person who aggressively pursued her teacher and then blamed everyone else. Former Australian of the Year Grace Tame is up now. Katharine Murphy reports that the most senior women in the government are directly in front of Higgins as she launches into the deficiencies of the national plan (below). They’re right in her eyeline. Higgins gets a standing ovation, then resumes her seat. “She breathes in for five and out for five,” Murphy says. Actions are what matter, Higgins says: And what will be the true test of whether the government is committed to creating system change – task forces are great. Codes of conduct are important. But only if it’s paired with institutional change. There are 28 recommendations in the Jenkins review and, without their implementation, we will continue to see this toxic culture exist within our most powerful institution ... Without these changes, women will inadvertently continue to be discouraged from taking up rolls within parliament, or take a seat at the leadership table. If we truly want a gender-inclusive society, we need more vocal women in rooms where key decisions are being made to ensure that there is a gender lens placed over national policy. This starts with the implementation of the Jenkins review. The question is, if this moment doesn’t spark change in our parliament, what will? ... That brings me to the National Action Plan. The release of the draft national plan to end violence against women and children has been hotly anticipated. More than a decade after it historic launch, rates of violence [remain] far too high. In fact, they’ve barely changed since the launch of the plan and, in some cases, they’ve actually increased. This lack of action at the national level has seen the states go it alone. Victoria had the first royal commission into family violence, spurred on by the bravery of another former Australian of the Year, Rosie Batty. For women over the age of 15, 1 in 4 have experienced intimate partner violence. 1 in 2 women have experienced sexual harassment in their lifetime. I bet you’ve heard those statistics rattled off at White Ribbon breakfasts and at the top of ministerial statements for a decade. I know I have. But recognising these horrific facts is no longer sufficient. Women with disability across Australia experience significantly higher levels of all forms of violence. For example, 9 out of 10 women with an intellectual disability report experiencing sexual assault. And Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander women are 32 times more likely to be hospitalised, and 11 times more likely to die due to assault. Any single one of these statistics should challenge us. They should confront us. They should spur us to do whatever it takes. But instead, they’ve become sort of this throat-clearing exercise that we all just kind of tolerate. A mumbled pro forma before we get into the same old talk about how slow and difficult change is. To its credit, the national plan doesn’t aim low. Unfortunately, its aims are so lofty and vague that it’s impossible to disagree with and equally difficult to examine. The plan talks about a future free from violence against women and their children, claiming that it will serve as a blueprint for change that sets out our collective ambitions, priorities and targets for how we will work to end violence against women and children over the next 10 years. It claims to integrate all we have learnt since 2010. These aspirational statements are, indeed, ambitious, and equal to the scale of the challenge. But the question is - how will they be achieved? That is, unfortunately, where the draft plan has lost its way. Instead, it is largely a collection of statistics describing the problem, filled with warm sentiments and platitudes attached to noble outcomes which lacks the promised learnings from the past decade towards a future free from violence against women and children, and clear targets to that end. Without clearer action and firm targets, there can be no accountability. Without accountability, we are back to a world where we are describing the problem being seen as sufficient. The draft plan does not even directly acknowledge the fact that we’ve failed on our first account. Our one single measure for success – a target to see a significant and sustained reduction in violence against women and their children during the next 12 years – we failed. How can you speak on drawing on everything you have learned without confessing the failure of the one test we have set ourselves? Instead, we have monitored acknowledgements that rates of domestic violence have remained stable and rates of sexual violence have increased. In response, the planet laments wistfully that more needs to be done, but if it is more of the same compounded by a refusal to examine the past failures, let alone examine them, then this plan will not be worth the glossy paper it will eventually be printed on and Australian women and children will suffer through another decade of violence and abuse while politicians and policymakers ring their hands about the fact that we need to turn things around in 2040. As I think you have gathered by now, my patience has run out. I want to close by saying that for all the fear and anger and sadness that my time in politics has brought me, it did not take away my belief in Australia, my faith in democracy. I know our country can do better for women and girls. I know our parliament will be a better, stronger place if more women are ministers and members and senators and staffers. I know change is possible, and as long as there are people like Grace Tame and Rosie Batty ... I know that change is coming. It is up to us to keep those in power up to account. To take up the challenge, we each have a responsibility to one another and have a role to play in making things better for the next generation of women. Higgins is talking about the need for action, for change, and for justice: The women and girls of Australia deserve so much better than an improvement in the way that we publicly discuss the dangers that they face at home and in their daily lives. Put another way, last year wasn’t a march for acknowledgement. It wasn’t a march for coverage. It wasn’t a march for language. It was a march for justice. And that justice demands real change in our laws, as well as in our language, in our national culture, as well as our national conversation. That starts with the prime minister – yes, some of his language last year was shocking and, at times, admittedly, a bit offensive. But his words wouldn’t matter if his actions had measured up. Then, or since. I didn’t want his sympathy as a father. I wanted him to use his power as prime minister. The crowd erupted into applause at this point. Higgins continued: I wanted him to wield the weight of his office and drive change in the party and our parliament, and out into the country. And one year later, I don’t care if the government has improved the way that they talk about these issues. I’m not interested in words anymore. I want to see action. Late last year, we saw the final report from the Jenkins review, commissioned by Australia’s sex discrimination commissioner, who very kindly is here today. It revealed what many of us in this room already know to be true. Sexual harassment and bullying is rife in the corridors of power, with over 51% of participants reporting incidents of this nature. I earnestly thank the prime minister and the leader of the opposition for their statements of acknowledgement and apologies offered yesterday to victims of abuse in our national parliament. In addition, I’d like to acknowledge Zali Steggall, who enabled a handful of us to actually attend in person. It was encouraging, and an important sentiment, but I am cognisant that, at this point in time, they are still only words. Higgins is saying platitudes and weasel words are not enough: Nearly a year after the March4Justice made its way to the threshold of federal parliament, too little has changed. If you go back and read articles from March 15, there was a sense of a national moment of reckoning. A feeling of unstoppable momentum. An irresistible force. A raging current that would not be turned aside by tired old platitudes from fathers of daughters. But I stand here today fearful that this moment of transformative potential, the bravery of all those women who spoke up and stood up and said “Enough is enough” is in danger of being minimised to a flare-up, a blip on the radar, a month-long wonder in the national conversation. Or, worse, just a political perception problem neutralised and turned into a net positive. Even beyond that, I’m worried what too many people beyond the government and the media took out of the events of last year was that we need to be better at talking about the problem. In a lot of cases, that seems to have meant trading off offensive, tone-deaf statements for a convoluted mix of appeasing weasel-words. In the national conversation, we have this passive, anonymous language vaguely talking about “wrongs done” as if sexual violence falls out of the sky. As if it is perpetrated by no-one. As if it is inflicted on no-one. For a start, recognising there’s a problem is 50 years short of what’s required. Katharine Murphy is down at the National Press Club, and says the atmosphere is “electric”. Liberal MPs Marise Payne, Anne Ruston, Jane Hume and Simon Birmingham are there, as is former MP Julia Banks. Labor leader Anthony Albanese is also in the room to hear Brittany Higgins and Grace Tame. Former Liberal staffer Brittany Higgins said: I made my decision to speak out because the alternative was to be part of the culture of silence inside Parliament House. I spoke out because I wanted the next generation of staffers to work in a better place. To take up a dream job like I did. And for it to live up to their hopes and not betray them. And above all, I decided to speak out because I hoped it would make it easier for other women to speak out too. It’s become my whole life mantra right through the past 12 months – to make it easier for other women to speak. So while I’m very grateful to take the chance to talk at the National Press Club, I want to stress that I don’t pretend to speak for all survivors. Not for a minute do I imagine that I could. Everyone’s trauma is personal. I never wanted to be a spokesperson or a standard-bearer, but I do know that it’s easier to share your story if you recognise something of it in someone else’s. And above all, I believe it will be easier for women to share their story if they see it makes a difference in the workplace, in our national life, and in our parliament. That’s what keeps me speaking out – my determination to drive change. This could be confronting or triggering for some people. If you need help, call the National Sexual Assault, Family &amp; Domestic Violence Counselling Line on 1800RESPECT (1800 737 732) or visit www.1800RESPECT.org.au. The National Press Club is just kicking off now. Apparently there was a bit of a palaver earlier, when a woman at the front of the room was knocked over in the initial rush of photographers. But she’s upright now. And Brittany Higgins is about to start speaking – she has been greeted with rapturous applause. Until the recent Omicron surge in cases, overall mortality in Australia has been lower than previous years, as the increase in deaths from Covid-19 has been more than offset by the reduction in deaths from other respiratory illnesses. But the recent surge in Covid-19 cases has changed this. According to modelling released by the Actuaries Institute, the high cases and number of deaths is expected to result in a 10% increase in the total number of deaths, from all causes, in Australia during January 2022. In January 2022, official Covid-19 deaths in Australia totalled 1,582. There were 909 official Covid-19 deaths in 2020 and a further 1,344 deaths in 2021. Convenor of the Actuaries Institute’s Covid-19 working group, Jennifer Lang, said the model measures actual deaths against predicted deaths, adjusted as the population ages and grows, and allows for trends in mortality improvement. She said: In general, our model shows expected deaths are increasing faster from demographic changes than they are reducing because of improvements to mortality. For the month of January 2022, if there had been no pandemic, we would have expected around 13,500 to 14,000 deaths. However, the surge in Covid-19 deaths without any corresponding reduction in other deaths means that in January 2022 we expect to see excess mortality of around 10% once the complete death data is available. The foreign affairs minister, Marise Payne, says Australia has had “no discussions” with Taiwan about the possibility of renaming its representative office in Australia. Payne fronted the media at Parliament House alongside Lithuania’s foreign minister, Gabrielius Landsbergis. Payne flagged that Australia would soon open an AusTrade presence in Vilnius, Lithuania’s capital. She also said she had secured Landsbergis’ support to progress the Australia-EU free trade agreement that was stalled last year amid tensions with France over the Aukus deal. Lithuania has been embroiled in a row with China over the opening of a “Taiwanese Representative Office” in Lithuania, something that led China to downgrade the relationship and increase trade pressure against Lithuania. In Australia, Taiwan’s office is called the Taipei Economic And Cultural Office in Australia. Asked whether Australia had had any discussion with Taiwan in the past year about renaming that office, Payne was clearly not keen to open a new front in tensions with China: No discussions of that nature. Australia remains committed to our one-China policy. Pressed on whether she ruled out a renaming of the office, Payne repeated: “No discussions.” Last week legislators from both parties in the US proposed bills to rename the the Taipei Economic and Cultural Representative Office in the US. On Russia, Payne did not specify particular red lines that would trigger Australia to introduce further sanctions. Payne, who is also the minister for women, said she would head to the National Press Club to hear the address by Grace Tame and Brittany Higgins. (We’ll be bringing you that address shortly). Here are the latest coronavirus numbers from around Australia today, as the country records at least 68 deaths from Covid-19: ACT Deaths: 1 Cases: 475 In hospital: 54 (with four people in ICU) NSW Deaths: 20 Cases: 10,312 In hospital: 1,906 (with 132 people in ICU) NT Deaths: 0 Cases: 1,128 In hospital: 174 (with four people in ICU) Queensland Deaths: 24 Cases: 6,900 In hospital: 686 (with 44 people in ICU) South Australia Deaths: 2 Cases: 1,671 In hospital: 210 (with 18 people in ICU) Tasmania Deaths: 0 Cases: 574 In hospital: 15 (with one person in ICU) Victoria Deaths: 21 Cases: 9,908 In hospital: 542 (with 71 people in ICU) Western Australia Deaths: 0 Cases: 94 (14 local and 80 ‘other’) In hospital: 1 The Labor caucus meeting was pretty easy and breezy when it came to ways to improve the religious discrimination bill, but has got bogged down in the procedural/tactical question of what to do if both houses won’t agree to amendments. So far we understand the plan is to move amendments in both the House and the Senate – the question is what to do if the Senate amends the bill but the House does not agree to the Senate version. The Labor caucus is currently debating whether to: Bitch and fold – that is, if it’s the House version or nothing, pass the House version in the Senate to get this off the agenda; or Insist on amendments, even at risk of impasse – ie refuse to pass the House version in the Senate, even if this means the religious discrimination bill ends in limbo land and the government blames Labor for not passing it. New South Wales premier Dominic Perrottet has labelled the commonwealth’s religious discrimination bill unnecessary, saying the legislation could create “more problems”. Following Victorian premier Daniel Andrews’ criticism of the bill, Perrottet joined his southern counterpart in expressing caution on the bill on Wednesday and questioning why it was necessary. Perrottet, a member of the conservative wing of the Liberal party, said he had long held the personal view governments should be “very cautious about introducing legislation in this space”. He told reporters on Wednesday: It’s obviously outside our jurisdiction here in NSW and I’d be reluctant to provide a commentary on it because I think that would simply be a distraction from the issues at hand [but] I’ve made it very clear that I don’t believe legislation in this space is necessary and I think it can end up creating more problems than it [solves] It comes as the federal Coalition backed the bill despite a number of MPs threatening to cross the floor over the legislation. The government has recently confirmed it will move limited amendments to the bill which protect gay students from expulsion – but not other forms of discrimination – without protecting trans students at the same time. Landsbergis is asked about China’s treatment of Lithuania (see Daniel Hurst’s post below for context). He said: Well, for quite a while Australia was one of the main examples, when China was using economy and trade as a political instrument or one might say even as a political weapon. Now Lithuania joins this exclusive club, as we have discussed with the minister. But it is apparent that we are definitely not the last ones. Especially if these practices are not stopped with the instruments that we have ... I think we need to remind countries like China or any other country that would wish to use trade as a weapon that the like-minded countries across the globe, that they have tools, they have tools and regulations that help withstand the coercion and not to give into political and economic pressures. Payne agrees that there are like-minded countries “who are interested in openness and transparency and security, working together and being consistent in our approach on these issues”: There are many colleagues with whom the foreign minister and I work and engage on these issues and the more that we are able to share our views and to articulate our views, the more we are sending the strongest possible message about our rejection of coercion and our rejection of authoritarianism. Hurst is at the press conference, and will bring you a wrap of it a bit later. The foreign affairs minister, Marise Payne, is now speaking alongside Lithuania’s foreign minister, Gabrielius Landsbergis, as mentioned below. Payne has welcomed the opening of Lithuania’s first embassy in Australia. The pair have been discussing the embassy, the Australia-EU free trade agreement, and other connections between the nations. Payne said of the embassy: I think this demonstrates the warmth of the ties that Australia and Lithuania enjoy, underpinned by those shared values of democracy, human rights, the rule of law, gender equality and open markets. A man with Covid has died in the Australian Capital Territory, bringing the territory’s death toll since the beginning of the pandemic to 31. Today 475 new Covid cases have been reported, 54 people are in hospital, four of them in intensive care. Tasmania has recorded 574 new Covid cases. There are 15 people in hospital – the health department notes that 10 of them are being treated specifically for Covid symptoms, while five cases are positive, but being treated for unrelated conditions. One person is in intensive care. The foreign affairs minister, Marise Payne, is due to front the media in Canberra in about 10 minutes alongside Lithuania’s foreign minister, Gabrielius Landsbergis. Expect to hear messages about standing strong against “economic coercion” from China. Landsbergis is also in Canberra to open Lithuania’s embassy in Australia, and to address the National Press Club tomorrow. Lithuania has been embroiled in a row with China over the opening of a “Taiwanese Representative Office” in Lithuania. In Australia, Taiwan’s office is called the Taipei Economic And Cultural Office in Australia. China objects to the renaming and downgraded the relationship with Lithuania. The European Union has gone to the World Trade Organization to take the first step in what could be a formal challenge against alleged Chinese restrictions on the import and export of goods, and the supply of services, to and from Lithuania. Australia has signalled it will join these WTO talks in order to back Lithuania’s position. The federal government’s religious discrimination bill is “dangerous”, the Australian Council of Trade Unions says. Union president Michele O’Neil called the bill “confusing and divisive” and said it would “increase discrimination and make workplaces less safe”. O’Neil said: With less than 10 sitting days left of parliament the Morrison government is trying to rush through the religious discrimination bill before the election. The mental health and rights of working people are threatened by the religious discrimination bill which will enable humiliating, offensive and harmful comments about women, LGBTQI+ people, people with disability, and anyone from a marginalised community. Save the Children Australia want the bill withdrawn. Australian services executive director Matt Gardiner said all Australian children “including those that identify as LGBTQI or may do so in the future” have the right to live free from discrimination. Twenty-four people have died in Queensland. Sixteen of the Covid-related deaths were in aged care. It’s the state’s highest daily death toll since the start of the pandemic. The state has recorded 6,900 new cases. Lunch at the press club could be saltier than usual today. Timor-Leste’s parliament has passed a resolution calling for Australia to drop the prosecution of Bernard Collaery. The resolution, passed on Tuesday with cross-party support, also called for Witness K’s conviction to be quashed, according to local media. Collaery, a former lawyer who represented intelligence officer Witness K, is facing potential jail time for his role in exposing a 2004 operation to bug the government offices of Timor-Leste during negotiations to carve up the resource-rich Timor Sea. Alliance Against Political Prosecutions co-convenor Kathryn Kelly said the resolution was a “significant event”. Kelly said: It is clearly not in the national interest for the prosecution to continue if this is the Timor-Leste government’s view. The development comes amid new claims that former Australian foreign affairs minister Alexander Downer privately boasted in 2000 that Timor was an “open book” to Australia. According to an affidavit filed by Philip Dorling, a former adviser to the shadow foreign affairs minister, Laurie Brereton, Downer said: You know. There’s not much back there [in Dili] we don’t know. We know what they’re saying about Laurie. They’re an open book to us. Collaery’s case is also back before the ACT supreme court on Wednesday, where the parties are continuing to argue over secrecy issues. The attorney general, Michaelia Cash, wants to hand a judge super secret evidence, which Collaery himself would not be able to see, to justify why Collaery’s trial should be held partially behind closed doors. Earlier we reported on some amendments Labor is seeking, to amend the statements of belief clause and beef up protections in the Sex Discrimination Act. Labor’s shadow cabinet also wants: Anti-vilification provisions – because as Tony Burke has argued publicly – the bill in its current form doesn’t prevent people being abused in public for their religion. No discrimination in provision of aged care services by religious organisations. But it’s important to ask: and then what? Will Labor insist on the amendments and vote against the bill if they don’t succeed? Or is it more a case of (as my colleague Amy Remeikis would say) bitch and fold? Guardian Australia understands that Labor’s shadow cabinet agreed to seek amendments in the Senate. However, Labor’s final position will be decided by the caucus. Also – earlier we reported that shadow cabinet wanted to protect teachers and students, on sexuality and gender identity. We now understand this amendment will only protect students, not teachers. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, addressed an ovarian cancer awareness breakfast this morning. At the teal ribbon parliamentary breakfast he acknowledged women living with cancer, calling today a day of strength and courage. He said his government prioritises ovarian cancer and “will not blink” if the pharmaceutical benefits advisory committee recommends that new drug Zejula should be subsidised. Morrison also announced an extra $2m for the teal support program, which supports 420 women living with ovarian cancer. Labor’s shadow cabinet has been meeting since 8am to discuss the religious discrimination bill, and related amendments to the Sex Discrimination Act. Guardian Australia understands that one of the options presented to the meeting by the shadow attorney general, Mark Dreyfus, is to move amendments: Removing the controversial statements of belief clause, that provides that statements grounded in faith or non-belief do not infringe other discrimination laws (including state laws); and Increasing protections in the Sex Discrimination Act to protect students on grounds of sexuality and gender identity This was only described as an option - either because anything agreed in shadow cabinet will need caucus approval when it meets at 10:15am, or because there are other options still under consideration including amending the statements of belief clause rather than removing it entirely. We’ll bring you more as we have it. Liberal MP Bridget Archer has said she’s “horrified” at the proposed religious discrimination package. I have no idea what she’s discussing here with defence minister Peter Dutton, but I hope she is at least explaining how to wear a mask correctly. I think the wags of South Park call this a “chin diaper”). The anti-vaccine mandate mob are still in Canberra. Rogue MP Craig Kelly brought a few protestors into Parliament House yesterday, where they milled about for a bit in his office. There are parallels with the situation in Canada, where truckers with similar anti-mandate messages have laid siege to Ottawa, Ontario. Arwa Mahdawi writes that they are funded by the far right and fuelling misinformation: Canada may not be on the brink of civil war, but what is happening in Ottawa is one small front in a global information war. And the baddies, I’m afraid to say, are winning. The blaring horns caused such disruption to residents that the truckers have been forbidden from honking. Yes, it’s a honk ban. Victoria’s opposition leader, Matthew Guy, says he will cooperate with police, who are investigating images of his MPs not wearing masks inside parliament yesterday. He told reporters: Whatever comes comes, [we] will obviously deal with that and cooperate with any questions that are put to us. But I say this again, these rules are confusing, mask mandates in non high-risk settings should be a thing of the past. It is time for all of us to move on. Guy says several MPs were drinking coffee as Essendon legend Kevin Sheedy gave a motivational speech to the Liberal party room ahead of the 2022 state election. Some took their masks off for the photos with Sheedy, he said. Like any law abiding citizen who wants to do the right thing, if we’ve made a mistake then of course we’ll do the right thing. In October 2021, Victoria’s premier, Daniel Andrews, was fined $400 for twice not wearing a mask outside parliament. At the time, Andrews told reporters if he was not fined he would donate $400 to charity. Guy has offered to do the same. Liberal MP Dave Sharma has done the full rounds of the media this morning, making sure everyone knows he is “still in discussions” on the religious discrimination bill. In NSW, the premier, Dominic Perrottet, said yesterday it was “unlikely” rapid antigen tests would continue beyond the end of February, with the government “assessing what we’re going to do from week four [of term] onwards”. AAP reports that the education department was distributing 17.5 million more tests to maintain testing protocols until then. It came after more than 3,000 people – about 2,400 students and more than 600 school workers – tested positive to Covid in the first week of term. The Teachers’ Federation NSW president, Angelo Gavrielatos, said the union would be “seeking further discussions with senior officials ... in order to see how things may progress beyond that four-week period”. “There’s no doubt that the rapid antigen testing is identifying people who would otherwise be in schools infected,” he said on Friday. Some 43.2% of primary school-aged children have received their first dose of a coronavirus vaccine. Twenty-one people have died in Victoria, which recorded 9,908 new Covid cases yesterday. A total of 542 people are in hospital, 71 in intensive care and 27 on ventilators. Another 20 people have died in New South Wales. The state has recorded 10,312 positive Covid cases. 1,906 people are in hospital, 132 in intensive care. Following on from the statement of acknowledgement to parliament yesterday, and ahead of Brittany Higgins and Grace Tame’s appearance at the National Press Club later on, the government has confirmed it will press ahead with another two out of the 28 recommendations in the Jenkins report. According to the finance minister, Simon Birmingham, the legislation to be introduced in the Senate will do three things: Amend the Members of Parliament (Staff) Act 1984 to strengthen and clarify the employment rights of MoP(S) Act employees. The amendments implement recommendation 17 of the Jenkins Report. Amend the Work Health and Safety Act to clarify that parliamentarians are officers of the Commonwealth for the purposes of the WHS Act. This would clarify that parliamentarians must exercise due diligence to ensure the Commonwealth is fulfilling its duties under the WHS Act. The amendment also implements recommendation 17 of the Jenkins Report. Amend the Age Discrimination Act 2004 and the Disability Discrimination Act 1992 to clarify that these laws apply to persons employed or engaged under the MoP(S) Act to put beyond doubt that these employees have protection from age and disability discrimination. These amendments implement recommendation 24 of the Jenkins report. Australia’s sex discrimination commissioner, Kate Jenkins, handed down her report on the culture of Australian parliament last year. The Queensland government’s response to a gas seep “capable of posing risk to life or property” near Chinchilla included a briefing memo about the incident that described a local Knitting Nannas Against Gas group as a “risk”. Ben Smee reports: Today’s focus now switches to what Labor will do on the religious discrimination bill. Shadow cabinet is meeting right now, before a wider caucus meeting later on. Labor has largely kept mum on where it will land on its final party position, but speeches from MPs on Tuesday revealed some reservations. Matt Thistlethwaite warned the bill was being “rushed” and that the contentious “statement of belief” clause may take Australia “in the wrong direction”. Stephen Jones’ emotional speech called for more protections for gay and transgender children. Opposition MP Sharon Claydon, who will chair Labor’s caucus meeting, told a Parliament House press conference that the party believed there should be “no discrimination”. She said: Stephen Jones made it very clear last night that we should always seek to get important vital legislation right. We have always said people should have the right to practice their religious beliefs, but the whole point of anti-discrimination law is that the rights given to one group don’t override the right of others. Claydon said there was “robust discussion” within Labor. The Coalition took two separate party room meetings to reach their final position yesterday; Claydon didn’t commit to Labor reaching a final decision today. At his own press conference, Greens leader Adam Bandt pleaded for Labor to not “trade trans kids for votes” and oppose the religious discrimination bill, describing it as a “Trojan horse for hate”. Independent MP Helen Haines told the ABC that she wouldn’t be supporting the bill, claiming it was “not ready to be passed”. “I have serious concerns and most particularly I have real concerns about the safety and protection of our young gay students, our LGBTIQ+ students and transgender students,” she said. Liberal MP Dave Sharma says he is “still in discussions” about the religious discrimination laws. The moderate member for Wentworth as asked this morning if he might cross the floor. “I’m not going to telegraph in advance what I might or might not do,” he said: I’m still listening to the debate on the bill and the points that people make, and I’ll consider my position when the bill comes to a vote. But I do have significant concerns about the bill. I’m also concerned about other issues of discrimination – ongoing discrimination which aren’t connected with this bill, but that the inquiries into this bill brought out, particularly against gay and trans teachers and students as well depending on their sexual orientation, and I think we need to address those issues sooner rather than later. Sharma also pointed out that protecting students from expulsion was not the only important thing. He said: We need to bear in mind here that a student can quite easily be forced out of a school without being expelled. If they’re harassed or intimidated or bullied or made to feel unwelcome or unsafe, of course they’re going to leave. I’m aware of stories like that and students who have been in that predicament. I think that’s the sort of stuff we need to be addressing. I’d hope to do it in this bill, but if not I want to make sure that there is a process set up and underway that will address these things very quickly. There was plenty happening yesterday on the religious discrimination front – if you need to catch up, Paul Karp can help. And here’s the video of Labor MP Stephen Jones’ speech: The Coalition has been sitting on a major report into the state of the care workforce in Australia since September last year, Sarah Martin reports. The report “set out to examine the needs of the care and support workforce for aged, disability, veteran and mental health care”: I mentioned the Health Services Union’s survey earlier, in the context of the opposition hoping to wound the government over the aged care crisis. AAP has some more details – 71% of voters back a 25% pay increase for aged care workers. That would mean an increase in the average pay rate from $22 an hour to $29 an hour. I’m just going to repeat that. An increase in the average pay rate from $22 an hour to $29 an hour. Anyway, back to how religious discrimination legislation will determine the outcome of the election. Andrew Barr, the ACT chief minister, says “significant amendments” are needed to the proposed religious discrimination laws. Barr is a Labor politician, and the only openly gay government leader in Australia. “As they stand, yes, I think they need to be amended,” he told ABC radio this morning. “So if any of my colleagues are listening, have a look at the ACT government’s submission.” That submission has 14 recommendations for amendments. Barr said he opposes the bill as it stands, and that the Coalition is using it as a wedge against Labor, which has not yet decided on its position. He said: If they wave it through without amendment and Liberal members are crossing the floor against their own government bill and Labor votes for it – that is problematic. The trade minister, Dan Tehan, is travelling to India today – he says to try to make progress on a free trade agreement and to promote the reopening of Australia to students and tourists. Australia and India had originally aimed to finalise an “early harvest” trade deal by the end of December, to pave the way for a broader agreement later – but that timeframe wasn’t met. Readers may recall Tony Abbott flew to India on a trade mission on behalf of the Australian government last year. Tehan is scheduled to have “several meetings” with India’s commerce minister, Piyush Goyal, to “further negotiations” on the India-Australia Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Agreement, to be known as CECA. Tehan said the pair had been in regular contact over the Christmas/New Year period “because we are both committed to concluding an interim free trade agreement”. In a statement issued this morning, Tehan said: Nothing can replace face-to-face meetings to help speed up the process in the interest of both countries. Australia and India are important trading partners, and we share a strong desire to further enhance our bilateral trade relationship. A free trade agreement with India would be a boon for Australian businesses, farmers and workers, creating new jobs and opportunities with one of the world’s largest and fastest developing economies. Tehan said CECA would be “a potential game-changer in opening opportunities for both Australia and India” and also “an important piece of our post-Covid economic recovery”. According to his office, Tehan will also use the trip to sign a memorandum of understanding with the Indian government “to promote further travel and tourism between the two countries”. The foreign affairs minister, Marise Payne, is also, of course, the “prime minister for women”. The ABC asked her this morning what she thought of yesterday’s apology. “I was pleased that this was the implementation of the first recommendation of the Jenkins report,” she said. “This is an important step.” She also said she doesn’t agree with former Australian of the Year Grace Tame’s characterisation of it as a “stunt”, and says she’ll go to today’s National Press Club if a meeting with Lithuanian officials ends on time. On religious discrimination, she says discrimination against kids on any grounds is unacceptable. She says “ultimately” she’d like to ensure transgender kids are protected, and says that is why the government is getting the Law Reform Commission to look at the laws, and make sure there are no “unintended side effects”. Asked what she’d say to transgender students, she said: I don’t think the debate is particularly nuanced, to be frank, I think the debate is being held at peak volume and on social media ... I hope that those students are able to turn to their families, their supports and their schools and know that as a government we want to amend the legislation in the right way ... to ensure those students are also protected. Payne has again called for Prof Sean Turnell’s release after a false report earlier this week he had been freed from detention in Myanmar. He was working for leader Aung San Suu Kyi before he was detained during last year’s coup in February. He has now been in detention for a year. Payne has canvassed a broad range of foreign affairs issues on ABC radio this morning, including Russia and tensions with Ukraine. “We need to see action on the part of Russia to de-escalate the situation,” she said, adding that any Australians in Ukraine should leave immediately. Olympic legend Ian Thorpe has been campaigning against the religious discrimination bill. He told the ABC this morning: This is actually going to treat some people in our community as not being equal to others. And that is the major concern of what can happen with this. It not only affects the LGBTIQ+ community, it affects women, it also affects people of faith and that’s why we actually have faith-based organisations that are actually against this bill. When I say it has no friends in parliament, this is a bill that we’ve seen three different iterations of, and they still haven’t got it right. Still on prime minister Scott Morrison, and women, Katharine Murphy has looked at how Morrison finally said the hardest word. But what has he learned? With impeccable timing, independent candidate for Boothby Jo Dyer has launched a book called Burning Down the House: Reconstructing Modern Politics. Boothby, in South Australia, is a marginal seat that Labor has its eye on – Liberal MP Nicolle Flint is stepping down at the election. Dyer’s thrown her hat in the ring, one of the “teal” candidates hoping to unseat sitting members across the country. She was on the ABC this morning. She said that, having observed his behaviour, she thinks prime minister Scott Morrison is “uncomfortable” around women. “He shows again and again that he doesn’t really understand the issues,” she said. Before your day unfolds, take the time to read this piece from Labor MP Stephen Jones, which I mentioned briefly below: Now it’s their turn. As Sarah Martin pointed out yesterday, five men spoke first in parliament on its toxic workplace. The “statement of acknowledgement” recognised the bullying, harassment and assaults staff – predominantly women – had faced. Former staffer Brittany Higgins, whose alleged rape lit a fire under the issue, wasn’t invited until the last moment. It was the same for the other women who had spoken out – former staffers Rachelle Miller, Chelsey Potter and Josie Coles, and sexual consent campaigner Chanel Contos. They watched on as prime minister Scott Morrison said: “I am sorry”. Today Higgins will take the stage at the National Press Club, alongside former Australian of the year Grace Tame. It’s unlikely they’ll hold back. On the legislative front, Labor faces a quandary today about the religious discrimination bill. The government wants changes to the sex discrimination act to protect gay students from being expelled, but is not extending that protection to transgender students. There will be shadow cabinet and caucus meetings today. Labor MP Stephen Jones gave a powerful speech last night about the effect of leaving trans kids in the cold: Last week my family said farewell to my nephew Ollie. He was just 15 when he took his own life. He was a beautiful, creative, courageous young man. He was loved and accepted by his parents, brothers and friends. His mum and dad are in anguish. We all are. He was gay. He was uncertain about his gender and struggled with his mental health. Now he is gone and we will no longer be able to love him and support him on his journey throughout life. Clearly the love and acceptance of his family and friends was not enough. Morrison told his party room yesterday that getting the religious discrimination bill through was the path to electoral victory. He’s trying to set it up as a vote for multiculturalism, but hasn’t even convinced all those on his own side. Labor reckons aged care might be a vote swinger. The text-based attacks on Morrison’s character from earlier in the week (was that really just Monday?) have faded from the headlines and Labor will use question time today to again hammer the coalition over the crisis in aged care. The Health Services Union is in town, carrying survey results that show most Australians are keen to give health workers a 25% pay rise. Meanwhile, those pesky anti-vaccine mandate protesters are still lurking around, threatening chaos. Katharine Murphy, Sarah Martin, Paul Karp, Daniel Hurst and Josh Butler will steer you through today, with pictorial highlights from Mike Bowers.Petra Vlhova roared from behind to win the Olympic women’s slalom by 0.08sec on Wednesday only hours after Mikaela Shiffrin’s bid for a history-making medal haul in Beijing was left in tatters when the American star was disqualified from a second straight race. Vlhova, a six-time world champion medallist who had never previously made an Olympic podium, was 0.72sec back in eighth after the first run. But the 26-year-old surged into gold-medal position after a masterful second descent down the steep technical course known as the Ice River with a combined time of 1min 44.98sec, then watched tensely from the finish area as the seven rivals who clocked faster morning times took their best shots. One by one they came up short until Vlhova raised both fists and pumped them toward the sky before embracing her team, having won Slovakia’s first medal in alpine skiing by less than one-tenth of a second over Austria’s Katharina Liensberger, the reigning world slalom champion, who settled for silver. Switzerland’s Wendy Holdener was 0.12sec off the pace, adding a bronze to her Olympic slalom silver from Pyeongchang four years ago. “Honestly, it was really difficult to be calm and focused on my skiing,” said Vlhova, whose gold medal is Slovakia’s first at a Winter Games not in biathlon or snowboarding. “But I had a lot of power from my team. They trusted me, they believed in me and they repeated to me: ‘You are so strong, just ski free, enjoy and focus on your skiing, nothing else’. They were always repeating this to me in between the two runs. I gave everything I had and at the end I am Olympic champion.” One of the most anticipated events on the alpine skiing programme had been framed as a showdown between Vlhova and Shiffrin, whose neck-and-neck race atop the overall World Cup standings has held the sport in its thrall all year. They have combined to win every slalom on this season’s schedule with one-two finishes in all but two of them. But Shiffrin’s day was over practically before it started. Seventh out of the starting gate for her first run, the American was forced off line and nearly fell after one of her skis kicked out too wide on a turn around the fourth gate. The two-time Olympic champion then sat in the snow alongside the netting on the side of the hill with her head bowed in disbelief for more than 10 minutes as her rivals continued their first attempts down the course, which on Wednesday was set by Shiffrin’s long-time personal coach, Mike Day. The extraordinary result came two days after Shiffrin skied out during her first run of the giant slalom, which ended her Olympic title defence only seconds into her Beijing debut. The 26-year-old had failed to finish a race only twice in four years entering the Games and 13 times in a total of 228 starts across all disciplines at World Cup, Olympic and world championship events. Her last consecutive DNFs in technical races? Back in December 2011, when she was 16. “Pretty awful,” a tearful Shiffrin said afterward in the mixed zone. “But I won’t feel awful forever. I just feel pretty low right now.” She added: “I was pushing out of the start. I had full intentions of skiing as hard as I could. I slipped up a little bit on one turn and I just didn’t give myself room to make any kind of error like that. I was planning to go on the most aggressive line, the most challenging line to ski. But I also know it’s the fastest.” Germany’s Lena Dürr was unable to hold on to her 0.03sec lead after the first run and came in fourth, bursting into tears in the finish area after realising she missed her first medal at any major championship by an agonising 0.07sec. Sara Hector of Sweden, who won gold in Monday’s giant slalom and was third-fastest after Wednesday’s first run, went for broke on her second trip and appeared on course to become the fourth woman to complete the Olympic technical double only to straddle a gate near the bottom of the course on the south side of Xiaohaituo Mountain. Shiffrin, whose three Olympic medals include gold in slalom in 2014 and in giant slalom in 2018, said her plan is to race all five individual events in Beijing. Her next chance to make history as the first US alpine skier to win three Olympic golds will come on Friday in the super-G, the speed race which she has never entered in two previous Winter Games but did win at the 2019 world championships. She will also have medal chances in Tuesday’s downhill and on Thursday week in the alpine combined, where she took silver in 2018. Since becoming the youngest Olympic slalom champion in history in 2014, Shiffrin has dominated the sport’s most technical discipline like no one before. She’s won more World Cup slalom races than any male or female skier (47), including four world championships and six World Cup discipline titles, which are awarded for sustained excellence over the course of an entire season. But over time the Colorado native has blossomed from a specialist into the world’s best all-around skier, branching out into the speed events with success and becoming the only person, man or woman, to win World Cup races in all six disciplines. Her 73 career wins on alpine skiing’s top circuit are third-most on the all-time leaderboard, trailing only Swedish great Ingemar Stenmark (86) and longtime US teammate Lindsey Vonn (82). Shiffrin’s failure to finish either of her races so far was the latest sour note in what has been a bleak Beijing Olympics so far for Team USA. The Americans’ longest-ever wait for their first gold at a Winter Games – which stretched past more than 30 events and finally ended with Lindsey Jacobellis’s surprise win in snowboard cross later on Wednesday – included several of their hottest medal contenders missing the podium entirely, among them defending Olympic champion Red Gerard (men’s snowboard slopestyle) and speed skaters Brittany Bowe (women’s 1500m) and Joey Mantia (men’s 1500m).As a child, I never rode bicycles or played sports such as gymnastics and karate because it was “not good for girls”. I later understood it was to avoid the risk of breaking my hymen and “losing” my virginity, but I only understood the magnitude of this “loss” when my cousin and best friend got married. She had been abused by a mullah – a religious cleric – as a baby. Her mother was less worried about the trauma caused to her daughter by the abuse than she was about her daughter’s hymen having been broken as a result. These fears were not misplaced. When my cousin did not bleed on her wedding night, she was sent back to her mother’s home the next morning beaten black and blue. Nobody questioned or blamed the husband. As I got older, I was always told by my grandmother to avoid wearing tight-fitting clothes that showed my body, and not to put on makeup or leave my hair open (without a burqa), because it would take away from my character. I was not allowed to wax my eyebrows before getting engaged. I grew up in a society where a woman’s worth is her beauty and body, and it is measured in herds of animals, given as a dowry when she is married off. As Afghan women, our bodies have suffered under fundamentalism, misogyny, violence, patriarchy and US occupation. Today, under Taliban rule, the oppression and violence against women has only worsened. Women wearing nail varnish, high heels or perfume, or leaving their homes without a male companion, or laughing loudly in public, are deemed “immoral”, as are women who venture out of their homes for work or education. Women are paying the price for having dreams because of their bodies; bodies that many people believe are only created to fulfil men’s lust, and therefore have to be covered and hidden, not decorated and revealed. However, the tide is beginning to change. Afghan women have long felt miserable and ill-fated because of their bodies, as well as guilty about what they are told their bodies do to men. Now, many are beginning to realise that the Taliban burying women’s aspirations beneath a burqa is actually a sign of their weakness. They are fearful of our beauty, strength, resilience and resistance. The brave and glorious protests by women in Afghanistan are proof that we will no longer be silenced. We will continue to fight, resist and rise against fundamentalism, inequality, violence and patriarchy. The Taliban cannot repeat today what they did two decades ago. I am not ashamed of my body. My body is a symbol of resistance against the forces who want to use it to control me. I will make sure that my daughter also sees her body in this way. Her hymen and virginity will not define her. I will make sure that she rides a bicycle, plays sports and dances freely. She will be proud and courageous. In a society that is exceptionally cruel to women, our bodies will not weigh us down. Nazia (not her real name) is based in KabulSpeaking of compelling Super Bowl LVI angles, Los Angeles Rams quarterback Matthew Stafford finds himself in the big game just one year after he asked the Detroit Lions, who won their last NFL championship nine years before there even was a Super Bowl, to trade him. As he pointed out Monday, though, “Just because I came here doesn’t mean we were going to get to this point.” For one, several teams were interested in obtaining Stafford, who had thrown for more than 45,000 yards and 282 touchdowns in 12 tough seasons in Detroit – but had not won a playoff game because his teammates not nicknamed “Megatron” were not so good. (“Megatron” would be Calvin Johnson, the Hall of Fame wide receiver.) Sheila Ford Hamp, the Lions’ principal owner, was not so sure she wanted to get rid of Stafford either, considering that she’d sacked the general manager and coach two months earlier. She said she was a “huge Matthew fan.” So were the team and their long-suffering fans. Stafford, selected with the No 1 overall pick in 2009, the year after the Lions finished 0-16, was no fresh talent – no guaranteed success in LA. He’d played every game over eight full seasons, often hurt, but missed the second half of the 2019 season with fractured bones in his back. Besides, the Lions were not going to just give him away. But the Rams offered a bounty in return: Jared Goff, their 27-year-old starting quarterback, plus, of larger importance, first-round draft choices in 2022 and 2023 and a third-round draft choice in 2021. Hamp OK’d the deal because, as she told the Detroit Free Press in October: “We want people to be here that want to be here and that want to play for us.” She understood why Stafford did not want to start over with another head coach. She saw everyone could benefit. Stafford had two years left on his contract, and he has acknowledged that the Lions could have said, Tough luck, pal. You are in this with the rest of us. The Lions might not win many games, but they made the deal, and for more than football reasons. “I mean, I think we’re in two different phases, and I think that’s what he had recognized,” the Lions’ new general manager, Brad Holmes, said at the Senior Bowl last week, referring to the Lions and Stafford. “I respected his request, and we did the best thing for our organization, the best thing for him.” Stafford grew up in Dallas and went to the University of Georgia, where he met his wife, Kelly. But Detroit became a special place for the Staffords. All four of their daughters were born there. Kelly had surgery there in 2019 to remove a brain tumor. He became involved with the community, participating in charities, becoming a voice. “His stand over the summer during the George Floyd protests revealed a man who’s fully morphed from taking things seriously to doing things seriously,” Mitch Albom, the Detroit Free Press sports columnist, wrote after Stafford asked to be traded. The Lions went winless in their first 11 games under Dan Campbell, the new coach, but Goff played much better at the end of the season, winning three of his last four starts. They have two first-round picks in 2022, the No 2 overall pick and either the No 31 or No 32 pick – and two more first-round picks in 2023. They can say they have benefited from trading Stafford. “All we can do is stay in the present, for where we’re at right now,” Holmes said. “The Rams, congrats to them. It’s an accomplishment to host a big game in their own city. But the present is the reality, and they’re headed to the Super Bowl, and we’re coaching the Senior Bowl,” an all-star game for top college prospects. The Rams don’t offer the cuddly appeal of their Super Bowl opponents, the Cincinnati Bengals, who almost magically have rocketed from a 2-14 finish two years ago to make their first Super Bowl appearance in 33 years under their cool 25-year-old QB, Joe Burrow. The “Who Dey?” Bengals have a 38-year-old head coach, Zac Taylor, who had to get a vote of confidence a year ago from Mike Brown, the owner, after a 4-11-1 season. Meanwhile, the Rams’ 36-year-old head coach, Sean McVay, is in his second Super Bowl in four seasons. The Rams will also be playing in their own stadium. No wonder they are a four-point favorite. There have been hiccups this season. The Rams won seven of their first eight games, but they lost three in a row in November. They then won five games in a row, but lost to the San Francisco 49ers for the second time this season in their finale. But the Rams have won three playoff games – the first playoff victories of Stafford’s career – including a victory in the NFC Championship Game over the 49ers. The mid-season additions of veteran linebacker Von Miller and wide receiver Odell Beckham Jr have helped. Of the Detroit fans, Stafford said on Monday that he would “always have a soft spot in my heart and will appreciate them.” He seemed to be aware that many people in Detroit are rooting for the Rams to win the Super Bowl because he plays for them. He appreciates that. “I think we all are playing for not only the guys in this locker room, but those who helped us get to this position,” Stafford. “There’s so many people in Detroit, important people in my life, that have helped me get here.” Campbell understands why Stafford asked for a trade, adding that there are no hard feelings. The Lions will have to rebuild again, this time without Stafford, for their first Super Bowl appearance. But they granted him the opportunity to try something new, because they knew he’d benefit, too.Who should be famous? There are people who are so brilliant at – and dedicated to – what they do that their work makes the world seem bigger and more exciting. Watching them act, hearing them sing, reading their writing or seeing their art can make you feel like something inside you is waking up – like there is more to life than work, bills and shopping. It really hits you. There are people who live wild, fascinating lives, full of stories that remind you rules can be broken. There are people who are so beautiful they seem to come from a different planet. You see a face like this and it stays with you. You find yourself, months later, in a supermarket queue, smiling and wondering about them, still. There are people who are very brave. Who will do the right thing, whatever the personal cost, because someone has to. Then there are influencers. The typical mainstream influencer is conventionally attractive but unexceptional. They are accessible. They painstakingly document the minutiae of their lives: a parade of nights in; Tupperware lunches; cups of tea (herbal after 5); cocktails in chain bars; Ikea trips; gym outings; worthy non-fiction books; bland clothes from high street brands (they know fast fashion is bad, don’t worry); and their political views – corporate-brochure style progressivism. They are safe and unchallenging, a symptom of a risk-averse culture. As Natasha Stagg writes in Sleeveless: “A typical influencer today is basic – the opposite of avant garde.” They are famous because they want to be. And often thanks to a deeply random origin story – appearing on a homepage, buying followers, being tagged by a bigger influencer, accidentally going viral – or via their participation in reality TV. Mainstream influencers revel in their ordinariness. The larger their following, the more ordinary they tend to be. The biggest TikTok-er is Charli D’Amelio (135.8 million followers), a perfectly average suburban teenager whose skill is tap dancing. For a while her bio was a self-deprecating joke: “Don’t worry, I don’t get the hype either.” Social media has democratised fame and elevated banality. My sense is that this banality has driven the demand that influencers conform to a narrow definition of a “good person”. A squeaky-clean type with brand-friendly progressive views, who lists their privileges and performs plainly superficial gestures, such as the trend for white people “confessing” to whiteness (a characteristic that is usually obvious). If a famous person is unexceptional, the subject of their morality becomes more salient because it poses an uncomfortable question: why do they deserve their fame? Earlier this year, Molly-Mae Hague, an influencer who gained prominence as a contestant on Love Island, attracted ire for an interview where she said: “We all have the same 24 hours in a day … If you want something enough, you can achieve it.” This was interpreted as a shocking revelation of her Thatcherite worldview. Particularly stark since she serves as creative director of Pretty Little Thing, a brand that got bad publicity after its suppliers were revealed to be paying garment workers in Leicester just £3.50 an hour. The vehemence of the response was striking. It seemed overstated, or mistimed. Hague’s position at PLT predated this – and the wages were national news in 2020. You don’t need great powers of deduction to discern that Hague’s politics would not align with a union rep’s. Was the issue her views? Or that she didn’t conform to what was expected of her as an influencer? If she had woodenly listed her privileges and self-castigated, while remaining at PLT, what difference would that have made? While Hague’s media storm raged, I was subjected to a concerted advertising campaign by Uber, using a YouTube influencer named Lucy Moon. “Safety Matters with Lucy Moon,” went the tagline: “I love exploring the city. But as a woman, I also want to feel safe.” Footage showed Moon sipping cocktails and zipping around in a taxi. Uber has been beleaguered by issues linked to low driver pay, as Polly Smythe documented, and by safety concerns. This advert seemed like Uber’s attempt to mitigate these issues. I imagine I saw so much of it because it was targeted at young women. This is not the most sinister (or canny) marketing strategy. But the influencer partnership struck me. Moon’s social media brand is familiar: a beige array of cardigans, teas and stock privilege disclaimers. In posts from summer 2020, when the outcry over George Floyd’s murder made disavowing racism a brand imperative, Moon (who is white) exhorted followers to be better allies and advertised her own credentials by announcing that she was now reading Why I’m No Longer Talking to White People About Race. When I watched her Instagram story, it was a video explaining colonialism. This self-conscious progressivism, performed while in partnership with a company that had to be forced by the UK supreme court to recognise workers’ rights, seems like galling hypocrisy. But I’m not sure it’s that; I think it’s mindlessness. The natural outcome of a politics that is proudly proclaimed when it is of personal benefit but totally unconsidered. Is this posturing better than what Hague said? Or worse? Moon looks like just one example of the cynical and deeply unserious way that social justice operates among influencers: as a branding device. Melodramatic language (phrases like “taking a stand”) disguises the fact that what counts as activism on social media is inherently low-effort and low-cost. Even under these conditions, influencers are spineless. They frantically espouse support for causes that have mainstream buy-in and ignore controversial ones. The anti-racism black square in 2020, for example, was ubiquitous. Expressing views on Palestine is rare. Inconsistencies abound. Rejecting colonialism is common, but there was silence last month on the 50th anniversary of Bloody Sunday, when British soldiers shot dead 13 people at a march for civil rights in Derry. The regular instances when a smear campaign (posing as a social justice crusade) is used to attract followers and advertise righteousness never involve personal risk. The recent West Elm Caleb saga was so corporate-brochure friendly that a mayonnaise conglomerate was involved within hours. It’s all just fake and silly. None of this would matter if this progressivism was not being used to sell us something. Not just Uber or mayonnaise. But these people. These bland, ordinary figures. These symptoms of a culture that is forgetting the value of beauty, weirdness and coolness. Of people who are brave. Of people who are very good at something that matters. Of feeling like something inside you is waking up. A culture that is so risk-averse it has stupefied itself. Rachel Connolly is a London-based journalist from BelfastA UK health minister has apologised for continuing with a meeting despite being aware she had tested positive for Covid. Gillian Keegan, the minister for care and mental health, said on Twitter she was in a meeting with three fathers who had lost their daughters to suicide when she received the result of a lateral flow test. She said she should have “immediately” ended the meeting, and described not doing so as a “mistake” and “an error of judgment”. The Chichester MP said she had told the men the result of the test but stayed on to hear their stories while taking “further precautions”. She said on Twitter: “Earlier today, ahead of a planned visit I took a precautionary LFD test which gave a positive result. I am now isolating at home and fortunately feel fine. “When I was told my test was positive I was listening to three fathers who had tragically lost their daughters to suicide. I told them the result and took further precautions but with their consent, I stayed for a short period to hear their stories. “I should have immediately ended the meeting and on reflection this was an error of judgment on my part. “I fully recognise the importance of following the letter and spirit of the policies, so want to be upfront about what happened and to apologise for the mistake I made.” A spokesperson for Keegan’s boss, the health secretary, Sajid Javid, said he had accepted her apology after she had “taken responsibility for her actions” and “continues to support her in her role”. Keegan has been MP for Chichester since 2017 and was appointed as an education minister in February 2020 by Johnson. In August 2021, she faced criticism for being on holiday in the French Alps while the exam grades crisis unfolded in Britain. In a September 2021 reshuffle, she was appointed minister for care and mental health. She sparked controversy a month later when she suggested wearing protective face masks had become a form of virtue-signalling.The mayor of London has signalled he is prepared to try to oust the Metropolitan police commissioner in days or weeks over a series of scandals. Sadiq Khan said he was “disgusted and angry” by recent failings and that he thought Cressida Dick lacked a plan to boost confidence in the police force, which had been “knocked and shattered”. Last week, Khan said the commissioner was “on notice” after details emerged of messages shared among a group of 14 officers at Charing Cross police station between 2016 and 2018. Khan and Dick met last week for a 90-minute discussion that left the mayor unsatisfied. On Wednesday, Khan told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme he wanted action soon from Dick and also signalled that his trust and confidence in her leadership of Britain’s biggest force was under serious strain. Khan said: “I have been quite clear to the commissioner: my expectation is the next time I see her I want to see what her response is to the examples not of one officer, of 14 officers being involved in racist, sexist, misogynistic, homophobic, antisemitic, Islamophobic and the like behaviour, nine of whom are still serving. “Secondly, what her plans are to win back the trust and confidence that’s been both been knocked and shattered as a consequence.” Asked if Dick still had his trust, Khan said: “That will be contingent upon the response from the commissioner the next time I see her.” Khan said: “If it is the case that I no longer have trust and confidence in anybody who works for me, I’ll make that quite clear and take action.” Khan said the two big questions for Dick to answer urgently were about the culture of the Met that fostered a series of scandals and what the plan is for winning back the trust and confidence of the public. Other scandals include two officers taking photos at the scene where two sisters lay murdered in a London park, and the Met leadership’s mishandling of the case of Sarah Everard, who was kidnapped, raped and murdered by a serving police officer. Khan said inquiries announced by the Met and the home secretary could take too long, and urgent action was needed. Lack of confidence, Khan said, could deter people coming forward as victims and witnesses. Khan is the police and crime commissioner for London, but Dick is appointed by the home secretary, who has to show due regard for the views of the London mayor. It is thought, but not written down in legislation, that if the London mayor made it clear the Met commissioner no longer enjoyed their confidence, the commissioner would be likely to resign. The Guardian understands the Home Office shares Khan’s concerns about the Met but so far has been less vocal about any desire to oust her, only months after her contract was extended by two years. The most recent precedent is in 2008 when the then Met commissioner, Ian Blair, resigned after losing the support of the then London mayor, Boris Johnson. Khan said his anger over the Charing Cross scandal was intensified by the fact so many investigated over the messages remained as police officers. “I think Londoners can’t understand why nine of these 14 officers are still serving,” he said. One who had misconduct findings against them was promoted to sergeant, the Guardian revealed last week, while another who had no discipline finding against them was also promoted. Khan said the scandals reminded him of horrifying police practices in the 1970s and 80s. “It was unacceptable then, but it is definitely unacceptable now,” he said. A Charing Cross investigation by the Independent Office for Police Conduct revealed messages about the deaths of black babies and the Holocaust, prompting accusations of a culture of misogyny and racism. The IOPC stressed the incident was not isolated.“I think it’s pretty fresh for an Indian audience,” says Deepika Padukone of her new movie, Gehraiyaan (“Depths”). “The way this story has been told, and the way in which it explores infidelity is certainly very new.” Gehraiyaan’s promotional material isn’t hiding anything, with clips showing Padukone’s character Alisha losing herself in clinches with her illicit lover Zain (Siddhant Chaturvedi), her cousin’s fiance. If that wasn’t messy enough, Alisha also has a perfectly nice boyfriend of six years, Karan (Dhairya Karwa), who’s done nothing to deserve this betrayal. “She feels stuck,” is how Padukone explains her behaviour. A 30-year-old yoga teacher in Mumbai, Alisha seems like an otherwise likable and pleasant human being, and the film dwells closely on how conflicted she is. “She feels like she’s been with this one person for so many years. And now, you know, she is at a stage in her life where she feels stuck.” Given how deeply traditional India’s reverence for marriage and fidelity is, Gehraiyaan represents something of a departure from how Bollywood typically deals with the subject, by treating infidelity as a private matter rather than a social and moral one. “It deals with complex relationships,” says Padukone, “and views these complex characters through a non-judgmental lens. It’s like peeling an onion: there’s so many layers to all of these characters and everything they’re experiencing.” “We’ve always seen characters in Indian films as very black and white,” she adds. “Maybe a couple are together and one realises that their soulmate is outside of this. But that’s not always the case; sometimes people just drift. They want different things for their life. And I think the way we view them in this movie is a little more grey. By the end of it, you feel that everyone has a story, everyone has a journey that is far more complex and deeper.” “Infidelity is not a new topic in Hindi cinema,” says Anupama Chopra, editor of the website Film Companion, “but the treatment has changed vastly in the last 10 to 15 years.” Of films that tackled the issue in the recent past, probably the best known is Kabhi Alvida Naa Kehna (Never Say Goodbye) from 2006. Starring a galaxy of big names, including Shah Rukh Khan, Rani Mukherjee, Preity Zinta and Abhishek Bachchan, its writer and director Karan Johar set the movie in New York, making it more a parodic tale of overly westernised Indians than an exploration of human desire. “I remember Karan Johar telling me that he couldn’t actually show the actors in a hotel room together,” says Chopra. “We see them walking into the hotel, but we don’t see them in the room. There were these boundaries that you couldn’t cross because Shah Rukh and Rani were such massive stars.” On the whole, the theme has been “not very popular”, says Chopra. “Cinema was very invested in the idea of the wholesome Indian film heroine, who is presumably a virgin until she gets married and then stays in the marriage and lives happily ever after. Those films prescribed a notion of epic love that could not deal with infidelity. Writers and film-makers didn’t know how to make it into mainstream commercial cinema that would be palatable to audiences who they assumed were very conservative.” Gehraiyaan marks a radical shift, not least because its star, Padukone, says Chopra, “is a massive A-lister, and these very limited ideas of what actors can or can’t be on screen are clearly now becoming outdated”. It’s also revolutionary for exploring the female motivation for straying, rather than abiding by the nudge-nudge, wink-wink humour that usually accompanies the portrayal of male infidelity. “The whole idea that it’s fine, boys will be boys,” says Chopra. Female infidelity, on the other hand, “has always been seen as a graver error of judgment than a man having an affair.” While largely ignored by Bollywood, “complexity in relationships goes back to Adam and Eve. It’s not a concept that we do not understand or aren’t aware of,” says Gehraiyaan’s director, Shakun Batra. “It’s a more modern take on infidelity and relationships. Intimacy is something we shied away from in the past. I wanted to make sure we did it in a new way. I like to believe that there is an audience for a more mature story today.” He knows his film is taking a risk. “Thankfully, the movie is on Amazon,” he says. “There is no box office collection.” Gehraiyaan certainly achieves an on-screen intensity between its protagonist Alisha and her lover that is rare in mainstream Indian cinema. “We had an intimacy coordinator on-set,” says Padukone. “I don’t think any Indian film has had that before. We knew exactly what we were getting into. The boundaries had been explored, and we knew who was comfortable with what … It was an extremely safe and comfortable environment to work in. And when it’s true to the story, that in itself makes the actor feel comfortable.” Batra says the film is not pro- or anti-monogamy, but it would be hypocritical to ignore the complexities of relationships. “We often couch the story of infidelity as the search for the soulmate or the search for the one,” says Batra, “and I felt it was time to try to tell a more authentic, more nuanced story, without taking sides or making any judgments. The idea is to provide a space to observe a relationship and be able to ask ourselves what we think of these things.” • Gehraiyaan is released on 11 February on Amazon Prime Video.It’s a familiar scene. You’re perched in front of the TV, remote in hand, “deciding” on something to watch. There’s that show about the mafia, or the one about drugs, or that one about drugs and mafia? What about this new police one? It’s written by that bloke who did that other police one, I think he used to be in the police, or the mafia, or both? No? Well there’s that subtitled one we recorded? Mmm, bit too much of an investment, it’s only a Tuesday night after all and I sort of don’t want to have to watch the screen all of the time. Have a look what’s on “normal telly” now, there might be something good. There might! Just have a look! Cut to two hours later. The mafioso and police remain behind their respective thumbnails, unchosen, unwatched. Unsatisfied, you peel yourself off the sofa and shuffle off to bed. You’ve made a start on that book, maybe you’ll give that podcast a listen, there’s that one about … oh forget it. Welcome to the tyranny of choice. Hold on. Having choice is a good thing, right? Well, yes. But too much choice can be harmful. Just ask Barry Schwartz. Just ask Jos Buttler. In fact, maybe give it a while with Jos. Schwartz is a psychologist and social theory professor. In a 2005 Ted Talk he explains that an “explosion of choice” has led affluent western societies towards “paralysis rather than liberation”. He merrily talks about his local store stocking 175 types of salad dressing or about the time he went to buy a new pair of jeans and was bamboozled by the different styles and fits. With so many choices to be made in everyday life, Schwartz argues that humans increasingly find it difficult to choose at all, and when they do, they are rarely satisfied with their decision. They’re haunted by the lingering thought of other options they could have chosen. His talk has been viewed 16m times. It made me think of Jos Buttler. Mark Ramprakash wrote a revelatory column for the Guardian a few weeks ago recalling a coaching session he had with a frustrated Buttler in Abu Dhabi in 2015, not long after the keeper-batter had been dropped from the Test side. Ramprakash mentioned Buttler had “a lack of trust in and understanding of first-class cricket”, that he was unsure of how to go about constructing an innings when faced with carte blanche and the scoreboard is not dictating the run rate and tempo as it does in white-ball cricket. “In that net session, I suggested I should throw him a few balls and he should play each ball on its merits,” Ramprakash wrote. “He seemed to not quite understand that concept. It led me to think there is so much premeditation in one-day cricket that some players who come through and excel in that format never adapt to the ebb and flow of Test cricket.” Renata Salecl, a Slovenian philosopher and theorist, called her 2011 book The Tyranny of Choice. She believes that choice “brings a sense of overwhelming responsibility into play, this is bound up with a fear of failure, a feeling of guilt and an anxiety that regret will follow if we make the wrong choice.” Could Buttler be suffering from the tyranny of choice? He’s a white-ball supremo. The bowler in coloured kit knows that Buttler can hit the exact same delivery in numerous different places, depending on the state of the game and the field placings. Take a length ball just outside off stump: he can step out and bunt it down the ground with just a flick of those meaty and pliable wrists. Or rock back and glide it through point. Step to leg and crash it over extra cover. Step to off and paddle it fine or slap it over midwicket. He can sweep, reverse-sweep, paddle-sweep, scoop, ramp, flick, tap, tickle and thwock. I’ll run out of verbs before Buttler runs out of scoring options, choices, to a single white ball. But in Test cricket, especially in the recent Ashes series, it’s a different story. Buttler is the panicked shopper, rendered paralysed by the choice on the condiment aisle or the dithering boxset doom-scroller. He scored 107 runs across eight innings at an average of 15.28 with a glacial strike rate of 27.43. Unsure of his process, continually bemused as to what his best option was in any scenario. Paralysis rather than liberation. Buttler faded throughout the series. With each passing game he looked more glum, upset, confused, frustrated. When Sam Billings replaced him in the final Test in Hobart, his Tiggerishness – is that a smile? Chatter and encouragement behind the stumps!? – only served to reinforce Buttler’s Eeyorish decline. England’s most successful man with the willow in Test cricket, Alastair Cook, he of the 12,472 Test runs, has often been described as only being in possession of three shots. Maybe four if you include the leave. With a cut, a pull and a nurdle off his hips being his mainstays, Cook had a limited array of strokes coupled with an absolute clarity of role and purpose. Three or four modes, slightly dull to watch at times but capable of breaking records and unifying a nation, Cook was the last terrestrial TV cricketer. No, not in actuality but you know what I mean. Buttler is at the peak of his powers in the white-ball game where more often than not there is a blueprint of how to play. The format determines it. Ramprakash recalls one of Buttler’s finest innings being the 75 against Pakistan at Old Trafford in 2020, a final day that more resembled a ODI match – a run chase, a time constraint, an equation to work with. Choice narrowed by the game situation. Very much Buttler’s meat and drink. It’s not just Buttler, of course. Any number of England’s young male batters who have grown up playing all formats, who have all the shots at their disposal, struggle with how to go about putting an innings together in Test cricket. Zak Crawley, Ollie Pope, even the feast or famine of Ben Stokes suggests a lack of clarity and confidence in how to approach the open possibilities afforded by the longest format. How many of them, Buttler included, will continue to keep attempting to crack Test cricket? How many will cut their losses and head down a white-ball-only route? After recent performances, the choice might no longer be theirs to make. What a relief. This is an extract from the Guardian’s weekly cricket email, The Spin. To subscribe and get the full edition, visit this page and follow the instructions.The US postal service (USPS) is facing the mounting fury of the Biden administration, Democratic lawmakers and environmental groups over its plan to spend billions of dollars on a new fleet of gasoline-powered mail delivery trucks that critics say will upend a White House goal to slash planet-heating gases. The USPS has outlined plans to spend $11.3bn on as many as 165,000 new delivery trucks over the next decade to refresh what is one of the largest civilian vehicle fleets in the world. The familiar boxy white trucks with red and blue stripes will be replaced by a new design that has been likened in appearance to a duck. A full 90% of the fleet, however, will have traditional gas-powered engines, with just 10% being electric. While the new trucks will come with air conditioning, this means their fuel efficiency will be strikingly poor at just 8.2 miles per gallon (3.56 km per litre). This is worse than all of the most popular gas-hungry trucks currently on sale in the US and is even less efficient than the original Hummer, a vehicle infamous for the vast amount of fuel it burned through. “We were optimistic the postal service would listen to us about the benefits of an electric fleet, but it doubled down on its inexplicable preference for polluting trucks,” said Adrian Martinez, senior attorney at Earthjustice. The postal service’s truck contract with Oshkosh Corporation, a Wisconsin-based defence contractor, has sparked uproar within a Biden administration that has set a goal for the federal government to get to net zero emissions by 2050 in order to tackle the climate crisis. Transportation is the largest source of greenhouse gas emissions in the US and analysts have warned the transition away from gas and diesel cars must speed up if disastrous climate change is to be avoided. The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has written to the USPS to complain that the new truck contract is “seriously deficient” in its appreciation of climate concerns. “The postal service’s proposal as currently crafted represents a crucial lost opportunity to more rapidly reduce the carbon footprint of one of the largest government fleets in the world,” wrote Vicki Arroyo, the EPA’s associate administrator for policy. Some commercial delivery operators have started to look closely at electric trucks to meet corporate climate goals and realize the cost savings of running vehicles that generally require less maintenance, and run on cheaper fuel, than the traditional gas option. Amazon, for example, has ordered 100,000 electric trucks from the electric vehicle company Rivian. The USPS, however, has said that it is in a “perilous” financial situation and that it has to choose the most reasonable contract to meet its obligations of delivering to 161m different addresses across the US. “Our commitment to an electric fleet remains ambitious given the pressing vehicle and safety needs of our aging fleet as well as our dire financial condition,” said Louis DeJoy, the USPS postmaster general. “When you’re an independent government entity running billion-dollar annual losses, and with a congressional mandate to operate in a financially sustainable manner, we are compelled to act prudently in the interests of the American public.” The controversy has heightened Democratic calls for the removal of DeJoy, a major donor to Donald Trump who has remained in his post following the previous president’s election loss. The USPS board of governors, which Biden controls appointments to, holds the power to fire postmaster generals. “The postal service urgently needs a change in leadership,” said Sheldon Whitehouse, a Democratic senator from Rhode Island. “Under postmaster general DeJoy, the postal service is actively choosing to ignore science and the law in order to make sure one of the world’s largest fleets of government vehicles continues to be a major source of pollution. “Postmaster General DeJoy has messed around with our mail system for too long and he’s caused real harm to the Americans who rely on it. This cannot continue.”The UK and Welsh governments are facing a legal challenge over the recent decision to grant a new coal mining licence in south Wales. Legal representatives acting for the Coal Action Network have notified the Coal Authority and the devolved Welsh administration that the group plans to challenge the lawfulness of the decision to permit an expansion of the existing Aberpergwm site in the Neath Valley. Their pre-action letter sets a deadline of 14 February before the organisation will look to file for judicial review proceedings. Amid a continuing row between Whitehall and Cardiff Bay, the full licence for Aberpergwm was awarded just weeks after Boris Johnson’s government called on other countries to “consign coal to history” at Cop26. The deconditionalised permit could allow the firm Energybuild Ltd to extract up to 40m tonnes of high-carbon anthracite (or “hard coal”) over the coming two decades. Devolved ministers maintain that, since the granting of Energybuild’s conditional licence preceded new devolution powers that came into force in 2018, they have been unable to intervene. But the Coal Action Network’s legal team argues that planning permission for the mine extension was consolidated in 2018 by the Neath Port Talbot local authority, which in effect provided an opportunity for the Welsh government to act under the new powers. The Coal Action Network’s lawyers have asked the Coal Authority to withdraw the licence it granted Energybuild last month, while Welsh ministers have been asked to notify the operator and the Coal Authority that they do not authorise the approval of the Aberpergwm application. The legal letter also argues the Coal Authority’s stated position up to now – that essential criteria for the mine expansion were met and, in the absence of external intervention, it therefore had no choice other than to grant the full licence – is a “clear misunderstanding” of its legal powers under the 1994 act that established the body. This, the letter contends, is a narrow misreading of the statute “and thus represents an error of law which independently infects the decision to grant the licence”. The 1994 legislation also states that the Coal Authority has the discretion to consider other factors – of which climate change can be one – when awarding new licences. It has been estimated that the new Aberpergwm scheme may emit more than 100m tonnes of CO2 over its lifetime, while the Global Energy Monitor research group believes the mine expansion could emit somewhere between 200,000 and 1.17m tonnes of methane. The Conservative MP Jacob Rees-Mogg last month defended the colliery expansion, as Whitehall is expected to rule on plans for a major new coalmine in west Cumbria over the coming weeks. A Welsh government spokesperson told the Guardian: “We do not have the powers to make a decision in this case. “This licence predates our powers on coal licensing. The fundamental issue is having a Coal Authority whose duty is to maintain a coal mining industry in the UK. “We have been calling for the UK government to change this duty in the Coal Industry Act to reflect the climate emergency.” A UK government spokesperson said: “The UK government’s view is that the Coal Industry Act 1994 states, where a coal operator wants to mine in Wales, it must seek the approval of the Welsh ministers as part of its application for a licence to do so. “Our net zero strategy makes it clear that coal has no part to play in our future power generation which is why we’re phasing it out of our electricity by 2024 – a year earlier than planned.” Daniel Therkelsen, a Coal Action Network campaigner, said: “As ministers refuse to respond to the public’s and civil society’s concerns, we must resort to a legal challenge. This is a terrible climate injustice, it must be stopped, and those responsible must be held to account. Granting a licence for this coal mining could open the floodgates to other coal companies that hold conditional coal licences with the Coal Authority. We cannot afford to mine more coal for any purpose.”Green campaigners are increasingly concerned that the push for net zero emissions has been undermined by a series of recent government actions. Ministers and government bodies are considering extending a coalmine in Wales and a new one in Cumbria, have approved a new oilfield in the North Sea and the expansion of the airport at Bristol, and are making cuts to public transport services. These decisions have come while the Treasury is reported to be seeking ways to cut the green levies from fuel bills, which would reduce support for home insulation for poor households, and as some rightwing commentators have clamoured for increased gas production as a solution to soaring energy prices. Jamie Peters, the campaign director at Friends of the Earth, said: “The government are saying one thing and then doing something completely different in a string of recent decisions, and the climate emergency is too important to be treated this way. “Their approach to net zero demonstrates either a lack of understanding or a lack of interest in how climate breakdown will affect people here in the UK.” The Abigail oilfield licence was approved by the Oil and Gas Authority last month, despite a UK-commissioned report from the International Energy Agency last year that found no new oil and gas exploration could take place if the world was to limit global heating to 1.5C. Similarly, the extension of a coalmine at Aberpergwm in Wales is now under consideration, as is the licence for a new mine in Cumbria that would supply coking coal. After international outcry last year, the government called an inquiry on the Cumbrian plans. That meant a pause while ministers hosted the Cop26 UN climate summit in Glasgow, but the issue is still live and is expected to be resolved soon. Mark Jenkinson, a local Conservative MP who has campaigned for the mine, has called green campaigners “climate terrorists” and is a member of the Net Zero Scrutiny Group, a group of about 20 MPs and peers who want to curb or reverse the government’s commitment to reaching net zero emissions. As president of Cop26, the UK has a continuing duty to ensure its resolutions are met, until Egypt takes over as president of the next round of talks this November. That means asking other countries, some of which have large fossil fuel industries, to come up with national plans to reduce their emissions. That will become more difficult if the UK appears to renege on its domestic carbon-cutting plans. Peters said of the recent decisions: “No reasonable person can say that this adds up to a government that understands the scale of action needed. The [net zero] strategy should be strengthened, and rewritten if necessary, to recognise the realities of the climate and ecological emergency. That means no new coal, no new roads, no new airports, and this must be the backbone of everything Whitehall does: it’s not an incidental nice-to-have.” Transport remains another sore point. Rail fares are rising while public transport plans have been scaled back with cuts to rail services and buses. Norman Baker, of the Campaign for Better Transport, said: “The government claims it wants public transport to be the ‘natural first choice for all who can take it’ but funding cuts to the rail and bus network will make public transport more expensive, less convenient, less reliable and ultimately less attractive to millions of people who have a choice to drive.” Hopes for a green recovery from the pandemic, which could create jobs in areas from home insulation and renewable energy generation to tree-planting and building flood defences, were also dealt a blow by the levelling up strategy, which relegated green investment to the bottom of its long list of priorities. Ed Matthew, the campaigns director at the climate change thinktank E3G, said this was a mistake, as an insulation programme alone could help to reduce energy bills, create jobs, improve the health of people in cold homes, and reach net zero. He said: “As energy bills go through the roof due to the rocketing cost of gas, it is worth remembering that the most energy-leaking housing stock in western Europe is in the north of England. Fixing it would slash energy bills and emissions while boosting the economy of the north. Failing to put that at the heart of this levelling up strategy is a spectacular own goal.” With Boris Johnson’s premiership hanging by a thread, and his potential rivals courting the right wing of his party, there is widespread concern among green analysts and campaigners that the push for net zero could become a casualty of his weakness. Doug Parr, the policy director at Greenpeace UK, said: “For all the government’s claims to be climate leaders their weak record on delivery in key sectors leaves you pondering just where is this leadership? Recent developments raise real questions about delivering on the promises we made to the international community in Glasgow last November.” He added: “The government has felt quite at home making grand climate statements on the international stage but with Cop26 over, the focus needs to move on. Attention has to turn to the real graft needed to deliver drastic emissions cuts here at home.”There are lies, there are damned lies, and then there are real estate listings. If you have ever wasted hours of your life clicking through houses for sale or rent (are you human? of course you have) then you will know exactly what I mean. That Scandi-chic – and surprisingly affordable – upstate cabin that looked so cute in the photos? It’s actually a crumbling hovel on the side of a highway. The difference between what you find advertised online and what you actually see when you visit a place can be extreme. I would know: during my time in New York, I have seen bedrooms with no windows (“cozy!”), fire escapes described as “outdoor space”, and one-bedroom apartments magically transformed into three bedroom apartments via removable walls. So how do real estate agents do it? What are the little tricks of the trade to make money-pits look like mansions? In the spirit of public service, I called up a Brooklyn-based realtor to find out. “So you want to know how we make shitty apartments look good?” he said after I gave him my carefully worded spiel. Yes, sir, yes I do. The very first photo you see is where all the effort is You know this already, but it’s worth emphasizing. The first image you see is the hero shot, the highlight of the house. “We need to make that image clickable,” broker guy tells me. “It’s got to be the Airbnb dream.” How do they do that? Well, sometimes it’s as simple as running out and getting a new couch: “Swapping out that old floppy couch that’s been carted around three different apartments with a new one can increase the sales price immensely.” You’ve been warned: don’t get conned by a couch. Smoke and lots and lots of mirrors You don’t have to be an interior designer to know that strategically placed mirrors can make a room look bigger than it is. As the realtor tells me: “If you put a mirror on the wall that’s near a large window, it looks like it’s brighter and has more exposures than it actually has.” Brokers love mirrors. It’s not deception, it’s décor. More photoshop than the Kardashians Virtual staging, you may have noticed, is all the rage. You’ll click through 10 photos of a picture-perfect house only to realize all the furniture was photoshopped in and the actual listing needs, to borrow from real estate lingo, “a little TLC”. Isn’t virtual staging a little bit misleading, I ask my insider? Nah, he says. They’re not lying to you, they’re just helping you see the property’s potential. They’re doing you a favor, really. There is, he admits, a point at which “helping people imagine a place’s potential” does cross over. “I have seen people virtually stage an entire backyard that doesn’t exist.” The same is true of roof decks. Does your house have a roof? Congratulations, according to some visionaries in the trade, you automatically have a roof deck! Awkward eyesore? There’s an app for that! Sometimes things aren’t just photoshopped into listings, they’re photoshopped out. Those ugly in-window air-conditioning units you see in a lot of New York apartments? They’re one of the most common victims. “We often digitally remove them,” the broker tells me. “Our justification is that half the year they’re not in use. We don’t want to draw attention to the fact that the apartment doesn’t have central AC; if we can remove that obstacle from their visual field we can get them into the apartment. And if we can get them into the apartment, we can get them to fall in love with other things.” Room with a skew: the wonders of a wide-angle lens or crafty shot While virtual staging may be a relatively recent phenomenon, real estate agents have always been good at working magic with a camera. Squash yourself against a wall, pull out a wide-angle lens: voila, your room has doubled in size! The right lens and the right angle can make a box room look like a master bedroom, or transform a kid’s paddling pool into a luxury infinity pool. Perspective really is everything. Sneaky appeals to your inner influencer You may think you are a savvy buyer, but the real estate broker knows you’re not. The broker knows that there’s a strong probability you’re gonna buy a cheaply renovated house just because it has an Instagrammable bath. One of the tell-tale signs of a super-cheap renovation, the broker tells me, is putting a big modern tub in a glass-walled shower, which is one of the bathroom trends of the moment. If you see that in an up-and-coming neighborhood, it’s pretty much a given that the place has had the cheapest upgrade possible. Expect everything to start falling apart as soon as you’ve closed. If you can fit a queen bed in a room, it’s officially a ‘master bedroom’ It doesn’t matter to the broker that a bed is literally the only thing that can fit in the room. Nor does it matter that the bedroom doesn’t have a single closet or room for one. Where are you supposed to keep your clothes, you wonder? In the kitchen cupboards? Nope: there’s only one cupboard in the glitzy open-plan kitchen. (There are fancy appliances, though.) Sometimes it’s not what the listing shows, it’s what it leaves out Like, you know, the fact that the one-bedroom apartment that costs $2,000 a month doesn’t actually have a toilet. It’s in the communal hall. (The clue in the listing: “A great building to make new friends!”) Or that it faces on to a cemetery. (The clue in the listing: “Quiet neighbors.”) Or that it backs out on to a major trucking route. (The clue in the listing: “Easy access to the highway.”) Or that your neighbors are almost definitely hoarders. (The clue in the listing: absolutely none.) The sad truth, though? It’s a sellers’ market, so agents don’t even have to try any more Have you taken a look at the market lately? Rents have ballooned, house prices are out of control, and competition is so fierce one desperate buyer offered to name her first-born child after the vendor (she didn’t get the house). Brokers once had to put in a bit of work to shift terrible houses. Now there’s no need to pad bad listings with creative language and Photoshop: they can just sit back and relax as people outbid each other for a house they haven’t even viewed.When the coronavirus struck New York City in March 2020, an unprecedented number of tenants stopped paying rent. Many just couldn’t afford it. Others demanded better conditions in their buildings. And some saw it as a way to call for structural change. This informal movement, organized around a call to “cancel rent”, was buoyed by a nearly two-year eviction moratorium, enacted to protect New Yorkers from losing their homes during the pandemic. But with the moratorium expiring last month, have New York’s tenants recovered, or are they at risk of losing their homes? We spoke to more than a dozen people across New York City who stopped paying rent or went on rent strike since the pandemic began. We wanted to listen to the city’s most precarious residents as they fought – and still fight – to hang on to the roofs over their heads. Most had applied for housing assistance during this time, but none had yet received aid. All described how they had gained a deeper appreciation for collective action, and all know their battles are far from over. Below are five of their stories. Rose Helesca, 42, Brooklyn Rose Helesca was at a breaking point. Not just from her work as a nurse on the frontlines of the pandemic – but from living with her three children in one of Brooklyn’s most neglected buildings, 1616 President Street. Even before the virus hit, the ceiling leaked, the walls were moldy, the heat hardly worked, and rats and roaches roamed free. She didn’t know whom she was angrier at: her landlord, Jason Korn, who ignored the residents’ complaints, or New York’s housing department (HPD), which seemed unable to hold him accountable despite him topping the list of the city’s “worst landlords” two years in a row. So when her neighbors decided to start a rent strike to demand changes, Helesca was all in: “We said, ‘Let’s hit his pocket.’” It was the city’s first organized rent strike under the pandemic, and it got Korn’s attention. He began calling tenants to negotiate, offering payment plans and individual fixes. But the tenants held firm in demanding top-to-bottom repairs. Then, in the summer, says Helesca, the landlord turned the heat up, forcing all the tenants outside. When they called Korn to complain, Helesca says he replied: “What’s the big deal? You’re not paying rent, so what are you complaining about?” In an email, Josh Rosenblum, a lawyer representing Korn, called the story about the heat “an absolute lie” and blamed the building’s outstanding violations on tenants refusing access to their apartments for repairs. In September 2021, Korn sold the building to a newly created holding company; Helesca says tenants have never met the new landlord, but they suspect Korn is behind the company, which Rosenblum also denied. The standoff is approaching two years with no resolution, but Helesca feels more determined than ever. They’ve inspired tenants of Korn’s other buildings, who have started rent strikes of their own. “The other buildings believe in us – they’re like, ‘1616 is so powerful.’” Helesca said she hoped more tenants would realize they can stand up to their landlords. “Don’t be afraid. Fight for what you think is right. As my mama says, there’s nothing to be scared of if you know you’re not wrong.” Caitlin Baucom, 37, Brooklyn The first time the artist and activist Caitlin Baucom received an eviction note after they fell behind on rent for their Bushwick loft in 2019, it felt “terrifying”, they said, “like the floor was falling out from under you”. But it was a gift in disguise. As Baucom researched housing laws, they realized the note from their landlord, Richard Pogostin, was likely to be illegal – along with many other aspects of his management of the building. So when the pandemic hit the following year, they felt empowered to stop paying rent for good. “I was just like, ah, fuck it,” they said. “I don’t think they can legally proceed with an eviction because their half is also illegal.” That summer, after a gym vacated the storefront under their apartment, Baucom and other volunteers entered the space and transformed it into a mutual aid hub against their landlord’s wishes. For a while, the Gym, as the operation became known, distributed support kits to Black Lives Matter protesters, as well as meals and supplies to neighborhood residents and unhoused people – until Pogostin forced them out with the aid of police. Since then, the volunteers have continued to help their neighbors from the sidewalk. In a phone call, Pogostin called Baucom’s complaints about the building maintenance “ridiculous” and said he would continue efforts to evict them. He said Baucom’s mutual aid was “all about them not having money, needing a place to stay, and somehow turning it into a social issue”, and their sidewalk activities were “hurting business and scaring people”. It was people like Baucom, he said, who were driving New York’s rents up by forcing others to subsidize them. But Baucom argues that not paying rent does precisely the opposite, by refusing to feed the cycle of speculation that drives rents up in the first place. And people with more privilege should join in, they say. “In my opinion, the mutual aid thing and the rent strike thing and the active resistance of capitalism is all the same thing,” they said. “It shouldn’t be incumbent on people who can’t afford to pay rent right now to rent-strike. The point should be that everyone rent strikes or refuses to pay above a certain amount of rent so that then their neighbors can also have homes.” Shy Morris, 48, Brooklyn Virtually every dollar Shy Morris receives – from her disability checks, social security and odd jobs – goes toward her apartment. That means nothing left over for food, and sometimes not even her phone bill. “I’m just afraid because I don’t want to be homeless,” she said. With the eviction moratorium over, she doesn’t want to take any chances. Morris’ one-bedroom co-op in Fort Greene was left to her by her grandmother, who owned the unit and passed away shortly before the pandemic. But the virus hit, Morris lost her job as a home attendant, and that’s when she stopped paying her apartment’s monthly maintenance fee – which “kept piling” until it had reached more than $8,000. A member of the co-op board approached Morris and threatened her with eviction: “You can’t just stay in this apartment. You’ve got to give something.” Now Morris pays the monthly maintenance but relies on a neighborhood mutual aid group to buy food and other necessities. “They really saved my life,” she said. “Food stamps are OK, but sometimes you need cash. Tissues, soap, you can’t buy these things with food stamps.” To give back, Morris volunteers her free time to help with food distribution. It’s become a community for her. “It’s a place where you can come and be elbow to elbow with people. I like that we can sit, and talk and chill, even if it’s just for the few minutes, the few hours.” Ramona Ferreyra, 41, the Bronx When Ramona Ferreyra decided to stop paying rent, it wasn’t just because her apartment was in disrepair. For her and her neighbors in Mitchel Houses in the Bronx, it was about saving public housing. “Lawyers will tell us, do you just want to sue for repairs? And I’m like, ‘No, I’m looking at big systemic issues,’” she said. Ferreyra, a former government employee, wants a class action lawsuit against the New York City housing authority (NYCHA), which owns and maintains the city’s deteriorating public housing buildings. She alleges that the housing authority’s chair, Greg Russ, has purposely allowed apartments to degrade as part of a plan to privatize them. Under Russ’s plan, called the “Blueprint”, NYCHA would transfer as many as 110,000 NYCHA apartments from section 9 – federal public housing – to section 8, a federal voucher program. To qualify for the vouchers, NYCHA would have to declare those units “obsolete”. It could then raise money for repairs by issuing bonds to private investors against those vouchers, using the properties as collateral. Russ says this method could raise as much as $6 for every dollar of federal funding. Ferreyra argues this would effectively kill public housing, as the debt would leave the buildings vulnerable to the investors, who would have far less reason to guarantee tenants’ rights. Under section 9, tenants enjoy federal protections, including a rent capped at 30% of their income, a right to organize and eviction protections. “In these spaces, we’re able to thrive and use flex, our imagination and our capacity because you have the safety net of housing,” she said. “So that’s why you have a Nas, that’s why you have a Jay-Z, right? These spaces are incubators for people not to be worried about, ‘Am I going to get evicted next month?’” Marina Quiróz, 62, the Bronx Four years after renting her first apartment, Marina Quiróz still doesn’t have a key to her building’s entrance – and that’s far from the worst thing about it. The building is filthy, leaky and constantly breaking down; in the freezing winter, the heat comes on once or twice a day for 15 minutes. The elevator doesn’t work at least three days a week. But nothing has affected her as much as getting harassed by her landlord and superintendent after she lost her hotel cleaning job in March 2020 and could no longer pay rent. “They called and called and came to knock on my door all day and night, sometimes at 9pm,” she said. “The stress was killing me because I didn’t know what to do.” She fell sick from the anxiety, developing hypertension, heart palpitations, dizziness, and pain in her shoulder. Soon, the medical bills started adding up, too. She finally felt relief after meeting members of Community Action for Safe Apartments (Casa), a Bronx non-profit. “I started visiting the office, and I felt there was human warmth,” she said. “I began to know my rights as a tenant. I thought that if something was damaged and the landlord and super didn’t fix it, then I couldn’t do anything. I found out that I can claim my rights, demand them.” On 1 February, the first day her rent was due following the eviction moratorium’s end, Casa announced it would launch an anti-eviction campaign in the Bronx, where 40% of New York City’s evictions occur. Pablo Estupinan, the group’s lead organizer, said that in addition to launching an “eviction defense network” to educate residents about their rights, they would start performing eviction blockades: physically blocking marshals from carrying out evictions – at tenants’ request. Estupinan expects the campaign to go on for years. “It’s been normalized for thousands of people to be evicted, and our job is to stop that. We’ve seen it’s possible with the moratorium.” Now, Quiróz plans to stand in front of the governor’s office and demand an extension of the moratorium until June. “We have to make ourselves seen by the authorities. What are we going to do on the streets during this awfully cold winter? We have to protest, we have to continue with this fight. “We all need help. It’s not just me, Marina Quiróz, it’s the entire city.”One morning in March 2016, before Eric Adams burst onto the national stage as the charismatic new mayor of New York City, he had a very rude awakening. The then Brooklyn borough president was startled to find that he could barely see the alarm clock that was sounding his morning call. His bedroom looked shrouded in mist. “I thought it was just sleep in my eyes and my eyes adjusting to the light,” Adams says. “But the cloudiness didn’t change. Something wrong was going on here.” He leapt out of bed only for the horror to intensify. Through the fog he could see that his right eye was bloodshot. His left eye was totally blind. “I had a piercing pain in my stomach which didn’t leave. I guess everything was breaking down all at once.” Adams is no stranger to fear. As he lays out in his book, Healthy At Last, he experienced plenty of it over more than two decades as an NYPD officer, patrolling the streets at night, raiding drug dens, investigating homicides, investigating the dark side of urban American life. This was different. This was the start of a journey into his physical dark side and the ugly truths he found there. He was quickly delivered a diagnosis of type 2 diabetes. Doctors told him that his condition and the multiple pills he would now be forced to swallow every day would define him for the rest of his life. American politics thrives on personal narratives of overcoming adversity, and Eric Adams is no exception. He didn’t accept the medical advice. He kept on searching until, with the help of scientists at the Cleveland Clinic, he discovered a way to beat his ailment with a radical whole-food plant-based diet. Now 61, Adams is reveling in his new stature as New York’s second Black (after David Dinkins in the 1990s) and first (almost) vegan mayor. Since he started in the post on 1 January he has been ubiquitous, popping up all over the city brandishing his trademark swagger. “When a mayor has swagger, the city has swagger,” is his mantra. There are many aspects of Adams’ first month in office that beg attention. He likes to present himself as the future of the Democratic party, a “radically practical” politician who is tough on both police brutality and crime, who gives working-class New Yorkers what they need and want while being scathingly dismissive of the progressive left. The stance clearly resonates with many New Yorkers who narrowly gave him victory in the Democratic primaries in July and with it the keys to Gracie Mansion. But Adams has had a troubled start, some of it self-inflicted. He tried to put his brother Bernard into a $210,000 job as his top bodyguard (the city’s conflict of interests board whittled that down to a $1 salary as an adviser). He appointed as head of public safety Philip Banks, who in 2015 came under federal investigation as an “unindicted co-conspirator” in a major NYPD corruption scandal. Adams doesn’t want to talk about all that. Before he sits down for an interview with the Guardian, his press team stipulates that he will answer no questions about politics – he will only talk about his journey back from ill-health and his exuberant championship of a plant-based diet, as laid out in his book. Even here Adams is placing himself in choppy waters. A few days after the Guardian interview, he incensed groups helping those impacted by the opioid crisis by likening excessive cheese consumption to heroin addiction. Then Politico came out with a report that quoted several people claiming to have seen Adams regularly dining out on fish. The story inevitably spawned the Twitter handle #FishGate, and forced Adams to put out a statement saying “I am perfectly imperfect, and have occasionally eaten fish.” Adams clearly needs to get his story straight. Is he a strict vegan who only ever eats plant-based foods? (No.) Is he a pescatarian? (Maybe.) Is he someone who was given the scare of his life by contracting a devastating disease and drastically changed his life as a result? At least that last one is a definite yes. After Adams received his diabetes diagnosis, he began asking himself difficult questions about his lifestyle. He started reflecting on all those years of NYPD night shifts and the terrible diet that entailed. There were the inevitable McDonald’s drive-throughs and Wendy’s shakes and burgers. He became a connoisseur of the dollar menu, the double cheeseburger, coffee and fried chicken at KFC. It took its toll – by the time of the blindness episode he had such a stunningly elevated blood sugar level that his doctor said it could have put him in a coma. And then Adams dug deeper. Looking further into the root causes of his condition, he thought about the soul food that he had grown up with in New York and that his mother Dorothy and forebears had consumed in rural Alabama. He thought about the sugared buttered rolls, the chitterlings (pigs’ intestines), pigs’ feet and ears, fried chicken, ham hocks, fried steak and catfish. He thought how delicious. And how deadly. So much of it smothered in sugar, high in cholesterol and saturated fats, contributing to the epidemic of modern American diseases – diabetes, obesity, high blood pressure and heart conditions. And then he thought, picking up on a debate that has been happening in African American communities for many years, this is not soul food, this is survival food, slavery food. “This was the diet our slave masters gave to us hundreds of years ago,” Adams writes. “We adopted a diet born from slavery and made it our own.” I asked Adams to elaborate upon the idea that the modern diet of millions of Americans today, in 2022, has its roots in the scraps of food tossed at slaves from the master’s table. All these years later, he replied, the long tail of slavery is still killing African Americans through morbid ill health. “Sometimes we think of being enslaved and we think about physical restraints,” he said. “Our hands and feet are in shackles. And we don’t acknowledge that the term ‘enslaved’ also applies to something you can’t free yourself of – and that’s what bad food is.” He goes on: “We have to free ourselves of it mentally. Sometimes physical restraint is easier to free yourself from than emotional restraint.” It’s striking that at a time when the enduring injury of slavery is increasingly being studied and debated, whether in terms of racial inequality or the injustices of the criminal justice system and mass incarceration, the same unbroken link to enslavement is rarely drawn when it comes to American food. “Food is doing more of an injustice than mass incarceration,” he says. “They are both bad, but the number of lives we are losing from bad food are X times the number lost to mass incarceration.” That’s a bold statement, given that there are about 670,000 Black people currently behind bars in the US. Yet Black Americans are almost twice as likely to be diagnosed with type 2 diabetes than white Americans, and that more than five million of them are assailed with the illness today. Certainly, he has witnessed the impact of food-related ill-health within his own family. He describes how diabetes was so rampant among his relatives that they even had a pet word for it – “sugar”. His aunt Betty died of sugar aged 57 – one year older than Adams was when he was struck with temporary blindness. No matter how prevalent disease has been among his community, it must have been a tall order trying to persuade people accustomed to soul and fast food to follow him into the strictly vegan, no-oil, non-processed, plant-based and whole food diet he has adopted. Among the recipes offered in his book are quinoa and tempeh stir-fry, chia oats with berries, and sweet potato and flaxseed smoothies. Try selling that to someone accustomed to St Louis ribs, hush puppies and oxtail. Adams said there have been times when friends would accuse him of elitism, turning his back on the traditional foods of his community and going all “white” on them. “There is a lot of pushback,” he told me. “Remember, when you talk about what a person is eating you are also talking about the emotions attached to what they are eating. When you talk about not eating soul food, people tend to believe that you are too good for it. ‘My grandmother was raised on this’, they’ll say.” So how does he go about trying to get beyond such resistance? “I give them the history. I make the connections. Sometimes people just need to connect the dots. When you start showing them the origins of fried chicken, the origins of chitterlings and pigs’ feet, of all the other food that were the scraps and waste from the slave master’s table, that hits folks and they begin to think differently about it.” It is ironic that his book, with its recipes and self-help bullet points, is focused very much on the individual. But out in East New York or in Brownsville, where Adams was born, and other low-income areas of the city, African Americans have scant chance of eating healthily even if they wanted to, given the food deserts they live in. Isn’t it the case that in neighborhoods where fast-food restaurants and delis stocked with sugary fatty products are the only outlets, a more systemic – rather than individualist – approach is needed? Yes, he says. “What I’m hoping to do, it’s almost like the Marines taking control of the beach. If I plant this seed in the minds of people while we are transforming these communities to have access to healthy food, then we will go from ‘Wait a minute, I don’t have access to it’, to ‘Hey, this is what Eric was talking about’.” I ask him what he means. “Imagine you see something on the shelf like quinoa and couscous, and you have no idea why you would want to eat those meals. But if you are given information before you walk into the supermarket then you might try this healthy meal next time round.” That’s all very well, but how are the food deserts in low-income African American neighbourhoods ever going to get access to the kinds of whole-grain, plant-based foods that Adams espouses? There is no shortage of guidance that Adams could draw on from other parts of the country where Black communities have long experimented with community gardens and vegan hot lunches in schools. When he was Brooklyn borough president he initiated “meatless Mondays” in local public schools, and campaigned to have all processed meat removed from school meals. Now that he’s mayor, he is expanding his push for healthy food. This week he introduced “vegan Fridays” for all New York public schools – a reform to the quality of school food that Adams still stands by despite his difficulties with #FishGate. Will there be more coming, and if so how will he use his new power to make lasting change? “How do I do it?” Adams says. “I look at where as government we are feeding people and I change that. We feed 1.1 million New Yorkers every day at school, people in hospitals, correction facilities, senior centres. How about giving them all healthy food?” It’s early days for the Adams administration, too early to make firm assessments. So far there are no signs of detailed plans emerging for actually carrying out such a food revolution. It leaves a question mark hanging over his undoubtedly powerful and positive mission to change what we eat. In his own life, the results of the transformation are dramatic and unanswerable, fish or no fish. He shed 35lbs, kicked diabetes, and now exudes glowing good health. He appears to have had some personal success, but can he replicate it among all New Yorkers?When Madeline Heckman decided to move from the Upper West Side to Brooklyn last year, she knew exactly where to start her search: with StreetEasy. “I honestly didn’t bother looking at other alternative apps,” she said. The interface was user-friendly, the entire city’s listings were there, and her previous website of choice, Naked Apartments, had shuttered in 2020. She ultimately found the place of her dreams, a two-bedroom with a walk-in closet in the Prospect Heights neighborhood of Brooklyn. Heckman is in good company. Ask anyone in New York City how they found their apartment, and the answer is a no-brainer: in 2022, StreetEasy might as well be the city’s entire real estate business. This wasn’t always so. For the entirety of 2006, the first year of StreetEasy’s reign, the real estate giant did not hire a single employee from the industry. The two founders didn’t want to operate under the assumptions associated with the business. They wanted a fresh start. They got that and more: the company was acquired by Zillow in 2013 for $50m, and the pair’s real estate brands now boast a 70% market share. Today, StreetEasy not only hosts a list of all available rentals and homes in New York City, it also allows users to secure agents and schedule viewings. From the moment would-be renters or buyers start their hunt to the moment they walk into their new homes, keys in hand, StreetEasy facilitates it all. “It’s almost like saying you buy your stuff on Amazon,” one agent said during a phone call (like others quoted in this piece, the agent requested anonymity due to their ongoing relationship with the company). “Like, OK, you could buy it from Target or somewhere else, but Amazon is still Amazon.” But as StreetEasy has revolutionized the city’s real estate, its success hasn’t gone unchallenged. As is the case when a company disrupts a market, winners and losers abound – and sometimes trade places in the process. Total dominance (and total disruption) In its infancy, StreetEasy’s real estate Rolodex was accumulated by scraping listings from the internet and pairing them with specific information – such as the number of days a property had been on the market or fluctuations in price. Things changed in 2017, when the platform began charging a “per listing, per day” fee for rental properties. Starting at $3, it jumped to $4.50 in 2018, landing on $6 a year later. (Sale property listings remain free for agents to post.) These fees directly affect agents. An anonymous broker said that the 30 apartments they currently have listed on the platform are costing them about $6,000 a month to maintain. They estimate that the listing fees have cost them a total of half a million dollars since their introduction. In 2015, StreetEasy introduced the first iteration of its other primary revenue stream: StreetEasy Experts. Today, real estate agents who go through a formal joining process are promoted in listings with ties to their previous work – for instance, in buildings or neighborhoods where they’ve made deals. These “Experts” – who pay StreetEasy when they close a deal – are advertised ahead of the listing agent. When a user attempts to schedule a showing for a listing, they have to scroll past the promoted Expert for the option to contact the listing agent. That can benefit new agents looking to grow their client lists, but established agents told the Guardian it was frustrating to lose their leads to Experts. “It takes away from the exclusive agent’s ability to collect the larger commission,” one said. He also claims that the program eliminates some of the flexibility that’s allowed if a buyer or seller was working with the original broker: “If the person came directly to one broker collecting the whole commission, they could probably lower their commission to make the deal work.” The brokers’ rebellion Before StreetEasy, many brokers put their listings in a public database, so renters and buyers had to approach brokers if they wanted to learn more about a property. Now StreetEasy allows customers to become thoroughly informed before ever speaking with an agent. For instance, the site offers a home valuation tool to give sellers a free estimate of their home’s current market value. From there, sellers can receive emails to keep them up to date on when it’s the right time to sell, alongside records of recently listed and in-contract homes in their neighborhood. Even though Anna P (who asked to withhold her last name) bought her home in Brooklyn over six years ago, she keeps the same search filters on to keep an eye on the market. “I watch the available places in our price range getting smaller and smaller over the years and it sort of helps with buyers’ remorse,” she said over direct message. “We couldn’t have done any better! And our property value is going up!” Many brokers, feeling the system is rigged against them, have repeatedly called for boycotts. Following the introduction of listing fees in 2017, the agencies Brown Harris Stevens, Town Residential, Compass, Stribling &amp; Associates, Warburg Realty and more stopped updating their StreetEasy feeds. But StreetEasy bypassed the issue by allowing individual agents to manually update listings themselves, and in early 2020 StreetEasy stopped accepting automatic listings feeds from brokerage firms altogether. Listings from agents at Brown Harris Stevens, Compass and Warburg Realty ultimately appear on StreetEasy, although companies such as Compass have attempted to get an edge on the website with the introduction of their own exclusive listings. A June 2021 survey of New York residents conducted by YouGov found that more renters described StreetEasy as trustworthy than any other real estate platform. “Why fix something that’s not broken? I think that’s the way customers see it,” Kaptan Unugur, senior global real estate adviser and licensed salesperson at Sotheby’s, said. He added: “We have to have a good relationship [with StreetEasy] because that’s our only option.” If you can’t beat them, find your niche Emily Bergmann is one of the few NYC renters who found all of her previous apartments using platforms such as Twitter and Craigslist. “[StreetEasy is] useless if you are one person who doesn’t have roommates they’re looking with already,” she said over direct message. (If an apartment hunter wanted to find a place before securing roommates, they’d need to put down a full deposit up front, something Bergmann said had been financially prohibitive for her in the past.) For her first solo apartment in Prospect Heights, which she moved into this past month, she went with Listings Project. “Everything on StreetEasy was out of my price range,” she said. “My place on Listings Project was a lease takeover in a rent-stabilized building that was easily $200 below the cheapest studio in my neighborhood [on StreetEasy].” Unugur, of Sotheby’s, believes there are better sites out there, but hardly any competitors match StreetEasy in revenue. While Zillow reported $1.7bn in the third quarter of 2021, Redfin reported $540m and CoStar, owner of Apartments.com , reported $499m. So rather than compete on scale, real estate alternatives in New York tend to focus on a niche. Listings Project began 20 years ago as a personal email list run by Stephanie Diamond, when she was looking for an apartment. The service now spans over 200 countries, with the highest percentage of listings in New York. Listings Project remains community-based; searchers can only access listings after they subscribe to the newsletter or sign up to the site. Diamond said each post received a “direct human touch”, vetting for inclusion and editing for gentrifying language. Realtor.com, owned by NewsCorp, boasts features to give buyers information about the environment around their potential property, including a noise indicator – with a map to show where and what the source of the noise is – and flood risk data. Lee Lin, the CEO of RentHop, said its unique strength lies in its efforts to weed out bad-faith brokers, claiming to have a much stricter verification process than other sites. It also tracks conversations between clients, agents, and landlords to ensure prompt and consistent replies while respecting privacy. “We have suspended or banned many cases where agents have not kept their listings up-to-date, including banning our largest advertiser last year after a few repeated violations and warnings,” Lin wrote in an email. But StreetEasy isn’t slowing down. The service received 180m visits in 2021, up almost 40% from 2019, according to a spokesperson. Plus, luxury homes sold nearly two months faster this past year than the year before, with the overall median Manhattan asking price jumping more than 10%, according to a recent StreetEasy market report. On the rental side, there’s been a significant drop in inventory as apartment-hunting picked back up following the initial effects of the pandemic, making the landscape even more competitive. “Every day, our teams are thinking about what is still inconvenient or difficult about finding a home in NYC,” Caroline Burton, StreetEasy vice-president and general manager, wrote over email. “What technology can help improve the process?” In 2022, she said, the site aims to focus on smarter and more efficient ways to match buyers, sellers, and renters with agents. In that sense, StreetEasy’s only competition is itself. This piece was amended on 9 February 2022 to clarify the function of the Experts program.A government under potentially lethal fire and fearing for its very existence will do virtually anything to protect itself. That is the plight of this wretched government. It will contort reality, throw up flares and turn its face on decency – anything to save itself. So perhaps we should not be surprised that through shadowy channels, via sycophantic media, Boris Johnson has made known his intention to further feed his “war on woke” by scuppering a perfectly sensible suggestion “to counter unconscious bias and/or underlying racism” in parliament. Last Thursday afternoon, when the report was debated in the Commons, the only MP openly discussing his difficulty with the proposed “respect” principle was, predictably, Jacob Rees-Mogg, always a willing combatant in the war on woke. But through judicious leaks to encouraging and enabling media, we see the government’s direction of travel. The measure was suggested by the crossparty Commons standards select committee and would bring the mother of parliaments into line with the practices and expectations common in firms and institutions up and down the UK. Its adoption would send an important signal to those who have not already committed themselves to “anti-racism, inclusion and diversity” by showing leadership on the matter. But the beleaguered prime minister desperately needs to shore up his support, so instead he and his supporters promise a stand against “politically correct restrictions”, according to a Whitehall source in the Telegraph. They reject calls for more anti-racism, inclusion and diversity and clothe it as a principled move to protect “free speech”. There is of course form for this in the Conservative party: last year, when unconscious bias training was made available at the Commons – a voluntary scheme requested by MPs themselves – several Tory MPs refused to take part and one, Ben Bradley, denounced it as “Orwellian” and “totally nonsensical”. It begs the question: in attempting to shore up his position, would the prime minister and his allies be happy to tolerate disrespect, intolerance and the furtherance of racism? It is also a misleading attempt at “virtue signalling” over free speech. The truth of the matter is that no single individual can unilaterally decide on Commons standards issues. They’re what’s known as “whole of the House” matters to be settled by 650 MPs, not prime ministerial decree. The “review of the code of conduct: proposals for consultation” is just that – nothing has been finalised, and the consultation closes on Thursday. The government hasn’t even responded yet. One wishes it would do so through the proper channels rather than anonymous briefings to distract from the real concerns people face in the shape of the pandemic and the cost of living crisis. MP are already expected to observe principles set out in the parliamentary behaviour code – of respect, professionalism, understanding others’ perspectives, courtesy, and acceptance of responsibility. If they believe they are already abide by those principles, why would they worry about the expectation being made more transparent and specific? The plan to undermine a decent attempt to make parliament an exemplar in terms of race and equality is yet another example of MPs setting themselves apart from the diverse communities they serve. This Johnson government, seeking any advantage in a time of crisis, cannot be expected to act in the best interests of the country, or even parliament. We MPs must rise to a higher responsibility. Rupa Huq is the Labour MP for Ealing Central and ActonIt was 26 May 2017 on the Portland MAX light rail service when a white supremacist named Jeremy Christian began threatening two teenage girls; one of the girls was black, the other in hijab. Three other men, all strangers on the same train, stood up to Christian, defending and ultimately saving the girls. Christian attacked the three men with a knife, killing 53-year-old Ricky John Best and 23-year-old Taliesin Myrddin Namkai-Meche and injuring Micah David-Cole Fletcher. As Taliesin was bleeding, another passenger, a woman named Rachel Macy, knelt with him, comforting him and staunching his wounds. Taliesin knew he was dying. “Tell everyone on this train I love them”, he said to Macy in his final moments. These beautiful words stopped me in my tracks when I first heard them. They gave me a directive, a way of being. At my best moments, this stranger’s last words guided where I looked, how I acted, and what I chose to do with my time. Taliesin Myrddin Namkai-Meche’s mother describes her son’s last words as “the most important thing in the whole process”. Taliesin’s father says that when he heard what his son said, “It was literally a saving grace for me.” They were a saving grace for me, too: they changed my life. Loving everyone on the train meant I could love people I didn’t yet know. What Taliesin said felt instinctually correct to me yet was simultaneously baffling. It often seems there are impossibly huge chasms between me and others, so how could I love them? The heroism of the men on the train spurred many to react in all sorts of ways. A crowdfunding account called “Muslims Unite for Portland Heroes” raised more than $600,000. Many people, myself included, took Taliesin’s final message into their hearts. Strangers wrote songs and made videos and artworks about his actions and words. The public reaction to the men who saved the girls on the train, and Taliesin’s words, helped his family through the trauma of his death. I talked with his parents last month. “I think if there weren’t such a major up-swell of compassion and energy that came out of that, I would have had a lot harder time with the whole thing,” his father, Christopher DuPraw, said. “It was quite miraculous just how it expanded. That energy of ‘tell everyone on this train I love them’ completely shot around the world and on some level made it OK.” He laughed a little as he said that last part, still seeming to marvel at the fact. There is much to marvel at in the story of Taliesin’s life and his death. He was young, just 23, and according to his friends and family members he was a funny, energetic, compassionate person with a drive for adventure and a deep understanding of the need for social justice. Women adored him and vice versa; he loved to gamble; his friends stayed his friends for ever. Taliesin’s mother, Asha Deliverance, said, “He really fully believed that his life could help make change happen. And he had enough fire behind him to really believe that. He was not a lost soul at all; he was a soul with purpose.” The last time she saw Taliesin was on Mother’s Day, and she asked him why he didn’t drive to work, offering to pay for a parking garage so that he didn’t have to take the train. He told her he just preferred public transport. Asha wonders now if that was her mother’s intuition warning her to get him off the train. At the same time, she is confident that Taliesin was on a path, and was not to be diverted. He was intentional about the importance of love, and when he defended the girls against Islamophobia and racism on the train, he meant it. She knew he was living his beliefs when he was killed. “He chose to do that. That became very apparent within a few days, that this was a massive statement he was making. I never questioned or doubted his choices.” Christopher sees his son’s last words as having meaning that will carry into the future. “I feel like this is an ongoing saga. His message was a unifying message, but so much of what we are dealing with today is so divisive, from Trump to Covid, and it makes it so hard, just so difficult for people to get back to the unified consciousness.” He sounds sad, just for a moment, but I hear him brightening, and he adds, “But there is always that reminder somewhere if people look for it. And hopefully, they’ll keep looking for it.” I find that reminder in Taliesin’s words whenever I think of them. For Asha, the words that have come to mean so much to so many people still remind her mostly of one person: her son. “Of course, I miss him sometimes, but also I don’t miss him because he often just shows up the minute I think of him – and I feel the love.” Maeve Higgins is a Guardian US columnist and the author of the book Tell Everyone on This Train I Love ThemA battle is raging in front of our eyes, but this is no ordinary war. While the combat may be bloodless, no one should be fooled. This clash is fierce and unforgiving, representing the ideological struggle of our age. On one side we find men wearing animal horns and dressing in furs. On the other are legions of devotees draped over their computer screens. This contest of wills is the ultimate postmodern showdown. I’m talking, of course, about the fight for our future, namely, the legendary battle of far-right conspiracy theorists v K-pop. And the good news is that, in this war, K-pop – that globally renown, highly engineered, synthesiser sounding, toe-tapping, arm-snapping, bubblegum pop music – keeps winning. The latest evidence landed a few days ago with a post on Reddit, where one Redditor wrote that her “liberal left-wing QAunt” had “descended down the rabbit hole of Qlore from cabals who eat kids to democrats/Hollywood celebs trafficking people to Epstein island.” Then, the poster explained, “it all just ... stopped. She stopped sharing Q stuff, stopped believing in it, started talking about liberal stuff again like it never happened. I was baffled. Did she have dementia? A stroke?” The answer, my friends, is right there, plain for everyone to see. Her aunt’s saviors? BTS, the seven-member megastar boyband from South Korea. “She started getting into K-pop as soon as Dynamite was released,” the redditor wrote, referencing BTS’s 2020 hit and their first song completely in English, “and dear lord, now she knows their names, their mom’s names, their favorite food, etc. From what she told me, they inspired her to be a better person. They would make donations to BLM, rally for accessible mental health for all and promote self-love and compassion. She is now an ARMY and I guess ... That’s that?” For the uninitiated, ARMY stands for Adorable Representative MC for Youth. (I cringed when I learned that, too.) Adorable aside, BTS’s ARMY is a formidable global force for good. As the post indicates, ARMY takes BTS’ message of “radical poptimism” and parlays it into global fundraising campaigns to “heal the world”. Made up of millions of young and admiring fans across the planet, ARMY has raised money for everything from helping rape survivors in South Africa to planting trees in Ecuador. Most donations are relatively small and, like the band, not overtly political, but when BTS took a stand against racial discrimination by donating one million dollars to Black Lives Matter in 2020 (which seemed only appropriate considering they draw so heavily on African American music), ARMY rallied its own fundraising campaign and matched the million dollar donation in a quick 25 hours. In other words, if you thought K-pop was all hair gel and dance moves, you’ve got another thing coming. K-pop fans are not to be underestimated, and they are inventing community everywhere they go. In the United States, at least, that community has an increasingly political bent. US K-pop fans are young and energetic, highly literate in all kinds of social media, and lean heavily toward socially progressive causes. This has translated into a kind of Covid-era activism from the home computer. In June 2020, K-pop fans in the US took over a white supremacist hashtag on Twitter, spamming the hashtag with either nonsense messages or anti-racist posts. When the Dallas police department asked people to send them videos of protestors that same month using an app called iWatch, K-pop fans quickly crashed the app by bombarding the system with content from their favorite K-pop stars. Also in 2020, K-pop fans, along with TikTok users, were credited by many with registering for thousands of tickets for Trump’s 19,000 seat-rally in Tulsa, Oklahoma and then deliberately staying home to ruin the event. Genius. And here I was thinking the appeal of the music was in the beat. K-pop activism is about more than melodies and personalities, and it moves in stark contrast to the social isolation that marks so much of our society, especially during our contemporary Covid era. K-pop activism is about belonging and the common good. As one 18-year-old BTS fan from California told Good Trouble magazine, “I wasn’t in a great place when I became ARMY. Having music that makes you feel a little less alone helped me a lot. The more I listened, the more their message resonated.” For that reason, maybe K-pop’s counterpoint to far-right extremism isn’t so hard to understand. Both movements may offer subcultures to belong to, but those subcultures couldn’t be more different from each other. Another K-pop fan, a 43-year-old man from Cincinnati, told Good Trouble magazine that the “opposite of the toxic brew of ugly Trumpist nationalism happening in the US” is something inherently positive. “BTS has created a virtuous cycle of infectious hopeful optimism that crosses every language, cultural, or age barrier.” This fan’s description of the BTS world seems like a far cry from the nether reaches of the dark web, where much of the far right exists. Understanding the difference seems important at this moment. Reputable research on extremism warns us that people join extremist groups not because of commitments to any particular faith or ideology or because of personality type. Rather, social isolation, economic insecurity, and extended loneliness are among the real vulnerabilities, and all kinds of radicalizations thrive when people fall into this state. As the Center for Analysis of the Radical Right puts it, social isolation “exacerbates already existing grievances, leaving individuals vulnerable to extremism”. It’s no wonder that wacko conspiracy theories have thrived under Covid lockdowns. This is not to argue that every lonely person is about to become a QAnon follower or a Proud Boy, but we should recognize that our isolated and atomized society – made all the more so because of Covid and, in some way, our technology – comes with risks attached. Hannah Arendt, the great twentieth century political philosopher of totalitarianism, understood this well. Arendt wrote about how “the masses grew out of the fragments of a highly atomized society” made worse by society’s “competitive structure and concomitant loneliness”. The result of this atomization helped to facilitate “an especially violent nationalism, to which mass leaders have yielded against their own instincts and purposes for purely demagogic reasons”. She wrote that shortly after the second world war, but it almost sounds as if she’s describing today’s Republican party. Okay. This is getting heavy. Can you hear the bass boom? I’m ready. What I mean to say is that while K-pop fans, like far rightists, may also be labeled as cultish and extreme, and while K-pop stars are sometimes extremely culturally insensitive, it may still just be possible enough to see K-pop activism as a deradicalizing movement. Just look at what K-pop activists are accomplishing compared to what the far right is doing. At the very least, the K-pop activists seek to embrace the world rather than to dominate it. As music, K-pop is most certainly fully formed consumerist kitsch. It’s a purely manufactured, post-industrial product pulsing and blinging at the heart of global capitalism. Yes. But, also, come on! It’s just so damn danceable! I’m pretty sure Emma Goldman would have invited BTS to play at her revolution. And had he been alive today, even an old anti-fascist curmudgeon and universal hater of pop music like Theodor Adorno probably would’ve secretly had his own favorite BTS band member. My guess? He would’ve chosen J-Hope. Makes sense. Always choose hope. Moustafa Bayoumi is the author of the award-winning books How Does It Feel To Be a Problem?: Being Young and Arab in America and This Muslim American Life: Dispatches from the War on Terror. He is Professor of English at Brooklyn College, City University of New YorkA line of large blue skips full of chopped wood sit at the back of a site belonging to Norway’s biggest bitcoin mining operation, a 5,000 sq metre warehouse on the outskirts of Hønefoss, a small town 40 miles west of Oslo. Hot air is being pumped into the 12 skips through bendy corrugated pipes curling out from the warehouse. Despite the snow, it will take a few days for the logs to be dried out, after which a local lumberjack, grateful for the free service, will take them away for sale. The wood is being warmed by some of the so-called waste heat being emitted from thousands of stacked-high computer servers, known as miners, working away inside the warehouse. It is one of two such sites owned by the Norwegian company Kryptovault. The company expects its mining to account for just under 1% of the computing and process power in the global bitcoin network later this year. Bitcoin mining, the process of earning cryptocurrency by solving complex computational math puzzles and verifying transactions in the process, is famously energy-intensive. The latest calculation from Cambridge University’s bitcoin electricity consumption index suggests that as a result, the sector consumes more energy in a year than many countries, including Argentina, Pakistan and Poland. Heat is an inevitable waste byproduct. Despite noise from ventilation fans so loud that the company had to spend about £1.5m on insulation after complaints from neighbours, the hot areas in the Hønefoss warehouse can reach 55C. For many, at a time of rocketing energy prices, this may be further evidence of the unsustainability of a business that was recently described by Robert McCauley, a senior fellow at Boston University’s global development policy centre, as “worse than a Madoff-style Ponzi scheme”. The critics are certainly circling. Russia’s central bank has proposed outlawing all cryptocurrency operations in the country, and China has already done so. Swedish regulators have called for something similar in Europe. Norway’s regional development minister, Bjørn Arild Gram, told the Guardian his government was reviewing its options. “Although crypto-mining and its underlying technology might represent some possible benefits in the long run, it is difficult to justify the extensive use of renewable energy today,” Gram said. “The ministry of local government and regional development is currently reviewing potential policy measures in order to address the challenges related to extensive energy usage caused by crypto-mining.” But there is a fightback brewing in the sector, of which Kryptovault, which uses only renewable energy, is a part. This week, the billionaire Michael Novogratz, the owner of Galaxy Digital, a digital assets company that seeks to become “the Goldman Sachs of crypto”, launched a sustainability programme on energy use and social responsibility, saying the industry needed to tackle a “false narrative around it being bad for the environment”. It has been described by some critics as greenwashing, but within a world that has until now been less than transparent over its activities, preferring secrecy over sympathy, this was a shift. Kjetil Hove Pettersen, 39, Kryptovault’s chief executive, who founded the company with friends after deciding to turn a hobby into a business, said he also believed it was time for the sector to push back at the prevailing narrative. “If you look at the total energy cost, globally, for any given thing, it’s always going to be huge – I think we can always compare to that of a small European country,” he said. “That includes also traditional gold mining, which takes more than four times the amount of energy as bitcoin mining.” Advocates for bitcoin argue that it offers the opportunity to exchange value with someone instantly without using a third party such as a bank, without permission and virtually for free. They say it is being adopted at a faster rate than the internet in the 1990s, with El Salvador having become the first country to adopt it as legal tender, alongside the US dollar, in spite of misgivings from the International Monetary Fund. Pettersen said people wanted bitcoin, and mining operations provided economic returns through tax and employment. Mining is further said to offer a way for countries with excess renewable energy supply from hydro, wind or solar power at certain times and seasons to make value of it within their own borders and without transfer costs. Estimates of what proportion of the energy used in mining is renewable vary from 25% to 57%. “Mining is not polluting in itself,” said Pettersen. “If you are running coal to run mining then that’s another story, that’s what you don’t want. Mining should be done in more than places like Norway – and it can be a way to save trapped energy. For example, in northern Norway where there is excess, or in El Salvador where they are now using energy from volcanoes, setting up production when it wasn’t there before.” Kryptovault aims to have 15,000 miners at work by this autumn. Otto Him, 37 and Martin Mikalsen, 26, who manage the Hønefoss mine, have nicknamed one area between two huge walls, or pods, of 6,500 computers as “the cathedral”, in recognition of its awesome scale. The company is transitioning from older bitcoin miners to new ones shipped from China that are said to be three times more efficient. There will be plenty more waste heat to use. The company is in early talks to dry seaweed for a local firm. Pettersen says the narrative will change. “At some point, country after country will adopt bitcoin as legal tender and at some point it will be obvious that it is going to change the world,” he said. “Just as it became obvious that the internet was here to stay.” Top 10 countries for bitcoin mining activity 1) Kazakhstan 2) Russia 3) Ireland* 4) Germany* 5) Sweden 6) Norway 7) Iceland 8) UK 9) France 10) Georgia *Evidence of activity probably inflated owing to redirected IP addresses via the use of VPN or proxy services. Data from the Cambridge Centre for Alternative Finance’s Cambridge bitcoin electricity consumption index. Table based on the latest data from August 2021.Good morning. The French president completed a whirlwind diplomatic mission to Moscow and Kyiv on Tuesday and said he had received personal assurances from Vladimir Putin that Russia would not worsen the crisis over Ukraine. Speaking after talks in Kyiv with Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, Emmanuel Macron said Putin had made clear during discussions on Monday that he would not escalate tensions. The standoff could take months to resolve, Macron added. However, Zelenskiyadmitted he was sceptical about his Russian counterpart’s apparent commitment to peace. “I do not really trust words. I believe every politician can be transparent by taking concrete steps,” he said at a joint press conference with Macron. “Openness was great” so long as it was “not a game”, Zelenskiy added. What else happened? Six Russian warships and a submarine passed through the Dardanelles strait on Tuesday, heading towards the Black Sea from the Mediterranean. The vessels – landing ships used for amphibious assault – began arriving in the Black Sea today. Why have Macron’s comments set alarm bells ringing? The French president seems to have stuck pretty faithfully to the script he had exhaustively agreed with his Nato partners. However, after the meeting he hinted at shifts in Nato’s outlook that some members say should never be made in response to military intimidation. Arrests in Ottawa as Canadian truckers block main bridge to US Traffic has ground to a halt at the busiest border crossing in North America, as Canadian truckers and others angry with vaccine mandates spread their protest beyond Ottawa. Trucks started blocking Ambassador Bridge linking the cities of Detroit and Windsor late on Monday, closing down traffic in both directions. Yesterday, entry to Canada remained blocked while US-bound traffic slowed to a crawl. Each day, 8,000 trucks normally cross the bridge, which handles about 27% of trade between Canada and the US. Protesters also targeted another key border crossing in Coutts, Alberta. Canada’s capital city remained blockaded by hundreds of vehicles from the “freedom convoy” while protest organizers called for a meeting with all federal political leaders – except the prime minister, Justin Trudeau – to find a “peaceful resolution” to the crisis. What are the police doing to stop the blockade? Ottawa police said on Tuesday that 23 arrests had been made in relation to the “unlawful demonstrations”. The deputy police chief, Steve Bell, told reporters police had immobilized many of the heavy vehicles taking part in the blockade. Mitch McConnell rebukes RNC for censuring party members investigating ‘violent insurrection’ Mitch McConnell criticized the Republican National Committee (RNC) for censuring the representatives Liz Cheney and Adam Kinzinger over their work for the House select committee investigating the January 6 attack on the Capitol, which he characterized as a “violent insurrection”. The Senate minority leader said it was not the party’s place to single out members over their views. Speaking to reporters outside Senate Republicans’ closed-door weekly lunch, McConnell rebuked the RNC for its characterization of the deadly riot at the Capitol as “legitimate political discourse”. “Let me give you my view of what happened on 6 January,” McConnell said. “It was a violent insurrection for the purpose of trying to prevent the peaceful transfer of power after a legitimately certified election, from one administration to the next.” Does McConnell still have confidence in the leadership of the RNC chair, Ronna McDaniel? He said he did, adding: “But the issue is whether or not the RNC should be sort of singling out members of our party who may have different views from the majority. That’s not the job of the RNC.” In other news … Hours after Mikaela Shiffrin’s attempt at a history-making medal haul in Beijing was left in tatters when the American star was disqualified from a second successive race, Petra Vlhová roared from behind to win the Olympic women’s slalom by 0.08sec yesterday. The US justice department has announced the unraveling of its biggest-ever cryptocurrency theft case, seizing a record-shattering $3.6bn in bitcoin in a saga that has captivated the internet. Ilya “Dutch” Lichtenstein, 34, and his wife, Heather Morgan, are accused of conspiring to launder $4.5bn in bitcoin. Claims that another Chinese tech worker has died after excessive overtime has reignited debate over the industry’s “996 culture”. The company denied that it overworked the employee but said it would pay more attention to the health of its staff. The University of California has agreed to pay $243.6m (£179m) to settle allegations that hundreds of women were sexually abused by a former UCLA gynecologist. The settlement covers about 50 cases involving 203 women who said they were assaulted by Dr James Heaps. Each will receive $1.2m. Stat of the day: Nearly one in five applicants to white supremacist group tied to US military Nearly one in five applicants to the white supremacist group Patriot Front claimed to hold current or former ties to the US military, according to leaked documents published and reviewed by the Southern Poverty Law Center and the alternative media collective Unicorn Riot. Eighteen of the 87 applicants, or 21%, said they were currently or previously affiliated with the military. According to the SPLC, the Patriot Front “represents one of the most prominent white supremacist groups in the country”. Don’t miss this: How New York’s housing market got even more ridiculous If the early stages of the pandemic favored the New York renter – with bountiful apartments and incentives such as free months or waived amenity fees – that period has run its course as people continue to make their way back to the city. Between December 2020 and December 2021, the city’s median asking rent made its largest year-on-year gain since the pandemic began, from $2,500 to $2,800, according to data from StreetEasy. In December 2021, Manhattan’s median rent, with incentives factored in, reached a new record for the month at $3,392, reports the real estate company Douglas Elliman. … or this: Why we’re publishing a series on New York’s dire rental market Our seven-piece Guardian US series, The Rent Is Too Damn High, looks at how the Covid pandemic further strained one of the country’s toughest rental markets. We talk to striking low-income renters on edge now that the eviction moratorium has been lifted. We ask a broker to explain the tricks they pull on us. We investigate why co-ops, which make up 74% of Manhattan’s apartment stock, are able to operate with such power and impunity. Climate check: Identify A-ha moments to trigger fast climate action, say UK scientists Tipping points could be identified and triggered to deliver fast action to tackle the climate crisis, according to an analysis led by an academic at a British university. The study examines how small interventions, once triggered, can grow into systemic changes. Rather than focussing directly on cutting emissions, this approach leads to green choices becoming the most attractive. The scientists also said the approach could dispel feelings of helplessness about complex global challenges, stressing that big changes could start in small groups. Last Thing: US nun to serve a year in jail for stealing $835,000 from school A California nun will serve a year in prison for stealing $835,000 from an elementary school to support her gambling habit in an emotional case that left Los Angeles families and even the federal judge who handed down the sentence reeling. Mary Margaret Kreuper, 80, who pleaded guilty to wire fraud and money laundering for stealing the money over the course of 10 years while she was principal at St James Catholic school said: “I have sinned, I’ve broken the law and I have no excuses.” Sign up First Thing is delivered to thousands of inboxes every weekday. If you’re not already signed up, subscribe now. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.comThe cost of housing rent in the UK has hit a 13-year high with the average tenant paying nearly £1,000 a month. According to Zoopla, rent has risen 8.3% in a year during the pandemic. We would like to hear how you have been affected by the rise in UK rent. How much more are you paying compared to last year? Do you have any concerns? We want to hear from people renting from the council or a housing association, as well as those who rent from a private landlord. Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.A statue of a Jewish woman whose success in business and connections with powerful people made her a renowned figure in 13th-century England will be unveiled by the Prince of Wales on Thursday. The story of Licoricia, who was murdered in her home 13 years before all Jews in England were expelled on the orders of Edward I, “shines a light on the nature of the medieval Jewish community”, said Ephraim Mirvis, the chief rabbi. The lifesize bronze of Licoricia with her son Asher is being installed on Jewry Street in Winchester, the ancient city where she spent much of her life. After being unveiled by Prince Charles, Mirvis will bless the statue. The ceremony is the culmination of a five-year campaign to raise funds for a monument intended “to act as an inspiration to women of today and also promote tolerance and understanding in our society”. It has been created by the sculptor Ian Rank-Broadley, who told the Hampshire Chronicle it was an honour to recognise “a woman who made a significant contribution to this country in terms of financial expertise and one who is probably forgotten by many people today”. On the plinth of the statue are words from Leviticus: “Love thy neighbour as thyself” – in English and Hebrew. Rabbi Jonathan Romain, who has researched the life of Licoricia, said: “The fact that the heir to the throne is unveiling the statue is a very strong signal that Britain is a home to all minorities.” A widow with four children, Licoricia had accumulated sufficient money and acumen to start a moneylending operation in Winchester in 1234. She was one of a number of Jewish businesswomen in the city and spoke several languages. At the time, there were restrictions on how Jews could make a living. Moneylending was one of the few occupations open to them as church law at the time forbade Christians to make loans. “On the one hand, it was a livelihood. On the other hand, it earned them an enormous unpopularity because everybody likes a moneylender when they need a loan but not when it comes to paying back. So it was a very toxic profession to go into, but unfortunately one of the only avenues open at that time,” said Romain. In 1242, Licoricia married David of Oxford, one of the richest Jews in England, after Henry III blocked efforts by David’s first wife, Muriel, to persuade a rabbinical court to nullify the couple’s divorce. Two years later, David died, leaving Licoricia with a fifth child and his successful moneylending business to add to her own. First she had to pay a huge windfall tax, much of which went towards building Westminster Abbey. In 1277 Licoricia and her Christian maid were found murdered in the home in Oxford she had shared with David, probably killed by a burglar. By then, Jews in England were subjected to violent discrimination and persecution, and in 1290 Edward I ordered they all be expelled. Jews did not return to England until the middle of the 17th century. Mirvis said: “In many ways, the story of Licoricia shines a light on the nature of the medieval Jewish community. Despite living in a society which was frequently hostile to Jews, Licoricia was totally committed to raising her family, building a successful enterprise and contributing to the prosperity of the country. “As such, the unveiling of this significant statue sends a powerful message to contemporary British society of the importance of industriousness, generosity and respect for all people.”The average cost of renting a home in the UK is approaching £1,000 a month after demand drove prices up 8.3% in the final three months of last year, marking the fastest increase in more than a decade. Renters around the UK are now paying £62 more each month than before the pandemic, taking the average monthly rent to £969, according to property website Zoopla. The average annual rent for people who are agreeing a new let is now £744 higher than it was in March 2020 before the pandemic. The rate of 8.3% in the final three months of 2021, compared with the same period a year earlier, is the steepest rise in 13 years. The increase will put further pressure on households, who are already feeling the squeeze from rising energy bills and wider price rises. Rising rents will also make life difficult for people who are trying to get on the property ladder at a time when the price of the average UK home reached a record high of £276,759 in January – £24,500 higher than a year earlier, according to recent figures from Halifax. Over the past year, rents have risen in every region of the UK, Zoopla found. The strongest growth – 10.3% – was in London, followed by Northern Ireland (10.2%) and Wales ( 9.8%). The increases were the lowest in Scotland, where they reached 4.8%, and north-east England where they rose by 6%. However, rents in the capital are only £18 a month higher than they were in March 2020, because they fell during the pandemic. Renters including office workers and students are now returning to the centres of the country’s largest cities including London, Manchester, Birmingham, Leeds and Edinburgh, after the “race for space” during the pandemic led many people look for a move to commuter areas. Demand for rental homes took off at new year, as the number of people searching for a property was 76% higher than during the same period between 2018 and 2021. Higher demand has not been matched by an increase in supply, and 39% fewer homes were available on the rental market in January compared with typical levels seen at the start of the year. The lack of available properties has pushed the cost of renting higher and created intense competition for rental homes, which are taking an average of 14 days to let, compared with three weeks in late 2020. “Rent hikes are fanning the flames of the cost of living crisis,” said Sarah Coles, a senior personal finance analyst at broker Hargreaves Lansdown. “Tenants have already been badly burned by rising prices, so higher rental costs risk sending their finely balanced budgets up in smoke.” She said the number of renters was growing, “partly as a result of lockdowns persuading more people in shared accommodation to look for a place of their own.” Meanwhile, landlords have seen tax changes put a squeeze on their income, so have considered selling their properties while prices remain high. Rent still accounts for 37% of a single earner’s pre-tax income, according to Zoopla, which is higher than the low of 34% seen during the pandemic, but only slightly above the 10-year average level of 36%.Tyson Foods utilizes between nine and 10m acres of farmland – an area almost twice the size of New Jersey – to produce corn and soybeans to feed the more than 2 billion animals it processes every year in the US alone, according to new research. The study by the Union of Concerned Scientists (UCS) published on Wednesday also estimates that only about 5% of this land, 408,000 acres, has been enrolled in sustainable farming programs announced by Tyson in 2018. The UCS findings are based on calculations of the amount of corn and soybeans Tyson required to feed the approximately 6 million head of cattle, 22 million hogs and nearly 2 billion chickens it processed in the US in 2020, drawing on data reported by Tyson. Most consumers do not appreciate how much land is needed exclusively to support industrial animal farming and the wider environmental impacts of that, said Marcia DeLonge, a senior scientist in the food and environment program at the UCS and co-author of the report. “We are using this land in a way that creates a lot of pollution and a lot of problems that contribute to climate change,” DeLonge said. Tyson Foods did not respond to requests to comment on the UCS research and questions about its crop feed footprint. Gidon Eshel, research professor of Environmental Physics at Bard College, said the scale of farming needed to produce animal feed contributes to many of the environmental problems of large-scale agriculture. These issues include changes to soil and the natural flow of water, the way solar energy relates to the earth, and disruption of plants and animals. Pollution from fertilizers and pesticides are another big concern, and the risks of contaminating drinking water and harming ecosystems. In 2020, 174m acres were used exclusively to plant corn and soybeans in the US – an area larger than Texas, which accounts for 56% of the US’s 310m total cropland acres – according to the UCS report. Some of these crops are used for biofuel and processed foods but, according to the US Department of Agriculture, most is used for feed crops. “Because [this land] could otherwise be used to grow foods eaten by people, feed crop production ultimately affects everyone,” the report said. There is a significant opportunity cost in growing feed crops, Eshel said. “If you produce 100lbs of corn and feed it to beef, you get 3lbs of edible beef. Because of this, using land to grow feed crops instead of food [for humans] is incredibly questionable – it’s wasteful,” he said. While Tyson itself does not own feed crop farms, its influence over the thousands of farmers in its supply chain is huge. The company, which produces about 20% of the pork, beef and chicken consumed in the US, is one of the nation’s largest buyers of feed. In 2018, the company announced a commitment to “support improved environmental practices” on 2m acres of corn it uses for feed crops by the end of 2020. Tyson said the pledge would “encourage grain farmers to adopt more efficient fertilizer practices, and take additional measures to reduce water runoff and soil loss”. Tom Hayes, the company’s then CEO, said in a statement at the time: “The world needs a more sustainable food system, and we believe it’s up to big companies like ours to set the pace with bold goals.” Today, however, only 408,000 acres have been enrolled into pilot sustainability programs and the company has pushed its deadline to meet the 2m mark to 2025, mainly citing Covid-related delays. Tyson’s dominant position means the company could be a leader in sustainable food practices but its current efforts fall short, said DeLonge. “Two million acres is an important step, but not only did they delay that goal, they’ve also only come through on 408,000 acres.” Even if Tyson achieves its 2m acre pledge, this land is only a fraction of the company’s overall impact. According to UCS’s estimates, Tyson’s total feed crop footprint is more than five times larger and close to 23 times the size of its current progress. DeLonge also questioned the lack of detail in Tyson’s pledge. “Enrolling those acres into sustainability pilot programs is a good first step, but it doesn’t necessarily mean that those acres are being managed in a way that is truly sustainable,” she said. Tyson Foods recently set a goal to reach net-zero greenhouse gas emissions by 2050. Sustainable feed crop farming means growing crops without damaging the environment, degrading resources or exploiting people, said DeLonge. “Achieving this would mean building and maintaining healthy soils, managing water wisely, minimizing pollution, promoting biodiversity and treating workers with dignity and respect,” she said. Last August the Guardian and UCS published a joint investigation which showed how Tyson’s near monopoly in its home state of Arkansas gives it huge power, at a cost to farmers and the environment. Tyson Food at the time defended its record as an employer and pointed to the economic activity the meat industry created. The new UCS report said that the environmental impact of croplands management can become worse in the face of farmland consolidation, explaining that for decades, the land used to grow crops has been merged into fewer and larger farms, undermining rural economies and communities across the US. “When a single company, like Tyson, has so much leverage over so much farmland, their actions can have substantial consequences,” said DeLonge.Shakespeare gives a variety of psychological and theological reasons for young Hamlet’s inability to avenge his uncle’s murder of his father. Freddie Fox’s portrayal adds the possibility that the prince’s hands might shake too much to stab straight. This is not due to any lack of confidence in an emotionally wrenching and vocally ranging portrayal but because this student prince is, fascinatingly, a full-on alcoholic. Returning from Wittenberg uni draining a big whisky bottle, he understandably gags on his mother’s swift-wedding champagne but soon swigs down gin, entirely justifying the playing of Hamlet’s “till then sit still, my soul” as an attempt to settle delirium tremens. He visibly fears that the visitation from his father’s ghost may be his own consumption of spirits speaking. Attempting white-knuckle self-rehab while seeking revenge adds another layer to the usual complication of whether Hamlet’s “antic disposition” is acted or involuntary. This narrative refreshment is served in the atmospheric setting of Guildford’s Holy Trinity Church, with the stage a raised platform in the chancel, and characters entering through rood screen and nave. Tom Littler, the most enterprising Shakespearean director outside the big venues, mines every site specificity. The sad songs of Rosalind Ford’s dignified Ophelia are, unusually, set to Bach. Stefan Bednarczyk’s Polonius is plausibly a bishop of the Danish church, with the actor impressively multiskilling by playing the organ live. During a “manic” episode, Fox nicks the adviser’s mitre and stole for some comic business in the pulpit, including a perfect impersonation of the coffin-lowering motor in a crematorium. The surrounds underline the play’s integral Christianity – Hamlet cannot kill himself or Claudius for avowedly doctrinal reasons – but also add darkness as the space is taken over by the graves and skulls that, in religious terms, churches pledge to transcend. This is, in every sense, a Littler production: the director intelligently trims about 50 roles in the second quarto to 16, played by eight actors. The travelling players become a monologist and, just before his performance, you panic that the doubling can’t possibly work, until the show achieves one of numerous Houdini solutions, which also include a disembodied Edward Fox making a touching contribution as Hamlet’s father in two senses. At Holy Trinity Church, Guildford, until 23 FebruaryThe Thames could get its first designated bathing site for wild swimming, the government has announced. This would be the second river designated for swimming in England. Members of the public have been invited to give their views on the possible designation of Wolvercote Mill Stream at Port Meadow, Oxford, and another bathing site on the Isle of Wight coast. If accepted, the water quality would be monitored for bathers, with improvements being ordered by ministers if minimum standards were not met. Sewage Free Thames, the group that applied for the bathing spot in Oxford, said: “We love our rivers: they’re part of our daily lives, and we all walk, play, socialise, swim, paddle, row or fish on or around them. They give us many benefits, and they’re home to numerous other species. “However, our local rivers are in a poor state. In 2020, raw sewage was released into the upper Thames for nearly 50,000 hours. We want to make dumping raw sewage in rivers illegal, and our rivers safe and healthy for people and wildlife again. “We are applying for bathing water status for a stretch of the River Thames through Oxford. This will prevent sewage spills and improve water quality.” The stretch of river is popular with swimmers and paddle-boarders, but there are fears the water quality is poor. Local volunteers monitor the river for sewage spills, but Thames Water has promised to give real-time overflow updates in the near future. The environment minister Rebecca Pow said: “Bathing waters in England are a success story, with almost 95% achieving ‘good’ or ‘excellent’ status last year – the highest since new standards were introduced in 2015. We protect people’s health at popular swimming spots across the country by requiring the water quality at those sites to be regularly monitored and improvements made if they don’t meet the minimum standard. “It is great to see people getting involved in efforts to increase the number of designated bathing sites and I encourage local residents and swimmers to take part in these consultations so we can have as many views as possible to inform our final decision.” A Thames Water spokesperson said: “We fully support the application for bathing water status and have assisted the Oxford Rivers Project with sampling, including providing volunteers for a sampling day earlier this year and testing the samples in our laboratories. We are also trialling notifications in close to real time to river users in parts of Oxfordshire when discharges are made so that they can make informed decisions on whether to enter the water and will be rolling this out to all our permitted discharge points by the end of 2022.” Last year, the River Wharfe in the West Yorkshire town of Ilkley became the first river in England to be given bathing status. Campaigners hoped this would pressure local government and the water company to keep the stretch sewage-free, and clean it up. However, the river’s water was deemed poor quality by the Environment Agency after discharges from sewage overflows. Yorkshire Water said at the time it had committed to achieving a designation of “good” for the popular swimming area.Imports of UK goods into Germany fell 8.5% last year, in the latest signal that extra costs and red tape related to Brexit are damaging British trading relationships. Britain also fell out of the top five of Germany’s largest trade partners as the EU’s biggest economy turned to its neighbours inside the eurozone for machine tools, car parts and components for the aerospace industry. The German statistical office, Destatis, said UK imports fell in 2021, the first year since the Brexit free trade deal was agreed in late December 2020, to €32bn (£27bn). However, the situation improved for many of Germany’s other trading partners, which enjoyed a big rise in sales to Germany. Total goods imports into Germany surged by 17.1% during the year to €1.2tn, in part due to the extra costs of imported energy, but also after the easing of lockdown restrictions and as vaccine rollouts spurred the global economic recovery last year. The increase included a 16.8% rise in imports from Germany’s fellow European Union members, and a 20.8% rise in imports from China. In December alone, German imports from the UK were down 18.2% year on year, which analysts said was due to a rush of stockpiling in December 2020 as firms prepared for possible Brexit disruption. The EU introduced checks on goods from Britain entering the bloc as soon as the Brexit deal came into effect, with experts warning that UK firms were losing their competitiveness. The value of German goods arriving in Britain has also fallen. The UK delayed its checks on goods coming in until 2022. But even so, German exports to the UK fell by 2.6% during 2021, to €65.4bn. Overall, German exports rose by 14% in the year, even as the pandemic continued to cause disruption to global supply chains. Destatis said: “Compared with the same month last year, exports to the UK dropped by 7.6% to €5bn in December 2021. Imports from the UK were down 18.2% to €2.6bn.” Carsten Brzeski, the global head of macroeconomics at ING, said the trade data showed that Brexit had left its mark on German trade. He said: “Looking at export destinations, 2021 clearly marks a structural shift, illustrating current themes including reshoring, slowing of Chinese growth and different ways to deal with the pandemic. “Brexit has left its mark on German trade as the UK dropped out of the five most important trading partners list, with German companies exporting more to Austria than to the UK. “In the run-up to the Brexit deal signed in December 2020 many supporters of the vote to quit the EU single market and customs union said the importance of the UK as a trading partner for Berlin would override new trade frictions.” In 2020, figures from the World Bank showed £49bn of goods were exported to Germany, making Germany the UK’s second largest export market for goods after the US. For imports of goods, Germany was the largest trading partner with £66.1bn of goods being imported in 2020, according to the ONS. A report by parliament’s financial watchdog on Wednesday urged ministers to secure further agreements with the EU to ease trade across the channel. The public accounts committee said fresh EU regulations were likely to hit trade when they come into force in September unless the infrastructure at ports is improved.Today in a nutshell: It was a tough day at the office for favourites Mikaela Shiffrin and Charlotte Bankes, but the redemption of Lindsey Jacobellis is a tale for the ages Next up: The opening men’s curling matches and the luge doubles, and then tomorrow we get the chance to watch Nathan Chen going for gold, while the US men start their ice hockey campaign Petra Vlhova set the pace early in the women’s slalom, and then had to watch a series of world-class skiers come down the hill and just fail to pip her time, giving her Slovakia’s first ever Alpine skiing gold. Katharina Liensberger took silver for Austria. Switzerland’s Wendy Holdener was third. Swede Sara Hector had looked set to win a second gold in three days, but the newly-crowned giant slalom champion fell with the finish line in sight and an advantage over Vlhova of almost half a second. Yet perhaps the defining image of the event was US star Mikaela Shiffrin sitting in the snow with her head bowed in disbelief for several minutes after she was disqualified after missing a gate early in first run. After crashing out of her last event, her dream of a record medal haul is rapidly becoming a nightmare and afterwards she said she might not continue to compete in these Games. It was a very different story for Lindsey Jacobellis, who won the first US gold of Beijing in the women’s snowboardcross final. It was redemption for the 36-year-old, who missed out on gold in the 2006 Turin Games with a late fall while in the lead after she attempted a showboating jump trick while well clear of eventual winner Tanja Frieden. After today’s victory, Jacobellis said: “They can keep talking about the 2006 Games all they want because it really shaped me into the individual that I am and kept me hungry and really helped me keep fighting in the sport.” Chloe Trespeuch of France took the silver, while the bronze went to Meryeta O’Dine of Canada. Charlotte Bankes was Britain’s biggest medal hope of these Games, but the 2021 world champion failed to progress beyond the quarter-finals. “I can’t explain,” she said after finishing third. A dominant 108m jump by Japan’s Ryota Yamamoto meant he went into the cross-country leg of the Nordic combined normal hill/10km in front, but he couldn’t live with the pace of the leading group. Vinzenz Geiger of Germany took gold, 0.8 seconds ahead of Norway’s Joergen Graabak. Things you might have missed Natalie Geisenberger won an incredible third consecutive gold in the women’s single luge late yesterday, saying victory this time – her first event since becoming a mother – was different. “I think it was a pretty hard way because my son is absolutely my number one, and my training was around my child,” she said. “But that I’m now here with another gold medal is just amazing.” Geisenberger’s compatriot Anna Berreiter took the silver. The medal ceremony for the team figure skating competition has been delayed because of an ongoing legal issue that could affect medalists, the International Olympic Committee (IOC) said. The athletes of the Russian Olympic Committee (ROC) had been placed first, with the US second and Japan third. Canada finished in fourth. Several of the ROC skaters, including star Kamila Valieva, did not appear at practice sessions today. No reason was given. One of the journalists who conducted the first independent sit-down interview with Chinese tennis star Peng Shuai says the carefully controlled conversation did not answer questions about whether she can speak her mind or move freely. However, the IOC president Thomas Bach, who watched the freestyle skiing with her as his guest yesterday, said: “We answered the question, ‘Where is Peng Shuai?’. You could see it in her appearances that she is enjoying the Games, enjoying being among athletes and the public and this is why we are continuing to have this contact. I hope I will meet her again in the summer in Lausanne.” Sweden took a one-two in the women’s cross-country sprint free event yesterday, with Jonna Sundling finishing nearly three seconds ahead of Maja Dahlqvist. Johannes Hoesflot Klaebo of Norway won the men’s event by a much tighter margin over Italy’s Federico Pellegrino, who was just 0.26 seconds shy of gold. You might also enjoy: Eileen Gu soars to Olympic gold as China embraces dual-culture star China to boost supply of Olympic panda mascots amid shortages Ledecka’s snowboard gold keeps her on course for double-double The briefing’s picture of the day Norway’s Birk Ruud claimed the first ever men’s freeski big air Olympic gold. Having landed a switch left triple 1980 mute – that is five and a half rotations – in the first run, the 21-year-old scored a total of 187.75 and was assured of the title before the third and final jump, which he made holding the Norwegian flag. Colby Stevenson was second for the United States. What to look out for next Times are all in local Beijing time. For Sydney it is +3 hours, for London it is -8 hours, for New York it is -13 hours and San Francisco is -16 hours. Later today – Wednesday 9 February 8.05pm Curling – the round-robin stage gets under way in the men’s competition 🥌 8.20pm Luge – two runs will decide the doubles medals 🥇 9.10pm Ice hockey – the men’s ice hockey competition began earlier with a bad-tempered clash between ROC and Switzerland which the Russians won 1-0. The Czech Republic and Denmark are in the same group and will play tonight’s late game 9.20pm Short track speed skating – the men’s 1,500m final 🥇 Tomorrow – Thursday 10 February 9.05am and 2.05pm and 8.05pm Curling – 12 matches spread across the men’s and women’s competitions 9.30am Figure skating – Nathan Chen goes for gold as the men perform free skating 🥇 9.30am – 3.15pm Snowboard – it starts with the women’s half-pipe, with the final scheduled for 10.25am, and then it is the men’s cross, with the final right at the end of the session 🥇 10.30am and 2.15pm Alpine skiing – it is the men’s combined event, they do the downhill in the morning, and the slalom in the afternoon 🥇 12.10pm and 4.40pm and 9.10pm Ice hockey – four matches in the men’s preliminaries, of which the pick is probably the US v hosts China in the evening slot. 3pm Cross-country skiing – the women race the 10km classic 🥇 7pm Freestyle skiing – tomorrow evening in Beijing it is the mixed team aerials 🥇 8pm Speed skating – the women’s 5,000m 🥇 9.30pm Luge – it is the team relay, which promises to be as wild as it sounds – do not miss it 🥇 Full Winter Olympics schedule | Results, sport by sport | Medal table How things stand Here’s what the emoji table looked like at 6pm Beijing time … 1 🇳🇴 Norway 🥇 4 🥈 2 🥉 4 total: 10 2 🇩🇪 Germany 🥇 4 🥈 2 🥉 0 total: 6 3 🇸🇪 Sweden 🥇 4 🥈 1 🥉 2 total: 7 4 🇳🇱 Netherlands 🥇 3 🥈 3 🥉 1 total: 7 5 🇨🇳 China 🥇 3 🥈 2 🥉 0 total: 5 6 🇦🇹 Austria 🥇 2 🥈 4 🥉 3 total: 9 7 🇮🇹 Italy 🥇 2🥈 4 🥉 1 total: 7 8 ◻️ Not Russia 🥇 2* 🥈 3 🥉 5 total: 10 Selected others 10 🇺🇸 United States 🥇 1 🥈 5 🥉 1 total: 7 12 🇨🇦 Canada 🥇 1 🥈 1 🥉 5 total: 7 15 🇦🇺 Australia 🥇 1🥈 0 🥉 1 total: 2 16= 🇳🇿 New Zealand 🥇 1🥈 0 🥉 0 total: 1 [*The ‘Not Russia’ total includes the team figure skating gold which is yet to be formally presented] You can always get in touch with me at martin.belam@theguardian.com and let me know whether, if like me, you don’t think there’s a single Winter Olympics event where as soon as the starting gun / buzzer / whistle went, you wouldn’t just simply fall over. I’m not even sure I could successfully balance on a luge while lying down. The last word I think the Olympics in your home country is a once-in-a-lifetime thing. People saw it and now there will be so many people who are going to try it out. Maybe this will be the beginning for many Italian people in curling” – Stefania Constantini, the 22-year-old curling mixed doubles gold medallist who hails from Cortina, which will co-host the 2026 Games.Single mothers have a hard time of it, in life and in fiction. Frequently they’re portrayed as unhinged psychos, sex-crazed hoydens, self-sacrificing saints (often widowed), or ground-down sloggers. I can’t think of that many happy, successful, yet devoted SMs in books – but maybe that wouldn’t make a good story. My second novel, Em &amp; Me, centres on a single mother called Delphine, whose life was derailed as a teenager when she fell pregnant with her daughter Emily. I’ve long been preoccupied by the state of single motherhood, possibly since I had my own children and realised what back-breaking effort is required to raise them. The idea of doing it alone seems unimaginable, so I wanted to imagine it; to write a story that reflected the struggle but also allowed my protagonist to fulfil her ambition and potential. Along the way, I’ve been inspired by these lone mothers of literature, in all their crazy, complex glory: 1. Medea by Euripides It might seem odd to start with a drama about a barbarian witch who kills her own children when her husband leaves her for a princess. But shoutout to Euripides for featuring a female protagonist who dominates the action, a chorus of Corinthian women, and a scot-free exit. Medea murders her sons in cold blood to annoy her ex, Jason. But Jason is maddening – a shameless social climber who rubs salt in the wound by suggesting Medea stay on as a mere mistress. Medea has the last laugh, escaping with the bodies of their sons in Helios’ chariot, hinting the Gods are on her side. This is a woman scorned taking back control and getting away with it. The Athenian audience didn’t react favourably to the notion, awarding the play third place (out of three) at the Dionysia festival of 431 BCE. I’m sure Euripides would be heartened to know Medea’s No 1 in my top 10. 2. Mrs Dashwood in Sense and Sensibility by Jane Austen I always think of Mrs Dashwood as ancient, but at 40 she’s four years younger than me. Perhaps it’s because she’s in the SM category of noble widow that she seems older. She has no name, known only as “Mrs Henry Dashwood”, subsumed into the persona of her dead husband, who failed to provide for her or his daughters. Like many of Austen’s mothers, her chief aim in life is to find suitable matches for her girls, who keep spraining their ankles, contracting fevers or being self-destructively repressed. It’s a sad trial for Mrs Dashwood, but she gets there in the end, and can happily retire to the bland Barton Cottage to await grandchildren. 3. Marmee in Little Women by Louisa May Alcott Mrs March is the archetypal single mother saint. Technically she’s not single, but her husband’s absence elevates her to the SM sisterhood. Margaret March Senior is infuriatingly perfect. As a child, I remember being very upset at the thought of only getting a Bible for Christmas, and blamed Marmee, feeling she could have spent their pennies in a more enjoyable way, rather than virtue signalling. Alcott hints at dark depths when Marmee confesses she was once as hot-headed as her daughter Jo, but learned to control her temper. I would love to have seen a tiny flare of it, the glimmer of original sin. 4. The Bolter in The Pursuit of Love by Nancy Mitford Another with no name, the Bolter is a favourite of mine, because she’s all sin – unrepentantly feckless, without a speck of maternal instinct, “too beautiful and too gay to be burdened with a child”. I find her extraordinary flippancy radical, inspiring and chilling. The family turn her hedonism “into a sort of joke” to avoid hurting daughter Fanny’s feelings, and that’s Mitford to a T – just because it’s funny doesn’t mean it’s not serious. 5. Annie Lee in Cider With Rosie by Laurie Lee Mother Lee is noble and self-sacrificing but not as irritatingly good as Marmee. She’s messier and more endearing. “Disordered, hysterical, loving … muddled and mischievous”, Annie talks too much and dawdles, can’t cook or make beds, but her mothering skills are rich and varied. And, like many SMs, she stays when the father is long gone. In this tender, evocative coming-of-age, it’s not Rosie but Annie who wins my heart. 6. Pauline Mole in The Secret Diary of Adrian Mole Aged 13¾ by Sue Townsend Adrian’s world is densely packed with detail and full of warmth despite the failings of his family. His mother Pauline is a philanderess who uses the family allowance to buy gin and cigarettes, locks the dog in the coal shed, sings My Way at 2am at the top of the stairs and runs off to Sheffield with another man. Ruthlessly unsentimental unless she’s drunk, on the rare occasions she reveals her maternal streak, it’s very special. When she turns up at Adrian’s bedside before he has his tonsils out, he dispassionately notes how old and haggard she looks. The love is there; it’s just locked in the coal shed with the dog, only let out occasionally. 7. Fiona Brewer in About a Boy by Nick Hornby Hornby’s skill is making this chronically depressed and tiresomely earnest woman engaging and sympathetic. What Fiona does at the beginning of the book is startlingly selfish on one level, but also a painful reflection of the pressures of single motherhood, and the bone-crushing flatness of depression. Fiona is ground down by it all – being a mum isn’t enough, mothering alone isn’t enough, and that’s the trouble. 8. Jess Thomas in The One Plus One by JoJo Moyes A heart-tugging example of the long-suffering slogger, Jess juggles two jobs in an attempt to keep things together for her kids, occasionally Skyping Marty, their father, to suggest he contribute to their upkeep. When it’s later revealed exactly what Marty’s been up to since he left the family home, I relished Jess’s demented rage. In the end, Jess gets a worthy plus-one, just as she deserves. 9. Mia Warren in Little Fires Everywhere by Celeste Ng Mia’s guarded quality makes her fascinating, both to the reader and her landlady Mrs Richardson. Mia is Pearl’s mother, a listener and a watcher, intuitive and empathetic, but also distant. Elena Richardson’s rebellious daughter Izzy recognises Mia’s subversive spark and reacts to her subtly provocative challenge – “what are you going to do about it?” – ultimately resulting in a conflagration. An enigmatic figure, Mia’s magnetism puts her right at the heart of the fire, even if she’s not there to see it. 10. Desiree Vignes in The Vanishing Half by Brit Bennett The tale of light-skinned Black twins who take very different paths forces you to look one way, then the other, confounding expectations. Shy, introverted Stella boldly passes herself off as white. Desiree, the headstrong extrovert, returns to their dull home town with her daughter to escape an abusive relationship. But it’s Desiree who has the dignity that Stella craves and fails to find in her desperate sham of a marriage. Yin and yang, when Stella vanishes, Desiree stays – because that’s what single mothers have to do. They stick around. Em &amp; Me by Beth Morrey is published by HarperCollins. To help the Guardian and Observer, order your copy from guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.The prospect of harnessing the power of the stars has moved a step closer to reality after scientists set a new record for the amount of energy released in a sustained fusion reaction. Researchers at the Joint European Torus (JET), a fusion experiment in Oxfordshire, generated 59 megajoules of heat – equivalent to about 14kg of TNT – during a five-second burst of fusion, more than doubling the previous record of 21.7 megajoules set in 1997 by the same facility. The feat announced on Wednesday follows more than two decades of tests and refinements at the Culham Centre for Fusion Energy and has been hailed as a “major milestone” on the road to fusion becoming a viable and sustainable low-carbon energy source. “These landmark results have taken us a huge step closer to conquering one of the biggest scientific and engineering challenges of them all,” said Prof Ian Chapman, the chief executive of the UK Atomic Energy Authority. “It’s clear we must make significant changes to address the effects of climate change, and fusion offers so much potential.” The doughnut-shaped JET is built to contain plasmas, or highly ionised gases, which are heated to 150m degrees Celsius, 10 times hotter than the centre of the sun. At such extreme temperatures, atomic nuclei can fuse together to form new elements and release vast amounts of energy. The same fusion reactions power the sun, but at considerably lower temperatures, because stars have gravity to lend a hand. Experiments at JET have focused on whether fusion is feasible with a fuel based on two isotopes of hydrogen known as deuterium and tritium which combine to form helium gas. The latest results suggest that it is and provide crucial confirmation for Iter, a larger fusion project being built in the south of France. Iter is scheduled to start burning deuterium-tritium fuel in 2035 and ultimately generate more heat than is needed to keep its plasma at high temperature. If all goes well with Iter, the next step is to build a European demonstration power plant that produces more electricity than it uses and is hooked up to the grid. The prospect of fusion energy is deeply attractive because it does not release greenhouse gases and 1kg of fusion fuel contains about 10m times as much energy as 1kg of coal, oil or gas. While deuterium is abundantly available in sea water, tritium is extremely rare and produced in nuclear reactors. Future fusion plants – Iter included – are expected to make their own tritium fuel by using high-energy neutrons, released when deuterium and tritium fuse, to split the common metal lithium into tritium and helium. Dr Mark Wenman, a reader in nuclear materials at Imperial College London, said that while the experiment released fusion energy for only five seconds, it proved that the fuel could be burned in a sustainable manner. “It’s been a while since they have produced a record like this and it’s a major milestone on the way to proving that fusion’s a viable and sustainable energy source for the future. “Five seconds doesn’t sound like much, but if you can burn it for five seconds, presumably you could keep it stable and keep it burning for many minutes, hours, or days, which is what you are going to need for a proper fusion power plant. It’s the proof of that concept that they have achieved,” he said. Prof Ian Fells, the emeritus professor of energy conversion at the University of Newcastle, said the record-breaking release of fusion energy was “a landmark” in fusion research. “Now it is up to the engineers to translate this into carbon-free electricity and mitigate the problem of climate change,” he added.This American classic is a zingy, yellow act of rebellion against stodgy, beige, winter puddings. A celebration of seasonal citrus topped with a snowy cloud of meringue, it’s also a true showstopper: the culinary equivalent of another Southern blonde bombshell, Miss Dolly Parton – altogether too much, and all the more irresistible for it. Serve à la mode with a scoop of ice-cream for maximum pleasure. Prep 40 min Chill/rest 1 hr Cook 30 min Serves 6 For the pastry 225g plain flour 2 tbsp caster sugar ½ tsp salt 120g cold butter 1 egg yolk 2 tbsp cold water 3 digestive biscuits For the filling 6 lemons, at least 3 of them unwaxed for preference 25g cornflour 175g caster sugar 3 egg yolks 25g butter For the meringue 4 egg whites 1 pinch of salt 225g caster sugar 2 tsp cornflour 1 Make the pastry dough Start with the pastry. LMP requires a sturdy, rich shortcrust, which you’ll need to make yourself (you could use a ready-made sweet shortcrust, if you prefer, but this is much nicer). Mix the flour, sugar and salt in a large bowl, grate in the butter, then rub it in using your fingertips. Alternatively, pulse everything in a food processor to coarse crumbs. 2 Finish the pastry … Add the egg yolk and just enough of the cold water (you shouldn’t need it all) that it comes together into a soft, but not sticky dough that you’re able to shape into a coherent ball – too much water will cause the pastry to shrink in the oven, while too little will mean it’ll disintegrate under the rolling pin, so add it gradually. 3 … then chill and rest Flatten the pastry ball, then wrap and chill for 30 minutes (if you need to leave it in the fridge for longer, get it out a little while before you want to roll it out). Meanwhile, grease a 20-22cm loose-bottomed tart tin, and crush the digestives to crumbs (putting them in a bag and whacking them with a rolling pin is a fun way to do this). 4 Roll out the pastry Scatter half the biscuit crumbs on a work surface, then lay the pastry on top and roll out to about 5mm thick. Scatter the remaining crumbs on top, then use the pastry to line the tin, trimming it neatly, so there’s still just a little standing proud of the sides. Chill for another 30 minutes. Heat the oven to 200C (180C fan)/390F/gas 6. 5 Blind bake the pie case Prick the base all over with a fork, then line the tin with greaseproof paper and baking beans or similar (dried beans, rice, etc) and bake for 20 minutes. Carefully lift out the beans and paper, bake the base for another five to seven minutes, until the pastry is dry and pale golden, then remove and leave to cool. 6 Start on the lemon filling Zest three of the lemons (if they’re waxed, scrub the skin well with hot water first), then juice all six of them: you should end up with about 200ml. Put both the zest and the juice in a saucepan. Whisk 50ml water into the cornflour until smooth, then whisk this into the pan. Stir in the sugar and egg yolks. 7 Pour into the tart case Dice the butter and put it near the hob. Put the pan on a low flame and heat gently, stirring, until the mix is warm. Still stirring, add the butter, then slowly bring the mixture up to a simmer. Once the lemon thickens and reaches the consistency of thick custard, spoon it into the tart case and set aside to cool completely (it will continue to firm up as it cools). 8 Make the meringue Heat the oven back up to 200C (180C fan)/390F/gas 6. In a large clean bowl, or in a food mixer, whisk the egg whites and a pinch of salt to soft peaks. Whisk in the sugar a spoonful at a time, then carry on whisking until the meringue mix is stiff and shiny. Finally, whisk in the cornflour. 9 Finish the pie Spoon the meringue on top of the pie, artistically shaping it into snowy peaks. Bake for about 15 minutes, until the meringue is lightly golden on top. Leave to cool before serving. The soft meringue means that this is not a dessert that keeps particularly well, but cover any leftovers loosely with foil and refrigerate. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from OcadoAntonio Conte could make a move for Christian Eriksen in the summer after admitting he was surprised to see the Denmark midfielder back in the Premier League with Brentford. The Tottenham manager, who worked with Eriksen at Internazionale – they won the Serie A title together last season – thought the player might need more time to recover from the cardiac arrest he suffered last June. Eriksen collapsed in Denmark’s opening Euro 2020 finals game against Finland and needed life-saving treatment on the pitch. Conte, who is living in a London hotel – his wife and daughter have remained in Italy – enjoyed a chance encounter with Eriksen on Sunday. Eriksen is staying at the same hotel after agreeing a deal with Brentford until the end of the season. Conte said he had not discussed signing Eriksen as a free agent in January with the Spurs board, mainly because he did not imagine the former club favourite would be ready to play again in England. He will monitor his progress closely over the final months of the season. Eriksen has been fitted with an implantable cardioverter defibrillator, which meant that Inter had to release him because the rules in Italy do not allow players with such a device to compete. He has not played since the trauma of the Finland game and is working on his fitness for what will be an emotional return with Brentford. “Honestly, no,” Conte said, when asked whether there had been a discussion about bringing Eriksen back to Spurs. “Honestly, I was surprised about the situation because in my mind, honestly, I thought Christian needed more time before coming back to play in England. “For sure, Eriksen is part of Tottenham’s story. To come back here would be a good opportunity for him, for me, for the club. Now he’s signed for Brentford … only six months, and we’ll see what happens. “I was lucky because I met him on Sunday and it was good to speak with him. I saw him with his family and it was good. I met him in the same hotel that we were both staying in. We didn’t prepare the meeting. It was only a coincidence to see him and his family. “I’m the first person to be happy to see him again on the pitch because we spent a really good time at Inter Milan together. We won the league, we spent two important seasons together. I wish him all the best for the future. And you don’t know what will happen. It would be good for me to have him again, to work together.”An initial investigation into allegations that Israeli police targeted citizens with spyware has confirmed that the application was indeed used against three people, according to claims by a local news station. The Israeli broadcaster Channel 12 said a police investigation ordered by Israel’s public security minister, Omer Barlev, had concluded that of 26 individuals named in recent reports as having been targeted using NSO Group’s Pegasus software, three named individuals were targeted, with the police successfully hacking only one of the phones. Channel 12 did not name the three people and the Guardian has not been able to independently verify the report. The disclosure comes amid reports that officers from the intelligence agencies Shin Bet and Mossad would be involved in the investigation. Channel 12 claimed in its report that the initial inquiry suggested that in all three cases a court had approved the interception of individuals’ phones. The report leaves numerous questions unanswered, including whether Pegasus was the only application of its kind available to the Israeli police’s cyber-intelligence unit, and whether others than those named in recent reports were targeted. Barlev ordered the initial investigation at the behest of the Israeli prime minister, Naftali Bennett, pending a decision on what shape any further commission of inquiry should take. “Before a decision is made on the mechanism for investigating the affair, the prime minister requested to conduct a [further] probe of the 26 names mentioned in the Calcalist newspaper’s report,” a statement from Bennett’s office said, referring to the media outlet that initially reported the use of the spyware. Calcalist reported on Monday that the spyware was deployed without court authorisation against senior government officials, mayors, activist leaders, journalists, and the former prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu’s family members and advisers, naming two dozen targets. Bennett said this week: “This tool [Pegasus] and similar tools are important tools in the fight against terrorism and severe crime. But they were not intended to be used in fishing campaigns targeting the Israeli public or officials, which is why we need to understand exactly what happened.” The investigation into alleged police use of Pegasus is the latest controversy to hit NSO Group’s spyware. The Pegasus project – by a global consortium of media organisations, of which the Guardian is a partner – has alleged that the spyware, licensed by Israel, has been used against activists, journalists, political opponents and human rights defenders in a number of countries. NSO says all of its sales are government-authorised and that it does not itself run Pegasus. The controversy has prompted a wider debate about all kinds of surveillance of Israeli citizens by the state. It has also fed into the drama surrounding Netanyahu’s corruption trial, with the former prime minister seizing on reports that police illicitly tapped the phones of key witnesses. On Tuesday a Jerusalem court accepted a request to cancel a hearing in order to provide more time for prosecution lawyers to seek more information on the claims.The descendants of Italy’s last king are suing the Italian state in their fight to reclaim the crown jewels, which for almost 76 years have been stashed in a treasure chest in a safety deposit box at the Bank of Italy amid a long-running mystery over their ownership. The legal action comes after the offspring of King Umberto II failed to reach an agreement with the bank to return the jewels, which comprise more than 6,000 diamonds and 2,000 pearls mounted on brooches, necklaces and tiaras worn by various princesses and queens during the monarchy’s 85-year existence. The first hearing will take place on 7 June at the court of Rome, said Sergio Orlandi, the lawyer representing Umberto II’s son, Vittorio Emanuele di Savoia, and three daughters, Maria Gabriella, Maria Pia and Maria Beatrice. “We knew the mediation meeting [with the Bank of Italy] wouldn’t go anywhere but were obliged to have it before [suing the state],” added Orlandi. “I hope we manage to get the jewels returned, and it will now be up to a judge to establish if the family has the [ownership] rights.” The Bank of Italy took delivery of the jewels on 5 June 1946, three days after Italians voted to abolish the monarchy and nine days before Umberto II, who ruled for just 34 days, was banished into exile along with his male heirs. Umberto II had asked Falcone Lucifero, the minister of the Royal House, to bring the jewels to Luigi Einaudi, the then governor of Bank of Italy who later became president, for safekeeping. The jewels are said to have been the only part of the royal estate that were not confiscated by the Italian state after the monarchy was scrapped, an element that may help the Savoia family win back possession. They also hope that a cryptic note delivered alongside the treasure chest, which said the “precious” crown jewels must be “entrusted to the custody of the central cashier” and “kept at the disposal of those who have right”, will help determine that the jewels belong to them and not to the state.Last week, a commission set up by Stanford University and the Lancet found that the devastating opioid crisis in North America could happen again, and not just there. The unethical practices that Patrick Radden Keefe documented in his prize-winning 2021 book, Empire of Pain, were not restricted to one company, Purdue Pharma, and the part of the Sackler family that owned it. They were and remain normal behaviour in the pharmaceutical industry and in the agencies that are supposed to regulate it. The Covid pandemic has, in some senses, been big pharma’s redemption. The vaccines that were developed at record speed, albeit on the back of decades of painstaking, publicly funded research, have been portrayed as a miracle of public-private cooperation. But this report reminds us that the question of trust isn’t going away – and it won’t until we do something about it. At a Lancet webinar last week, the addiction expert at Stanford, Keith Humphreys, who led the commission, noted that if you measure the opioid crisis in terms of years of life lost, rather than absolute numbers of deaths, the fallout in the US and Canada has been on a par with that of Covid. Measure it by deaths relative to the populations of those countries, and it’s worse than the HIV/Aids epidemic at its North American peak. This “epidemic” was caused not by a virus, but by human greed. And it’s not over. Because those who became addicted to prescription painkillers often progressed to heroin and then fentanyl, the crisis is still growing despite tighter controls on prescription. The commission’s modelling suggests that without major policy changes, the US alone could lose another million lives before this decade is out. That’s not to mention the damage that addiction does even when it doesn’t end in death. What’s more, the crisis is spreading as companies cast their marketing nets wider – notably, to low- and middle-income countries where appropriate pain relief and palliative care are often in short supply. Rich countries aren’t immune either. GP prescriptions for opioids more than doubled in the UK between 1998 and 2018, prompting some to claim that the country was seeing its own opioid epidemic. Humphreys laid the blame at the door of the opioid manufacturers, of which Purdue was only one. But he also described the culture that enabled them, pointing to “dramatic failures in regulation, in law, by healthcare systems and by individual physicians that failed to stop them”. And most of those weaknesses, he said, have not been fixed. They include a “revolving door” between industry and the agencies that regulate them; drug companies’ relative freedoms in countries to aggressively market their products; the existence of fake grassroots or “astroturf” groups that claim to represent patients’ interests but are actually in companies’ pay; and the industry’s well-funded lobbying of elected officials. Although the regulatory environments are different in Europe and the US, we know from at least 20 years of whistleblowing and investigative journalism that the problems the commission identified exist across the industry. In 2012, for example, GlaxoSmithKline was fined $3bn for promoting the inappropriate prescription of antidepressants to children. And last year, the French drugmaker Laboratoires Servier and the French medicines agency were fined for their part in the scandal over Mediator, a diabetes treatment that has been linked to hundreds of deaths. These cases will be familiar to those who follow drug industry shenanigans. What is interesting is the timing of the Stanford-Lancet report. It was released while we’re still living through a pandemic that has revealed unexpectedly high levels of mistrust in science. People who are vaccine hesitant often point to what they perceive to be the pharmaceutical industry’s untrustworthiness. Yet mainstream opinion absolves the industry of any responsibility for that. For the vaccine-compliant, the only bogeymen in this story – besides a handful of cynical anti-vaxxers – are the social media platforms that peddle disinformation. A week ago, for instance, the international non-profit NGO, the Center for Countering Digital Hate, wrote, “The simple fact is that the anti-vaxx movement – and its myriad offshoots – have gained public attention and traction for one main reason: because big tech profits from their content and their followers, and so refuses to take them down.” Let me be clear: the Covid vaccines deserve our trust. More than 10bn doses have been administered to date, and they have turned out to be safer and more effective than anyone dreamed possible. They are our best way out of this pandemic, and the more people who take them, the more lives will be saved. It is also worth pointing out that, even if Covid has created some vaccine billionnaires, vaccine development is not generally lucrative. Until Covid, big pharma was deserting the field because the profit margins were so slight – with the result that we still lack vaccines for some major killers, including HIV. But even if the industry pulled off a coup this time, in collaboration with academia, it needs to get its house in order or we risk seeing even higher levels of vaccine hesitancy in the next pandemic. After all, many people put their trust in opioids, and that didn’t work out so well. Some companies developing Covid vaccines, such as AstraZeneca, Pfizer and Johnson &amp; Johnson, have been censured for bad practices in the past. Is it really surprising that surveys show it is the least trusted industry? It is true social media has done us a disservice and our social contract was fraying before Covid came along. But it’s also true that, if anti-vaxxers and their enablers are ready to stop at nothing in pursuit of fat profits, they have an excellent role model in big pharma. If governments, industry and physicians acknowledge this needs to change, at long last, then this crisis won’t have gone to waste. Laura Spinney is a science journalist and the author of Pale Rider: The Spanish Flu of 1918 and How it Changed the WorldWe would like to hear from older workers, including those of retirement age and beyond, about their experiences of leaving the workforce earlier than planned. What are the factors that led to your decision? Are you leaving for health-related reasons, such as long-term illness or an operation, for example? Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.Ask trespassers if they are lost, install gates rather than stiles and only shoot dogs as a last resort. These are some of the guidelines issued to farmers and land managers by the government conservation agency Natural England, in partnership with Natural Resources Wales. The advice is designed to help people enjoy the countryside and covers protecting livestock and keeping rights of way usable. The guidance includes advice on what to do if a dog is chasing farm animals, including a warning that farmers should only shoot a dog worrying livestock as a last resort. Recommendations for cutting back vegetation and keeping public waterways clear as part of ensuring rights of way are usable, putting in more accessible gates – or even leaving gaps – rather than stiles, and better signage for visitors, are also included in the guidance. It advises land managers who find walkers trespassing on their land that “visitors rarely mean to trespass” and to ask them if they are lost and help them get back to paths or areas they are allowed on. Land managers are encouraged to help visitors behave responsibly, securing gates open if they want people to leave that way, considering self-closing gates or signs if they want them shut, and keeping land free from rubbish that could encourage fly-tipping. It also includes advice on reporting criminal or threatening behaviour to the police, and reporting noise disturbances and fly-tipping to the local authority. There is advice on creating a safe environment, including stacking bales safely, using and storing chemicals responsibly, managing trees, and warning visitors of hazards in the landscape. The new guidance is issued under the Countryside Code, which was refreshed last year in an effort to help people of all ages and backgrounds enjoy the countryside responsibly – with tips such as advising people to say hello to others, stay on footpaths, and bag and bin their dog’s poo. The Natural England chief executive, Marian Spain, said: “With more people than ever before spending time in nature, this refreshed advice for land managers has never been more important in helping to ensure we work together to protect our outdoor spaces. “I urge all land managers to follow this new advice and continue to help make nature accessible to everyone, so people of all ages and backgrounds can enjoy the invaluable health and wellbeing benefits that nature offers, while giving it the respect it deserves.” The rural affairs minister, Richard Benyon, said: “We want to ensure that nature is accessible for all, whilst also supporting people to do the right thing when they are visiting the countryside. “The new advice in the Countryside Code will help farmers and land managers to help the public enjoy the outdoors in a responsible way. I am grateful to all of those stakeholders who have helped shape this updated guidance.”The family of a British author who was found dead close to her home in the Dominican Republic are hoping that a long-awaited trial will finally bring them answers. The body of Lindsay de Feliz, 64, was found in a shallow grave in the north-west of the country more than two years ago. Her husband of 14 years, Danilo Feliz Torres, his two sons and a fourth man are to stand trial accused of her murder. All have pleaded not guilty. Proceedings are set to begin on 16 February after many delays. Speaking publicly for the first time, de Feliz’s family told the Guardian it would be a key moment in their search for justice. “Once the trial is over we will be able to start to grieve for Lindsay,” said her 60-year-old brother Patrick Firth. Her family in the UK – her mother, Shirley Firth, who is a few months away from her ninetieth birthday, and her three siblings – are grief-stricken by her death. Her mother misses their nightly conversations on Skype “where we put the world to rights”. De Feliz led a successful life in the UK, working as a marketing manager for various firms in the City. She longed for something different and in 2002 decided to leave her husband, job and life in the UK to follow her passion for scuba diving. After spending some time in the Maldives she settled in the Dominican Republic where she worked as a scuba-diving instructor and married a local man in 2005. Her family said she supported him financially to help him train as a lawyer and in an unsuccessful campaign to be elected as mayor. After she was shot in the throat during a robbery in 2006, de Feliz could no longer work as a diving instructor. She began writing blogs about her life in the Dominican Republic and published two memoirs – What About Your Saucepans? and Life After My Saucepans. The titles were references to a comment by her mother who had bought her a set of saucepans for Christmas that de Feliz did not take with her to the Dominican Republic. Her first book reached number one in the Amazon Kindle travel books chart. She adored her adopted country and the Dominican people. According to her mother, de Feliz would leave the UK after visits home for Christmas with suitcases bulging with over-the-counter medicines such as aspirin and paracetamol and plasters that she distributed to people living in poverty who were unable to access these basics. Her family say de Feliz was highly regarded in her adopted home and after her death there were 92 pages of tributes to her on the expat website DR1. “She was an amazing person,” Shirley Firth said. “She could go into a room and start talking to anyone. She made some dramatic changes in her life and even after she was shot in 2006 and could no longer work as a scuba-diving instructor she took it all in her stride. “A foundation has been set up in her memory to help disadvantaged women and children in the Dominican Republic. Royalties from her books are still coming in and we would like to give that money to a cause that Lindsay cared about.” Firth smiled at the memory of her daughter’s love of parsnips, which she tried and failed to grow in the Dominican Republic. She said that sometimes friends visiting from the UK would try to smuggle parsnips through customs for her. “We just have to keep going. We can’t have closure until this whole thing is finished,” she said. “We hope for some resolution and to see justice done.” Diana Fawcett, Chief Executive of the charity Victim Support, who are supporting the Firth family through the trial said: “Having to go through a trial in another country and in a different language makes what is already an agonising process all the more unbearable. “We are particularly aware of how hard this has been for the Firth family and all those who loved and treasured Lindsay, here in the UK and in the Dominican Republic.”Container ship accidents at sea should be considered the “oil spills of our time”, warned environmental organisations that found a toxic mix of metals, carcinogenic and other harmful chemicals on plastic washed up on Sri Lanka’s beaches after a cargo ship fire. When the X-Press Pearl sank off nine nautical miles off Colombo, Sri Lanka’s capital, in May 2021, the most “significant harm” from the country’s worst maritime disaster initially came from the spillage of 1,680 tonnes of plastic pellets, or “nurdles”, into the Indian Ocean. They were found in dead dolphins, fish and on beaches – in some places 2 metres deep. A UN report called it the “single largest plastic spill” in history. But a new study, from Sri Lanka’s Centre for Environmental Justice (CEJ) and the International Pollutants Elimination Network (IPEN), a coalition of NGOs in 124 countries, said the nurdle spill was the “tip of the iceberg” of environmental harm from the accident. Researchers analysed samples of nurdles and burnt lumps of plastic from four Sri Lankan beaches for heavy metals and various chemicals, including benzotriazole UV-stabilisers, which are used to prevent discoloration in plastics, bisphenols and polyaromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs). They found heavy metals as well as chemicals that both cause cancer and are “endocrine-disrupting”, or interfering with hormones. Of particular concern, they said, were levels of PAHs found on the burnt lumps, which far exceeded safe limits for consumer products set by the EU. For some substances, no level of exposure is considered safe. Dr Therese Karlsson, a science adviser at IPEN and co-author of the study, said: “Until now, there hasn’t been any publicly available chemical analysis of the spill. The chemicals have largely been overlooked because they are not visible.” While the nurdle spillage was “catastrophic”, Karlsson said, it was “the tip of the iceberg” due to the chemicals present – in particular BPA, which is used to make plastic and epoxy resins. “We found bisphenol-A (BPA), which is a probable human carcinogen and has been linked to everything from depression, to respiratory disease, to breast and colon cancer,” she said. “It is also an endocrine disruptor.” Of 1,486 containers carried on the vessel, 80 were classed as “dangerous goods” including caustic soda and nitric acid. The ship also carried epoxy resins, used in paints and primers, ethanol, and lead ingots, used to make vehicle batteries. The study concluded that current legislation and practices are insufficient to mitigate the risk of poorly packaged chemicals on ships. “Shipping is increasing, with 90% of the world’s trade moved by sea,” said Karlsson. “The cargo of these ships is so much more complex today. But the regulations have not kept up.” Chalani Rubesinghe, of CEJ, said the disaster had exposed the complexity of shipping chemicals. “These accidents have huge consequences on the environment and economies,” she said. The safety committee of the International Maritime Organization (IMO) has been discussing how to track containers and address the loss of pellets at sea. Sri Lanka has asked the IMO to classify plastic pellets as toxic substances, and Vanuatu is calling for better reporting of containers lost at sea. The Sri Lankan authorities said this week that clearing the wreck and debris of the sunken ship would take four months. They have filed an interim claim for damages of $40m (£30m) with the operator of the X-Press Pearl.Book now The old adage goes that everyone has a book within them - and this is possibly true, but what is also true is this: writing can be difficult, requires resilience and perseverance, and, truthfully, few people push through the challenges to make it to the end of their first draft. Rather than getting stuck, discover how to effectively construct your story by learning how to combine the three essential elements: character, storytelling and plot. Drawing on his upcoming creative writing guide, Your Story Matters, and in a friendly and informal virtual setting, author, screenwriter and writing mentor Nikesh Shukla will help you to draw out your story in a way that will hone your skills, boost your confidence and assure you that it is worthy of being told. Learn how to get your plot, character and story talking to each other in a structured manner, and how to ensure that your characters are leading your reader through the plot and not letting the plot dictate what happens to them. Crucially, discover how to boost your confidence and strengthen your resilience to carry you through a writing process that, far from being a slog, can be empowering. Course content Three elements that need to work together: character, storytelling and plot How not to let the plot dictate what happens to your character Building a story around your characters Constructing a plot that services your story This course is for … Writers at any stage of their creative process, writing in any genre Tutor profile Nikesh Shukla is an author, screenwriter and one of the most prominent UK voices on diversity and inclusion in the arts. Nikesh is a contributing editor to the Observer Magazine and was previously its columnist. He is the editor of bestselling essay collection The Good Immigrant, which won the Reader’s Choice at the Books Are My Bag Awards, and was shortlisted for Book of the Year at the British Book Awards. He is the author of a number of books, including Coconut Unlimited (shortlisted for the Costa First Novel Award and longlisted for the Desmond Elliott Prize), Meatspace, Run Riot, The Boxer, Brown Baby and is co-editor of The Good Immigrant USA. Nikesh’s creative writing guide Your Story Matters: Find Your Voice, Sharpen Your Skills, Tell Your Story is released on 17 March 2022. If you live in the UK, you can purchase a book and ticket for the combined price of £62.08 including P&amp;P. Details Book now Dates: Tuesday 22 March 2022 Times: 6.30-8.30pm (GMT) Price: £49 (plus £2.66 booking fee) or £62.08 for book + ticket (plus £3.22 booking fee) This masterclass is available globally. If you are joining us from outside the United Kingdom, please use this time zone converter to check your local live streaming time. 6.30pm GMT | 7.30pm CET | 11.30am PDT | 2.30pm EDT You will be sent a link to the webinar 2hrs before the start time of 6.30pm (BST). Sign up to our newsletter and you’ll be among the first to find out about our latest courses and special offers. You can also follow us on Twitter here. Information on Guardian Masterclasses To contact us, click here. Terms and conditions can be found here. By enrolling on this masterclass, you’re helping to support the Guardian, and this allows us to keep our quality reporting open to all. All Guardian Masterclasses are fully accessible - but please contact us if you have any queries or concerns. Returns policy Once a purchase is complete we will not be able to refund you where you do not attend or if you cancel your event booking. Please see our terms and conditions for more information on our refund policy.John Menzies, a Scottish firm that provides ground, air cargo and fuelling services at airports, has rejected a £469m takeover approach from a Kuwait rival, sending its shares soaring. The Edinburgh-based firm said its board had unanimously rebuffed a “preliminary and unsolicited proposal” from National Aviation Services, a subsidiary of the Kuwait-based Agility Public Warehousing, at a price of 510p a share in cash. It came after Menzies knocked back an earlier offer at 460p a share. Shares in Menzies jumped as much as 41% to 475p, a two-year high, and later traded 36% higher at 455.50p, below the offer price. It is the latest overseas bid attempt after a surge in takeovers of UK companies by foreign firms in recent months, including the £7bn sale of Morrisons, Britain’s fourth-biggest supermarket group, to a US private equity firm. Menzies was founded in 1833 as a bookseller, but has focused on its aviation business since selling its newspaper distribution arm to the private equity firm Endless in 2018, after pressure from investors. It is one of the world’s biggest aviation services providers, with services including plane fuelling and de-icing, ground and cargo handling, and maintenance at more than 200 airports in 37 countries. Agility builds warehouse parks and offers last-mile delivery, as well as customs services, property management and aviation services across the Middle East, Africa and parts of Asia. The company generates annual revenues of $5.4bn (£4bn). It was established as a state-owned company in 1979 and privatised in 1997, when Tarek Sultan, a Kuwait businessman and member of the country’s powerful Sultan family, was named chairman and managing director. After consulting its financial advisers, Goldman Sachs, Menzies concluded that “the proposal is entirely opportunistic, conditional and that the terms fundamentally undervalue Menzies and its future prospects”. It said the offer came “at a time when the full impact of management actions is not yet reflected in Menzies valuation and underlying volumes have yet to return to pre-pandemic levels”. The company suffered heavy losses in 2020 when the Covid-19 outbreak led to a collapse in global aviation. It has since reshaped its business and implemented a £25m cost-cutting drive. Global air travel has been recovering since last summer and Menzies had a strong finish to 2021, despite the impact of changing travel restrictions prompted by the rapid spread of the Omicron variant. Philipp Joeinig, the chairman and chief executive, said: “This strong performance and momentum in 2021 has continued in 2022, with further contract wins and renewals alongside the continued recovery of global flight volumes.”While fears of a possible Russian military invasion of Ukraine continue to grow in Europe and the west, people in Ukraine have to get on with their daily lives. A callout asking people about the situation in the country received scores of responses, with readers primarily emphasising that while there was concern, Ukrainians were not in a state of panic and life largely continues as normal. Many underlined that the crisis was not new – there has been a conflict with Russian-backed separatists in the country’s east since 2014. The Guardian received submissions from people across Ukraine, with about half of responses coming from residents of the capital, Kyiv. Here, five people share their experiences of what it’s like living with the threat of a Russian invasion. ‘There’s this general feeling of unease’ Last week I went to the supermarket and stocked up on some basic food items. It’s one of the first things that comes to your mind – the kind of thing we did when the pandemic broke out. So I just went and bought stuff that has a long shelf life, like pasta, olive oil, canned food, rice. I haven’t seen anyone panic-buying in the supermarket. I also checked where my documents were and put them in a backpack together with my laptop. It’s really hard to imagine what this can be like. I’ve been fortunate to only have seen war in films. Basically I’m getting my inspiration from Hollywood films – it sounds a bit silly, but you don’t really know how to behave. There’s this general feeling of unease – can you even make long-term plans? I have started taking sleeping medication to help me sleep at nights when I suffer from bouts of anxiety. I am in central Ukraine. I’m kind of halfway between Kyiv and Crimea, so it’s still a long way from, for instance, Donetsk and Luhansk. It’s much worse in eastern Ukraine and in Kyiv. I have friends [there] and my brother also lives in Kyiv. They do say that people are panicking a lot more there because they feel they might be the primary target. I have a friend in Kyiv who says many of her friends have signed up for self-defence courses or even purchased hunting rifles. I live with my three-and-a-half-year-old daughter and retired parents. My daughter and I have European passports (my partner is French) but I can’t bear leaving my parents behind. If push comes to shove, I may simply have no choice as I need to protect my daughter. Julia, 34, Kropyvnytsky, translator ‘If Ukraine is invaded, I will stay and fight’ Many people have already thought of what they will do in case of an invasion, like whether they will go with their relatives, whether they will go themselves, where they will [send] their relatives. I don’t want to run somewhere, I don’t want to leave Ukraine … I don’t want to have to [make] this decision. But [in case of an invasion], I think that I will join the army. At least as far as I’m able to do that, because I don’t have military experience. [Invasion] feels like it’s very, very possible. I cannot say what is more likely – that invasion will be or that it won’t be. Maybe the feeling is like 50/50, but 50 is a lot. It seems like everyone is nervous but not in panic. At least so far. All in all we are used to it – war and military threats from Russia have become a common business over the last eight years. The escalation has become the [main] topic in our media and a usual topic of chats over coffee. People discuss whether to fight, to do nothing or to run away somewhere in Europe. YouTube is full of [videos advising] “how to prepare for surviving a war” or “what to put in your survival/alarm kit”. These videos have mostly been created in the last two months – some were created [before] but have become popular now. Some people are making stocks of some supplies, like food, but in general I don’t feel like it’s too many people. The shops are full of products. Dmytro, 27, Kyiv, works at a law firm ‘No one is panicking’ There was a little bit of panic a few weeks ago after the American embassy ordered their staff to go back home – because of this, the [value] of Ukrainian hryvnia went down compared with the euro or American dollar. But the exchange rate has got back to where it was. As the Ukrainian president said, we need to remember that the war started in 2014 when they [Russia] annexed Crimea. Just because Ukraine wasn’t in the centre of all the media outlets in the world, it doesn’t mean that there was no war – 14,000 have died as a result. So I suppose for my parents and for [other people], they don’t feel that this crisis is new. I have lived in the UK for eight years but have been in Odessa for the past three weeks visiting my parents. It was the first time I was able to visit them in two years because of Covid. Odessa is the centre of the navy in Ukraine, so there are navy ships around, and Nato ships come to Odessa when they visit the Black Sea. So from that perspective, I guess people feel a bit more protected. People are very much pro-Ukraine, they support independence, they support American and British help. You can even get a free drink in some parts of Odessa if you have a British passport. People talk about the Russian threat a lot, of course. However, no one is panicking. People go on with their lives. Shopping, work, school, banks are as busy as usual without any signs of despair and mistrust. The attitude [towards Russia] here is sort of like: come on, you can try, but nothing good will come out of it. Rodion, 37, visiting Odessa, works in the pharmaceutical industry in the UK ‘We’re anxious about how it will develop’ I am Russian-Ukrainian, born in St Petersburg but living in Kyiv all my life, since 1950. I’ve felt some hostility in the past [toward Russians] but it was hidden. Now it’s flourishing and really hurts. It hurts to see that between people because although I understand the hostility between the government and officials, I don’t understand enmity between common people. This is not right. 2014 was the crucial year [when the situation worsened] – Russians were regarded as personae non gratae. Some said just go away, just go to Russia. My daughter from my first marriage lives in Moscow, and my wife’s relatives [are also in Russia]. We avoid communicating about the situation. We speak trifles. I don’t know what [my daughter] thinks about the situation. We’re anxious. I live with my wife and she’s not well. We have no place to hide. So we’re just waiting. I’m reading the news every day. We’re anxious about how it will develop. I don’t have a gun, I don’t know how to fight back. I’m Russian, but I support my [Ukrainian] government and support the help that we’ve been offered from the west. I’m on the side of Ukraine, although I’m Russian, down to my bones. But Ukraine is my real native country. Victor, 72, Kyiv, former scientist ‘There is a terrible tension’ I look at the news every 30-40 minutes and it has a huge impact on my mental health … but I can’t stop and I can’t think of anything else. I am very scared for my family – my four-year-old daughter and husband. I want to live my life in my beloved country, Ukraine, in my beloved city, Odessa. Live in a European democratic society. I want to make plans for the future, have another child, travel the world. But now I can’t plan anything. Even a trip to visit relatives in another area on the weekends. Because I do not know what awaits me tomorrow. Everything is calm on the streets – you might even think that nothing is happening. People are just trying to live their lives. But there is a terrible tension. Everyone around is trying not to talk about a possible Russian attack. And even at home we try not to talk about it. Everyone just reads the news every day and then I see in the eyes of my friends, neighbours and family the degree of growing anxiety. Yesterday my husband said that if the situation becomes the worst situation, [she should go] with the baby outside the country, and [he would] stay to [fight]. Now we live like it’s the last day, we try to be happy and take time with our family and do our work. Because we don’t know what will be tomorrow. Anastasiia, 34, Odessa, store managerIn 2007, Boris Johnson took a shot at Hillary Clinton, then a candidate for the Democratic US presidential nomination, in his Telegraph column. He wrote that Clinton’s eyes put him in mind of a “sadistic nurse in a mental hospital” and that she represented “everything I came into politics to oppose,” not least “purse-lipped political correctness”. He even threw in a reference to “the position of poor Vince Foster’s gun”. Foster was a Clinton-era White House counsel, and his suicide in 1993 has fed wild conspiracy theories – including that the Clintons had him murdered – ever since. When Clinton ran for president again in 2016, her opponent Donald Trump often spoke of her in similarly inflammatory terms, referring to the Foster case as “very fishy”. Anti-Clinton propaganda swelled online to the point where, a month after the election, a man stormed into a Washington pizzeria to investigate claims that Clinton and other top Democrats were running a paedophile ring out of the basement. “Pizzagate”, as it was known, and the broader QAnon movement that believes a cabal of Satan-worshipping celebrity paedophiles control the world, has since drifted ever closer to the heart of American public life. This brings us back to Johnson, who last week lobbed a paedophilia-themed smear at his own political opponent when he falsely suggested in the Commons that Keir Starmer, the Labour leader, had personally failed to prosecute Jimmy Savile during his tenure as director of public prosecutions. Then, on Monday, a mob of protesters harassed Starmer as he walked near the Houses of Parliament, lobbing a range of conspiratorial grievances including that he was a “traitor” and “paedo protector”. It’s not clear whether the protesters were directly incited by Johnson’s words. But it’s abundantly clear that these sorts of conspiracy theories all swim together in the same cesspool and that it isn’t possible to draw a neat dividing line down the middle of the Atlantic. What happens in America – online and off – increasingly influences what happens here. The protesters who mobbed Starmer were marching in solidarity with a Canadian anti-mandate movement that has documented QAnon ties. More generally, QAnon, while still small in the UK, has been growing here, too. British adherents, along with other extremists, have previously circulated the Starmer/Savile smear online. This is the putrid context in which Johnson smeared Starmer. Johnson has always been a keen observer of American political trends, and so it would surprise me if he didn’t know about this one. As much as allies might try to defend it as normal parliamentary “cut and thrust”, Johnson’s remark was a distinctly Trumpian act – not only in its execution, but also in its reception in online fever swamps. Comparisons between Johnson and Trump are often overblown. Trump’s moves to rile his base have tended to be much more overt, representing a greater departure from conventional political discourse. And he has long stacked his inner circle with creatures of the far-right media fringe – such as Steve Bannon and Michael Flynn. Johnson, who is as pure a product of the London media establishment as you’re likely to meet, has tended to hire spinners with ties to mainstream tabloids. His new communications director, Guto Harri, is a former BBC journalist who wasn’t rightwing enough to hold down a job at GB News. And attacking opponents with anything that might stick, of course, is a longstanding British media tradition. As a columnist for the Telegraph, Johnson made a habit of smearing his political enemies with a wink and a nod, usually before retreating to a place of plausible deniability. He did just that with his Clinton column, claiming later that it was all a big joke. He played his Starmer line the same way, initially defending it, before “clarifying” that of course he wasn’t referring to anything Starmer did personally, but rather his overarching role as leader of the prosecution service at the time. It seems likely that Johnson wasn’t necessarily trying to set a parade of far-right ghouls on Starmer as much as he was desperately throwing out a distraction – any distraction – from the scandals engulfing his government; a classic Johnsonian “dead cat”. That strategy has always been nasty. But our present, US-infused information hellscape makes it dangerous, too. Government sources have told reporters that it’s unreasonable to see the mob’s actions as Johnson’s fault. But cesspools are hard to separate; when they’re stirred up, everything floats together. And, as we’ve learned from the Trump years, it doesn’t take many extremists to seize on a leader’s words for violence to ensue. Johnson condemned the mob that harassed Starmer, but he’s made it clear that he won’t be saying sorry for his Savile remark or further distancing himself from it. In 2016, when he was asked again about his old Clinton attacks, he replied that “there is such a rich thesaurus now of things that I have said” that “it would really take me too long to engage in a full, global itinerary of apology to all concerned”. He’s clearly not intending to set off on one now. Jon Allsop is a freelance journalist. He writes the Columbia Journalism Review’s newsletter The Media TodayNguy Thi Khanh, Vietnam’s first recipient of the prestigious Goldman environmental prize, has been arrested on tax evasion charges. The founder of the Green Innovation and Development Centre was detained last month, but her detention was confirmed by state media on Wednesday. Khanh, who won the Goldman prize in 2018, has campaigned for Vietnam to adopt greener energy strategies, putting her at odds with the country’s ambitions to boost its coal production. Last month, her office and home were searched and documents and devices were confiscated. It is understood she has been allowed to speak with her lawyer, who was not immediately available for comment. Khanh is the latest activist to be detained by the authorities on tax-related charges. Last month, Dang Dinh Bach, who heads the Law and Policy of Sustainable Development Research Center, was sentenced to five years in prison for tax evasion, while the journalist Mai Phan Loi, leader of the Center for Media in Educating Community, received a four-year prison term for tax fraud. Both are board members of the VNGO-EVFTA network, a group of seven community organisations involved in monitoring how the implementation of the EU-Vietnam free trade agreement, which came into force in August 2020, impacts workers’ rights, land rights and environmental strategies. The organisations said the Vietnamese authorities had begun clamping down on their activities last year after they launched a campaign to promote clean energy. Phil Robertson, deputy director for Human Rights Watch’s Asia division, said: “Now that Hanoi has finished imprisoning all the political dissidents while the world was distracted by Covid-19, the state’s repressive apparatus is turning on the environmental and social NGOs. “Let’s hope the world fights harder for civil society leaders than they did for the dissidents, many of whom are now serving long prison terms for simply speaking out against rights abuses and corruption.”Simone Biles and Lindsey Vonn are among the US sports stars who have thrown their support behind Mikaela Shiffrin as the American Alpine skiing star’s nightmarish start to the Winter Games continues. Shiffrin, one of the most decorated skiers in history, whose bid for as many as five medals in China has been a cornerstone of the US broadcasting rights-holder NBC’s breathless promotion of the Olympics, has failed to complete either of her two races so far thanks to a pair of highly uncharacteristic errors. The 26-year-old overall World Cup leader skied out after missing a gate early in her first run of Monday’s giant slalom, ending her Olympic title defence only 10 seconds into her Beijing debut. Then on Wednesday, Shiffrin nearly fell at the fourth gate and was disqualified before the sixth in the slalom, her signature event, which was eventually won by Petra Vlhova of Slovakia. As the dejected two-times Olympic champion sat in the snow on the side of the hill with her head bowed in disbelief for more than 10 minutes, NBC drew criticism on social media for lingering on the shot while other skiers continued their first runs. While the network’s cameras were fixed on Shiffrin, the four-times Olympic champion gymnast Simone Biles tweeted a show of support. Shortly after, Biles retweeted a post by the LGBTQ+ activist Charlotte Clymer, who wrote: “I don’t know, shaming people just because they didn’t perform well at the Olympics feels like the opposite of why we supposedly have the Olympics in the first place.” Vonn, whose three Olympic medals include a downhill gold in 2010, wrote that she was “gutted” for her longtime US teammate. “But this does not take away from her storied career and what she can and will accomplish going forward,” Vonn tweeted. “Keep your head high.” In Biles’s case, the gesture was reciprocal. Eight months ago, when her own decision to withdraw from the Olympic women’s gymnastics team competition and most of the individual programme due to mental-health issues sent shockwaves through the sports world, Shiffrin was among the highest-profile athletes to rally behind Biles. Another call for empathy came from Shiffrin’s boyfriend, Aleksander Aamodt Kilde, the Norwegian skier who bounced back from a disappointing finish in the men’s downhill to win a bronze medal in the men’s super-G on Wednesday. Kilde shared a photo of Shiffrin seated on the hill in anguish after Wednesday’s disqualification and asked his followers to reflect on what it represented. “When you look at this picture you can make up so many statements, meanings and thoughts,” he wrote. “Most of you probably look at it saying: “she has lost it”, “she can’t handle the pressure” or “what happened?”… Which makes me frustrated, because all I see is a top athlete doing what a top athlete does! It’s a part of the game and it happens. “The pressure we all put on individuals in the sports are enormous, so let’s give the same amount of support back … It’s all about the balance and we are just normal human beings!!” A tearful Shiffrin, suddenly bruised by self-doubt, opened up at the bottom of the hill on Wednesday about the weight of these Olympics. “My entire career has taught me to trust in my skiing if it’s good skiing and that’s all that I have to rely on. “Of course the pressure is high, but that didn’t feel like the biggest issue today,” she said. “So it’s not the end of the world, and it’s so stupid to care this much, but I feel that I have to question a lot now.” That has been in line with her transparency over the past few months during a sometimes turbulent run-up to Beijing that included back spasms that limited her preparation in November, a bout of Covid-19 that sidelined her in December and the unknowns surrounding the Xiaohaituo Mountain staging the Alpine skiing programme, where the usual test events that allow skiers to get used to the hill were cancelled due to the pandemic. She has also felt the absence of her father, Jeff, whose accidental death in February 2020 made her consider hanging up her skis entirely. “Right now, I would really like to call him, so that doesn’t make it easier,” Shiffrin said after Monday’s mishap. “And he would probably tell me to just get over it. But he’s not here to say that. So on top of everything else, I’m pretty angry at him, too.” For now, Shiffrin will look ahead to Friday’s super-G, the speed race which she has never entered in two previous Winter Games but did win at the 2019 world championships. She will also have medal chances in Tuesday’s downhill and on 17 February in the Alpine combined, where she took silver in 2018. History is still in the offing.The prime minister has announced plans to end the remaining Covid restrictions in England by 21 February, a month earlier than initially proposed. One of the last restrictions includes the requirement for people to self-isolate if they test positive with the virus. We would like to hear what you think about the plans. Do you agree or disagree? Do you have any concerns? Share your thoughts You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.Many UK households are being squeezed by the rise in energy bills and inflation however for those lucky enough to be able to get away during the February half-term, we’d like to hear about any holiday plans you may be making. Are you seeing bargains for going abroad, if so which countries are you choosing? Are there any countries you’re avoiding because of Covid regulations? If you’re booking somewhere in the UK, how expensive are you finding it? For those not going away how do you plan on spending the time with your children? What activities are on offer near you? Are they good value for money? Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.Whisper it quietly, but for the first time in a good few years there is genuine optimism in rugby league ahead of what could be a seminal year for Super League. Few sports suffered quite like league did throughout the early stages of the pandemic, a point underlined by the publication of club accounts over the winter that showed monumental losses running into the millions for some of the biggest clubs. But, cautiously, that period appears to be behind us and Super League 2022 provides a chance to lay a positive platform for this year’s rescheduled World Cup. There are no shortage of stories to pick through too, with numerous clubs embarking on a new era, the opportunity for the competition to be shown on free-to-air television for the first time and the arrival of a second French club. Make no mistake, Toulouse Olympique face an uphill challenge to extend their stay in Super League beyond one season. They have been engulfed by Covid-related issues over the winter, culminating in the departure of their captain and talisman, Johnathon Ford. However, Sylvain Houles’ team will add colour and more continental vibrancy to the competition alongside fellow French side Catalans, and the prospect of a first all-French derby this summer is one to savour. Before that though, there is another line-in-the-sand moment for Super League. Sky Sports have been loyal and lucrative partners for the competition since its inception in 1996, but there is little doubting that the platform Channel 4’s new broadcast deal provides has the opportunity to open previously unthinkable doors. Their arrangement to cover 10 games a season begins this weekend, when Leeds host Warrington in a fascinating clash between title contenders. It can only be good for rugby league that multiple broadcasters want to show domestic action, be it the BBC’s long-standing coverage of the Challenge Cup or Channel 4 muscling in on Super League. With the comedian Adam Hills leading the coverage on the commercial broadcaster, there is also an opportunity for huge crossover and for new supporters to be exposed to what Super League can offer in terms of entertainment. That, in turn, increases the pressure on the stars of the competition to deliver. Warrington’s trip to Headingley on Saturday is the first match of a new era for the club after turning to Daryl Powell to try and end the Wolves’ 66-year wait for a league title. Powell, previously the coach of Castleford for nine seasons, will bring his attractive brand of rugby to a club desperate for success – but they are one of several sides who face a battle to clamber past last season’s leading lights. It is somewhat ominous for the likes of Leeds, Warrington and Wigan – who also have a new coach in Matty Peet, a former junior player who has worked his way through the coaching ranks – that both reigning champions St Helens and last season’s beaten finalists Catalans appear to have become even stronger. The Dragons have brought in State of Origin superstar Mitchell Pearce and retained the majority of the squad that took them to a maiden Grand Final last year. St Helens have undergone an overhaul of the squad that delivered three consecutive titles, with the likes of Lachlan Coote, Theo Fages and James Bentley all departing. It is to their credit they have replaced two of those with homegrown talents, including Jack Welsby, who will make a compelling case for inclusion in England’s World Cup squad as he succeeds Coote at full-back following his departure to Hull Kingston Rovers. The strength of the top two makes the rest of the chasing pack’s job difficult – and the challenge for those who stuttered throughout 2021 even more arduous. That does not mean there is a shortage of subplots, however. For instance, how will the two Hull clubs fare after contrasting seasons last year? FC badly underperformed and limped their way to the finish, while Rovers defied expectations to finish in the play-off places and look to have strengthened again. At the bottom, Toulouse start as favourites to go down, but if they can make their Stade Ernest Wallon home a fortress, they stand a chance of survival. Expect the likes of Wakefield Trinity and Salford Red Devils to be their realistic relegation rivals. And all of that is before you bring the intrigue of the World Cup into play. If England can fulfil expectations in October and November, and Super League’s move to terrestrial television is a hit, we could be looking at a very different sport this time next year. Sit back and enjoy the ride. It’s bound to be thrilling.Eighteen months ago, Tre Stead was in hospital; now she’s on Coronation Street. As Frank Turner’s tour manager, back then she was one of six people the Guardian spoke to about how the shutdown of the live music industry had affected their lives. But now, with Covid restrictions relaxed and gigs allowed to happen as if the pandemic doesn’t exist, have they all returned to work? Yes, but not necessarily in ways anyone expected. Live music is back and bigger than ever. Artists such as the Weeknd and Harry Styles, who were originally going to play arenas, have rebooked their tours for stadiums, while major names such as Dua Lipa and Billie Eilish are beginning their delayed runs. There’s more work than ever before. But some tours – including Frank Turner’s – have been postponed in recent weeks, and new Covid variants mean that live music remains a horribly uncertain industry. Aerosmith cancelled their summer European tour last week, citing “uncertainty around travel logistics and the continued presence of Covid restrictions”, and Doja Cat cancelled her Brit awards performance due to a member of her team contracting the virus. Stead is once again tour managing for Turner, but when she’s not, she now works in TV. At the end of 2020 she was contacted by another tour manager, who was working with the trade union Bectu to help music production people move into TV work – specifically to work in newly compulsory Covid departments created to ensure TV production could go ahead in a Covid-safe manner. She got her first credit on Rules of the Game, and currently she’s working on Corrie. “Part of the reason I did a Covid supervisor course was that anything I learned would be massively relevant when I went back to touring, in terms of knowing how to keep a tour safe,” she says. “We did our own festival at the Roundhouse in London September 2021, at full capacity, and we did 15 weeks of weekend touring, with no breakout in our team. We went with a team of six to the US on a tour bus, and again not one case. Then I went to Vegas on holiday in December and caught Covid on the plane home.” Matt Cox, keyboards technician for the Chemical Brothers and many more acts, knows other crew who moved into Covid supervision for TV. He had his own project – offering tech instrument support to musicians – that kept him occupied until live music returned. His first show was with the Chemical Brothers at Latitude, in July 2021. “It was weird,” he says, “because I’d been so dialled in to masks and sanitising – you can’t work if you’ve got Covid. And seeing 40,000 people without masks was weird.” The strangeness of the new world of touring is something everyone dwells on. “The album launch tour was very different,” says the Vaccines’ tour manager, Edd Sedgwick. “We did a lot of in-stores, and normally that means a lot of hugging. This time it meant the fans being two metres away from the band, and security guards wearing gloves passing the albums. I had a strict policy of no guests in the dressing room, no one going out to clubs and bars. We could have dinner together, but you couldn’t go to see your mate when we were in Birmingham. I might have been resented, but everyone wanted to get the job done and not have shows cancelled.” But going out on tour on the basis that you work the show and spend the rest of the time staying safe has rather reduced the level of enjoyment. “For some tours, there’s a more corporate feel to it now, with so many rules and regulations,” Cox says. “It’s taken some of the gloss off it, made it a bit more nine to five.” “It’s not as much fun as it was,” says Ben Bowers, a guitar tech for the hard rock band Rival Sons. “If you spend your time touring, you sacrifice a lot of your friendships at home. Your friendships are all over the world, and the road is your social lifeline. But it was like going to an office job where you have to stay in the office at the end of the night. It was really mentally challenging.” Harder for Bowers, in fact, than when there was no work, when he spent much of his time chasing the surf around the British coastline with his girlfriend in his old van. And even with protocols in place, disaster could still strike. Rival Sons went on a US tour during September and October, and then their drummer tested positive hours before a show. “We don’t get paid without a show, but I’m a drummer myself and I ended up stepping in and picking up the tour, so we were getting away with it. But then the rest of the band started falling down – we lost the bass player, then the singer, and we had to cancel 10 dates and quarantine.” That meant no money coming in, and lots going out – a financial disaster. And when the tour resumed, the crew started coming down with Covid: only Bowers and one other escaped, and he’s sure that’s because they had antibodies from infections before the tour began. There are those who are grateful for the chance to tour even with strict protocols. When we spoke in summer 2020, Tiffany Hendren was facing the prospect of having to spend the foreseeable future shut away at home in St Louis, Missouri – she is prone to respiratory infections and was at higher risk from Covid. She only returned to touring as a sound engineer in September because she had no choice: she was out of money. “That was a little terrifying. Even though if you are careful you are probably pretty safe, it just takes one afternoon in a coffee shop to get sick.” She loves her job so much that she’s happy to swap the normal touring routines for just going venue-to-bus, but safety is paramount. When she’s not touring, she runs the sound for a group of St Louis venues, which had reopened for business when the city lifted its mask mandate. “Cases went back up, and I almost cried when I realised people weren’t going to wear masks. And when we went back to full-capacity shows, that really freaked me out. Some shows everyone is doing the right thing and wearing masks, but country or hard rock bands you look out and see no masks.” Right now, the life of the crew member is more unpredictable than ever. Fears that they would see a drop-off in earnings because of low consumer confidence have been unfounded. “I’m earning the same, if not a bit more,” says Chris Yeomans, who has returned to work as a lightning engineer for McFly, among others. “Every artist wanted to tour again as soon as the gates were open, and there weren’t enough people to cover the number of tours. You might get four offers in a week, but you could only accept one of them.” The problem is the uncertainty: the peak of Delta and the rise of Omicron late last year prompted a rash of pre-emptive tour cancellations, and no one is ever sure shows will happen until they actually do – which means work can be there, and then disappear. On the other hand, though, there are always replacement slots on crews available when someone else has to pull out, owing to Covid. And, as Stead points out, the uncertainty is causing problems for everyone in the live music chain, from bus companies to booking agents. “At the Roundhouse we had a struggle to source lights, because everyone wanted everything at the same time,” she says. Stead isn’t unique when she surveys the future of crew work. “Working in TV made me realise how much I love music, but we all need a plan B now. My job as a tour manager is to plan for all eventualities. To not do that in my own life would be a bit silly.”This body is a genetic mistake, a pitiable stare, the scan on a mundane Tuesday lunchtime with a doctor speaking in hushed tones by the bed. It is glorious too, thanks. It is deep-in-the-bones laughter at 2am with people who love you; only strangers care that it is sitting in a wheelchair while doing so (“Have you got a licence for that thing, sweetheart?”). It is straight-As, promotions and beating expectations as much as the odds. It is being buckled over from the pain, clutching a public toilet bowl, pills and dignity rattling at the bottom of a handbag. It is sex, fevered goosebumps and kisses to the skin like magic. It is warm summers with friends, sunshine on bare legs and 90s dance music ricocheting through the air. It is fucking knackered. This body is more than twice as likely to be domestically abused, is paid on average £3.68 less an hour, is a third less likely to be able to access lifesaving breast cancer screenings, and is still told to be “grateful” for it. “Be grateful, love. You’re lucky they hired you. He’s a saint to be with you.” This body is a scrounger if it needs the state, a faker if it holds down a job. It is the reject of capitalist productivity, all the while working harder than any FTSE 100 CEO. This body is one in five, full of potential, untapped and waiting. It is ready to burst, to make its mark, if only the trains were accessible, personal assistants funded and housing usable. It is just not trying hard enough. This body is told to love something that hurts every day – #bodypositivity – or to loathe it, depending on the latest cultural winds. It is too ugly to be on the front cover of magazines, too pretty “to have to be in that chair, love”. It is a token, out front and centre when it suits, hidden in the back room when it all gets too much. It is more beautiful and powerful and astounding than words can muster. This body is not “differently abled” or “handicapped”, and it is not your “inspiration” either. It is the herculean sum of all those who came before and those who will after; the young girl wearing her BiPap machine with pride on TikTok and the menopausal woman with a stoma choosing knickers in M&amp;S. It is the changing of the seasons over centuries, from being hidden in institutions to regaling on the fourth plinth in Trafalgar Square, from begging in the workhouse to legislating in parliament. I believe they call that progress. It is said that the greatest act of resistance is to live well, and I think there is truth in that. It is radical to love a body that the world says is wrong. This body, in all its joy and tears and moving edges, is loved completely – not despite its disability, but because of it. Frances Ryan is a Guardian columnist and author of Crippled: Austerity and the Demonisation of Disabled PeopleRussia and Belarus will begin 10 days of joint military drills on Thursday, setting in train one of the most overtly threatening elements of the Kremlin’s buildup of forces around Ukraine’s borders. Valery Gerasimov, the head of the Russian general staff, arrived in Belarus on Wednesday to oversee the drills. Russia has moved up to 30,000 troops, two battalions of S-400 surface-to-air missile systems and numerous fighter jets into Belarus for joint training exercises with the Belarusian army. Satellite imagery shows much of the hardware has been moved to locations close to the border with Ukraine. The Russian president, Vladimir Putin, reportedly told France’s Emmanuel Macron this week that the troops would leave Belarus when the exercises ended on 20 February. Even if that does happen, the drills show that Belarusian dictator, Alexander Lukashenko, is a firm ally in Putin’s Ukraine policy. “Lukashenko will not be able to resist giving Belarusian territory for whatever purposes Russia needs it, whether it’s marching through, using Belarusian military facilities, airbases, maybe potentially even the air defence system,” said Artyom Shraibman, a Belarusian political analyst. From the border with Belarus, it is only about 130 miles (210km) down a highway to Kyiv, Ukraine’s capital, and the joint exercises add a new front to a potential Russian assault on Ukraine. There is also a threat from the south, where Russia annexed the Crimean peninsula in 2014, and from the east, where Moscow has directed an insurgency against Kyiv’s authority and has massed troops close to the Russia-Ukraine border. When Russia first invaded Ukraine back in 2014, Lukashenko remained studiously neutral, despite the fact Belarus and Russia are theoretically part of one “Union State”. He refused to recognise annexed Crimea as Russian territory, and maintained warm relations with the then Ukrainian president, Petro Poroshenko. Privately, he told Poroshenko he would not allow Belarusian territory to be used by Russia in any attack against Ukraine. When Volodymyr Zelenskiy was elected in 2019, Lukashenko again extended the hand of friendship. “You have never had any problems from the territory of Belarus and with Belarus, you will never have them. We will always be the most kind and reliable of your supporters and partners,” Lukashenko told Zelenskiy in October 2019. Then, in August 2020, huge protests erupted in Belarus when Lukashenko declared an overwhelming victory in a rigged presidential election. The protest movement came within a whisker of toppling his regime, but Lukashenko regained control with a crackdown. After staying silent for some days, the Kremlin eventually decided to back its troublesome ally, offering Lukashenko support and financial backing as most western countries imposed sanctions and refused to recognise the election results. “Russia is slowly trying to extract the price for that support, and we’re seeing Lukashenko do things that he’s always resisted before,” said Nigel Gould-Davies, a former British ambassador to Belarus and a senior fellow at the International Institute for Strategic Studies. The announcement of the exercises, which came after Russia had already started massing troops close to the Ukrainian border, was a sign of Lukashenko’s willingness to support Moscow. In recent weeks, he has made several demonstrative statements to prove his loyalty is beyond doubt. “For the west, it’s important to drown the Russian-Ukrainian brotherhood in blood,” Lukashenko said two weeks ago, speaking in his annual address in front of an audience of thousands. “However much some people might not like it, we will return Ukraine into our Slavic fold.” In an interview this week with Vladimir Solovyov, a pro-Kremlin television presenter, Lukashenko went further, saying that if Ukraine launched an assault on Donbas, he would send Belarusian troops to fight alongside Russian troops to repulse the attack. “The Belarusian army will act in exactly the same way as the Russian army, it will be a joint response. Do you think we’re joking around on the southern border today?” he asked, referencing the joint training exercises. Lukashenko has also recently offered to host Russian nuclear weapons in Belarus. Shraibman said neither of these things were likely to happen, noting Lukashenko’s usual mode was to promise a lot and then attempt to extract concessions. “I think his deeds, actions will always be behind his promises. No matter what he promises to Putin it’s not a given that he will actually deliver,” he said. This was illustrated by a recent announcement in Moscow suggesting Belarus would send troops to aid Russian forces in Syria, which was quickly downplayed by Lukashenko. Still, the Belarusian leader’s room for manoeuvring has been severely curtailed and he appears to have little choice but to allow Russia’s military to use Belarusian territory how it pleases in the posturing against Ukraine. With backing from Moscow and control over the security forces and army, Lukashenko’s domestic position appears secure for now, even as his foreign policy is more and more dictated by Moscow. Most opposition figures have either been jailed or forced to flee the country. Later this month, he will hold a constitutional referendum, widely dismissed as illegitimate by western countries, that analysts say is meant to pave the way for him to step back from the presidency at some point but retain overall control. Sviatlana Tsikhanouskaya, who stood against Lukashenko in the rigged elections in 2020 and later fled to neighbouring Lithuania, has criticised the joint exercises and Lukashenko’s support for Moscow’s stance on Ukraine. “Belarusians aren’t a threat to Ukraine, the regime is,” she said last week, after holding a video conference with several Ukrainian MPs.There have been further increases in “sophisticated, high-impact ransomware incidents” coming from Russia and other former Soviet states during 2021, Britain, the US and Australia said in a joint review of cyber-extortion trends. Universities and schools were one of the top sectors targeted in the UK last year, the National Cyber Security Centre (NCSC) said, as well as businesses, charities, law firms, councils and the NHS. Hackers are increasingly offering services or exploits “for hire”. Lindy Cameron, the chief executive of NCSC, said ransomware – where cybercriminals seize control of IT systems and demand payment to hand them back – was “a rising global threat” and called on organisations to review their defences. Hackers typically come from Russia or are Russian speakers, with the west accusing Moscow of turning a blind eye to cyber-attacks. The shutting down of the notorious REvil gang last month by Russia’s FSB spy agency is understood not to have had any impact on incident levels. KP Snacks, the maker of Hula Hoops and McCoy’s crisps, warned earlier this month that it was struggling to supply stores after a ransomware attack. It said supply disruption would last until “the end of March at the earliest”. In November, an attack on a supplier to the Labour party led to Labour losing access to some of its membership data. The supplier had refused to pay a ransom, leading to some data being permanently lost. No figures were put on the level of increase in attacks during 2021, although last October spy agency GCHQ said UK ransomware incidents had doubled. But the joint advisory did say hackers were diversifying because “the criminal business model of ransomware is now well established”. Some cybercriminals specialised in ransom negotiations; others sought to offer victims “a 24/7 help centre” to facilitate prompt extortion payments. Ransoms demanded vary by the size of the victim and the greed of the criminals, although figures of £1m or more are not unusual. It is not illegal in the UK for businesses to pay to regain access to their IT systems, and while there has been a debate in government about the issue, the situation is not expected to change. Criminalising British businesses who have been targeted by Russian hackers is not considered an attractive option. In the US, the FBI, NSA and Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency said they had seen a shift away from “big-game hunting” – the targeting of high-profile organisations – although this was not the case in the UK or Australia. Some of the American effect may be a response to complaints made by the president, Joe Biden, directly to his Russian counterpart, Vladimir Putin, after several high-profile attacks, and a growing US willingness to disrupt hacker activity. Last May, fuel supplies in the US south-east were disrupted after an attack on the energy supplier Colonial Pipeline; the company paid a ransom of $4.4m, although half was subsequently recovered the US authorities. Attackers gained entry by trying to lure people into clicking on malicious links in emails, brute force or exploiting software vulnerabilities, the joint warning said. Remote working in response to the pandemic meant such attacks would “likely remain popular”, the three countries’ cyber agencies added.The director of the Rijksmuseum said he was “happy” as Dutch prosecutors announced they would not proceed with an investigation into complaints over a newly opened exhibition on Indonesian independence, the first of its kind in Europe. The exhibition, Revolusi! Indonesia Independent, at the Netherlands’ national museum, has been a source a controversy since one of its curators, Bonnie Triyana, said the term “bersiap”, or stand by, would not be used in reference to the violent upheaval that followed a declaration of independence from the Dutch state. Triyana claimed that use of the word, a battle cry for young Indonesians seeking independence, “takes on a strongly racist connotation” in the Netherlands today that “always portrays primitive, uncivilised Indonesians as perpetrators of the violence”. He said: “The team of curators has decided not to use the word bersiap as a common term referring to the violent period in Indonesia.” In a sign of the ongoing sensitivity in Dutch society over the country’s colonial history, the comments drew a furious response in some quarters, with the head of the Federation of Dutch Indonesians, Hans Moll, accusing the Rijksmuseum of genocide denial by ignoring that “thousands of Dutch people were brutally tortured, raped and murdered by Indonesians because of their Dutch or European ethnicity”. Complaints were made to the general prosecutor last month but Taco Dibbits, the Rijksmuseum’s director, said he had learned on the eve of the exhibition’s opening on Thursday that the justice ministry would not be proceeding with the case. “I’m happy and had expected the decision that the case is not viable,” he said. “But I think it is very good that there is discussion about these concepts. It is our duty to broaden our view of history.” Dibbits said the exhibition did make reference to the term bersiap but put it in the context of violence endured by a large range of people, and that the show explored the entire period from 1945 to 27 December 1949 when the Dutch withdrew. He said: “The term ‘bersiap’ is used in the Netherlands by different communities that had to flee Indonesia and were repatriated during the revolution. It marks a very specific moment in time in the four and a half years of the revolution, the moment of the fall of 1945, when Indonesia has just declared itself independent and groups of insurgents executed extreme violence against several groups: Indo-Europeans, Moluccans on the Dutch side, and Chinese and others they thought were on the Dutch side. It takes place in the chaos just after the declaration of independence. “We explain the source of the word, which started to be used in the Netherlands in the 1980s, and give it a historical context, but also speak about the violence against other groups during the revolution. We speak about violence in a much broader sense.” Dibbits said he felt it was a “pity” that complaints had been made to the prosectors before the exhibition had opened. A second complaint, which is also not being pursued, was filed with prosecutors after Dibbits clarified before the opening that the bersiap concept would be referenced. Dibbits said: “One claimed that not using the term was against history and the second complaint said the using of the term was against history.” Indonesia became a member of the United Nations in 1950 and today the country counts about 270 million inhabitants across more than 17,000 islands. The exhibition explores the personal stories of independence fighters, artists, diplomats, politicians, journalists and those seeking to maintain Dutch hold over the territory by displaying more than 200 objects, including privately owned keepsakes and paintings. Dibbits said among the most powerful artefacts was a bundle of baby clothes made out of book covers, belonging to a young woman called Julia Nelisse. She had given birth to a daughter, Merani, in a leper colony in Pelantungan, modern-day Java, on 6 September 1947. Corpses of fighters and civilians were regularly washing up on the river shore, which Nelisse laid out on cloth shrouds. Due to the lack of remaining cloth, she had to take the covers from books in the abandoned colony library to make into clothes. On show is a vest, a pillow and a nappy. “It is very emotional to see and brings it very close,” Dibbits said.The telecoms regulator has dropped its long-held belief that a merger between any of the UK’s big four mobile operators should be blocked at all costs, reigniting fears that less competition could lead to higher-priced phones and bills for consumers and businesses. Under the former chief executive Sharon White, Ofcom was an outspoken opponent of Three UK’s attempted £10.25bn takeover of O2, which was blocked by competition regulators six years ago. Ofcom said on Tuesday it had now “clarified its position on mobile consolidation”. Months before the deal was blocked, White, who is now the chair of the John Lewis Partnership, delivered a scathing speech attacking the deal, saying that a move from four to three main players would “shift the balance of power” in the market. “Competition is the lifeblood of today’s telecoms market, spurring innovation, better coverage and fair prices,” she said. “The deal could mean higher prices for consumers and businesses.” Three and O2 offered to freeze prices for five years in a bid to gain regulatory clearance. However, the UK’s Competition and Markets Authority, to which Ofcom feeds market data and views on any takeover, and the European Commission both subsequently agreed that the deal should be blocked. Ofcom has previously explicitly stated in its annual plans that the UK market needs four leading mobile players in order to operate efficiently. The UK’s four biggest operators are O2, which is now part of Virgin Media O2, with 34 million customers, BT-owned EE, which has 26 million, Vodafone UK at 18 million, and Three UK with 9.3 million. On Wednesday, Ofcom softened its outright opposition to such a prospect in today’s market, saying: “Our stance on a potential merger would be informed by the specific circumstances of that particular merger, rather than just the number of competitors.” The shift in position will be welcomed by the Vodafone boss, Nick Read, who is under pressure to improve the company’s performance from the new activist investor Cevian. Read has been outspoken about the need for a change in the regulatory stance to allow mergers from four to three competitors, as has been seen in markets such as the US. Last week, he said that the European telecoms industry must consolidate to create more profitable businesses that are more attractive to investors. He confirmed the mobile operator was speaking to rivals in the Germany, Italy, Spain and the UK, including Three. Shares in Vodafone hit a seven-month high in January after it emerged that the company had held talks late last year to buy Three UK from its parent, CK Hutchison, a takeover that would create a British mobile powerhouse with almost 30 million customers. A relaxation in Ofcom’s view on how it will handle future potential deals opens the door to a possible mega-mobile merger between the two companies, with Three UK’s chief executive welcoming the possibility of consolidation. Robert Finnegan said the UK mobile market needed consolidation as its infrastructure was “subpar” compared with many other countries. “As things stand, the UK does not have the quality of mobile infrastructure it deserves,” he said. “Investment is spread too thinly across too many players, meaning our networks are subpar by international standards.” Finnegan said consolidation in the industry could improve networks. “Moving from four to three mobile players in the UK would mean better, smarter investment in the networks which would, in turn, improve the quality and scale of connectivity in Britain and would unleash more competition,” he said. He added that ultimately this would mean customers and businesses would “benefit from more choice and better deals”. In 2020, the general court of the European Union annulled the commission’s decision to block the Three/O2 merger in 2016. The commission is awaiting the outcome of an appeal of the general court’s decision to the European court of justice. While Ofcom’s change in position may spark hope of a mega mobile merger, it is ultimately the Competition and Markets Authority that decides whether any deal among the UK’s main mobile operators should be approved or blocked. Earlier this week it emerged that the telecoms group Iliad, which is controlled by the French billionaire Xavier Niel, made an offer of more than €11bn to buy Vodafone’s Italian business.The current western narrative on the Ukraine crisis is that Russia is a machiavellian power with an expansionist agenda. That view is shaping our response: we are matching Vladimir Putin’s aggression, meeting strength with strength and threats with threats. But what if we tried to get inside the mind of the enemy, and ask what was motivating the aggression? By doing so, could we break this cycle – and offer Putin a way out, too? When the USSR deployed ballistic missiles to Cuba in the 1960s, their proximity to the US nearly unleashed a third world war. Sitting in Moscow today, does Putin see being encircled by Nato as an equivalent threat? After all, one of his core demands is that Nato curbs its expansion close to the Russian border, and that Ukraine must not join. Russia claims that the US repeatedly told Soviet leaders it would incorporate Russia into a cooperative European security framework. In practice, Nato emerged as a US-dominated security frame with about 75,000 US troops still on European soil. Great powers always treat with suspicion and hostility the presence of rival great powers on their borders. Putin was always bitter about the collapse of the Soviet Union. He bided his time, and in 2014 Russia seized Crimea and sent troops into Ukraine’s mostly Russian-speaking Donbas region to support the separatist movement. Russia today is no benign liberal democracy and President Putin has an intelligence mindset, playing poker, not chess. He is prepared to threaten war, create chaos and spread misinformation to push back Nato from Russia’s borders. Using coercive diplomacy, he has amassed more than 130,000 troops on the eastern border of Ukraine, a continued threat to its sovereignty. Yet however provocative Russia’s behaviour, western governments have a responsibility not to escalate the threat of war. The consequences of a direct US-Russian confrontation in Ukraine would be catastrophic on all sides. A full-scale conventional war could escalate into nuclear war. Even a limited war would create a ruinous global economic crisis that could destroy for the foreseeable future any chance of serious action against climate change. I have worked in conflict resolution for the past 20 years and seen the dangers of stumbling into wars, unable to stop or turn back. Selling weapons to a country may look like a principled act in support of an ally but it usually takes them deeper and deeper into the quagmire of conflict. The US and the UK have instigated and been involved in four failed wars this century, but we seem to have failed to have learned the lessons. There are those who argue that sending military support to Ukraine strengthens Nato’s hand at the negotiating table. Yet there are inherent dangers in this approach – the use of deterrence could be the very thing that escalates the situation. Washington and London have pledged to increase offensive military aid to Ukraine and have announced arms deliveries, ammunition and anti-tank weapons. The UK is seeking to put itself at the forefront of western efforts to forestall what the prime minister, Boris Johnson, has called the risk of a “lightning war” in eastern Europe. Germany has been much more sceptical, blocking the transfer of German-made weapons from Baltic states to Ukraine. It has long argued against sending weapons to active conflict zones. Germany has declared that it is prepared to have a serious dialogue with Russia to defuse the highly dangerous situation, arguing that diplomacy is the only viable way. Whatever western governments feel about Moscow’s behaviour, de-escalating the conflict and giving Moscow a ladder to climb down is in everyone’s interest. We should not underestimate the link between humiliation and aggression. Putin is a very proud man, and smart politics by western governments should offer face-saving gestures if we are serious about avoiding war. According to Anatol Lieven, an academic and Ukraine specialist, this is “the most dangerous crisis in the world today; it is also in principle the most easily solved”. A solution exists, drawn up by France, Germany, Russia and Ukraine in 2015, which involves the implementation of the Minsk II agreement. This offers demilitarisation, a restoration of Ukrainian sovereignty including control of the border with Russia, and full autonomy for the Donbas region. The main objection for Kyiv is that autonomy for the Donbas would prevent Ukraine from joining Nato and the EU. One way through this would be for Nato to declare Ukraine a neutral country and decree that it does not join Nato for at least a decade. In practice, Ukrainian membership of the EU is ruled out for at least a generation because of Ukraine’s corruption, political dysfunction and lack of economic progress. Talks between Putin and France’s President Macron this week were more conciliatory in tone. Macron said: “There is no security for Europeans if there is no security for Russia.” A permanent forum where Russia is welcome is needed to re-examine the post-cold war security system in Europe. This approach to issues such as missile deployments, arms control and transparency around military exercises could ease this conflict. Such a dialogue could create a climate of security cooperation with Russia. Gabrielle Rifkind is a specialist in conflict resolution and the director of Oxford ProcessIntentionally or not, Tom Cruise has become the public face of pandemic film-making. His long-awaited Top Gun sequel has been booted down the release schedules even more than No Time to Die; its original release date of July 2019 was first pushed back a year, then held there for two more because of Covid. When the world (prematurely) thought that the virus had been sent packing in 2020, he made a special video about how much he loves going to the cinema. And then, of course, there was the leaked audio of him (correctly) going full nut-nut at his crew for breaching social distancing rules. Tom Cruise owns the pandemic, just like he owns running in films and sending out cakes at Christmas. However, this has come at a price. Yesterday, Variety revealed that the production budget for Cruise’s upcoming Mission: Impossible 7 has ballooned beyond all proportion. Thanks to a frantic shooting schedule that effectively saw Cruise and director Christopher McQuarrie racing around the world trying to beat the disease – stopping and starting production seven different times since February 2020 – the film has now burned through $290m. The budget increased with each shutdown, since the cast and crew remained employed throughout the downtime. Set pieces requiring the expensive closure of vast swathes of cities – including, according to Variety, an elaborate action scene during Carnival Venice – were cancelled and rescheduled over and over again. And then, with the rest of the world sheltering in place, the production found itself unable to locate much in the way of essential film-making materials like lumber. As if you need to be told, this is a huge amount of money. Not only is it a full $100m more than the previous instalment – 2018’s Mission: Impossible - Fallout – but it shoves the film into the upper echelons of the most expensive movies ever made. And it’s no exaggeration to say that the air is awfully thin up there. Adjusted for inflation, the current budget – which, let’s not forget, doesn’t cover the gargantuan expense of publicity and marketing – makes Mission: Impossible 7 the 13th most expensive film ever made. And while in some circumstances this could be seen as an absurd power-move, since some of the other most expensive films (like Avengers: Endgame and Titanic) are also the most successful, but nor is it something to boast about. The 12th most expensive film is the notorious flop Waterworld, and the 11th most expensive is the even more notorious flop John Carter. The eighth is Justice League, a film with a budget so high that it took more than $500m and still somehow lost Warner Bros $60m. Another problem for Mission: Impossible 7 is that it’s being filmed back-to-back with Mission: Impossible 8, rumoured to be the last in the series, and Cruise is apparently so determined to land the cliffhanger between the two that the first film won’t be released until the second one is completed. So far, this means that the seventh instalment will come out next summer and the eighth in 2024, but that may still change. And, needless to say, the longer you sit on a film, the more expensive it becomes. And if that wasn’t enough, then cinemas still face an uphill battle getting anyone to actually go there. Although Spider-Man: No Way Home punched an almighty hole in the side of the post-Covid box office, it stands surrounded by colossal flops. The Last Duel, West Side Story, The Matrix 4 and Moonfall have all died a horrible death theatrically, and there’s little sign that things will let up any time soon. Additionally, frosty China-US relations mean that a film like Mission: Impossible 7 can no longer count on a hefty Chinese box office windfall. On paper, Mission: Impossible 7 is sailing into a perfect storm. If a bad wind blows on the film, however gently, then we could be looking at an all-time trainwreck. That said, I remain optimistic. Because the Mission: Impossible films are as close to perfect as action films can get. They’re huge, propulsive, visceral beasts that do everything in their power to drag the audience along with them. One of my favourite ever cinema moments came halfway during Fallout when, after an electrifying motorbike chase through Paris, you could hear everyone in the entire theatre remembering to breathe again. It’s becoming slightly cliched to say that films deserve to be watched on the largest screen possible, but it remains absolutely true for the Mission: Impossible films. They’re joyous, giddy spectacles that deserve to be watched collectively. Cruise has come through worse than this before. When Sumner Redstone attempted to cancel him back in 2006, effectively banning him from Paramount, Mission: Impossible 3 quickly became the lowest grossing of the series. But he’s bounced back phenomenally well, with the last three Mission: Impossible films becoming the highest grossing of his entire career. Mission: Impossible 7 is going to be a success, even if I have to go to the cinema 1,000 times to see it.The Indian state of Karnataka has shut its schools for three days after the regional government backed schools imposing a ban on hijabs, leading to widespread protests and violence. The issue began in January, when six female Muslim students staged a weeks-long protest after they were told to either remove their headscarves or stop attending class at a government college in the district of Udupi. Last week, other colleges in the state began to enforce bans after some Hindu students, backed by rightwing Hindu groups, protested that if hijabs were allowed in classrooms, they should be allowed to wear saffron shawls. Saffron is the colour that has become commonly associated with Hindu nationalism. On Saturday, in an apparent backing of schools’ right to impose a ban, the Karnataka state government directed colleges to ensure that “clothes which disturb equality, integrity and public law and order should not be worn”. Muslim students have argued that their right to freedom of religion is being violated, and have taken the issue to state high court. The students have argued that “religious apartheid” is being imposed in some colleges where women in a hijabs are being allowed to enter but are being kept in separate classrooms. The issue has proved highly inflammatory. At some colleges, Muslim students have been aggressively heckled, while in others the protests between students turned violent, prompting police to charge at crowds and fire into the air. On Tuesday, the state chief minister Basavaraj S Bommai suspended schools and colleges for three days and urged students and teachers to “maintain peace and harmony”. Karnataka is run by the Hindu nationalist Bharatiya Janata party (BJP), which governs at a national level too. Under its watch there has been a rising tide of anti-Muslim violence and sentiment across India, where 12% of the population is Muslim. The BJP state chief in Karnataka, Nalin Kumar Kateel, has said banning the hijab would ensure that classrooms did not become “Taliban-like”. Rahul Gandhi, leader of the opposition Indian National Congress party, was highly critical. “By letting students’ hijab come in the way of their education, we are robbing the future of the daughters of India,” he said. “Prohibiting hijab-wearing students from entering school is a violation of fundamental rights.” The situation also drew condemnation from the Nobel peace prize winner Malala Yousafzai, who said the situation was “horrifying” and called on Indian leaders to stop the “marginalisation of Indian women”. Muslim students at Dr BB Hegde College in Udupi described how they had turned up to classes last Thursday and found they were barred entry by a large group of men, including fellow students, who were wearing saffron shawls. The group had demanded the Muslim students remove their hijabs. By Friday, the nine Muslim female students – out of more than 1,000 enrolled in the college – had been banned from entering through the school gates in a veil. The principal informed the women that it was a government order and that they must go to the bathroom to remove their hijabs or they could not attend class. After the girls refused to remove their headscarves, the gates of the school were locked to prevent them entering and several police officers were called. Rabiya Khan, a student at the college, said the school’s leadership had come under pressure from rightwing Hindu groups. “The Hindutva [hardline Hindu nationalism] elements don’t have a problem with the hijab, they have problem with our whole religious and cultural identity,” she said. Even though many Hindu students in their classes had privately voiced support for their right to wear a hijab, they were keeping quiet because they were fearful of the actions of vigilante groups, said Khan. As the row erupted and she was sent home from school, Khan’s parents told her to remove the hijab so at least she could still continue getting an education, with her crucial exams just two months away. “But I told them that if we give up, it will boost the morale of communal elements and create problems for the Muslim students in the future,” Khan said. “We have to make sacrifices and stay strong.” Khan emphasised that the Muslim students had never voiced any objection to Hindu students wearing saffron shawls. Saniya Parveen, 20, another Muslim student at the college, said she had worn a hijab to college for three years with no objections, and that Muslims and Hindus had always studied together side-by-side peacefully. Parveen said she and her fellow Muslim students were anxiously waiting for the outcome of the court order to find out whether they would be able to return to their studies. “I hope we will be allowed to attend classes in hijab,” she said. “It is our religious compulsion and a constitutional right; we are not going to surrender.” In Bhandarkars’ Arts and Science College in Udupi district, where a hijab ban was also enforced, one student spoke of her despair at Muslim students being made to feel like “beggars at the college gates”. “It is humiliating,” she said. “We used to feel so safe inside the campus and never felt we were in any way different from our Hindu classmates. Suddenly we are being made to feel like outsiders. For the first time we were made to realise that we were Muslims and they are Hindus.” In a statement, the national spokesperson for Vishva Hindu Parishad, one of the rightwing groups at the forefront of the anti-hijab protests, termed the hijab row “a conspiracy to propagate jihadi terrorism” and said that Muslim students were attempting “hijab jihad” in college campuses. Apoorvanand, a professor of Hindi at the University of Delhi, said the controversy was part of a larger project whereby “Muslim identity markers are being declared as sectarian and undesirable in public spaces”. “It is telling Muslims and non-Hindus that the state will dictate their appearance and their practices,” he said. On Monday, some students in hijabs were allowed into the government pre-university college in Udupi but were forced to sit in segregated classrooms. “We were made to sit in a separate room and no teacher came to teach us,” said one student. “We were just sitting there like criminals.”The main surviving suspect on trial over the 2015 terrorist attacks in Paris took the stand for the first time on Wednesday, telling a court that he had never killed or wounded anyone and was not a danger to the public. Salah Abdeslam is suspected of being a member of a group of jihadists who carried out a coordinated series of bombings and shootings across the French capital that left 130 people dead and hundreds of others injured. Called to be cross-examined for the first time in the marathon trial, he said: “I did not kill anyone and I did not injure anyone. I didn’t inflict so much as a scratch on anyone. It’s important for me to say this.” He added: “What I can tell you is that I am not a danger to society.” The 32-year-old is suspected of planning to blow himself up in a suicide attack in Paris’s northern 18th arrondissement but backing out at the last minute. Police found an explosive vest they believe to have been his in a rubbish bin. He told the court his current imprisonment while on trial had led him to reflect on whether she should have blown himself up in the attacks. “When you are in prison in isolation, watched 24 hours a day, harassed 24 hours a day, treated like shit you ask yourself, was I right to back out, should I have gone right to the end,” he said. Abdeslam told the court he had never been in direct contact with Islamic State but decided to support the group after western states, including France, carried out bombing raids in Syria. He said he had been brought up a moderate Muslim in the religious sense but had not been aware of political or military associations with the religion until then. He said his brother and his best friend, Abdelhamid Abaaoud, a Belgian-Moroccan believed to have been the “operational chief” of the attacks, had gone to Syria to fight the regime of Bashar al-Assad, but the bombings “changed everything” and prompted Islamic State to consider European targets. The lead judge, Jean-Louis Périès, asked him whether, given how many people died in the Paris attacks, it had been “reasonable” for him to think the attacks would change French politics. “Perhaps it would not make a difference,” Abdeslam replied, suggesting that the attacks were a tit-for-tat response to the killing of civilians in Syria. “What I find serious is when Mr François Hollande came here and said that if he had to go back he would do the same thing, which didn’t shock anyone here except me … I say, it’s because of him we are here today.” The judge responded: “We’re not here to judge France or the French parliament.” Islamic State claimed responsibility for the attacks on 13 November 2015, which began at about 9pm with the detonation of a suicide bomb at the Stade de France stadium and continued with a number of drive-by shootings and bombings at busy cafes and restaurants in the capital, and a massacre at the Bataclan concert hall. Apart from a number of outbursts at the opening of the trial last September, Abdeslam has remained silent since his arrest. On Wednesday he engaged in a verbal sparring match with Périès, telling him at one point: “Let’s take a deep breath.” Abdeslam told the court his support for sharia law included the idea that non-Muslims could be either freed, killed or held in slavery. “Yes, we can do this in the Qur’an,” he said. When the judge expressed astonishment and said this was not other Muslims’ view of Islam, he responded: “That is their vision of Islam. We can live our religion as we want. We are not going to change our religion to please others.” Asked by a defence lawyer how he had turned from a moderate believer to a jihadist, he replied it was out of “the fear of God, of hell, of God’s punishment. When I saw my brothers were massacred … I had to do something for the cause. “I was brought up to make the most of life and I was young and that is what I was doing. I didn’t pay enough attention to the saviour and religion. It’s when I knew what happened in Syria I became interested.” Abdeslam, a Brussels-born French national, is accused of being key to the international logistics operation bringing jihadists back to Europe from Syria, where they had been fighting. He was arrested in March 2016, after a four-month manhunt, in a shootout with Belgian police in the Brussels suburb of Molenbeek-Saint-Jean. Days after he was taken into custody, suicide bombers suspected of being part of the same terrorist cell struck at Brussels airport and the city’s Metro system, killing 32 and injuring hundreds. Statements were read from Abdeslam’s mother, sister Myriam and ex-fiancé Yasmina who decided not to give evidence in person. Myriam said she thought her two brothers Salah and the older Brahim, were skiing in Germany at the time of the Paris attacks. Brahim was one of the jihadists and blew himself up in a café on Boulevard Voltaire. Yasmina, Abdeslam’s fiancé a the time of the attacks, described her horror of learning of Abdeslam’s involvement in the attacks. “Everyone saw him as kind, respectful, sociable. We were together eight or nine years. He never spoke about politics until a bit towards the end when he spoke about Syria. He was not a practising Muslim and he didn’t follow Ramadan.” She said Abdeslam often went out at night without her, that he drank alcohol and would smoke joints. The marathon legal process is the biggest ever criminal trial in France. Fourteen suspects are in the dock and another six people are being tried in their absence, five of them presumed dead in Iraq or Syria; the last is in prison in Turkey. Abdeslam will face further cross-examination on Thursday. The trial is expected to last nine months.Starbucks has fired seven workers involved in organising a union in Tennessee, fueling accusations that the coffee giant is retaliating against the growing labor movement it faces nationwide. The workers – a third of the total workforce at the Memphis location – were fired on Tuesday, including most of the union organising committee. Starbucks Workers United (SWU), the union helping several stores organize, accused the coffee chain of “union-busting” and selectively enforcing company policies as a “subterfuge” to fire union leaders. The firings stem from a media event last month when the employees allowed journalists into the cafe after hours as part of the public launch of their efforts to unionize. A company spokesperson has denied that the layoffs were linked to union efforts or retaliation for staff speaking to the media. Spokesman Reggie Borges told the BBC that the seven workers were fired following an internal investigation which concluded that they knowingly breached company rules that amounted to “safety and security violations”. The company’s justification has been rebuffed by the fired baristas and the union, who claim the company’s actions are an attempt to slow down momentum, which is gathering pace across the county. Buffalo, New York recently became home to the first unionised Starbucks-owned stores in the US since the 1980s. Since then, more than 50 locations of the chain have filed to hold votes on unionizing, which would enable workers to negotiate with the company as a group over pay and conditions. The efforts are part of a labor movement resurgence in the US, with low paid workers across a range of industries interested in setting up unions. SWU said that it planned to file complaints over the seven firings in Memphis with the National Labor Relations Board, which enforces US labour laws. On Twitter, SWU wrote: “Starbucks is retaliating against union leaders &amp; supporters in Memphis for policies they’ve never consistently enforced before. This partner was fired after signing a union card in view of the security camera, not for ‘security violations.’” Starbucks has consistently tried to stop its workers from unionising, which it claims would be bad for workers. The company, which owns 8,000 stores across the US, argues that unions are unnecessary as it already offers benefits above and beyond the industry norms such as health insurance for part-time workers and college tuition reimbursement. According to the company, its average wage is currently more than $12 an hour, while half of its workforce earn more than $15 an hour – the minimum federal wage proposed by some labor groups and progressive lawmakers. The company previously announced that the average salary will rise to over $16 an hour this summer. It’s unclear how many workers organized in union efforts have been fired by Starbucks, but last year, the National Labor Relations Board found the coffee chain had retaliated illegally against two baristas involved in labour organising in Philadelphia. The company has appealed the ruling.When I moved to the UK nearly a decade ago, the City of London was one of the first places I visited. I joined a Jack the Ripper tourist walking tour on a Sunday, and I was really struck by how empty it was. All the shops and restaurants were closed, and just a few people were walking in the streets. It was shocking that one of the economic centres of the UK, one of the most powerful financial districts in the world and the site of such immense wealth, felt so totally dead. The word I always use to describe it is uncanny. Here is a place that hums with economic activity, but there were almost no people. It’s a symbol of accumulation but without any real subjects. Who is driving this rush to accumulate ever greater wealth? Who is benefiting from it? And to what end? I’ve always been a local photographer. I take inspiration from the social life of the communities I’ve lived in, but here, in the City of London, it just felt like there wasn’t one. I decided to take a series of pictures of the empty streets, to capture the strange ghostly place that I had encountered that Sunday. However I soon discovered that I could take similar images during weekdays but with solitary lonely city workers in the cityscapes, which gave the images a whole extra dimension. This shot was part of a wider series about burnout and the psychological fallout of today’s culture of work. The series often depicts people in moments of isolation – stepping out of the office for a cigarette, walking alone through the towering buildings, or staring into their phones. This image encapsulates all of that: a lone figure, overwhelmed by the sheer scale of the office buildings surrounding her. It’s an image of the human swamped by the world we have built. What I like about this image is that it’s both specific and general. On the one hand, it could be taken in any metropolis. It captures the way that globalisation has flattened different cultures, creating these identical spaces around the world. But on the other it speaks specifically to the architecture of the City of London and the feelings that its built environment evokes. This image is as much about the architecture as the person. I was completely fascinated walking through the City by the kind of friction between the buildings. Historically, its centre was always St Paul’s – this great symbol of the church’s power, overseeing everything around it. But now the cathedral vies for domination with the office blocks that cover the area. It’s like the built environment is locked in a power struggle, with Christianity and neoliberalism competing for dominion. Working life today is very different from what it used to be. But even before Covid and the rise of working from home, workers were increasingly alone and isolated in a way they were not in the 1970s, for example. There is much less interaction, and lots of the old methods of bringing workers into dialogue with each other – such as unions – have fallen on hard times. The series preceded the pandemic, but looking back on it now it does feel a little prophetic, and I think people probably respond differently to these images now than they used to, before we were all confined to our homes. We may have become more used to seeing our cities empty, but the process started long before Covid, and will continue after it. I see my photography as explicitly political, as a tool for social change. The photographers I’m most interested in use the camera to examine and critique the societies we live in. Today, everyone takes photographs. In many ways, that’s a great thing: it’s the democratisation of the medium. But it means that photographers need to distinguish themselves. Simply capturing moments is not enough. The work of the photographer, I think, is to be reflexive and, above all, critical. Jordi Barreras’s Already But Not Yet is published by Punctum Jordi Barreras’ CV Born: Santa Coloma de Gramenet, Spain, 1977. Trained: Grisart Photography School and Birkbeck, University of London. Influences: “Grama magazine, where I learned the social and political value of photography.” High point: “Achieving a balance between commercial work and artistic pursuit, and having the relative financial security and freedom to pursue my artistic projects.” Low point: “Losing my job at the newspaper I was working for, due to the financial crisis. The upside was that those events eventually led me to London.” Top tip: “Don’t wait for the results of your project to magically appear. Take to the streets, take bad pictures, and search for the solution for your project in your mistakes.”Samsung’s latest Android combines its Galaxy S and Note into one stylus-equipped superphone, which leads a new line of top-end S22 smartphones part-made from recycled plastic and fishing nets. Announced on Wednesday as part of its Unpacked livestreaming event, the Galaxy S22 Ultra combines the superzoom camera of last year’s top S21 with the body, form and features of Samsung’s popular Note phablet series, which has not been updated since 2020. The S22 Ultra is joined by two smaller and cheaper models, the S22 and S22+. All three new devices have faster chips, the latest Android 12 and ultrasonic fingerprint scanners under their 120Hz OLED screens. But they are also more robust, with a new, harder version of Corning’s Gorilla Glass Victus+, stronger aluminium frames and internal components made of 20% recycled fishing nets or 20% recycled water bottles and CD cases. Galaxy S22 Ultra The largest of Samsung’s non-folding phones for 2022 has a brighter 6.8in QHD+ screen that curves at the edges, with a design that strongly resembles the company’s Note 20 Ultra. The phone has a large battery and a slot to store and charge its S Pen stylus, which has reduced latency, better handwriting recognition and advanced features taken straight from the Note line. The improved quadruple camera has a slimmer profile on the back, but maintains separate 3x and 10x optical zooms, which continue to set Samsung’s top models apart from rivals. This year the camera has significantly improved light sensitivity, with much larger pixels for better, sharper shots at night and in tricky lighting conditions. “The Galaxy S22 Ultra is arguably a Galaxy Note device by another name and will be greeted with delight by the legion of Note device enthusiasts, who have proved to be a loyal niche audience for Samsung, but may leave traditional Galaxy S customers scratching their heads wondering why they need a stylus,” said Ben Wood, the chief analyst at CCS Insight. Galaxy S22 and S22+ The S22 and S22+ have 6.1in and 6.6in FHD+ screens respectively, making them Samsung’s smaller, cheaper and more manageable top devices. Only the S22+ has the same brighter display technology as the Ultra, but otherwise their specifications are similar to Samsung’s premium model. Both phones have a triple camera on the back with a 3x optical zoom similar to last year, and a flat glass and aluminium design. “The S22+ might actually be the star of the show this year,” said Wood. “For customers who don’t see the utility in having S Pen capability, the natural device of choice will be the S22+, which looks like a cracking product.” Galaxy Tab S8 Alongside the new S22 phones, Samsung also unveiled a new line of tablet computers. Each of the new Galaxy Tab S8 devices has Android 12, the latest chips, optional 5G and the S Pen stylus included in the box. The Tab S8 and S8+ have 11in and 12.4in screens respectively, but it is the new S8 Ultra that stands out with its big 14.6in display, making it Samsung’s largest tablet yet. The machines are designed for entertainment, with high-resolution screens and four Dolby Atmos speakers, but also productivity, with a range of keyboard case accessories and Samsung’s DeX software that turns the tablet into a laptop-like experience.With that all sorted, time for me to say goodbye. Another fantastic night session - we’re been spoiled so far this week. To catch up on the day that was, take a look at the Daily Briefing and sign up for it to be emailed to you each afternoon of these Beijing Games. Bye! Curling: Handy penultimate stone from ROC, putting them into two shots. But still, so much space for John Schuster. But instead, he drives hard and straight to knock both of those aforementioned shots away. Played. Sergei Glukhov buys some time to stop the clock but it’s far from the perfect stone, just clipping the edge of the four foot ring. So, over to Schuster with loads of space and he makes no mistake, right alongside the button it lands. USA, the defending champions, win their tournament opener 6-5 after an extra end. Curling: Back to the first extra end between USA and ROC; the Americans have the hammer. They call their time out with three stones to play but plenty of space on the dancefloor. Ice Hockey: At the start of the final period, Denmark lead the Czech Republic 2-1 in the opening match of men’s Pool B. If they can hold on, that’d be a big result for the world No12 knocking off the No6. Curling: A bit going on with Norway and Switzerland too, with the Swiss presented with a chance to take their match to an extra end as well if they can collect a second shot with the final stone of regulation... but it is way off target: the Norwegians take it 7-4. Curling: Fabulous work under pressure from both teams in this final end, really going punch for punch. There’s no more than a centimetre in this so the Russians have to land it on the button to get this to an extra end with their last stone of the night. And it isn’t to be! He runs it into the guard. So who has shot? It’s so close. If it’s the USA they win 6-4, if it’s ROC then we’re going again. It’s the ROC! We’re off to extra time in the curling. Meanwhile, next door, Sweden closed it out against China, winning by a margin of 6-4. Curling: A brilliant response from Not Russia, curling past three stones with precision, popping them into shot. The pressure transfers back onto America with their final stone of regulation. Curling: ROC have the hammer in this final end against the USA; they trail 5-4 with two stones left each. Brilliant draw shot from the American, knocking the Russian off the button. It’s also 5-4 in the Sweden/China clash but the leaders have the hammer there. Curling: Canada have finished the job against Denmark on the first night of the men’s competition, winning 10-5. Some close finishes coming up in the other three matches - I’ll jump into them now. USA 5 - ROC 4 (final end) Norway 4 - Switzerland 4 Sweden 5 - China 4 And with that, the final medals have been decided on this fifth day. Luge: They were hard held too, failing to get the perfect start, having to nail every turn there, but of course they did, securing gold by 99 thousandths of a second. And Tobias Wendl and Tobias Arlt, at age 34, have kept Germany to the top of the medal tally, this their fifth triumph of the Beijing games so far, and third in the sliding centre. 2014, 2018 and 2022 - what a magnificent achievement from the two Tobys, three gold medals in a row! Wow. It’s a quinella for Germany in the sliding centre, as it was in the women’s solo event yesterday. Luge: Eggert and Benecken have done what is required of them but it is a slightly slower run than the last time around. Wendl and Arlt have about a tenth of a second to play with compared to their previous run. If they get it right, they’re triple Olympic champs again. Together since they were 13, here they go - one more time! Luge: Here come the Austrians! Thomas Steu and Lorenz Koller are going to be on the podium - they’ve taken the lead! But now to the business end: the world champions next, the two-time Olympic gold medallists after that to finish. With 0.045 between them! Here are Eggert and Benecken at the top of the run - go, go go! Luge: The Italians Rieder and Kainzwaldner are right in the hunt for a medal here, the fourth last pair to go down. But they’ve failed to nail the last couple of turns; the Latvian youngsters remain up top with three teams to come, including the German superstars to finish! Luge: Five to go! The Latvian brothers Andris and Juris Sics have moved into first. But it’s a lead that hasn’t lasted, their younger countrymen Roberts Plume and Martins Bots have nipped ahead by 18 thousandths of a second! “Is that the baton being passed from one generation to the next in Latvian sliding?” asks the commentator. Luge: Ten down, seven to go. It’s Russians Aleksandr Denisyev and Vladislav Antonov in the lead but, to put it in perspective, the German leaders could slide down a second slower than they did in their first runs - a proverbial age in this sport - and still be ahead. Luge: Right, three of the 17 pairs have made their way down, going in reverse order of the times they banked in their first runs in this doubles competition. The drama will build until we spot the two German pairs to finish the event: the world champions in second - Toni Eggert and Sascha Benecken - then the old boys in the lead looking to win this for a third time, Toby Arlt and Toby Wendl. Curling: On the way back to the sliding centre for the final run in the doubles luge, a swing around the grounds for some updated scores: Canada 5 - Denmark 4 ROC 3 - USA 2 Norway 3 - Switzerland 2 Sweden 3 - China 1 And in the men’s Ice Hockey, Denmark have an early goal on the board against the Czech Republic in their Pool B opener. Speed skating: The standard post-race review takes place and it confirms that it’s Dubois not Elistravor over the line in second place. But there’s no doubt about Hwang Daeheon, who is a fine champion. He was booted out of the semi of the 1000m in most controversial circumstances but bounced back in the 1500m to top the world and earn Korea their first gold of the Games. For Team GB, Farrell Treacy who hung with the pack throughout before finishing in ninth place - a fine effort in a sport that doesn’t currently enjoy national funding. A daring move from Hwang Dae-heon to take the lead with a couple of laps to go then holding off Elistratov and Dubois. Whaddarace! Speed skating: Confortola now Elistratov take turns leading the pack early - all eight skating in a close file, six laps to go. Treacy at the back of the pack. Janghyuk to the front then the Hungarians! Speed skating: They’re away in the men’s 1500m final! A clean start. Watch for the Hungarian brothers - can Shaolin Sandor Liu get it done after losing gold in dramatic circumstances on Monday? Speed skating: “It will be Piccadilly Circus in rush hour,” says BBC caller Simon Brotherton as the ten athletes are introduced to the ice. “For Farrell Treacy, this is the biggest race of his life.” Find a telly! Speed skating: the start list for the men’s 1500m final, up shortly. 46 - Lee June-seo (KOR) 2 - Shaolin Sandor Liu (HUN) 1 - Shaoang Liu (HUN) 195 - Park Janghyuk (KOR) 52 - Hwang Daeheon (KOR) 3 - Semien Elistratov (ROC) 114 - Farrell Treacy (GBR) 15 - Adil Galiakhmetov (KAZ) 16 - Steven Dubois (CAN) 20 - Yuri Confortola (ITA) Speed skating: Great second-semi in the women’s 3000m relay, Canada holding their nerve after leading most of the way and Korea snaffling the second qualification spot. The USA and ROC miss out. Speed skating: A proud day for Farrell Treacy, reaching the ten-man final of the 1500m. Doubly impressive given he had Covid just a few weeks ago, which required ten days of isolation just when he was preparing for Beijing. At that point, it looked like he might have to pull out entirely but here he is, at the Olympics for the second time with a chance to do something special in 15 minutes from now. Curling: around the grounds as we wait for more speed skating action, it’s the opening night of the men’s curling. Progress scores: Canada 4 - Denmark 2 USA 1 - ROC 1 Norway 2 - Switzerland 2 Sweden 1 - China 0 Speed skating: The first of two semi-finals in the women’s 3000m relay, the Netherlands and China progressing to tomorrow’s final with Poland and Italy eliminated. Next up: Canada, Korea, Not Russia and the USA. Luge: At the end of the first run in the doubles competition, it’s the two highly-fancied German pairs in gold and silver position. Wendl and Arlt, chasing their third victory in this event, were one of several teams to break the track record and take a breather some 0.045 seconds ahead of world champions Eggert and Benecken. The final runs will begin, in reverse order, just 40 minutes from now. Figure skating: some drama elsewhere too, a positive doping result has led to the cancellation of the figure skating team event medal ceremony. Read all about it here, via Sean Ingle in Beijing. The Winter Olympics medal ceremony for the figure skating team event was cancelled due to a Russian skater testing positive for a substance before the Games that was not performance enhancing, multiple sources have told the Guardian. Speed skating: There will be ten racers on the ice for the 1500m final. That’s going to be total mayhem, about 30 minutes from now. Speed skating: They’re away cleanly, Charles Hamelin (CAN) leading them out, Farrell Treacy (GBR) taking his turn before Adil Galiakhemetov (KAZ) and eventually Shaolang Liu (HUN) settle in at the front with four laps to go. Dual gold-medallist Ren Ziwei (CHN) has work to do with a lap to go but takes third with Park Janghyuk (KOR) getting the second automatic qualification spot behind winner Shaoang. And from all that? The TV referee has his clipboard out again. Treacy, who finished fifth, could be the beneficiary of the review here? He is! Ren Ziwei is rubbed out and Treacy is into third! Team GB will have a racer in the Olympic Final. Goodness me! Speed skating: They are still going through the tape of second-semi two: has Sjinkie Knegt (NED), who finished third and could still yet qualify for the final, put in an illegal arm block? It’s a long wait - and yes, Knegt is rubbed out. Steven Dubois (CAN) is given the golden ticket to the final as the next man over the line. Love this sport. Team GB’s Farrell Treacy is coming up in the third and final race. Speed skating: This second-semi is stacked. Semion Elistratov (ROC) makes his move early but Hwang Daeheong (KOR) takes the lead back with seven laps to go. Action everywhere; six of the seven racers remain in contention. That same pair are first and second as they take the bell - can they hold on? They do. Beautifully played. Speed skating: Away in the first of three semis in the men’s 1500m short-track! And it’s clinical from Lee Juneseo (KOR) and Shaolin Sandor Lui (HUN). Oh wait, here comes the TV ref! He was the man who denied Shaolin gold in the 1000m after the fact... but no such intervention here; they have both booked their berth in the final. Luge: Two Two Tobys, Wendl and Arl - the double-champions - now 34-years-old having been doing this together for over 20 years. And they’re away safely and quickly, ahead by a whisker at the first check point. Can they keep it up? They can! Another track record; they’re into the lead by 0.045 of a second ahead of Eggert and Benecken. A reminder that the doubles is two runs only with the second starting as soon as the first round is complete - a quick game is a good game. Luge: And it’s brilliant from Eggert and Benecken (GER) at the first time of asking, breaking the track record in the second run of the entire competition. Wendl and Arlt are set to slide fifth. Game on. Luge: As we wait for the semi-finals of the men’s 1500m, over to the sliding centre for the first of two runs in the doubles to determine the Olympic champions over the next couple of hours with Germans Tobias Wendl and Tobias Arlt going for three gold medals in a row. But they’ll have to see of fellow Germans Toni Eggert and Sascha Benecken, who have been the in-form pair over the last two years. Speed skating: Hanne Desmet (BEL), who made the final of the 500m, is through to the semis of the 1000m with fellow youngster Courtney Sarault of Canada. Some drama in the seventh heat with the TV referee called on again, which resulted in Alyson Charles (CAN) advancing for the second time this week after hitting the deck, joining Natalia Maliszewska (POL) and Ekaterina Efremonkova (ROC). To complete the heats, Kirsten Santos (USA) and Petra Jaszapati (HUN) through without concern. “All the big names are still there except Boutin,” the assessment of the TV expert. Snowboarding: That Kim Boutin fall isn’t quite on the same scale as Lindsey Jacobellis in 2006, but what a story that has been today, finally claiming gold at age 36 in the Snowboard Cross. Sean Ingle details a tremendous tale of persistence and, at last, redemption. This time there was no grab of the snowboard, no showboating for the cameras. Just the greatest redemption story in Winter Olympics history. For 16 years Lindsey Jacobellis has been known as the snowboarder who led the 2006 Olympic board cross final and then decided to take a premature celebratory grab. It was an act of reverse alchemy that caused her to stumble and slip and turned gold into silver. It is a mistake that has haunted her ever since. Curling: Let’s get a quick look at the Norwegian strides between speed skating heats. Oh. Disappointing: trousers for their competition-opener against the Swiss are... navy blue. Play on. Speed skating: Here comes Arianna Fontana (ITA) who won the 500m and has ten Olympic medals across her wonderful career. And she’s through - easily. What a glorious athlete. Kim Boutin’s turn, the Canadian craving a first gold medal after plenty of silver and bronze... BUT SHE FALLS OVER AT THE FINAL CORNER! She was in the lead by a couple of metres and, from nowhere, GONE. Gosh, she is, understandably, absolutely gutted sitting on the ice. Blimey. Speed skating: The Olympic Record goes again! What a start to the women’s 1000m. It’s Suzanne Schulting (NED) this time, who won gold in this event at Pyeongchang and claimed silver in the 500m on Monday, lowering the mark. Speed skating: I neglected to mention that before the business end of the men’s 1500m, we have the heats of the women’s 1000m. Team GB’s Kat Thomson is in the first group to go but doesn’t finish in the top two, so she’s out. Choi Minjeong though, the Korean who won two gold medals in her home Games four years ago, has burned up the track with an Olympic Record to start the competition! Speed skating: 21 racers have qualified for the semi-finals of the men’s 1500m on the short-track, split into three heats of seven. They will be back for that shortly after they’ve cleaned up the ice. Vinzenz Geiger is an Olympic champion for the third time! He had 86 seconds to make up after the ski-jump but powered to the finish line to win the race and the gold by just under a second. Jørgen Graabak (NOR) wins silver and Lukas Greiderer (AUT) the bronze. “This was impressive a finish as we’ve seen,” the TV caller says of Geiger’s powerful surge after taking Graabak in the final stretch. And with that, Germany jump to second on the overall medal tally. Speed skating: Ren Ziwei, who already has two gold medals this week from the controversial 1000m and the 2000m mixed relay, leads them around in the sixth and final quarterfinal - nicely done. And a great result for Team GB with Farrell Tracey through in the third qualifying position, competing in his second Olympic Games. Speed skating: Sjinkie Knegt (NED), who won silver in this event at Pyeongchang and has the world record to his name - and survived serious burns to his leg an awful fire at home in 2019 - is through safely after a less eventful fifth quarterfinal. A big chance later. Speed skating: Showing all the experience of a three-time Olympic champion to stay out of trouble around a fall, Charles Hamelin (CAN) is into the semis with a pacy 2:11. There’s a review required after two skaters hit the deck but it doesn’t change the result with the first three over the line safely into the penultimate round. Speed skating: Class from Korean superstar Hwang Daeheon in the third quarterfinal, taking the lead as the bell rang and cruising to victory over Semen Elistratov (ROC). The the former world champion also qualifies for the semi-final in an hour from now. Speed skating: The TV referee has nine cameras to review to make their decisions, as is so often the case on the short-track. And the Italian Pietro Sighel has copped a penalty for an arm block in quarter final two, so he’s gone from second to eliminated - tough sport. Nordic combined: A reminder that this is a 10km time trial on skis after the athletes completed their jumps yesterday. The first 11 (of 44) are away in the first of four groups to take to the circuit. Speed skating: The first quarterfinal for the men’s 1500m and the Olympic Record has gone! A big statement from Shaolin Sandor Liu (HUN) who lost the gold in the 1000m on protest two days ago. Cheers, Tom. What a top evening session we have ahead of us with three gold medals up for grabs between now and the close of play on this first Wednesday of these XXIV Olympic Winter Games. It’s 7pm in the Beijing, which signals the start of the individual Gundersen. This is a brilliant event, combining ski-jumping and 10km of hard graft against the clock. Japan’s Ryota Yamamoto leads the way after his jumps with four German and Austrians within a minute, after distance is converted to seconds on the cross-country course. The silver medal winner from 2018, Akito Watabe, starts 76 seconds behind in 9th position – well within striking distance. At the Capital Indoor Stadium, the bedlam of short-track speed skating returns with the men’s 1500m moving from the quarter-finals to the medal race over the next couple of hours. Defending champion Lim Hyo-jun is there again but under a different flag, moving from the South Korea team to the Chinese team. Dutchman Sjinkie Knegt, who was runner up in Pyeongchang and has since claimed the world record, is another we’ll have our eyes on. Last night at the National Sliding Centre we saw a tremendous piece of Olympic history with Natalie Geisenberger victorious for the third Games in a row. In the doubles, which begins in just over an hour, her fellow Germans Tobias Wendl and Tobias Arlt have the chance to do the same and win this event three times on the trot. However, they’ll need to see off another German pair, Toni Eggert and Sascha Benecken, who won bronze four years ago - they come into the competition leading the World Cup rankings in 2021. Through the night we’ll also drop in and out of the curling, where the men’s round robin begins; Norway’s crazy pants (believe me, this is a thing) is likely to dominate the attention there. Meanwhile, at the National Indoor Stadium, Pool B of the men’s Ice Hockey kicks off with the Czech Republic up against the Denmark. And after all that, we’ll go to bed very satisfied little Olympic-obsessives, right? Join me for the fun - drop me a note or a tweet. Switzerland’s Hoffman is denied from point-blank range in the closing seconds and the Russian side and tournament favourites hold on for the win against a spirited Swiss side. And on that bombshell, I’ll hand you over to Adam Collins, who’ll steer you through the rest of today’s action. It’s pretty end-to-end in the ROC-Switzerland men’s ice hockey opener, as we enter the final seven minutes. The Russians still lead 1-0. And here’s a story about the Australian skier Katie Parker, who got the all-clear to compete in the giant slalom at the last minute after overcoming Covid, but who crashed out after being unable to complete her first run. A bit of testiness in the ice hockey as Andres Ambuhl and Mirco Muller of Switzerland, and ROC’s Pavel Karnaukhov and Dmitri Voronkov get sent to the sin-bin with four minutes of the second period remaining following what might generously be called a melee. It’s followed by a tete-a-tete between Slepysov and Weber after the former is shoved into the boards, but the Russian’s headbutt retaliation lands the CSKA Moscow man in the bin for five minutes. As for the actual play, the Russians still look the better team but the Swiss are not without a threat and with only one goal in it, who knows? And the second period ends with the score remaining ROC 1-0 Switzerland. Figure skating medal ceremony delayed: Where would Olympic sport be without lawyers, appeals and wrangling? The medal ceremony for the figure skating team event that was won by the Russian Olympic Committee has been delayed due to an unspecified “legal consultation”, the IOC has said. “A situation arose at short notice that requires legal consultation,” IOC spokesperson Mark Adams said, without offering any further details at this stage. “You can bet your bottom dollar we are doing everything that this situation can be resolved as soon as possible. I cannot give you any more details but we will do our utmost.” Here’s the story: Here’s a quick summary of what’s still to come on day five. At 11am GMT we’ve got the men’s 1500m quarter-finals in the short track speed skating, followed by the semis at 12.29pm and the B and A finals at 1.13pm and 1.20pm. We’ll also have the women’s 10,000m heats (11.44am) and 3,000m relay semis (12.45m). The Nordic combined cross-country starts at 11am GMT and we’ve got the always-engrossing Luge Doubles with run 1 at 12.20pm GMT and run 2 at 1.35pm. The second period is well under way out on the ice, with the ROC still a goal ahead and looking the more menacing in their Group B opener against Switzerland. Later on in the same group we’ve got the Czech Republic v Denmark, at 1.10pm GMT, 9.10pm Beijing time. Thanks Gregg. We are indeed under way in the men’s ice hockey tournament, and gold-medal favourites the Russian Olympic Committee have just taken the lead through Anton Slepyshev in the dying seconds of a fairly cagey opening period against Switzerland. And we’ve got the men’s Nordic combined going on. After the ski jump Japan’s Yamamoto Ryota leads after scoring 133 points following a jump of 108 metres. He is 38 seconds ahead of Austria’s Lukas Greiderer. Right, Tom Davies is here now to take the blog on for a couple of hours. The ice hockey is under way between the Russian Olympic Committee and Switzerland. He’ll keep you updated on that and more. Thanks. Of course, these Games have been about much more than just sport. It appears another row is brewing over cultural appropriation, after a woman appeared at the opening ceremony of the Beijing Olympics wearing traditional Korean dress, known as hanbok. Her appearance sparked anger among many South Koreans, who denounced it as another attempt by China to claim parts of Korean culture – including its national dish, kimchi – as its own. The Chinese embassy in Seoul defended the decision, describing the participant dressed in hanbok as a representative of the country’s dozens of ethnic groups. Morning all. Gregg here. I’m just bridging a blog gap for a little while so why don’t we have a look at what has gone on this morning in a little recap. Mikaela Shiffrin’s disastrous Olympics continued as she failed to make it past even four gates in the women’s slalom and tumbled out in similar fashion to her horror-show in the giant slalom. Petra Vlhova went on to win gold. There was a gold for Norway’s Birk Ruud in the men’s freestyle skiing big air. He pulled off his final trick while holding a Norway flag, the big show-off! GB’s hopes of winning a third gold medal on snow were dashed as favourite Charlotte Bankes was eliminated at the quarter-final stage of the women’s snowboard-cross in Beijing. The men’s American snowboard legend Shaun White, who will retire after these Games, qualified for the final on his second run by pulling off a frontside 1260 to finish fourth. If he nails his tricks in the final he may get a medal to add to the three golds he has won at multiple Olympics. Lindsey Jacobellis earned redemption for her 2006 blunder when she won the first gold medal for the United States at Beijing 2022 when she took snowboard cross gold. On that glorious note I will hand you over to Gregg Bakowski who will take you through the next session of action. Bye for now. And Jacobellis, well ... I didn’t want to post this, but I also kind of did. This is what happened in Turin 2006. She was 20 then. Now she is 36. Here’s what Brockhoff had to say after narrowly missing out on a medal in the snowboard cross at her third Olympics: “I thought I’d be okay. I thought I wasn’t going to cry, but I’m definitely crying. I had a really bad training day yesterday. I had a shit time trial, I was having a bit of a breakdown but there’s a lot of fight in me. I went from 18th position to the big final. I gave it my all and that’s what I wanted to do. All I can say is ‘oh well’, rather than ‘what if?’.” She said she her stuttered start hadn’t been helped by her position on one of the left-sided gates. ICYMI earlier, Mikaela Shiffrin’s second straight disqualification from the women’s slalom was pretty devastating. The shock result came two days after the American skied out during her first run of the giant slalom, which ended her Olympic title defense only seconds into her Beijing debut. The standings: Gold: Jacobellis Silver: Trespeuch Bronze: O’Dine Really tough moment for Brockhoff, who is in tears as she is interviewed afterwards and is struggling to get words out. The American is beside herself, and so she should be. In 2006 she fell just behind the finish line. Back then she was in front and attempted a celebratory move which wildly backfired and which she had surely had some not-very-nice dreams about since. This time around she plays it safe, lands the final jump and breaks into a wide grin as she crosses. They are at the gates and now they’re down and off they go. Brockhoff has made a mistake early and she’s playing catch-up from the back. Jacobellis is in the lead. She wants this. She’s wanted it for 16 years. Trespeuch is in second and O’Dine third. Will this order remain? It does! Holy bananas. This is genuine history – personal history at least – for Jacobellis, who has finally won a gold. Pereira de Sousa has fashioned herself a bittersweet ending by winning the small final ahead of Critchlow, Gaskill and Moioli, the defending champion who has fallen minutes before her 2018 title is usurped by another of the women below. Moioli has a bloody face but she is waving that she is OK. Snowboard cross finalists: Meryeta O’Dine Lindsey Jacobellis Chloé Trespeuch Belle Brockhoff Brockhoff starts fast and she’s delaying a little but a couple of hundred metres on and she’s positioned nicely in second behind Odine. Pereira de Sousa falls after catching Brockhoff’s board but it doesn’t stop the Australian. Critchlow might though, and she’s sneaking up on her coming into the final jump and almost catches her only to cross in third behind Odine and Brockhoff. But wait, the results are showing Critchlow finished second and Brockhoff third, which surely can’t be right unless my prescription needs updating? A few confusing seconds pass as the Canadians celebrate with each other, before the results are promptly corrected and Critchlow’s campaign ends. Pereira de Sousa, meanwhile, had obviously gotten herself up and crossed the finish well after the rest and, in a lovely show of camaraderie, gets hugs from all her rivals. Final here we come! Semis time! There’s nothing between the top three in the start section but Jacobellis is soon out in front. Her line is on point and at no point did she look in doubt to take this one out. Trespeuch will also go for gold in the final but defending champion Moioli won’t be there. She spent part of this semi in second but fell away. Well they saved the best for last in terms of smarts and contest and drama because Australia’s Belle Brockhoff was last coming into the last 30 seconds. Dead last. And then from nowhere she surges, cool as, straight through the middle to overtake Charlotte Bankes at the death. That is Britain’s world champion eliminated. Massive shock that is. Gulini is also gone, and let’s not forget Tess Critchlow who will represent Canada in the semi-finals. Caterina Carpano, the Italian who does not ever take herself up the mountain without a thermos of warm tea. She has clearly did not have her tea quite hot enough today as she loses the front two pretty quickly. A good effort to catch them goes unrewarded so she exits. Meanwhile, Canadian Meryeta O’Dine is melting the snow beneath her board because she is on FIRE. A comfortable first place is followed with a “yeah giiirl”. The 2018 silver medallist Julia Pereira de Sousa Mabileau is through in second. Meghan Tierney, the fourth American to qualify for the quarter-finals, has gone out after a blip on the first jump that probably cost her. Italian Michela Moioli and Chloé Trespeuch of France progress. Those initial jumps are so ... jerky. Difficult to regain a centre of gravity and absolutely no time to prepare for the next. I mean, I imagine this is the case. A superb ride from Jacobellis in the second quarter has her through well in front of her opposition, even compatriot Gaskill, who ripped some cool moves. It’s good news for Bankes. More accurately, Bankes has created the good news by qualifying first in her final, relegating Brockhoff to second. Both qualify for the quarters which, as it happens are starting right now! Not a moment to spare here (or there, given I am on a couch in Sydney). There are four Americans already through to the quarters and three have qualified first in their respective finals in Gulini, Stacey Gaskill and Lindsey Jacobellis. Wouldn’t it be something if Jacobellis pulled off the gold 16 years after her 2006 wipeout with a superfluous trick in the last jump. She basically has everything in her cabinet except an Olympic gold medal. Here’s a trip down memory lane from one our Beijing correspondents, Bryan Armen Graham, while he was in Pyeongchang covering the 2018 Games. Gulini does it, qualifying first while Canadian Tess Critchlow is through as the second qualifier. Czech competitor Vendula Hopjáková fell and is being tended to. She looks in a spot of bother, and no surprise given how many brutal injuries are sustained in this sport. She is moving OK now. As the slalom continues down through the rest of the field I’ve switched over to the women’s snowboard cross 1/8 finals. For the Brits out there who are just waking up, Charlotte Bankes is coming up in final 8. Australia’s Belle Brockhoff is in the same final (we’re in final 7 at the minute – Team USA’s Faye Gulini is the favourite). Brockhoff’s fellow Aussie Josie Baff has taken a fall and won’t progress to the quarter-finals. Thanks Beau and good day to you. Let’s head over to the women’s slalom, where world champion Petra Vlhova is in the gold medal position and is guaranteed to win Slovakia’s first alpine medal at a Winter Olympics. Sara Hector of Sweden, the gold medalist in Monday’s giant slalom, was nailing the second run and seemed as if she might take Vlhova’s lead but then skied off course. Somehow, somehow(!), Vlhova has found another eight tenths of a second in her second run which is enough to secure the gold. Silver goes to Katharina Liensberger of Austria and Wendy Holdener of Switzerland. The last rider is the USA’s Chase Josey. With a 60.50, he’ll bump former US rider Louis Vito out of the last spot and put three Americans in the final 12. It looks good. It looks very good. And it’s just good enough. 69.50. Twelfth. That’s going to be all for me today. Over to Emma Kemp. Thanks for following along with me on a dramatic day at the Games. A score over 73 would get the three-time champion into the final. A 60 might be enough. Once upon a time, that was no problem at all. This time? Yes! He’s had bigger runs in his life, of course. But a frontside 1260 is impressive enough. Quite impressive, say the judges. That’s an 86.25, good for fourth. Team GB’s Charlie Guest is swatting her way through slalom gates as if perturbed, but she loses most of her momentum on a turn two-thirds of the way down and has to turn nearly 90 degrees to make the next gate. She’s down to eighth, with no shot at the top 10. Back to snowboard -- funny how the Olympic schedule got so busy all of a sudden. Taylor Gold has indeed clinched qualification before arriving at the top of the pipe. Will he go big or take it easy? Maybe somewhere in between. He showcased the beauty of the chicken wing grab, according to our international-feed commentators, and he did indeed improve by a couple of points to 83.50. Sixth place. Off to the final with you ... Let’s peek in on the women’s slalom, which our Canadian readers will appreciate, because Erin Mielzynski and Laurence St-Germain are second and third. That won’t last, given the 16 outstanding skiers with time advantages to come, but it’s a good start. Team GB’s Charlie Guest is next up. You get the sense that these competitors are trying too hard to crack the top 12. Louis Vito is the latest to try a massive trick and miss the landing, and he’ll have a nervous wait as he sits 11th. Germany’s Andre Hoeflich is a little more comfortable in ninth. Can Ireland’s Seamus O’Connor bump up from 13th? Nope. He doesn’t crash, but he bails out on the run after flailing in the air. He gives shoutouts to San Diego, Ireland and Park City. Eight riders to go, including Taylor Gold, who may be mathematically certain of qualification by the time he comes up. Another American will miss out on a halfpipe final. Lucas Foster landed hard on the lip of the pipe, right in the center of the board between his feet. It’s amazing his board is still in one piece. Reminder: Only one US woman qualified for the women’s halfpipe final. The men may be in the same situation. The days of snowboard sweeps are long gone. Is the figure skating team event really over? Apparently not. Due to “legal consultation,” the medal ceremony has been postponed. The medals went to Not Russia, the USA and Japan. The CBC is wondering if Canada could move onto the podium. Might the USA finally get a gold medal in Beijing? Slovenian Tit Stante went a long way up. Unfortunately, that’s also a long way down, and he landed badly. It’s a sad ride down to the bottom. Japan’s Kaishu Hirano also dares to touch the heavens, and he keeps it going. He puts a hand down on a landing later in the run, and that’s enough to keep him out of the 80s. But he improves slightly to 77.25. At eighth place, he’ll be a little nervous but is more likely in than out. Two Australians in the final! Almost certainly. Valentino Guseli shook off his first-run frustration with high amplitude and smooth landings. The 1260 at the end clinches a score of 85.75, currently fourth. Before Guseli’s run, Korean teenager Lee Chaeun looked like he was bound for the final until crashing at the very end of the run. He got up with a resigned smile. The second women’s slalom run is coming up. In this format, the top 30 skiers from the first run are inverted from 30th to 1st, so the last skiers know what they need to do to make the podium. Times are cumulative, of course. I’ll keep an eye on it, but the leaders likely won’t go until this halfpipe qualification is done. Switzerland’s Jan Scherrer had what seemed to be a middling run last time, but that may have been because he had the misfortune of following James. This time, he lands a 79.25, which is probably enough. Probably. A lot of riders are capable of changing their 15.75s to 85.75s. Gao Hongbo, who had the strange 15.00 run with no rotations in the first run, passed up his second run. Gu Ao comes up next instead and improves from 50.25 to 58.20. He’s 11th, and that’s not a comfortable place to be. “Last week, messed around and got a triple-double,” Ice Cube said in the cleaner version of It Was A Good Day. Ayuma Hirano just messed around and got a 93.25. It seems the Japanese riders didn’t really care that their qualification is all but assured. Ruka Hirano laid down a run of 87.00. What will Scotty James do in response? Plenty. It’s the same run through the first three hits, but the last is a promotion from a 1260 to 1440. He playfully rides up to the lip of the pipe and plants himself there at the finish. That’s a 91.25. See you in the final. Men’s halfpipe qualifying standings after the first run of two (top score counts): 1. Scotty James (AUS) 88.25 2. Ayumu Hirano (JPN) 87.25 3. Yuto Totsuka (JPN) 84.50 4. Taylor Gold (USA) 81.25 5. Ruka Hirano (JPN) 80.75 Those are the five who are probably safe. After that, the scores drop so sharply that Ireland’s Seamus O’Connor is 11th with a 57.00 and China’s Gu Ao sits on the bubble at 50.25. So while only one American is in the top 12 right now, it won’t take much to shake things up. Those of us of a certain age remember when Shaun White was a prodigy in 2006. Now he has a resume too long to list, and age 35, he has worked his way back to the top level while being sporadically active. The first 80% of his run is vintage White. The next landing is not. He’s underrotated, and he can’t stay upright. He’ll need to make good on his second run. The USA’s Taylor Gold just went big -- at least in parts of his run. He loses momentum midway through but finishes strong and stays clean, good for an 81.25 and fourth place. That’ll likely assure his qualification. China’s Wang Ziyang crashes, and that brings up the three-time gold medalist, Shaun White ... Mikaela Shiffrin spoke with reporters at length after her shocking exit in the slalom. The emotion of suddenly losing her father is still with her, especially in a situation like this, with two quick departures in these Olympics. But while the comparisons to Simone Biles are inevitable, Shiffrin insists she will compete in the rest of the races on the Alpine program. Canadian teen Liam Gill has a small crash. Like everyone else so far, he’s unhurt. That must be a relief to anyone who has seen him break his collarbone twice in his mid-teens. The USA’s Lucas Foster has a great run most of the way down. He has one bad landing but stays up. That one bad landing knocks him down to a 42.00. This isn’t figure skating, where a skater can medal even with a fall. Next: Louis Vito, who was fifth in the 2010 Olympics competing for the USA. He now competes for Italy. At age 33, he’s still got it, getting some amplitude up around 22 feet on a run that opens with a double cork 1260. Judges? 60.25. And now another US resident competing elsewhere -- Ireland’s Seamus O’Connor. He’s just 24 but is in his first Olympics. He alternates small tricks with big ones and, like Vito, gets about 22 feet above the lip of the pipe. That’s good for a 57. This is, of course, what you all want to know. When can we see curling again? Soon enough. You can either stay up another seven hours or go to sleep now and set an alarm. Australia’s Valentino Guseli is just 16, younger than most of the music being played at the venue (current: Jimi Hendrix). He lets loose an audible exclamation after landing hard on the lip of the pipe, but he brilliantly salvages the rest of the run. His score of 31.75 seems harsh. If you can land a double cork 1080 and a 1260 after a hard landing, shouldn’t that impress the judges? No one asked me, of course. We’ve seen a couple of crashes and mistakes since that opening quartet Hirano, Hirano, Totsuka and James delivered such astounding runs. The next Hirano, Kaishu, returns the competition to elite level with high amplitude and controlled rotations. Not quite the variety of grabs and moves to challenge the leaders, but that’s considerably better. A curious effort here from China’s Gao Hongbo, who tries no rotational tricks at all on his way down. It’s rare to get a 15.00 without falling, but Gao can now add that dubious accomplishment to his resume. Gu Ao gives a better representation of Chinese snowboarding with a couple of double cork 1080s. It’s only a 50.25, but at least it resembles world-class halfpipe action. Scotty James, one of the top Australian winter athletes by any measure, is a three-time world champion and the 2018 bronze medalist. And my goodness -- save something for the final, won’t you? James just ramped up the difficulty all the way down the halfpipe, ending with two double cork 1260s. The PA blares some AC/DC as James moves into first with an 88.25 and says hello to various relatives and friends via the camera at the finish. This is just the first run of qualification? Exceptional stuff here by all four riders so far. Ayumu Hirano is the two-time defending silver medalist, if it makes sense to “defend” a silver medal. He’s also first in this year’s World Cup standings. He also competed in skateboarding in the Olympics in his home country last summer. He’s good, in other words. And he certainly showed it here. Double cork 1080, double cork 1080, 900, 900, 1260, and dizzying heights. (“Amplitude” is the more apt word.) That’s an 87.25. He won’t have any trouble qualifying. (Same format as the women -- two runs, best score counts, top 12 advance to final.) Notable names in the men’s halfpipe qualification start list ... 1-3 Japan’s Ayumu Hirano, Ruka Hirano and Yuto Tosuka 4 Scotty James (AUS) 9 Valentino Guseli (AUS) 11 Kaishu Hirano (JPN) 12 Liam Gill (JPN) 14 Lucas Foster (USA) 17 Seamus O’Connor (IRL) 20 Taylor Gold (USA) 23 Shaun White (USA) 25 Chase Josey (USA) Ayuma and Kaishu are brothers. Ruka is not. At this hour ... It’s just a slow day for some reason. The only action right now is in snowboardcross, where half the field is going down the course to see how bad their seeds will be for the knockout rounds. But we have men’s halfpipe qualification coming up in 10 minutes. That’ll have the stage to itself for 1 1/4 hours until the women’s slalom has its second run with its two stars either out (Shiffrin) or far back (Vlhova). Over to snowboardcross now, where Team GB’s Charlotte Bankes has set the second-fastest time in qualifying. All four Americans -- Stacy Gaskill (fourth), Lindsey Jacobellis (fifth), Faye Gulini (seventh) and Meghan Tierney (16th) -- broke into the top 16 and can sit out the second run. And silver to the USA’s Colby Stevenson. The ebullient veteran Henrik Harlaut of Sweden nearly bumped ahead of Stevenson. But he seems quite content to share the podium, exulting after seeing his score of 91.00 posted. Ruud is taking his final run with a Norwegian flag in his hand. And he still lands it. Legend. And no! Donaggio can’t stick the landing, and Colby Stevenson will finish no worse than third. It’ll get scant attention compared with Shiffrin’s disaster and may even be overshadowed by the “US snowboarders other than Chloe Kim can’t qualify” story, but it’s something for US fans to celebrate in a week that hasn’t been what they’ve hoped. Can Colby Stevenson get a medal? It’s looking more likely. Sweden’s Oliwer Magnusson has a nice-looking tail grab and gets a 90.75, good but not enough to pass the American. Norway’s Birk Ruud has clinched a medal and will almost certainly take gold. The next two to go, Italy’s Leonardo Donaggio and Sweden’s Henrik Harlaut, will need to go well over 90 to beat Stevenson ... Alex Hall is up, up, away ... and he just never looked like he was in control. He went off-axis and never returned to on-axis. We’re told it was an attempt at a 2160, which is six full rotations. Four to go. The last run of the big air competition goes in reverse order of the current standings. The third man to go, Spain’s Javier Lliso, won’t medal, but he has a happy moment with friends and family back home via the screen setup at the finish. Next up: the USA’s Colby Stevenson. That looked impressive. Might that get him in contention? How does anyone judge this sport? In the women’s event, Gu and Ledeux were obviously better than the rest. Here? They’re all landing 1620s and 1800s. But this 1800 is indeed enough to get Stevenson into contention. It’s a 91.25. His best two add up to a 183.00, second to Birk Ruud. Another question: How do these guys not get hurt? Well, they do, on occasion, but the angle of the landing slope and their helmets must be pretty good if people like Norway’s Christian Nummedal can just walk away from faceplants like that. Canada’s Evan McEachran also can’t stick the landing. Six skiers to go. We might see a US medal here. The women’s slalom first run is still going, but we’re very much into the “participation trophy” phase of the competition. Next up is Iran’s Atefeh Ahmadi, and while it’s tempting to be snarky about the snail’s pace she’s setting on her way to finishing nearly 20 seconds behind the leader, it’s impossible not to applaud the effort. Besides, she has 30,300 followers on Instagram. Big air standings Two runs down, one to go. Top two runs count. 187.75 Birk Ruud (NOR) 176.00 Henrik Harlaut (SWE) 172.00 Leonardo Donaggio (ITA) 166.50 Oliwer Magnusson (SWE) 160.75 Alex Hall (USA) It’s still wide-open, at least for silver and bronze. Any of the top 10 have a mathematical chance at the podium. Catching Rudd? Good luck with that. Alex Hall has just landed a big air trick that most mortals cannot, especially given the fact that they are, indeed, mortals. He skis down the ramp without poles, which lets him grab one ski with both hands like a pole dancer. (In keeping with the American slump, my metaphors are getting worse.) Hall lands perfectly and smiles as he gets a 92.50. Let’s revisit Jessie Diggins’ bronze ... Maybe it’s because I live in an English-speaking country that isn’t Canada, or maybe it’s an idiosyncrasy of the schedule that has little action going on at the moment, but it just feels like everything has deflated this evening. Norway’s Christian Nummedal might disagree, having just attempted the same jump he tried in the first run but doing it much, much better. He gets a 93.00. He’ll need another good one, of course, to contend. And finally, for the first time since Chloe Kim’s first run (which, by her standards, was rather pedestrian), an American favorite does something special. Colby Stevenson gets a 91.75 on his second effort in big air. How do people land backwards? Intentionally? That boggles my mind. Canada’s Evan McEachran just flew too close to the sun, going for an 1800 (five rotations) with a double grab. Can’t stick the landing. But his 93.00 in the first run will leave him in contention if he cleanly lands on his third attempt. The first run of men’s big air is complete, and it’s ... Scandinavian. The last skier to go was Norway’s Birk Ruud, who takes the lead with a 95.75. Second is Canadian Evan McEachran, then Italy’s Leonardo Donaggio, then three Swedish skiers. At seventh, Alex Hall is the highest placed of the three Americans. Three runs, top two count. At this hour ... The women’s halfpipe qualifiers include three Chinese riders (Cai Xuetong, Liu Jiayu, Qiu Leng), three Japanese riders (Mitsuki Ono, Sena Tomita, Ruki Tomita) and two Canadians (Elizabeth Hosking, Brooke Dhondt). The rest are from Spain (the ageless Queralt Castellet), Switzerland (Berenice Wicki), Germany (Leilani Ettel) and the USA (Chloe Kim). In women’s slalom, the Vlhova-Shiffrin showdown has melted away. Shiffrin is out, and Vlhova is eighth. American Paula Moltzan is a surprising sixth. Germany’s Lena Duerr, the first skier on the course, still leads. Next up: Michelle Gisin (SUI) and Sara Hector (SWE). The snowboardcross seeding run is underway, but with more than an hour to go until men’s halfpipe qualifiers and 2 1/2 hours until the second run in the slalom, the event to watch is the men’s freestyle skiing big air. So let’s go to the Power Station, a name I fully intend to popularize, and watch .. Bryan Armen Graham has the story on Mikaela Shiffrin’s exit. Continuing with halfpipe qualification ... Tessa Maud (USA) is out, falling on the first hit of her run. Emily Arthur (AUS) is out, losing control in the air. Canada’s Elizabeth Hosking is in, which bumps out Maddie Mastro (USA). Zoe Kalapos (USA) is out. At this point, you couldn’t blame NBC if they just cut to reruns of Jessie Diggins and Ryan Cochran-Siegle. Changes in the standings in the second run in women’s halfpipe with a few athletes yet to go ... Liu Jiayu recovered from her first-run fall to post a 72.25. She has qualified for the final. Maddie Mastro is hanging on to 12th with five riders left, including Emily Arthur, Tessa Maud and Zoe Kalapos. Could Chloe Kim end up as the only American in the halfpipe final? Twitter is really, really angry with NBC right now for its Shiffrin coverage, particularly given the focus on mental health that came with Simone Biles’ story last summer. Let’s hop back to the halfpipe ... How unlikely was Shiffrin’s back-to-back flameout? Slalom is inherently an event of risk and reward. But the risk rarely catches up with Shiffrin. To wit ... That’s the cruelty of the Olympics. Shiffrin is on pace to win her fourth overall World Cup championship. She has six world championships. She may break the World Cup wins record by the time her career is done. But in the Games, it’s one slip, and you’re out. As if to illustrate the point, Chloe Kim crashed in her second halfpipe run. It won’t affect her qualifying prospects, but it’s a reminder that mistakes can happen to anyone, any time. Snowboarders, at least, get more than one chance. It’s worse when your sport doesn’t get any attention outside the Olympics. Consider Lindsey Jacobellis. She’s a five-time world champion in snowboardcross. She won the X Games 10 times, and then they cut her event. But to casual observers, she’s the person who was about to win gold in 2006 but did a hot-dogging grab on the last jump, leaving her to scramble for silver. She’s still competing and will go later today/tonight. Didn’t even make four gates. Her Olympics good hardly be going any worse. Quickly back to halfpipe to run through the first run results. Again -- best of two runs counts, top 12 make the final ... 1. Chloe Kim (USA) 87.75 2. Cai Xuetong (CHN) 83.25 3. Mitsuki Ono (JPN) 79.50 4. Queralt Castellet (ESP) 78.75 -- 8. Brooke Dhondt (CAN) 69.25 10. Maddie Mastro (USA) 65.75 12. Emily Arthur (AUS) 62.50 Americans Tessa Maud and Zoe Kalapos will need to improve to make it through. Here goes Vlhova, and though she seems aggressive, she’s far off the pace of the first skier down the hill, Germany’s Lena Duerr. That’s a shocker. It’s one thing for an elite skier to miss a gate in the complicated calculus of risk and reward. It’s another to just be slower. Back to the halfpipe briefly to catch up with Australia’s Emily Arthur, who has a solid but unspectacular run to land right on the bubble in 12th place. That’s two ahead of the USA’s Tessa Maud. The last American, Zoe Kalapos, gets virtually no height on her first few hits and then badly bungles an effort to go big. FIVE MINUTES UNTIL THE SLALOM and the showdown between Mikaela Shiffrin and Petra Vlhova. We won’t have to wait long -- Vlhova is up second, Shiffrin seventh. One interesting note from the international broadcasters -- each of their coaches set part of the course today. The second run is at 12:45 am ET, so get your caffeine now. But I just have this feeling that we’re going to see some mistakes and upsets. This is one of those events that goes for inclusion, so we’ll have 88 skiers. Jenise Spiteri is the only athlete from Malta in these Olympics. She is, as you might expect, originally American, having grown up as an actor and model in California. Another fun item from her bio -- she lives in a van she and her dad converted into a tiny home. She also puts a lot of effort into YouTube videos. Her first run was a 7.25, which we’ll assume means she crashed. We assume because it happened during a commercial break or a feature of some kind. Ten riders have gone. For those of you whose national language is the one in which you’re reading this, the athletes of interest in the start order are: 17. Brooke Dhondt (CAN) 18. Tessa Maud (USA) 19. Emily Arthur (AUS) 20. Elizabeth Hosking (CAN) 21. Zoe Kalapos (USA) Another of the American contingent, Maddie Mastro, has two world championship medals and is the first woman to land a double crippler 900 in competition, which involves being head-down at some point. But this is a lackluster run full of far simpler tricks than Kim and Castellet, and she also puts a hand down on a landing. It’s a mixed bag for the Chinese contingent so far. Cai Xuetong stands second behind Kim, but Wu Shaotong joined Liu in crashing hard. Fortunately, neither athlete appears injured. Chloe Kim opens by making a 12-foot-11 parabola out of the halfpipe and a 900 look like riding a tricycle. That’s an 87.75, which will probably get her through to the final already. Smile, wave, have a nice day. (That said, Spain’s Queralt Castellet opens her fifth Olympics with some dazzling spins, including a 900 and an upward flight of more than 20 feet. Somehow, that’s only 78.75.) And away we go ... Halfpipe qualification in a nutshell: Two runs, best one counts, top 12 go to final. We start with a crash by China’s Liu Jiayu, the 2018 silver medalist. Next up, the gold medalist from four years ago, the USA’s Chloe Kim ... And ... my feed just froze. Meanwhile, outside the bubble ... At this hour ... There’s nothing going on. It’s the break between mixed doubles and unmixed quadruples curling, so the schedulers in Beijing have nothing to offer at 9 am their time. But in 30 minutes, we’ll have the women’s halfpipe (snowboard, not ski) qualification rounds. In another 45 minutes, we’ll have the first run of the women’s slalom (ski, not snowboard). Then we’re back to Big Air Shougang, the post-industrial big air venue we should really start calling the Power Station. OK, let’s take a calming breath. Phew. Feel better? The purpose of that mini-meditation is to cleanse your thoughts of the 300 thinkpieces you’ve read today about Eileen Gu, a majestic freestyle skiing star who may win multiple golds in Beijing and is somehow simultaneously, according to the punditocracy, both a brilliant and savvy young woman who has parlayed her multicultural heritage into a dual-country financial and athletic empire AND an unwitting, naive tool of the Chinese government, the IOC and the judges who ranked her ahead of the unfortunate Tess Ledeux. Granted, the latter is my fault. And Sean Ingle has written well about Gu’s adeptness at the first of the portrayals I’ve listed here. But let’s take a moment to consider two underreported stories from yesterday ... First, Jessie Diggins is a badass. She and Kikkan Randall won gold in the 2018 Olympic team sprint while NBC’s Chad Salmela memorably yelled “HERE COMES DIGGINS! HERE COMES DIGGINS!” Yesterday, she became the first US woman to win a cross-country individual medal. And most of all, let’s all marvel at how Nathan Chen set a world record in the figure skating short program while being harassed by a cat. Coming up today Times are all in local Beijing time. For Melbourne it is +3 hours, for London it is -8 hours, for New York it is -13 hours and Los Angeles is -16 hours. 9.30am – 3.45pm Snowboard – there is a lot of action on Wednesday, including women’s and men’s halfpipe qualification. The women’s cross final is the session finale 🥇 10.15am and 1.45pm – the women’s slalom is contested over two runs 🥇 11am Freestyle skiing – it is the freeski big air day for men 🥇 3pm, 4pm and 7pm Nordic combined – this should be great, as the ski jumping trial round and competition round are followed in the early evening with the 10km cross-country 🥇 4.40pm and 9.10pm Ice hockey – the men’s competition begins with two group B match-ups: ROC v Switzerland followed by Czech Republic v Denmark 🏒 7pm – 9.20pm Short track speed skating – for women there are 1,000m heats and the 3,000m semi-finals, for men the 1500m goes from quarter-finals all the way to the final 🥇 8.05pm Curling – the round-robin stage gets under way in the men’s competition 🥌 8.20pm Luge – two runs at the Yanqing National Sliding Centre will decide the doubles medals 🥇 Full Winter Olympics schedule | Results, sport by sport | Medal tableAny movie star can put their face to a product. It’s the easiest thing in the world to do; you have a recognisable face, and people want to give you money for putting that face next to something they’re trying to sell. However, very few celebrities are good at endorsing products that fit with their own personal brand. Do you think that Kevin Bacon is really that interested in mobile data coverage? Of course not. And nobody would assume that George Clooney – handsome billionaire actor George Clooney – spends his whole day making coffee from little plastic pods. So when true synergy reveals itself, when a celebrity finally uncovers that one brand that fits so neatly with their persona that the two become indistinguishable, we have to applaud. I’m telling you this because Stanley Tucci has just announced a “multi-year collaboration” with San Pellegrino. Isn’t that beautiful? Isn’t that the most perfect thing you’ve ever heard? Tucci, the actor, producer and impeccably dressed cookery and cocktails lockdown heart-throb, is now for ever joined at the hip with a company selling expensive water. The two mesh so well, don’t they? Try to imagine Tucci in a restaurant asking for a jug of tap water. You can’t, can you? Even if you close your eyes and strain as hard as you can, you cannot summon the mental image of pristine man about town Stanley Tucci asking a waiter to give him something for free. No, Tucci wants to pay for his water. He wants to pay over the odds for his water. He wants to pay over the odds for a water that isn’t as nice as flat water, but carries slightly more prestige. This is who Stanley Tucci is, and everybody knows it. Sure, the collaboration will involve a television advertising campaign, probably where Tucci wanders around an idyllic spot in northern Italy, being charming in a well-fitting polo shirt and occasionally running his hands through a pile of lemons as he closes his eyes in ecstasy. That goes without saying. But what pushes this into extra special territory is this: San sounds a bit like Stan. And Stan is the first half of Stanley. You’re there already, aren’t you? That’s right, S.Pellegrino has temporarily rebranded as Stan Pellegrino, and there is apparently a competition to win a branded Stan Pellegrino bottle that has been engraved with Tucci’s signature. True, it won’t be for everyone. But people who like water, Stanley Tucci, puns and being wildly optimistic about the resale value of empty bottles that come with an incomprehensible scrawl scratched on them would do well to enter. But in the longer term, this is the sort of brand partnership to which celebrities should aspire. It isn’t enough to just plonk your face on an advert. Nor, sadly, is it enough to partner with the sort of brand that the public assumes you use. No. Now there needs to be a pun in it, too. We’re talking Meryl Streep advertising an expensive knitwear company and temporarily changing her name to Meryl Sheep. We’re talking Ryan Gosling endorsing a luxury lightweight hammock brand and appearing in adverts as Ryan Gauze Sling. We’re talking Emma Stone becoming the public face of stones and keeping her name exactly as it is. This is how things should only be from now on. Congratulations Stanley Tucci, you are a true pioneer.Rosemonde Bertin was only 17 when British officials arrived on Salomon Atoll in 1972. Everyone was ordered to gather at the manager’s office on the coconut plantation. She does not remember any advance warning. The commissioner of the British Indian Ocean territory (BIOT) told them they had to leave their homes because Americans were coming to the Chagos archipelago to set up a military base. For Bertin, who used to clean the house of the plantation manager, Mr Doffay, and look after a baby, it was the moment her island life vanished for ever. “It had been wonderful,” she said. “There were about 300 people and we lived as one big family.” On Wednesday, 50 years later, the 67-year-old was below deck in her pitching cabin reminiscing about her youth and heading back on a Mauritian-chartered vessel towards Salomon Atoll. By the weekend she should be able to set foot on her homeland once more. In the early 1970s, the islanders survived by fishing and working on the plantation; regular boats to Mauritius had stopped years earlier. “The authorities put pressure on people to say that we needed to go or otherwise we wouldn’t survive,” she said. “The provisions in the store on the island had been run down. There was only one bag of sugar. I can’t understand how someone who lived freely could be removed by these officials.” All the Salomon islanders were taken onboard a transport ship, the Nordvaer, chartered by the British government. Half of them were taken to Mauritius, half to a neighbouring island, Peros Banhos. Reports at the time recorded that the islanders’ pets were killed after they left. “I felt very sad, without knowing where I was going,” Bertin said. “There were no cabins on the boat. They put mattresses on the decks. It was in a very bad state: the vessel normally carried animals and guano – fertiliser for the plantations. Conditions were so bad one lady gave birth prematurely.” Bertin has lived in Mauritius ever since. She has been permitted “heritage” return visits twice before, in 2006 and 2009, under the close supervision of UK officials. Now she is delighted to be going home unmonitored. “I can’t accept being a visitor,” she said. “I’m a native.” Lisbey Elyse was 20 when she was taken off Peros Banhos in 1973. Now 68, she is also onboard the Bleu De Nîmes, the former British minesweeper chartered by the Mauritian government that is heading to the Chagos Islands for a marine survey. “Life was lovely. We ate what we grew. There was fish and fresh fruit,” she said. “We had a garden and cultivated tomatoes, aubergine, pumpkins and lettuce.” She worked on the plantation until “two men turned up, the commissioner and a director of the company. They said we couldn’t stay and that we would all be removed from the island and taken to Mauritius. They told us we would have houses and gardens there just like we had on Peros Banhos.” That promise never materialised, she said. “I felt very sad, heartbroken. There was no choice about leaving. I’m so proud of being from Chagos. I want to go back and live there again. It was paradise. There used to be 1,200 people on my island.” Ownership of the islands is disputed. A UN tribunal has ruled that the UK should hand the archipelago back to Mauritius. The Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office (FCDO) says the decision was only advisory. Responding to the Mauritian expedition, which will measure reefs in the Chagos Islands, the FCDO adopted a conciliatory tone, saying: “Mauritius notified the UK about its plans to conduct a scientific survey close to the Chagos Islands. The UK shares this interest in environmental protection and gave assurances to Mauritius that it would not interrupt the survey.” It did not restate the UK’s assertion of sovereignty. Chagossian Voices, an organisation representing some of the exiled Chagossian community who live in the UK, was more critical of the Mauritian government initiative. “This is an obscenely expensive vanity expedition carried out without proper consultation with the Chagossian community,” read a statement from the group. “Many Chagossians are appalled that such a huge sum of money can be spent at a time of economic crisis and when Chagossians remain on the margins of Mauritian society. Chagossians are filled with dread at the prospect of the islands being handed to Mauritius.” Henry Smith, the Conservative MP for Crawley, where most of the Chagossian community in the UK live, told the Daily Telegraph: “This is clearly a political statement by the Mauritian government with regards to its claims on the Chagos and nothing to do with conservation.” The Mauritian government has not said the voyage is about environmental matters: it was convened to carry out measurements in relation to claims to the seabed. During the day, the Mauritian ambassador to the UN, Jagdish Koonjul, who is also on the Bleu De Nîmes, raised his country’s flag on a yardarm. Amid heavy rain and with a following wind, the ship was steaming due east towards the Chagos Islands, rolling gently in moderate seas.All remaining domestic Covid legal restrictions in England are likely to be scrapped later this month, Boris Johnson has announced. Here is what we know – and what is yet to be set out. What is happening and when? As first set out by Johnson in a brief statement at the start of prime minister’s questions all domestic rules, including the requirement for people with Covid to self-isolate, are expected to end later this month. Johnson said he would set out the new strategy when parliament returns from recess, on 21 February. The changes are likely to come into force on 24 February. Did we know this was going to happen? Yes and no. When the government announced the end of so-called plan B Covid restrictions, for example on mask use, in January, it said the expectation was all domestic rules would end when relevant regulations lapsed on 24 March. Johnson has reinforced this intention and brought the timetable forward by a month. So what happens if you get Covid? You will still be expected to isolate, rather than struggle into work, coughing over fellow commuters and colleagues. However, this will be guidance rather than, as is currently the case, a law backed up with fines reaching a maximum of £10,000. The new guidance will be set out before the rules change, and it remains to be seen how strongly worded it is – and whether employers will be sympathetic. Will there be financial support to isolate? At the moment, people on lower incomes obliged to self-isolate are eligible for a £500 payment. It is not known if this will stay in place with the voluntary regime. The TUC has warned that people should be given proper sick pay and not be forced to work. Will there still be free testing? The testing system – no charge for instant lateral flow tests from pharmacies or sent via post, or for PCR tests at walk-in centres – will stay in place for now. It is a hugely expensive operation, and the expectation is that this will not be the case in the long term. What about travel restrictions? Many of these have now gone, but it is likely that some will remain, for example people arriving in the UK needing to fill in a passenger locator form, and quarantine for people who are not vaccinated but test positive after arrival. More information will come in the new guidance post-recess. Is this just for England? Yes, it is, as health policy is devolved across UK nations. Over time, restrictions have tended to be similar, but England has in recent months tended to move first in easing rules. Is there a public health case for this? There is certainly a longstanding view in public health that at some point Covid must be treated not as an emergency pandemic but a longer-term fact of life, which is mitigated in ways that allow everyday life to carry on. Downing Street has said it wants the virus to be seen as “endemic”, but with 60,000-plus confirmed cases a day, and the possibility of yet more variants, this is not something that can be simply willed. There is a suspicion that the advance of the timetable is connected to Johnson’s desire to please his mutinous backbenchers. • This article was amended on 11 February 2022. At the time of publication it had already been announced earlier that, from 11 February, travellers entering England who were not fully vaccinated would not need to quarantine on arrival; only if they tested positive after arrival. This has been clarified.Name: Old age. Age: 60. Quite old, then: Not at all.. Oh, sorry. What is 60, then, if not old? 60 is the new 40. And what is old? 76. OK, I’m a bit fuddled now. Not age-related, but some explanation is needed. There is a survey … That finds 60 is the new 40? Exactly, and that actual old age doesn’t hit until the age of 76. No! You mean I’ve got to wait 16 years longer before hitting the bingo hall? What am I supposed do in the meantime? Have you thought about taking up kitesurfing? Bog off! No, seriously. The survey, of 500 people aged over 60, finds that most feel about 12 years younger than their actual age … They’re not very good at simple maths then, are they? Because that would make 60 the new 48 … There was never really an old 48, though, was there? But that’s not the point. What is the point? That we’re feeling younger and younger, for longer and longer, and that has to be reason to celebrate. The research, from the activity provider Treasure Trails … Well, they would find that, wouldn’t they? … finds that 46% feel fitter than their parents did at the same age. Nearly a quarter (22%) claim to feel 20 years younger than they are. Voila: 60 is the new 40! And old age, which once started with a pension, is fended off until 76. And why is this? Well, life expectancy in the UK increased from 77 in 2000 to 81 in 2020: not 20 years, clearly, but this is about how old you feel, not how old you are or how long you’re going to live, and that is important. Many claimed that activities such as puzzles helped them feel younger. What, you mean jigsaws, that well-known hipster youth activity? Oi! There are other puzzles: apparently there’s a word-based one that people currently like. And we’re talking about code-breaking and mystery-solving games. Also, jigsaws are cool. Anything else that keeps us feeling young? More than 20% mention playing with their grandchildren, and for half of those, playing means playing sport. Quite a few (11%) enjoy gaming. And no, not crown green bowls – gaming on consoles, phones and tablets. Put it away, Gran, or I’m confiscating it! Exactly. And then there’s the 1% who are adrenaline junkies and do things like mountain biking, skydiving and kitesurfing. What even is kitesurfing? Dunno, I haven’t got to that age yet. Do say: “Psst, quick game of Call of Duty before bed? I’ll tell your parents we read Swallows and Amazons.” Don’t shout: “Bingo!”Uganda’s president, Yoweri Museveni, has appointed a former military intelligence chief, who is blacklisted by the US over alleged rights violations, to lead the country’s feared police force. Uganda’s police and military have been accused of widespread human rights abuses, including arbitrary detention, torture and assassination. Much of the repression has been directed at opposition activists contesting the 36-year rule of Museveni. The appointment of Maj Gen Abel Kandiho, who was recalled late on Tuesday from a new role as security envoy in South Sudan barely two weeks after being moved from his post as head of military intelligence, is a show of defiance towards the US and other western nations that have been critical of the deteriorating human rights situation in Uganda. Kandiho has “been appointed to the position of the Joint Staff of the Uganda police force,” Uganda’s military spokesperson, Lt Col Ronald Kakurungu, said in a statement. The US treasury hit Kandiho with sanctions last December alleging that he had presided over the arrest, detention and physical abuse of Ugandans “due to their nationality, political views, or critique of the Ugandan government”. “Individuals were taken into custody and held, often without legal proceedings, at [military intelligence] detention facilities where they were subjected to horrific beatings and other egregious acts … including sexual abuse and electrocutions, often resulting in significant long-term injury and even death. During these incarcerations, victims were kept in solitary confinement and [were] unable to contact friends, family, or legal support,” the treasury said, adding that in some cases Kandiho was personally involved, leading interrogations of detained individuals. The action freezes any US assets of Kandiho and generally bars Americans from dealing with him. There have been a series of crackdowns in Uganda aimed at stamping out dissent, with journalists attacked, lawyers jailed, election monitors prosecuted and opposition leaders violently muzzled. In the most recent case, a prominent author was held for nearly a month on charges of insulting Museveni and his powerful son, Muhoozi Kainerugaba, in a case that has raised international concern. Kakwenza Rukirabashaija, a 33-year-old satirical novelist, says he was tortured in custody and appeared on television to reveal welts crisscrossed over his back and scars on other parts of his body. Rukirabashaija’s most acclaimed work is the satirical The Greedy Barbarian, for which he won a PEN Pinter prize, International Writer of Courage, last year. The novel tackles themes of corruption and greed and has widely been interpreted in Uganda as a reference to the political life of Museveni. Rukirabashaija has previously been arrested and questioned by the military about whether the novel was about the president. Days before Rukirabashaija was detained, he posted several comments critical of Museveni and Kainerugaba, including one in which he called Kainerugaba “obese” and assailed his military credentials, denouncing the purported plans to have him succeed his father. The detention of the writer and the allegations of torture have drawn criticism and calls for his release from local activists, international diplomats and rights defenders, including the US Senate foreign relations committee’s ranking member, Jim Risch, and Eamon Gilmore, the EU special representative for human rights. The EU and several member states issued a joint statement on Monday calling for a “comprehensive investigation” into rights abuses in Uganda. Last year, lawyers acting for the victims of a wave of abductions and torture by security forces in Uganda named senior military commanders, including Kainerugaba, in a complaint to the international criminal court. Charles Rwomushana, a security and military analyst, said on Wednesday that Kandiho’s appointment showed that Museveni wanted to “have a firm grip [on] the police force”. Kandiho will be “powerful enough” to make crucial decisions “in favour of [Museveni’s] government”, Rwomushana said. Once hailed as a reformist, Museveni has ruled Uganda with an iron fist since seizing control in 1986, when he helped end years of tyranny under Idi Amin and Milton Obote. The US provides almost $1bn annually in development and security assistance to Uganda, and officials say Washington plays “a key role in supporting the professionalisation of the military”.Having thrashed mortal champions at poker, chess, Go, and Starcraft, an artificial intelligence program has delivered another humiliation, leaving the world’s best video game racing drivers in the dust. Researchers at Sony trained an AI called GT Sophy to play the PlayStation game Gran Turismo and found that it could outrace 95% of human players after two days and continued to shave tenths of a second off its lap times over the following week. Beyond learning the fastest line to take around different race tracks, GT Sophy honed its tactics around acceleration and braking, when to tuck in behind a fast car in front, and when to break out of the slipstream and attempt to overtake. Faced with cars that blocked its path, GT Sophy switched to another racing line to bypass those ahead. To add to the challenge, GT Sophy had to take account of race penalties that were dished out for infringements based on ambiguous rules – echoing the fine human judgements that can make the difference between winning and losing in Formula One. “The success of GT Sophy in this environment shows for the first time that it is possible to train AI agents that are better than the top human racers across a range of car and track types,” the authors write in the journal Nature. The team led by Peter Wurman, the director of Sony AI America, based GT Sophy on a common AI technique called reinforcement learning. The AI was fed information from multiple Gran Turismo games and by maximising rewards for fast lap times and minimising penalties for collisions and such like, the program steadily mastered the game. As with other AIs that have trounced human champions, there is more to GT Sophy than playing games. Excelling at Gran Turismo demonstrates how an AI can learn strategies for working in a demanding situation where the vagaries of human judgment are crucial. For example, it may seem sensible to drive as close as possible to the car in front, but if the lead driver touches the brakes too early, the inevitable rear-ending suggests the strategy needs more work. More importantly, the breakthrough will feed into a debate about the best computational approaches to use in driverless cars. Neural networks of the kind that underpin GT Sophy and other AIs, such as those from DeepMind, have proven themselves at identifying objects in the world, but other driving tasks such as planning the best line to take are often based on pure physics. GT Sophy suggests neural networks might do a good job of this too. Despite the AI’s impressive debut, the Sony team concede that GT Sophy still has much to learn. On a long straight, the AI overtakes at the first opportunity, sometimes leaving enough road for the opponent to use GT Sophy’s slipstream and pass back. Without collision penalties, the authors noted GT Sophy became “notably more aggressive”. In an accompanying article in Nature, Prof Christian Gerdes, co-director of the Center for Automotive Research at Stanford University, who was not involved in the research, writes: “What really stands out is GT Sophy’s performance against human drivers in a head-to-head competition. Far from using a lap-time advantage to outlast opponents, GT Sophy simply outraces them.”My brother David Liverman, who has died aged 66 of prostate cancer, was a British-Canadian geologist who became a tireless sports administrator in Newfoundland and Labrador, where he helped to regenerate interest in his favourite game, cricket. Having moved to Canada in his early 20s, David found it difficult to access cricket results in the early years of the internet and was one of the pioneers who developed Cricinfo from its origins as an email list into a fully fledged website. Living in Newfoundland, he discovered that cricket had been a popular sport there under British rule, but that interest had since faded. He decided to help to reinvigorate the game by offering his services as a volunteer organiser, coach and umpire, as well as develping school programmes. Eventually he became president of Cricket Newfoundland and Labrador, from 2017 to 2019, and also played a national role in managing Cricket Canada’s website, joining its board of directors. In 2019 David was named as Sport Newfoundland’s executive of the year, and in 2021 Cricket NL named their summer league trophy the Liverman Cup in his honour, also creating the David Liverman Fairplay award. When Hollywood came to Newfoundland to make the film The Grand Seduction (2013) – in which a remote Newfoundland community tries to attract a doctor obsessed with cricket – he became the movie’s cricket consultant, checking dialogue and teaching actors how to play. David was born in Accra, Ghana, where our parents, John and Peggy, worked for the British Volta mission. He grew up in Redhill, Surrey, attending Reigate grammar school and the University of Edinburgh, where he studied geology. Moving to Canada, he completed an MSc and PhD in glacial geology at the University of Alberta in Edmonton, with a break to work in the oil industry and then to backpack around the world. In 1988 David was hired as a geologist by the Geological Survey of Newfoundland and Labrador in St John’s, where he eventually became director of the survey and then assistant deputy minister in the provincial department of natural resources, retiring in 2016. An adjunct professor of geography at Memorial University, his geological interests included geoscience communication, the glacial and sea level history of Newfoundland, and geological hazards. He wrote a book, Killer Snow: Avalanches of Newfoundland and Labrador (2007), which attracted considerable popular interest. Aside from his dedication to cricket, David also spent many hours as a volunteer involved with figure skating in Newfoundland, serving as a club president and as a provincial executive, and winning the Skate Canada Volunteer of Excellence award in 2007. He was very proud when his daughter, Beth, joined the staff of Skate Canada. In addition David, who was a lifelong Arsenal supporter, spent many hours on the football field as a referee, and became a national level refereeing instructor for the Canadian Soccer Association. He is survived by his wife, Sandra (nee Powell), whom he met in Edmonton when doing his postgraduate studies and married in 1986, by Beth, and by his two siblings, me and Michael.Jimmy Kimmel Jimmy Kimmel took issue with the 2022 Oscar nominations announced on Tuesday morning, which did not include a nod for last year’s biggest blockbuster, Spider-Man: No Way Home. “How did that not get one of the ten nominations for best picture? There were only 11 movies made this year!” he joked on Tuesday night. “Forget the fact that the movie made $750m and is still going – this is a great movie. It wasn’t in the top 10 best movies of the year? There were three Spidermen in it!” Kimmel was particularly annoyed that Spider-Man, starring Tom Holland and Zendaya, was snubbed in favor of such “serious” movies as Don’t Look Up, a darkly comic parable for climate emergency directed by Adam McKay. “You’re telling me Don’t Look Up was better than Spider-Man? It most certainly was not,” Kimmel said. “When did we decide that the best picture has to be serious? As far as I know, this was not the point of feature film when they started making them. Ben-hur? Chariots and leprosy. Frankenstein? A monster powered by lightning. Fantasia? Mickey Mouse on an acid trip. The Wizard of Oz? Flying monkeys and a witch. These are great Oscar-worthy movies! “Now, there’s nothing wrong with a serious movie, a lot of them are fantastic and worthy of Oscars,” he added. “But why do they have to be serious, is what I’m saying. When did that become a prerequisite for getting nominated for an Academy Award?” “Here’s what happened,” he concluded. “The Academy voters, they looked at the list, they saw the names Leo DiCaprio and Meryl Streep, they checked that box, and then they put their kids in the car and they went to see the movie Spider-Man, and they loved it.” Trevor Noah On the Daily Show, Trevor Noah checked in on efforts to curb Russia’s incursion on the border of Ukraine, which has teetered on the brink of open conflict. “Because war is bad for business and also human life,” Noah explained, “every country is trying everything that they can to talk Russia down from its invasion plans,” including the president of France, Emmanuel Macron, who met with Russian president Vladimir Putin on Monday. “People had high hopes for this meeting,” said Noah. “Because the French and the Russians, they have a lot in common. For example, both have disgusting salad dressings named after them. But despite this commonality, the meeting did not go well.” After five hours of tense negotiations at the Kremlin, talks of de-escalation appeared to fail, and Macron warned that “the risk of destabilisation is increasing.” But Noah only had eyes for the biggest thing in the room: Putin’s massive white meeting table, was was over 20ft long. “Why are they sitting so far apart? I’ve been in zoom meetings where I’m sitting closer to the other person,” he mocked. “Why do you even have a table so big? Did you see that thing? Maybe Putin isn’t trying to take over Ukraine because he’s evil – maybe he just needs space for his giant fucking furniture.” “Apparently the reason for this distance is because they want to make sure that everyone is safe,” he continued. “And I’m not talking about Covid; I’m talking about Putin. Yeah, if he wants to kill you, at least with this table he’s got to catch an Uber to get to your end.”Inmates held in a women’s prison are making 1,000 calls a month to Samaritans amid record levels of self-harm, increased violence and low safety levels usually only seen in men’s facilities, a damning report has found. Nearly a third of women held at Foston Hall in Derbyshire, which holds 272 residents, told inspectors they felt unsafe, while the use of force in the prison has doubled over nearly three years and is the highest on the women’s prison’s estate. The women’s prison and youth offender institute is the first to be given a score of “poor” – the lowest – for the safety of female prisoners, since HM Inspectorate of Prisons developed its current framework more than a decade ago. The findings, in an official report by HM Inspectorate of Prisons, have prompted calls for the government to abandon plans to build more women’s prison places. Nearly three-quarters of female prisoners have committed non-violent offences. The Ministry of Justice (MoJ) disclosed last year it would be building 500 new prison places for women, as the planned recruitment of an extra 20,000 police officers is expected to cause a rise in the female prison population. Inspections of the prison took place in October and November and it became apparent that the prison has struggled with the Covid pandemic. Charlie Taylor, HM chief inspector of prisons, said the rating of “poor” for safety levels was a “rare and unexpected finding” in a women’s prison. “Neither the prison’s assessment of vulnerability, nor the support offered to newly arrived women were good enough. The unpredictability of the regime was contributing to tensions on the wings and, we suspected, increased violence, particularly against staff. “Violence was now very high. The use of force had doubled since the last inspection and was the highest in the women’s estate. There was now far more frequent use of the poor segregation unit,” he said. Recorded levels of self-harm were also the highest in the women’s estate and two prisoners had taken their own lives since the last official inspection in February 2019, he said. “As an indicator of the level of distress, women were making 1,000 calls a month to Samaritans. The prison had no strategy to reduce self-harm or improve the care for those in crisis,” Taylor said. The response to women in crisis was too reactive, uncaring and often punitive, Taylor observed. “This, taken with other safety metrics and observation, meant it was no surprise that in our survey nearly a third of women told us they felt unsafe,” he said. The report also found that the majority of women who harmed themselves did not have enough support or activity and faced daily frustration in getting the help they needed. “Messages left on the prison’s crisis hotline had not been checked for six weeks,” the report found. The conclusions have prompted condemnation from prison campaigners. Deborah Coles, the director of Inquest, said: “Foston Hall prison is a dangerous and harmful place for women. Horrendous rates of self-harm, exacerbated by the impact of Covid and restricted regimes, punitive treatment and segregation for women in crisis. This is inhumane and unjust.” Emily Evison, women’s policy officer at the Prison Reform Trust, said: “Women’s prisons are expected to solve problems which are made worse by women being in custody. Nearly three-quarters (72%) of women entering prison to serve a sentence have committed a non-violent offence. Many women who offend suffer from drug and alcohol addictions and mental ill health. “Building more women’s prison places, as the government has committed to doing, is an irrational response.” The report was accompanied by a paper identifying key findings in the inspection of five women’s prisons – Low Newton, Styal, Send, Downview and Foston Hall – in the last six months. Inspectors raised serious concerns about high rates of self-harm and vulnerability across the women’s prison estate, which accounts for only about 4% of prisoners in England and Wales. Self-harm is much more common for women in prison than men and has increased during the Covid-19 pandemic to record levels. Fifty-two per cent of women said they had children under 18 years old. The MoJ said it had set up a new safety taskforce at Foston Hall to assess monthly progress and drive forward improvements. The senior management team has also been boosted with additional capacity to provide oversight. Victoria Atkins, the prisons minister, said the issues highlighted by the inspection were not acceptable. “Across the wider women’s prison estate, our staff have worked hard to ensure women receive extra support to deal with mental health issues during the pandemic, overseen by a taskforce at national level, and we are starting to see a decrease in the number of self-harm incidents across the estate,” she said. In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org.KURT RESPONSE This isn’t the first time David Moyes’s judgment has been called into question. There was that interview in which he thought it would be most b@ntersome to threaten a female journalist with a slap, for example. Then there was the time he decided he was the very man to follow a 38-trophy-winning, paradigm-shifting, even-better-than-Busby legend, because what could possibly go wrong. Neither move was a good look, and on Tuesday evening he completed the personal trifecta by selecting Kurt Zouma, who earlier in the day had been caught on video kicking his poor innocent cat around his house in the piece-of-work style. Most casual observers with warm blood pumping through their human hearts had expected Moyes to drop Zouma, who had been universally condemned for his appalling cruelty. But the West Ham boss had other ideas, deeming the big centre-back essential for a Premier League match against a Watford side currently tearing up the division with one goal in the last four games. However, had Moyes been labouring under the misapprehension that online opprobrium wouldn’t transfer over into the real world, the volume of boos Zouma received every time he touched the ball would have rattled all of the wax out of the manager’s tin ear. “I’m an animal lover,” Moyes insisted, after deciding that three points were more important than sending out the right message, punishing the player, a dignified response, etc and so on, and so forth. “I had to do my job,” he added, although his glazed expression, haunted even by those United/Sociedad/Sunderland standards, spoke of a man slowly realising he could have handled this a whole lot better. To that end, the club have now fined Zouma the maximum amount possible and promised to support Essex police and RSPCA investigations into the matter. Meanwhile, the player’s cats have been taken into RSPCA care, hopefully to be given a clean bill of health and found a loving forever home. LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE Join Michael Butler at 4.30pm (GMT) for Al-Hilal 0-2 Chelsea in the Club World Cup semi-final and then keep up to speed with all four of Wednesday’s Premier League matches with Scott Murray’s clockwatch from 7.45pm. QUOTE OF THE DAY “I can’t really tell you much. He wasn’t happy and that was it. I can’t say anything else because that’s what happened. I wasn’t very happy and I’m better this way” – we’re not sure that Mikel Arteta is over Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang just yet. FIVER LETTERS “I won’t comment on the substance of the awful allegations involving Kurt Zouma but he’s ruined his chances for a dream move to Sunderland, hasn’t he?” – Mike Wilner. “Re: yesterday’s Fiver. Sometime back in the day I met and had a conversation with Gabrielle in a club in Manchester, where she was performing a selection of her best-known songs. ‘Dreams’, which you highlighted as a suitable anthem for Newcastle, was well received but my favourite hit that night is probably a more reliable guide to what’s going to result for the Toon Army. It’s called ‘Out of Reach’. Gabrielle was lovely, by the way” – John Myles. “I see in yesterday’s News, Bits and Bobs that Barcelona chief suit Ferran Reverter has quit the club. He’ll be back” – Declan Houton. “Can I be the 1,057th reader to point out to Noble Francis (yesterday’s Fiver letters) that the famously corpulent cat Garfield was named after the famously corpulent US president James Abram Garfield. Therefore he was making a distinction that somehow managed to make yesterday’s Fiver even more pointless than it usually is. I guess congratulations are in order” – Richard O’Hagan. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’ the day is … John Myles. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS Wayne Rooney has been contacted by the FA’s Thought Police after claiming he set out to knack a player in Manchester United’s match at Chelsea in 2006. Antonio Conte reckons Spurs could make a move for Christian Eriksen if the playmaker rips it up at Brentford. “You don’t know what will happen [but] it would be good for me to have him again, to work together,” he cooed presumptiously. Ralf Rangnick is clearly still trying to come to terms with reality after Manchester United’s 1-1 draw at Burnley. “We scored three goals. That was different from last Friday when we only scored one goal,” he parped. “We scored three goals. The second one that was disallowed, the linesman flagged foul but 10 seconds after that incident. This was a very soft decision.” Frank Lampard’s Everton manager Frank Lampard has told everyone to calm down after the 3-1 defeat at Newcastle left the Toffees lingering perilously close to the relegation zone. “I’ve been here a week,” he yelped. “We’ve come into a very difficult match against Newcastle, who are very effective in some of their direct play.” Jürgen Klopp reckons Mo Salah would be well up for punishing Leicester with or without Afcon heartache to fuel him. “[Is there] greater determination for Mo? I am not sure that is human,” he blabbed. “I don’t think there’s a lot of space for more determination in Mo’s mind.” Achilles-knack means Steph Houghton is not in the England squad for the inaugural Arnold Clark Cup next week. “She is really, really disappointed,” sighed manager Sarina Wiegman. Walsall have bundled Matt Taylor through the door marked Do One after a seventh defeat in a row (1-0 at Firewall FC, in case you’re interested). And Tottenham’s Ben Davies, who recently got a 2:1 in economics, reckons there are loads of brainy footballers out there. “Maybe the headlines don’t do us much justice,” he sniffed. “Eric [Dier] is quite smart, Harry Winks is quite smart, and Joe Rodon is surprisingly smart. His geography knowledge is excellent, I have to say.” STILL WANT MORE? “I think players from Bahia have a special spice.” Arsenal’s Rafaelle Souza gets her chat on with Júlia Belas Trindade about why her home region is so good at producing footballers and the joys of having her mum with her to cook the best stew. QPR’s Albert Adomah gets his own chat on with Ben Fisher about staying loyal to his boyhood club, his “uncle” nickname and paying tribute to a friend who died of Covid. Barney Ronay coins the phrase “neo-Newcastle” and sings Allan Saint-Maximin’s praises after the 3-1 win over FL’s Everton. The most last-gasp of all last-gasp comebacks, the “South Coast Team” mystery and a whole load of Os are among the topics raked over in this week’s Knowledge. And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! AND NOW FOR SOME HAPPIER CAT NEWSIan Stewart’s ability to murder his first wife and resume a normal existence, going on to murder another partner, is beyond the comprehension of most. The cold duplicity of his actions would lead many to ask how was he capable of such deceit. Forensic psychologists and criminologists have given their view on why Stewart was able to commit such awful crimes. Emma Kenny, a psychologist and TV presenter, said it was clear Stewart was an “organised serial killer”. She said it was possible for killers such as Stewart to “coexist perfectly in the world around you” as their lack of empathy allows them to be “very good at being a chameleon”. Kenny, who has her own YouTube true crime series, told the Guardian: “Quite often, if you’re an organised killer you might be someone who has held down a decent job or maintained a successful relationship, a monogamous relationship, they can often be someone you would want to spend time with, successful with friendships, charming … that’s what is so disconcerting about it.” Kenny, who appeared in an episode of the true crime series What the Killer Did Next about Ian Stewart’s murder of his fiancee, the author Helen Bailey, said he was a “narcissistic” killer. “They ask ‘what is it I need for my life’ and ‘how can this work for me’. If something is working for them, they may carry on as normal. If they see something they desire and a person is a pawn to get that … let’s say life insurance … then they may see that person as not being required any more,” Kenny said. Kerry Daynes, a consultant forensic psychologist of more than 25 years, working in prisons, secure hospitals, courts and police stations, told the Guardian that Stewart’s behaviour could be explained by what is known as “cognitive distortion”, what she labels “mental gymnastics” that help people justify their actions. Daynes said this is a process most of us experience – she gives an example of someone on a diet making themselves feel comfortable and guilt-free about eating a slice of chocolate cake. But in Stewart’s case this twisted logic was taken to the extreme – to justify the killing of not one but two women. Daynes, author of autobiographical books What Lies Buried and The Dark Side of The Mind, said: “They make all kinds of cognitive distortions, they distort their thinking in order to give themselves permission to offend. “It doesn’t necessary make any logical sense – they know what they’re doing yet they’re able to compartmentalise. “So during his relationship with Helen Bailey at times he was able to simply live in the moment, actually enjoy the relationship, go through the motions and yet knowing what he was going to do and somewhere along the line he felt he was deserving of the money he would inherit.” Daynes, who appears on Faking It, the Discovery UK show about high-profile criminal cases where people claim in public they are innocent about a crime they have committed, said thinking he had got away with the murder of his first wife, Diane Stewart, would have given Stewart the confidence to set his sights on a wealthier target – Helen Bailey. She added: “This is somebody who has been able to live with it because he thinks he’s been successful, he’s been successful and he’s gone about planning it again, there’s no obvious remorse there and that’s what makes this so chilling.” She went on: “He clearly views women as commodities and at some point in his marriage, he started viewing his first wife as a commodity and thinking about what life would be like without her and what he would stand to gain from that.” “He’s always quite parasitic, averse to hard working life, he’s viewed these women not as human beings but as meal tickets.” Daynes said it was not unusual for men to kill their partners, with a woman killed by a current or former partner every three days, but the level of calculation in Stewart’s made it very unusual. “It’s very chilling because of the level of premeditation when it comes to Helen Bailey,” she said. “I think he’s somebody who has got a great sense of entitlement, he’s owed a living really, you see that in that he’s quite parasitic.”A man charged in an alleged plot to kidnap the Michigan governor, Gretchen Whitmer, pleaded guilty on Wednesday, a second key conviction for the government a month before four others face trial. Kaleb Franks joined Ty Garbin as the second person to admit guilt in a plot to abduct the Democratic governor before FBI agents arrested them in October 2020. The plea gives prosecutors another important witness for the 8 March trial. The government said the group wanted to kidnap Whitmer because of their opposition to her administration’s public health measures to prevent the spread of Covid-19. More than 900,000 people have died with Covid-19 in the US during the pandemic, far more than any other country worldwide. Franks replied, “yes, sir,” to a series of questions from US magistrate Judge Phillip Green about his role. He signed a document admitting he “was not entrapped or induced to commit any crimes” by undercover agents or informants. Garbin pleaded guilty in 2021 and was sentenced to slightly more than six years in prison. Franks acknowledged in court documents that he was deeply involved in the plot, which included outdoor training with firearms in Wisconsin and Michigan and scouting Whitmer’s second home in northern Michigan. In August 2020, less than two months before their arrest, Franks said he and a co-defendant “discussed their frustration with people who advocated anti-government action but were unwilling to use force themselves”. While there is no agreement on the length of his prison sentence, Franks could be rewarded if he “materially and substantially assists” the government. Besides Adam Fox, who is described as a ringleader, the remaining defendants are Barry Croft Jr, Daniel Harris and Brandon Caserta. When the kidnapping case was filed in 2020, it added even more heat to the final weeks of a tumultuous election season. Then-president Donald Trump refused to denounce far-right groups who inspired anti-lockdown extremists across the country. Trump had earlier urged supporters to “LIBERATE” Michigan and two other states led by Democratic governors from stay-at-home mandates in April 2020. Dozens of US public health officials have reported receiving death threats for their work during the pandemic. Associated Press contributed to this reportGSK made £1.4bn from Covid-related medicines last year, beating forecasts in its first financial results since rejecting Unilever’s £50bn buyout offer in December, as the chief executive, Emma Walmsley, pledged a “step-change in growth” in a landmark year. The company is under the spotlight after promising to raise billions by spinning out its consumer arm, whose over-the-counter brands include Nicorette, Panadol and Aquafresh, in a London stock market listing this summer. GSK reported total sales of £34bn for 2021, in line with last year. The consumer healthcare business contributed £9.6bn, down 4% from 2020. GSK’s annual profit before tax fell to £5.1bn, from £6.4bn in 2020. In the final quarter of the year, turnover rose 9% to £9.5bn, slightly ahead of analysts’ forecasts, while earnings per share were also better than expected at 25.6p. Analysts at Morgan Stanley and Goldman Sachs described the results as “solid”. Walmsley is under pressure from the activist investor Elliott Management, a New York hedge fund, which is clamouring for change along with the much smaller London-based Bluebell Capital Partners. Both have pushed for a sale of the consumer business. However, GSK recently rejected three offers from Unilever as too low, the last of which was worth £50bn, and Unilever walked away. Elliott and Bluebell have also demanded that Walmsley reapply for her job, but she insists that she will continue to lead the drugmaker after its split. Walmsley said the company had “very broad shareholder support” for its pursuit of a consumer spin-off. “We have a lot of encouragement to stay focused on the successful execution of this demerger, the creation of what we think is a very exciting big player on the FTSE,” she told journalists. Unlike rivals, GSK has not developed a Covid-19 vaccine, but its Xevudy (sotrovimab), an injected antibody drug, was approved by the UK drugs watchdog in early December. Trials found it cut the likelihood of hospital admission and death by 79% in people with mild to moderate Covid-19 who are at high risk of developing severe disease. It was found to be effective against the Omicron variant. The drug brought in £958m of sales while GSK’s pandemic adjuvant, a formula added to Covid vaccines developed by others to make them more effective, generated sales of £447m. Aside from Xevudy, GSK received US regulatory approval last year for the cancer drug Jemperli and Apretude, a long-acting injection for HIV prevention. The focus now is on new products, such as a respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) vaccine for older adults, with late-stage clinical trial results expected by June. The company needs to replenish its drugs pipeline, and has been dealt a blow by the forthcoming departure of its chief scientific officer Hal Barron, a highly respected US scientist who is joining a Californian startup backed by the Amazon founder Jeff Bezos. He will be replaced by Tony Wood in August. Walmsley brushed off any concerns and said: “This is going to be a landmark year for GSK, with a step-change in growth expected and multiple research and development catalysts, including milestones on up to seven key late-stage pipeline assets. “We are now in full countdown mode to demerger and our aim is to unlock the potential of both GSK and consumer healthcare, strengthen GSK’s balance sheet and maximise value for all shareholders.” She said GSK would set out the future growth ambitions and the financial profile of the consumer business at an investor event on 28 February. The remaining pharmaceuticals and vaccines business, called New GSK, is expected to deliver sales growth of 5-7% at constant exchange rates this year, compared with 5% growth last year for the whole group. This is higher than analysts were expecting. GSK’s vaccines sales dropped 10% to £1.8bn last year, as countries’ normal vaccination programmes were disrupted by the Covid-19 vaccination drive, hitting sales of the drugmaker’s shingles and meningitis jabs.When Perth festival opens on Friday, it will be a very different program to the one announced in November, with five major shows cancelled or postponed due to Western Australia’s Covid-19 border restrictions, including the festival’s free opening weekend event. The event’s executive director, Nathan Bennett, said the decision to cancel Escape, the opening weekend event, was made after management ruled the production could not go ahead in a Covid-safe way. A celebration of the culture of the Noongar people, Escape would have been staged in various parks, wharves, warehouses and beachfronts this weekend. “An event of that scale has unrecoverable costs and we were very keen to ensure that we could honour our commitments to suppliers even though we’re cancelling the event,” Bennett said. Despite the cancellations, the festival’s management and board nevertheless considered themselves to be in a fortunate position, he said. “We’re the lucky ones because we’ve been in a position where we are able to plan a festival and do so with full knowledge that we might have to adapt our plans, change, or cancel things altogether,” he said. “That’s far better than what would have been the least risky decision, which would be to not plan a festival at all. I think that would have been an even worse outcome for the artists that we’ve managed to keep employed.” At least six productions and events at risk of cancellation have been salvaged, after a number of performers from outside WA secured special dispensation from the state’s chief health officer, allowing them to cross the border and complete a two-week quarantine before taking to the stage. Among those to receive exemptions are singer Katie Noonan and comedian Oliver Twist, who are both arriving with shows fresh from this year’s Sydney festival. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Members of the Queensland-based dance and theatre collective The Farm have been granted entry, in comfortable time for The Ninth Wave – their joint work with Perth troupe The Co3 Contemporary Dance company, to go ahead in early March. Melbourne-based artist Joel Bray has been granted entry in time for his one-man show Daddy. The immersive theatre installation Patch’s Lighthouse and dance work And the Earth Will Swallow Them Whole will also proceed as planned. But Fremantle concerts by Melbourne band King Gizzard and the Lizard Wizard, and Sydney rap artist Barkaa have been cancelled, while the West Australian Opera’s performances of Carmen, the festivals’s flagship opera, will not go ahead on 25 and 26 February Launching the 2022 program in November, festival artistic director, Iain Grandage, said at the time he was hopeful border restrictions would be lifted by early February. The following month the state premier, Mark McGowan, flagged a 5 February reopening of WA’s borders, six days before the festival’s opening night. But McGowan backtracked in late January, announcing that the borders would remain closed to quarantine-free travel due to the spread of the Omicron variant, and would remain so until at least mid March. Bennett said the total cancellation of the Perth festival was an option canvased by the board as early as April 2020, when lockdowns and border closures began sweeping across the country. “There’s been so much uncertainty to navigate, but our board took a very clear, swift view that we needed to carry on and we needed to carry on in a safe way. The option of not planning a festival at all was ruled out very quickly,” he saidIf back at the end of 2019 someone was to tell you that just over two years later we would be debating when will the unemployment rate go below 4%, you would have been excused for thinking that the number of employed must have surged a lot faster than it actually has. Prior to 2020 employment was growing around 4.2% every two years, so you would have been excused from thinking to get unemployment down so low, job growth must have taken off and we would be well above 13.5 million people employed. And yet, no. Employment since the end of 2019 has increased just 2.1% – in effect at half the speed it had been in the period up to the pandemic: If the graph does not display please click here The level of employment is around 2.2% below what would have been expected, but the key thing to remember is that the unemployment rate is a percentage (the ABC’s Gareth Hutchens has some funky videos explaining this). It is related to the number of people in the labour force – and one of the big changes since the pandemic is the absence of migration has meant the pool of working age people has barely grown at all: If the graph does not display please click here And thus with a barely growing labour force, employment does not need to grow as fast in order to see unemployment fall. As it is, the level of unemployment is well below what would have been expected a couple of years ago: If the graph does not display please click here This does not mean it is irrelevant that unemployment is low, just that it is always worth remembering the current labour market is weird and in some ways artificial – not just due to the limit on migration but also due to the massive level of fiscal and monetary stimulus that is pumping up demand. The last time the unemployment rate fell to 4.0% in 2008 we were still benefiting from the mining boom, the GFC had yet to arrive, the budget was in surplus and the Reserve Bank of Australia had increased interest rates seven times in three years to take the heat out of the economy: If the graph does not display please click here We are not in such a situation now, and neither are we in a situation as was the case when the unemployment last had a 3 in front of it – back in the November quarter of 1974. It is quite remarkable how greatly our labour force has changed since then – a time so far removed that the ABS didn’t even do monthly unemployment figures! The first big change is that our labour force is older now. In 1974, 45% of our working-age population was under 35; now it is just 33%: If the graph does not display please click here But the biggest difference is the gender makeup. And it explains somewhat why unemployment was so low then – ironically it was for an artificial reason as is currently the case. While our current labour force is restricted by migration limits, back in 1974 it was restricted by both laws and conventions that kept women out of work. In 1974 just 35% of those in the labour force were women; now it is 47%: If the graph does not display please click here The difference can be seen in the breakdown of the age of those working. In 1974 the most likely age a woman would work was in their early 20s. Then the “nappy valley” would occur: women leaving the labour force, having kids and essentially never returning. Men on the other hand did not seriously leave the labour force until their early 60s: If the graph does not display please click here Now things are much more equitable (if not completely so). The current most likely age for women to work is their 40s and 50s and the nappy valley has become a flat land. Women don’t have the steady increase that men do in their late 20s and early 30s, but there is no longer the large exit from work: If the graph does not display please click here Another key change is that women are now more likely to work full-time than in the past. In 1974 just 30% of women in their late 20s worked full-time, now half do: If the graph does not display please click here Here we still see evidence of women leaving to have children – although it now occurs in their 30s rather than 20s and it is more likely to involve going from full-time to part-time. For men, however, the story is the quite different. Men are now less likely to work full-time than their counterparts 48 years ago – due to the shift towards more “flexible work arrangements”: If the graph does not display please click here But despite these movements, the gender gap of full-time work remains very much in force, with men in their 30s and 40s being almost twice more likely to work full-time than women at that age: If the graph does not display please click here And so the unemployment rate is likely to get below 4% sometime this year – it’s already at 4.2%. But it is worth reflecting that we got to that level due to very unusual circumstances, and that just looking at the rate itself hides a lot of what is going on in the labour market. We have a very different economy to what we had the last time the unemployment rate was under 4%, but what unites both now and 1974 is that a reduced labour force might provide a better looking unemployment rate, but not necessarily a better economy or community. • Greg Jericho is a Guardian columnist and policy director at the Centre for Future WorkTwo newly approved oral treatments for Covid-19 are recommended mainly for unvaccinated patients and will not be available for Australia’s general practitioners to prescribe for “many, many weeks”. The antiviral drugs Lagevrio and Paxlovid block the ability of the Sars-CoV-2 virus to replicate in the body, and were provisionally approved by the Therapeutic Goods Administration on 20 January. The treatments can only be given to adults with mild to moderate Covid-19, who do not yet require oxygen, and must be administered within five days of when symptoms begin. The federal government secured 500,000 treatment courses of Paxlovid and 300,000 courses of Lagevrio for use this year. Amid global supply constraints, distribution of the antivirals has begun via the National Medical Stockpile – a reserve of pharmaceuticals and PPE managed by the federal government for use during public health emergencies. Australia’s deputy chief medical officer, Prof Michael Kidd, said the treatments would possibly be listed on the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) “in the coming months”. “We won’t be doing normal prescriptions [for the Covid antivirals] until this is on the PBS,” he said. “As supply of these treatments comes into the country, the initial distribution is going to need to be prioritised to those who are at the highest clinical need,” Kidd said. “They’ll go to residential aged care facilities, to rural and remote communities – particularly those regions with high Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander populations – and directly to the state and territory governments for distribution to those at highest risk in the community, including people with disability.” Lagevrio would be placed in residential aged care facilities as soon as possible, Kidd said. Paxlovid – which has numerous drug contraindications that may make it unsuitable for elderly patients on other medications – will be distributed to state and territory health authorities. Dr Karen Price, the president of the Royal Australian College of General Practitioners, said: “Prescription using a normal prescription pad is many, many, many weeks off at this stage.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Associate professor Paul Griffin, the director of infectious diseases at Mater Health Services, said GPs would eventually “have a huge role to play” in prescribing the antivirals, but it was too early to know exactly how distribution would occur. “There’s no question that – given these are oral [medications] and need to be given early – they’re very much going to be community focused,” Griffin said. “We know that GPs are the backbone of healthcare in that setting.” Clinical guidelines for both antiviral drugs – which health experts emphasise are not a substitute for Covid vaccination – specify a focus on at-risk unvaccinated adults. Clinical trials of both drugs found they reduced hospitalisation and deaths in people with Covid-19 when given within five days of the onset of symptoms. However, trials did not include individuals who were partially or fully vaccinated. “These medicines were trialled before the vaccine was widely distributed,” Griffin said. The antivirals are also recommended for people who are immunosuppressed or “have received one or two doses of vaccine and who are at high risk of severe disease on the basis of age and multiple risk factors”. “People who have not been vaccinated remain at the highest risk,” Kidd said. “Treatments will most likely be of most benefit to people aged 60 and above, and those who have significant medical conditions such as diabetes, obesity, heart disease, chronic lung disease or cancer.” Dr Diego Silva, a senior lecturer in bioethics at the University of Sydney, said providing the treatments to unvaccinated people aligned with the goal of treating people “at highest risk of progressing to serious disease”. Criticisms that unvaccinated people “didn’t do anything to protect themselves, [so] why should they get priority or why should they have equal access” run counter to the purpose of universal healthcare, Silva said. Healthcare was set up to “treat you no matter whether you’re at ‘fault’ or not,” he said. Griffin agreed. “If people have made a decision not to be vaccinated, whilst I certainly wouldn’t endorse that decision, our role when they get Covid … is to do everything we can to stop them getting unwell,” he said. “In medicine, our role is not to be judgmental.” Prof Trent Twomey, the president of the Pharmacy Guild of Australia, on Tuesday welcomed the first lot of antiviral deliveries from the National Medical Stockpile, but said more needed to be done to secure additional doses amid global supply chain shortages. “We look forward to working with government on getting more detail around when the Covid oral treatments will be listed on the PBS and can start rolling out to communities around the country,” he said. The Department of Health was contacted for comment.Small towns with high Indigenous populations and western Sydney suburbs that are home to the most socioeconomically disadvantaged residents in the city bore the brunt of Covid fines during the ramp-up in enforcement during last year’s Delta outbreak. A Guardian analysis of data obtained by the Redfern Legal Centre under freedom of information laws shows that small towns including Walgett, Brewarrina and Wilcannia had the most fines per capita over the entire outbreak. Approximately six people out of 100 in Walgett were fined for Covid breaches, according to the data, with Brewarrina seeing five in 100 residents fined and Wilcannia, with a population of 956 people, seeing over four in 100 people fined. Areas with greater socioeconomic disadvantage had higher rates of fines per 1,000 people on average. The most advantaged suburbs had a rate three times less than the most disadvantaged suburbs. Only two suburbs in the state were hit with more than $1m in fines between July and October last year: Liverpool and Mount Druitt in Sydney’s west. Residents in Blacktown were hit with almost $730,000 in fines. The figures are much larger compared with many wealthier eastern and inner west suburbs, such as Bondi, which was hit with $83,900 in fines in the same period, or Rozelle, which was hit with just $43,200. The suburbs facing larger amounts of fines are some of the most diverse in the country, with large First Nations communities, and where residents faced tough Covid restrictions including a curfew and limits on travel. The suburbs are also home to a high percentage of people from low socioeconomic backgrounds, with the median weekly income in Blacktown $633 according to the last census. Overall, the data reveals a massive ramp-up in fines issued across the state during the 2021 outbreak compared to the previous financial year. The total number of fines issued in the 2020/21 financial year stood at 1,818, compared to the 48,078 fines issued between July and October 2021. The stark difference between the fines faced by suburbs further west illustrates some of the criticisms made of the policing of Covid breaches during the Delta outbreak. The fines came during a time where many in NSW were struggling under tough lockdown restrictions, with businesses closed and families separated, specifically for the 12 “local government areas of concern” in Western Sydney. The government had also deployed hundreds of military personnel during that time, joining police in enforcing the lockdown rules. NSW police’s acting assistant commissioner, Peter Glynn, said the public health orders were in place “for a reason.” “The rapid spread of the virus caused the health orders to continually evolve, resulting in LGAs of concern nominated by NSW Health. The NSW government and NSW Health both sought an urgent police response to ensure the highest level of compliance with the health orders in those areas. “The public health orders have been in place for a reason, to ensure as many people as possible are protected from serious illness or even death.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Redfern Legal Centre’s police accountability solicitor, Samantha Lee, said the data showed that some suburbs and regions in NSW were more policed than others. “There is no doubt that those who were over-policed before Covid were just policed more during the pandemic, and there was an incredible imbalance when it came to the enforcement of orders and the policing of different suburbs.” Lee said the fines could sometimes amount to between $1,000 and $5,000 for an individual, figures that become difficult to pay in low socioeconomic suburbs hit hard by the lockdown. “The fines really do discriminate against people from low socioeconomic backgrounds, or those who have a low income, because they are not means-tested.” Lee said the public health orders were changed over 70 times in that period, making it harder for residents and police officers to keep up, resulting in many people being fined incorrectly. She said the government needed to “take a look” at the ways Covid rules were enforced during the pandemic, and called on the fines to be voided for those facing dire economic or social circumstances.The Coalition has ramped up its pre-election attack on Labor over national security, while new documents show how concerned the Australian government was about China’s widening trade bans as the diplomatic relationship soured. At the height of the tensions, coal industry figures told the Australian government Beijing’s ban on supply from Australia was fuelling “elevated uncertainty”, especially because it was unclear how long the disruption would last. Briefings to the treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, also warned that Beijing had “effectively eliminated Australian barley as a feasible option for Chinese importers” and that Australia’s wine industry had struggled to divert to other markets. Guardian Australia obtained the briefings after a freedom of information battle with Treasury surrounding the economic impact of trade actions taken by Australia’s largest trading partner – an issue that is likely to feature in the looming election campaign. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, told parliament on Wednesday that his government would “continue to stand up for Australia’s values in the face of threats and coercion” and “we’ll never have an each-way bet”. The defence minister, Peter Dutton, followed up by saying any voters who were “worried” about China or Russia “wouldn’t vote for Labor at the next election” – despite the opposition offering broad bipartisan support on foreign affairs and national security issues. The comments come after Labor accused the government of a “dangerous ploy” to pretend there are substantial differences between the main parties when it comes to China. From 50m tonnes to nothing Treasury initially blocked the public release of the advice it prepared for Frydenberg about the economic impact of the trade tensions, fearing the disclosure could cause damage to the diplomatic relationship and “prejudice future trade discussions involving China”. But it later agreed to release 28 documents, produced between January and September 2021, after a successful request for an internal review of the FoI decision. The documents provide an insight into what Frydenberg was told about China’s trade actions – which hit a range of sectors including barley, wine, coal, seafood, timber and red meat – and how he should respond to questions in parliament. A 2021-22 budget issues brief to Frydenberg said: “While the ongoing trade restrictions with China have had significant impacts on specific firms and regions, most goods targeted by the restrictions have so far been successfully redirected to other export markets, though often at lower prices.” It added: “Consultation with market and industry participants, however, has highlighted that there is elevated uncertainty in the coal market, in particular around the duration of the Chinese restrictions on Australian coal, as well as around global environmental policies.” China’s informal ban on Australian coal came to a head in late 2020 when dozens of ships carrying Australian coal were left waiting at sea – some for months – to offload their cargo at Chinese ports. Jo Clarke, an associate editor for Argus, a global commodity and energy publication, said the vast majority of ships that were waiting outside Chinese ports were diverted to alternate non-Chinese ports. She said a few of the ships were allowed to discharge Australian coal on humanitarian grounds so that the crews could return home. “All the coal that had been discharged has now been given customs clearance to be released from the ports, but no new Australian coal is being allowed into China,” Clarke said. The latest figures suggest Australia exported no thermal coal to China in 2021, compared with 35m tonnes in 2020 and 50m tonnes in 2019. The shortfall was offset by increases in shipments to India, Japan and South Korea. The resources minister, Keith Pitt, said Australia’s coal industry had “shown tremendous resilience”. “Australia remains open to talks with China on resuming exports, including coal, that would be of mutual benefit to both countries,” Pitt said. Frydenberg’s talking points The budget issues brief to Frydenberg catalogued “a range of complex trade issues between Australia and China”. They included formal actions – such as tariffs, suspensions and increased testing of goods on arrival – along with informal measures such as quotas or unofficial instructions to Chinese buyers. The document said Beijing’s 80% tariffs on Australian barley – announced in May 2020 and now subject to a World Trade Organization challenge – had “effectively eliminated Australian barley as a feasible option for Chinese importers, and exports to China effectively ceased after the tariff’s introduction”. “Despite trade restrictions from Australian barley export volumes were up 176% through the year in March quarter 2021 … due to higher production resulting from favourable seasonal conditions in 2020.” But the Australian wine industry – also hit by tariffs – found it more difficult to divert to other markets. This transition “has been faster and lower-cost for barley exports than for wine”, according to a Treasury economic note in June 2021. A briefing to prepare Frydenberg for an interview in May 2021 suggested he emphasise Australia’s “mutually beneficial trading relationship with China” if asked whether the government was concerned about the actions. “We are concerned about trade disruption,” those talking points said, while adding that the impact of China’s actions on Australia’s overall economy “has been limited”. That view was reflected in Frydenberg’s public statements about the Australian economy’s “resilience” in the face of sharp “pressure”. The documents also show how Frydenberg was briefed for parliamentary question time throughout the course of last year, including to say the government had “sought assurances from China that trade will occur in a timely, transparent, non-discriminatory and predictable manner”. A question time brief, prepared in January 2021, suggested to say the government was “deepening Australia’s economic partnerships with a range of countries” if asked what it was doing to mitigate the damage. The question time brief also stated the Australian government “will always protect our national interests, first and foremost”. Officials suggested Frydenberg note both Australia and China have “benefitted greatly from our trade relationship” and “without this, we both lose”. A question time brief in August 2021 played down a story in Chinese state media that suggested Chinese steel exports to Australia had dropped “more than 50% in recent months” and that this would hurt Australia’s economy. “This potential fall in steel exports reflects China’s broader policies to reduce emissions and curb steel prices – it is not targeted at Australia specifically,” the brief said.Australians with urgent but non-life-threatening medical conditions have been prevented from accessing bulk-billed telehealth consults during the pandemic because they do not have a regular GP. Anna Blair* suffers from chronic health conditions including regular, painful urinary tract infections that require urgent treatment. But she has found the rules around telehealth appointments to be more “frustrating” and “annoying” than helpful. To help prevent the spread of Covid the government made changes to allow telehealth appointments to be bulk-billed, encouraging patients to avoid physically attending a GP practice. But patients can only be bulk-billed for telehealth if they have seen their regular GP or another health professional at the same practice, face-to-face in the 12 months prior. Blair could not see her regular Sydney GP when she began experiencing symptoms, including urinating blood and a burning sensation, because the doctor was on medical leave. No appointments with other practitioners at the clinic were available. The condition commonly requires a script for antibiotics, and delaying this treatment can lead to the infection spreading to the bladder or kidneys. Blair found a different clinic with appointments available, but was told that because she had not attended the clinic before, she could not access bulk-billed telehealth. “The telehealth rules have the biggest impact when you need same-day care and can’t get into your regular practice,” Blair said. “It prompts you to either delay seeking care, which can have major consequences when it’s infection-related, or pay big gap fees elsewhere for simple appointments.” The president of the Royal Australian College of General Practitioners, Dr Karen Price, said the 12-month rule was in place to help established, accredited GP practices provide better care and to stop opportunistic, digital-only “dial-a-doc” practices emerging just to “click over a high volume of appointments as fast as possible”. But she said “we do need some more commonsense flexibility” in the telehealth rules. Price has written to the department of health saying that the 12-month rule is affecting immunocompromised GPs and patients in particular. The letter said that immunocompromised GPs, and GPs caring for immunocompromised family members, should not be forced to see patients face-to-face even after 12 months due to the increased risk Covid presents to them. “While the number of immunocompromised GPs or those caring for immunocompromised family is low, the current demand for general practice care is unprecedented – requiring flexibility of rules that were established at a time when the impact of the Covid-19 pandemic was unknown,” the letter said. “While GPs furloughing can see patients via telehealth, the strict application of the 12-month rule means that they are often precluded from seeing some patients via telehealth, despite the fact the patient is known to the GP and the practice.” However, a spokeswoman for the Department of Health said access to telehealth is strong. So far this year, telehealth represents approximately 30% of GP services compared with 23% of services throughout 2021. The government is also providing personal protective equipment to clinics to help GPs provide safe face to face treatment to people with respiratory symptoms, the spokesperson said. She added that access to bulk-billed services, whether by telehealth or face to face is ultimately a decision of the practitioner and their practice. “The government encourages practitioners to bulk-bill with incentive payments for bulk-billed services to eligible patients, and practitioners take their patients’ circumstances into account when setting their private fees. While the government sets the value of the MBS rebates, practitioners are free to determine their fees for their services, and whether all, some or none of their patients are bulk-billed.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Price said access to care was the “hallmark” of a good health system. “Doctors should be able to practise in a way that is the intent of Medicare, which is to provide access to healthcare as part of a social contract of the government to the electorate,” she said. “Nobody wants to waste taxpayers dollars on any kind of ill-conceived business model, but we just want to have some common sense applied.” *Name changed for medical privacyAnnie O’Brien’s first thought was that the frog in their shower had eaten a lip balm. Her two boys had raised the alarm about the “funny-shaped” green tree frog – one of several that had taken up residence in their Balgal Beach home near Townsville in Queensland. Further investigation revealed a foam Nerf gun dart had become lodged inside the family’s resident amphibian. “I grew up in the UK so when you see things like this you go, ‘oh my god, that’s so wild,’ but when you live in Australia for 20 years, it’s like ‘oh god, what are we doing with this frog at 9 o’clock at night?’” she said. “I thought we really need to do the right thing by this frog because we’ve obviously contributed to this.” A quick internet search and late-night call to snake handler Trish Prendergast resulted in a trip to the emergency room to get the frog some help. Prendergast, a senior veterinary nurse and reptile coordinator for the North Queensland Wildlife Centre, said the Nerf dart had become stuck diagonally inside. Using a teaspoon to pry open its mouth, Prendergast was able to remove the dart which was about the same length as the frog’s body. “You would be surprised at what they shove in their mouths,” Prendergast said. “There would have been a bug or something on or next to the Nerf dart, so it’s gone for the bug, pounced on it to eat it and shoved the Nerf dart into its mouth.” When the O’Brien family moved in to their Balgal Beach home two years ago, they quickly learned it came with several amphibious housemates. “And I’m sure more have moved in since,” O’Brien said. “They come out at night. They don’t worry you at all, though this one obviously bit off more than he could chew.” Since then her two boys, Cooper, 9, and Callum, 7, have adopted the frogs as pets, with each one getting a different name every week. When they found the frog in trouble, they knew they had to help. When frogs eat something they shouldn’t, they don’t regurgitate it like humans. When they accidentally eat a living wasp or poisonous insect, they will push their stomach out of their mouth like a pocket turned inside out, “scoop out” the offending object and then swallow their stomach again, Prendergast said. However, in this case the dart was lodged diagonally, meaning the frog wouldn’t have been able to do that and would have likely died without intervention. Prendergast said the incident was a reminder to keep litter and other objects away from wildlife. Prendergastand fellow snake catcher Jeremy often get called out to rescue animals that have become entangled or trapped in litter such as plastic bags, or in one case a tennis ball. On Tuesday night she said they received a call to rescue an eastern brown snake that had been caught in an empty beer can after hunting a family of mice. Having swallowed the mice that had been nesting in the can, it had become trapped and had to be cut free. O’Brien said the green tree frog had been “reinstated” to the shower and appeared to be happy, healthy and trouble-free. “The whole thing was funny and then watching the video back again is just like: that poor frog, what it’s been through,” O’Brien said. “Hopefully it doesn’t have a long memory; hopefully it remembers not to eat nerf darts, but hopefully it doesn’t remember the trauma.”Online bookie Sportsbet will pay $3.7m in fines and penalties after breaking spam laws by sending more than 150,000 text messages and emails promoting gambling to customers who had tried to unsubscribe. The amount includes the biggest penalty to date for breaking Australian spam laws, of $2.5m, with the remainder made up by refunds Sportsbet has agreed to pay to customers who made bets after receiving the unwanted marketing messages. It comes as financial counsellors and suicide prevention experts have called for a complete ban on gambling advertising. About 37,000 consumers received the Sportsbet spam, which was sent between January 2020 and March 2021 and offered either incentives to gamble or alerts about upcoming races, the Australian Communications and Media Authority said. Acma said the company, a subsidiary of Irish betting behemoth Flutter Entertainment, also sent 3,000 marketing texts that did not include a way to unsubscribe. The company continued to send spam after Acma contacted it, authority chair Nerida O’Loughlin said. “The Acma contacted Sportsbet on several occasions leading up to the investigation to let the gambling provider know it may have compliance problems and it failed to take adequate action. “Sportsbet is a large and sophisticated company which should have robust systems in place to comply with spam laws and protect the interests of its customers.” As part of a court-enforceable undertaking, Sportsbet has agreed to appoint an independent person to oversee refunds and monitor its compliance with anti-spam laws. A spokesperson said: “Sportsbet accepts the Acma’s findings and apologises to customers who were affected by this issue.” “The non-compliance resulted from technical and systems failures that regrettably meant not all customer unsubscribe requests were actioned in a timely manner. “Sportsbet suspended all email marketing for several months and implemented extensive system upgrades to ensure that all unsubscribe requests are now correctly actioned.” The company takes the issue seriously and “is committed to ensuring that past failings are not repeated”, the spokesperson said. In a report released on Wednesday, Suicide Prevention Australia and Financial Counselling Australia said the lack of regulation of marketing to VIP customers and inducements to gamble posed “harmful risks to people who have trouble managing their gambling”, particularly when combined with companies’ ability to mine personal data to target individuals. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “Advertising is a major contributor to gambling harm,” Lauren Levin, director of policy and campaigns at Financial Counselling Australia, said. “People trying to stop can’t get away from it. Children and young people are getting damaged from the normalisation of gambling. It has to stop. We did it with tobacco.” The report, Gambling and Suicide Prevention: A road map for change, also found that gambling harm is being overlooked in police investigations and coronial processes in possible cases of suicide. Banks should also act to reduce gambling harm, including banning debt-funded gambling (with credit cards, for instance), and gambling companies themselves should establish “proactive harm minimisation, staff training and operational protocols”, the report says. “We need government to step up,” Levin said. “The fix is not a bit of tinkering. The fix is a cohesive gambling harm prevention plan. The gambling suicide problem is not going away. It is growing. We are calling on our political leadership to commit to a comprehensive gambling plan before the election, and beyond. Lives literally depend on it.” • In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Gambling Help Online is available on 1800 858 858 and the National Debt Helpline is at 1800 007 007As someone paid millions of dollars to speak for a living, I’m too often left speechless after finding something funny on the internet. Whether it’s the monotony of our Facebook feeds or our lord and saviour the TikTok algorithm, the internet is comedy gold, and from that first login to Club Penguin in 2006 I was hooked. I’d like to think I’m the most qualified person to tackle this list – being a radio presenter means I know my way around a pointless countdown. Yes, the internet started out as a place to nudge friends on MSN Messenger and chat to strangers in the lobby of Habbo Hotel, but it has quickly transitioned into a source of content for my radio show, The Night Show with Mitch Churi. Without further ado, the content. 1. Swinging helicopter lady This is my generation’s Diana. We all remember where we were when we first witnessed this poor woman get absolutely dry-cleaned as she was airlifted to safety after injuring herself while hiking in the US. It is worth noting that she was 100% fine after this and was left with nothing but a fab natural blow-dry. 2. Conan O’Brien gives his staff performance reviews I have a real penchant for American late-night talkshow hosts, and the best of the best for me has always been Conan O’Brien. Something about a six-foot-four Irish redhead will always be funny to me, and this is by far my favourite remote segment he’s ever shot. Why do you think I modelled my hair after his? 3. Facebook Marketplace There are no laws that govern Facebook Marketplace. It’s the wild west, the end of the earth, the final frontier for humanity. If you need a quick laugh, list an everyday item for $10 and watch the hagglers come to life. NIL! ONO! BNIB? Learn to speak Marketplace or it will eat you alive. 4. Bowen Yang as the iceberg that sunk the Titanic Bowen Yang is the figurative lifeboat that saved the sinking ship that was Saturday Night Live. Bowen reinvigorated the show and blessed us with this stupid sketch that remains one of my all-time faves. For extra laughs, listen to his podcast Las Culturistas on iHeartRadio. I used to only listen to it to hear ads for my own iHeartRadio podcast, Is It Just Me?, but eventually got hooked. 5. Grape Lady falls I’m a media junkie. News bloopers? I’ve seen them all. This, however, is the blueprint. The nuance of the anchors wincing, the VHS static, the regretful groans and moans of Grape Lady: it’s all there. Enjoy. 6. Close friends stories There is nothing funnier to me than seeing that I’ve been added to the close friends story of someone I met once in a nightclub bathroom. If you’re going to post on your close friends story, I want drama. No memes or tweets. I want video of you keying someone’s car. If your close friends story looks like this … block me now. 7. Food delivery photos If ever given access to a time machine, these are the images I’d take to show to a pilgrim. There is nothing more dystopian than being photographed by a stranger on a e-scooter as you bend down to collect your overpriced burrito bowl. These images show humans at their most vulnerable, and I love it. 8. Legally Blonde (high school version) I’m a theatre kid from way back. I’ve been Pippin in Pippin and so I know the feeling of thinking you’ve nailed a performance when in fact your entire family was wishing the bleachers would collapse from underneath them. This is a high school rendition of Legally Blonde the musical, and it’s full of … choices. 9. Fake Showbiz News I find white lies so funny. As long as nobody’s getting hurt then lie the house down! This Twitter page fabricates stories about celebs and passes them off as real. I’ve been scarily close to broadcasting these on the radio before realising that, no, Kerri-Anne Kennerley had not in fact invested $3.3m into Petbarn stock. 10. My nan’s Facebook cover photo This, to me, is the funniest thing on the internet. My gorgeous 91-year-old grandmother Clare created a Facebook in 2009 and thought: you know what describes me perfectly? A cup of peas. And so it has sat as her cover photo ever since. Mitch Churi is a comedian, podcaster, TV presenter and the host of The Night Show with Mitch Churi, live weeknights from 7pm on the KIIS network. He also hosts the iHeartRadio podcast Is It Just Me?, with new episodes every week.The sharp rise of renewable energy led to it providing more than 30% of Australia’s electricity in 2021, while gas-fired power fell to its lowest level in 16 years. Data collected by OpenNEM, an open source platform, shows renewable energy provided 31.4% of electricity within the national market covering the eastern states and South Australia last year. It was 32.2% in the separate West Australian grid. The national figure has quickly surged beyond the national renewable energy target, which required electricity retailers to sell about 23% of generation from solar, wind and hydro plants by 2020. Gas-fired power – which is being backed by the Morrison government through hundreds of millions of dollars in funding as part of what it calls a “gas-fired recovery” from the pandemic – has fallen to its lowest level of generation since 2005. It now provides just 5.7% of the total. Its decline from a high of 12.8% seven years ago is largely attributed to its relatively high cost and the sharp increase in the amount of cheaper solar and wind energy available. Coal-fired power provides 62.8% of electricity, its lowest level in both proportion and total amount since the interconnected national market began in 1999. Back then, it was 95.4% of grid generation. Tim Baxter, a senior researcher with the Climate Council, said renewable energy had increased dramatically since 2018, when it was about 20% of the total share. The surge had initially been largely driven by a rush to fill the national renewable energy target, which the Morrison government did not extend or replace. It had continued due to the plunging cost of solar and wind, state-based renewables schemes and corporates increasingly promising support for zero-emissions energy. “Electricity is now the cheapest it has been in almost a decade, and we have solar and wind to thank for that,” Baxter said. The most significant rise has been in household solar systems. More than 3m homes have photovoltaic panels, including at least 360,000 systems installed last year, according to the Clean Energy Regulator. Regulators say that has created some new grid management challenges as solar energy floods into the system and makes other forms of generation uncompetitive when the sun is high in the middle of the day. Solar energy provided 12.3% of electricity generated in the national market. Nearly two-thirds of that came from rooftops, the rest from large-scale farms. Wind contributed 11.3% of electricity and hydro power 7.8%. Gas-fired fall In contrast, gas-fired power had declined due to it being the most expensive electricity fuel available. Baxter said while there may be some year-to-year variation, the fall in its use for power was expected to continue as other “dispatchable” sources that could be called on when required became available. They included pumped hydro, batteries, virtual power plants and demand response programs. Baxter said it made the government’s support for gas power – including $600m for a new gas-fired generator at Kurri Kurri in the Hunter Valley and another four listed for potential public underwriting – look “increasingly irresponsible and economically reckless”. “Let’s be clear, this record [of solar and wind lowering electricity prices] has nothing to do with the federal government, which has been missing in action and leaving all the heavy lifting to the states and territories,” he said. The Kurri Kurri gas plant, to be built by the public owned Snowy Hydro company, has been criticised as unnecessary to ensure a secure electricity supply is maintained once the nearby Liddell coal plant shuts next year. Kerry Schott, the former head of the Energy Security Board, was among those who said a new gas plant in the Hunter did not make commercial sense given there were cheaper and cleaner alternatives, but the head of Snowy Hydro, Paul Broad, this week predicted the country would continue to build “a lot more” gas-fired stations. Federal Labor last week said if it won the upcoming federal election it would require the Kurri Kurri station to run on 30% green hydrogen made with renewable energy when it opened next year, and 100% green hydrogen as soon as possible. Chris Bowen, the opposition energy and climate spokesman, said this could cost up to another $700m, inflating the potential total to $1.3bn. Green hydrogen has been widely backed as a significant future energy source as the world cuts greenhouse gas emissions, but some experts have ranked electricity generation near the bottom of its likely commercially viable uses. It is seen as important in creating “green” steel, aluminium and ammonia, among other products. Labor has also promised a $20 billion off-budget “rewiring the nation corporation” to accelerate the construction of planned electricity grid links. Modelling for the opposition by the firm RepuTex suggested it could lead to renewable energy providing 82% of electricity by 2030, compared with 68% on the current trajectory under the federal Coalition. The Greens say the country should be aiming for 100%.My partner is going to start chemotherapy in a couple of days. It will last six months. He spends a lot of time with his family on the phone talking, laughing, sharing the way he feels with his brother, his sister and his mother … I feel very lonely. It feels like I am just here to do the cleaning, the shopping, the driving to hospital, etc. I don’t know what to do. Should I tell him the way I feel? I don’t want to hurt him. I went through cancer before I met him. I survived, but my then-relationship did not. Eleanor says: Grief counsellors sometimes talk about the concentric circles around tragedy. There’s the person in the centre, to whom the thing actually happens, then one circle out there are the loved ones and close relatives who will wear the marks of the tragedy for a long time. Then there are the distant friends or relatives, and so on out by degrees until we get to colleagues or friends of friends. It’s meant to be a guide to who asks what of whom: while everyone in the circle feels shaken, we’re meant to send comfort inwards – to the smaller circles – and fear or frustration outwards. The teacher of a suddenly ill child gets to be teary over how confronting it is, but probably not on the phone to that child’s parents. Comfort in, worry out. It would be easy to think of yourself as in the second circle immediately around your partner. But I want to encourage you to think that you deserve your own circle. There are two distinct stressful experiences coming your way here – one as the partner of someone suffering, and the other as a caregiver. In the first, you’ll be with your partner’s friends and family, all oriented around the shock of his diagnosis and treatment. In the second, you’re entitled to a separate support network – made up of your relatives and friends, where the fact at the centre is that caregiving is stressful. Because caregiving is stressful. You’ve already mentioned cleaning, shopping, driving to the hospital – and that says nothing of the emotional experience. Caregivers can wind up feeling like a plus-one to some of the hardest events they’ve experienced. If you can create support for your experience – not just the one you’re having as part of an “us” – that loneliness you describe might ebb. You might even find you need different things in each role. As a partner you might want help processing how illness affects your relationship; as a caregiver you might need the exact opposite – a moment where no one talks about your partner. You asked whether you should say anything to him. It’s difficult to say, not knowing the rest of your dynamic. I will say that people battling illnesses often keep the lowest-energy parts of their day to the people they love the most. It’s easy to see someone lighting up on the phone and feel confused or even resentful – “why aren’t they that vibrant with me?” – when in fact, their willingness to not be that way with you shows they trust you enough to not be “on”. If you want to, you can share your feelings honestly, without asking him to solve them. Just be sure to recruit as much help as you can from outside the relationship to solve the trials that occur within it. That means vocally asking for assistance in both the stressful roles these months will force you into – naming specific things others can do to assist; acknowledging to yourself that it is legitimate to ask. You and your partner face a big challenge. If you can meet the needs you have as separate people, you might be better able to help each other with the ones you’ll face together. *** Ask us a question Do you have a conflict, crossroads or dilemma you need help with? Eleanor Gordon-Smith will help you think through life’s questions and puzzles, big and small. Questions can be anonymous. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service herePerched near the top of Mynyddislwyn mountain, overlooking the Sirhowy valley in Caerphilly, there is a castle. It’s not one of Wales’s grandest or most historically significant castles; in fact it’s probably the smallest and almost certainly the most recent. The story of how it came to be is an important one, however, not only to the man who built it, but to others as well. How to reach it, though? It’s not on the map. Through the mist I can see it from the valley, the Welsh flag flying proudly above. As I climb towards it, into the trees, the castle soon disappears. There are plenty of dog walkers around to help with directions; everyone knows the castle, and it gets plenty of visitors. Round the edge of the woods, then, and over a stile, and there it is, high up on a grassy slope, just below a solar farm. A man named Keith greets me, holding a spade – this castle isn’t even finished. He says Mikey went down to the disused quarry to fetch more stone. I follow his directions and find a man coming back up, carrying a pack on his back. You can tell that the load is a heavy one from the way he carries it, leaning forward so as to not to topple backwards. Back at the castle, I can barely lift it; it must weigh 60kg. Mike Allen began the building work three years ago – but if castles have seeds, then this one’s was sown further back in time, and a long way away. In January 2012, in Helmand province, Afghanistan, a platoon from the Royal Welsh was on patrol when the lead Warrior armoured vehicle hit an IED. Allen – L/Cpl Allen at the time – was in the following Warrior. He jumped out with a colleague to check on the men inside, who were shaken up but, remarkably, unharmed, then started to secure the area. Two Afghan policemen, who they were working with, approached on foot. Allen signalled for them to stay back, since there were likely to be other devices around, but it was too late. Just a moment before, Allen had walked over the same spot; somehow he hadn’t triggered the device. “We were talking when they went up. I got blown off my feet, then there was just a big dust cloud. You could hear their groans.” One of the Afghan men was – again, remarkably – not too seriously wounded, but the other was in a bad way. “His body had been completely twisted everywhere. Me and my colleague got him to the medic and he went in a helicopter back to Camp Bastion, but he died on the flight. “At the time, you just do what you’re trained to do: respond in a professional manner,” says Allen. “Many people find it’s when they come back home, and have time to stop to think, that things kind of hit the surface.” That’s what happened to him. Allen’s tour ended after seven months and he came home to his wife and daughter, whose first steps and first birthday he had missed. “It’s difficult because you get used to living a certain way. When you come back, it doesn’t make much sense. You’ve been dealing with life-and-death decisions; you come back home and it’s, ‘Put the toilet seat down!’” Everything went wrong, he explains. He left the army, but then injured his back, and couldn’t continue working as a physical training instructor. He attempted suicide, the marriage fell apart and he became homeless. Later, his mother died. “There was a complete breakdown in my character. I went from being a quiet family guy to: I want to die. I became self-destructive in terms of drink and drugs, and wanted to end my life in a way that didn’t look like suicide so nobody would blame themselves.” Allen, now 41, speaks in a gentle, measured way. He sometimes pauses, either when a memory is painful, or when he’s wondering whether he should mention something: “I’ve got to be careful here,” he says. He’s not about making trouble. Allen started getting flashbacks and having bad dreams. He was diagnosed with PTSD, and had some counselling. “I went through five sessions, being asked the same questions from the same piece of paper. Some people can deal with crisis moments and move on, but for others there are long-term problems and it takes a different kind of approach in order to have a meaningful life. For me, if I’m a complete mess, the best thing is not to go into a closed space with plastic chairs and tell someone about my life; it’s to come up a mountain and have peace and quiet, and be away from it all.” So that’s what he did. When his marriage fell apart, he went to live in the woods. First he stayed in a makeshift shelter, then he started building a wooden cabin to live in across the valley. It was in a very secluded spot, way off the beaten track, covered by bushes and trees – no one could have stumbled across it. He didn’t want to be around people, didn’t trust anyone, had lost all faith in the system. But being outdoors, making something, gave him purpose again. “I found building gave me goals to focus on. I suppose it’s about being creative but also the physical aspect and fitness side of things coming back, and the survival bit of it as well. All combined together, it gave me hope and dreams and achievable goals.” Gradually, life got a bit better: he reconnected with his dad and with some friends, and slowly began to reintroduce himself to society. He also found work as a labourer, but that could trigger flashbacks. Once, on a building site, he was walking behind a digger because the ground was firmer and less boggy there. “Suddenly, I couldn’t step off the track, because on either side of the tracks was impending death.” In Helmand, when on foot, they had walked behind the Warriors, in the tracks, because it was the one safe place to tread. He had some more counselling sessions, in Cardiff, and found them more useful this time. “She helped me stop asking myself questions like: did I survive, am I alive, do I need to be here?” But then, another setback: Allen returned to his cabin one evening to find it had been completely demolished. The landowners had discovered it and simply destroyed it. Allen moved in with his dad for a couple of weeks, but then the owners of some land on Mynyddislwyn mountain, a farming family, found out what had happened and asked Allen if he wanted to come and live on their hill. They had a caravan he could stay in, with electricity, water and a toilet, as well as chickens and donkeys for company. “It was really useful having the animals. I still see the donkeys now and again,” he says. Allen began a new building project three years ago, but this time it wasn’t only for himself. “My first thought was to create a little cabin that, if someone is having a bad day, they can just go to without filling in any paperwork, or have anyone asking for their email address. The landowners were happy for it to be a community project.” He started to bring stones up from the old quarry nearby, and to build. At times, he got help from other veterans, some of the men from the Royal Welsh. The cabin began to grow, although Allen can’t say at what point exactly it turned into a castle, or why. Maybe it was just because he’s “very, very, very Welsh,” he says. The castle grew in ambition, too. It became the base for Endex, the community interest company he has started, which will offer skills-based courses and qualifications to help veterans rebuild their lives. There’s going to be a dry stone walling course – five days with a qualification at the end of it – run by the Wales branch of the Dry Stone Walling Association. “Dry stone walling is therapeutic and reduces stress,” says Allen, who is self-taught, having done a lot of it over the past three years, building the castle. Plus, it can lead to work opportunities. There are also plans for first aid training, and a chainsaw course led by an ex-soldier who became a tree surgeon; it’s not an uncommon post-forces career path, he says. Allen now teaches fitness classes, mainly down on the football field in the valley but occasionally up at the castle, too. Outside, he shows me the gym apparatus he has built from scratch, including a pull-up bar and rocks set into the ground at various distances apart, on which to do press-ups, squats, dips and crunches. He has raised money by crowdfunding for the courses and projects, and by obtaining sponsorship from a firm of solicitors and a training provider. There are plans for a couple of counsellors, including one who offers equine-assisted therapy, to host sessions at the castle. On Easter Sunday, he plans to host a big open day, with music from the Mynyddislwyn male choir and Into the Ark, who were finalists on The Voice. Until then, the castle continues to function as a safe place to get away from it all, make a fire and have a chat or a game of chess. (There was a giant outdoor chess board, made from tiles, but the local sheep “danced on it and smashed it up”.) Allen believes they’ve had nearly 3,000 guests at the castle so far. The majority of visitors are ex-army, although it’s open to everyone. Allen doesn’t think former soldiers are properly looked after by the army. “Rather than spend hundreds of millions of pounds on nuclear missiles that are never going to be used, why not put it into the soldiers who are there for Covid response, for the petrol crisis? Make the job a bit easier and less stressful for them and their families.” The transition from army to civilian life can be bumpy, and the former isn’t always great preparation for the latter. There is the loss of rigid structure, plus the fact that you might have been through traumatic experiences, and lost colleagues or friends. In a way, explains Allen, the route to homelessness is not surprising. “We’ve done exercises, we’ve been on tour, we’ve done hard things. Sleeping rough is no biggie; it’s easy to slip into.” The Royal British Legion estimates that between 3% and 6% of homeless people have an armed forces background. Allen is no longer homeless: he has a one-bedroom council flat in the village in the valley. He still sometimes camps up at the castle, though, and you can see why. While we’ve been talking, the sky has cleared: you can just make out the Severn Bridge, and, through a gap in the hills, the Bristol Channel. It’s lovely. Allen is also in a new relationship, with Rachel, an army widow. It can still be hard – even good news sometimes leaves him feeling “completely numb” – but things are better than they were. The castle, and the building of it, have certainly helped him. “And,” he says, “I hope that other people might benefit from it too.” In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org.Many of the earlier generations of women working at senior levels in the BBC were often tough, as they probably had to be within the mainly male environment. Jana Bennett was completely different, operating with human warmth and kindness. When I lost my job as head of community and disability programmes in 1998, it was Jana who set about finding a new role for me. Knowing I was on the verge of quitting, she offered me a succession of posts, all of which I turned down, still furious at the way I had been treated. It was Jana’s sixth and final offer that did the trick. I was touched that Jana had gone to such lengths to help. She conveyed the impression that she regarded me highly, and that the BBC did so too, for which I will always feel affectionate gratitude.In the dock in both of his trials – both for murder, both of women he had professed to love – Ian Stewart cut an unimpressive figure. Shabby, hesitant, inexplicably dull – he seemed unremarkable in every way. On Wednesday the 61-year-old was unmasked as a serial killer, found guilty of the murder of his wife Diane five years after being convicted of the 2016 murder of his fiancee Helen Bailey. In 2017 a jury found Stewart guilty of killing Bailey, a children’s author, after hearing that while she was planning their wedding he drugged and suffocated her. After the murder he dumped her body, and that of her beloved dachshund, in a Victorian cesspit in the grounds of their home in Royston, Hertfordshire, so he could inherit her £4m fortune. It was only after his arrest that alarm bells were raised about the fate of Diane, who died at home in Bassingbourn, Cambridgeshire, in 2010. At the time, her death was recorded as sudden unexplained death in epilepsy (SUDEP), after Stewart said he found his wife collapsed in the garden. But over three weeks a jury at Huntingdon crown court was unconvinced of his insistence that the pair “were in love, very happy” and that he had desperately tried to save her life. The court heard that he made several delays before ringing 999 on 25 June 2010. He did mouth to mouth, which he said “exhausted” him, then he went to “try to get help” from a doctor and a nurse who lived opposite. He said he tried CPR again before finally ringing the emergency services. The jury heard a recording of the call, in which Stewart could be heard counting along with the emergency call handler, apparently using the resuscitation techniques described to him. But the paramedic who attended the scene said Stewart was “initially distracted, idly pacing” when help arrived. He wasn’t crying, screaming or upset but “appeared dissociative and was simply answering questions calmly.” There were no signs of the bodily trauma that normally accompanied the administering of effective CPR, he added. Twenty minutes after the ambulance arrived, Diane was pronounced dead. Alexandra Bailey, who studied with Diane at Salford University in the 1980s, said in a statement that Stewart “seemed totally unbothered and seemed quite aloof” at her friend’s funeral. Stewart’s 90-year-old father, Keith, put the lack of emotion shown by Stewart down to a long-term muscle condition. “I don’t think he’s capable of doing something like that,” he said of the murder charge. Diane’s sister, Wendy Bellamy-Lee, said she had harboured an “element of suspicion”, heightened after Stewart got angry when she called the coroner’s office days after Diane’s death. “He was so cross with me. Then I felt really bad that I had done that and I had to tell him,” she said. After Diane’s death, Stewart received £96,000 in inheritance, which he said was for their sons’ future. He bought a red two-seater MG and said the purchase was in her memory. But he did not do the probate paperwork for another £50,000 he could have claimed. The prosecution barrister Stuart Trimmer – who also prosecuted Stewart’s first trial – suggested this was because he had already met Bailey. Stewart’s son Jamie, who was 18 when Diane died, told the court that at the end of that year Stewart met someone in an online bereavement group. As he settled into his new life it must have seemed to Stewart that he would never face consequences for what he had done. Diane’s body had been cremated, and a full toxicology had not been done as part of the 2010 postmortem examination. But one vital clue to the murder remained – Diane had donated brain tissue for medical research. Upon re-examination, a neuropathologist said it showed signs that “breathing had been restricted” for between 35 minutes and an hour before her death. A consultant neurologist estimated the risk of the 47-year-old having had a fatal epileptic seizure at about one in 100,000. Another expert said he would have expected to see injuries on the outside of the body of someone who had fallen on concrete during a seizure. Stewart denied having had Diane cremated to destroy evidence, arguing that if that was the case he would not have agreed to keep her brain and heart. He denied being “a man capable of extreme and callous violence” and said his relationship with his wife had been “too perfect really, too good.” But his protestations – and the picture Stewart painted to the outside world of a “caring and gentle” husband who was part of a “nice family unit” – were a lying charade, the jury decided. Over the course of the trial, the web of deceit that had been hanging together by a thread unravelled entirely. Already serving a life sentence for Bailey’s murder, he will now spend the rest of his life behind bars after being handed a whole-life term, meaning he will not be considered for release.Is it hard-wired into us, as parents, to get on our children’s nerves? I watched the Brit awards with my daughter and resolved not to make tart comments, because I remember, as a kid, finding my parents’ contributions on such matters excruciating. I was only eight when Bohemian Rhapsody came out. Even though I found the video a bit bewildering, I was still appalled when my mum said, “What’s this about killing a man? That’s rubbish that is.” As a massive Led Zeppelin devotee in my teens, I was agog when their concert film The Song Remains the Same came out on video. With only one television in the house, there was no privacy in those days; kids today don’t know how lucky they are. Sure enough, in came my dad, asking what exactly it was that Robert Plant had stuffed down the front of his extremely tight jeans, and why Jimmy Page was playing his electric guitar with a violin bow. Yes, I knew it was all a bit ridiculous, but these men were my idols and I couldn’t bear having the suspension of my disbelief dismantled so brutally. And here was I, with the opportunity to disrupt the repeating of history, to be better than my own father – so of course I blew it. I just couldn’t help myself. Here are some things that I said: “Why’s everyone wearing those big clumpy shoes?”, “What’s this Mo [Gilligan] bloke all about?”, “Who on earth is Dave?”, “Adele’s having herself these days, isn’t she?”, “It’s all a fix anyway”. I ended up getting on my own nerves, as well as hers, so I left the room and went elsewhere to berate myself for being a grumpy old fool. When I returned, the aforementioned Dave was on, performing with a gospel choir. It was wonderful. I told my daughter as much, but it was too late to redeem myself. I’d passed the point of generational no return. Adrian Chiles is a broadcaster, writer and Guardian columnistNewcastle city council’s leader, Nick Forbes, who is a close ally of Keir Starmer and sits in the shadow cabinet, has been deselected from standing in May’s local elections, putting his political future in jeopardy. Forbes has run the city’s council for more than a decade and also sits on Labour’s ruling national executive committee (NEC), but he will be unable to remain in his post if he cannot stand for re-election as a councillor. At a selection meeting for his Arthur’s Hill ward on Tuesday evening, Forbes was defeated by Abdul Samad, a local activist, by 13 votes to four. Forbes said he was “immensely sad that Labour party members have chosen a different candidate” to stand for the ward he had represented for 22 years. He suggested he could try to find an alternative seat, saying: “A number of party members have already approached me asking if I will stand in a different ward.” Forbes said he would now “take some time to consider these options”. Forbes’s allies have described his defeat as being inflicted by the “hard left” and pointed out that the ward selection meeting was held late, limiting his opportunities to find an alternative potential seat. But one local activist, who declined to be named, told the Guardian it was “not about left or right,” but about choosing a local candidate who would focus all their energy on the ward, “someone who’s actually prepared to be here, be a lot more hands on.” They added: “We feel for a long time that hasn’t been the case, and we wanted our voices heard.” A senior Labour source in the north-east pushed back against the idea that the leftwing campaign group Momentum had been involved, describing Samad, a 25-year-old recent master’s graduate, as unaligned with a particular faction. Forbes “basically just lost a vote. That’s what happens in democratic politics,” the source said. Forbes’s defeat comes against the background of a power-struggle over the direction of wider Newcastle politics. Two Labour sources said Forbes’s deselection was connected with a clash with the party’s former chief whip Nick Brown. One said Brown had organised efforts to challenge Forbes as leader of the council after a falling out, and that Forbes had known his seat was under potential threat. “It’s obviously damaging and embarrassing. Nick is very accomplished but he did not organise well.” Brown, the MP for Newcastle upon Tyne East since 1983, was moved out of his longstanding role of opposition chief whip during Starmer’s reshuffle in May 2021. Of Newcastle’s 78 council seats, 26 are up for grabs in May. Local Labour activists fear the infighting could favour opposition parties including the Conservatives, who continue to target seats in the north-east. “This is not in the interest of the party, locally or nationally, or the city,” one said.Looking back on the 1990 ousting of Margaret Thatcher as Conservative prime minister, her chief whip Tim Renton concluded that Thatcher had lost power because she “had ceased having an open mind” about how to unify her party or to govern. “She only wanted to have her own friends around her and she had come to identify No 10 and the job of prime minister with herself,” wrote Renton. “Anyone who stood in her way … was to be dispensed with. They were not of the right faith.” Boris Johnson is not in the same league as Thatcher as a successful prime minister and much else. She lasted 11 years in Downing Street and won three general elections. He has been prime minister for two and half and has won just once. She possessed ideological conviction in spades. His only serious interest is in himself. Yet all the evidence from the so-called reboot of Johnson’s government in the wake of the lockdown party scandals is that this prime minister is now making many of the same mistakes that Thatcher did more than a generation ago. Like her, Johnson surrounds himself with flatterers. Like her, he has come to identify the Conservative government with himself rather than the party or the electorate. Like her, he ostracises those who are not true believers – which in this case means believers in him. There are, of course, some differences. Yet the outcome will be the same. It would be hard to exaggerate the damage that ‘partygate’ has already done to Johnson. You can measure this in lots of ways: the drip-drip of backbenchers losing confidence, the mostly quiet (so far) ministerial resignations and departing advisers, and in the bad headlines – another photograph emerged today showing Johnson at a December 2020 party with a bottle of champagne. Never forget that, lurking in the wings, there is potentially the most threatening factor of them all: the police investigation into Downing Street parties and No 10’s false denials. Yet the most important evidence of how bad things have become is already in plain sight in election results and opinion polls. Johnson’s poll ratings today are truly dire. Indeed they are even worse today, in early February, than they were as recently as December, when the Conservatives suffered the humiliating loss of the North Shropshire byelection with a swing of 34% to the Liberal Democrats. According to Ipsos Mori polling, 65% of voters in Britain were already dissatisfied with Johnson back in December; today that figure stands at 70%. Even among Tory voters – of whom there are fewer to pick from now than before – dissatisfaction with Johnson went up from 28% to 34% in the same period. Another Ipsos Mori poll, conducted only a week ago, found just 14% of all voters think Johnson is an honest person (72% think he is not), while a mere 18% say he is a prime minister they can be proud of. He trails both Keir Starmer and Rishi Sunak on one leadership yardstick after another. These are polling and voting figures from which leaders do not come back. The Conservative donor John Armitage is right that Johnson has not just lost moral authority – as these polls confirm. He has also lost his touch. But Johnson is also losing votes. The crunch moment is now the local elections on 5 May, in which the Tories are defending some previously strong performances when these seats were last contested, but in what is now a far more ominous political environment. One of Johnson’s “senior advisers” in No 10 was quoted in last Sunday’s papers as saying: “He’s making very clear that they’ll have to send a Panzer division to get him out of there.” This is recognisably the sort of overblown language that Johnson would use as he battles to hang on to his prime ministership. But it is also recognisable evidence of a state of denial about how the rules of politics – and of real life – tend to work. When Johnson has to go, it will not involve a tank division in Downing Street. It will happen for one of three reasons – because of law-breaking, electoral defeats or ministerial resignations (Sunak’s in particular) – or some mix of them. Johnson will try to brazen it out. But in the end all routes will lead through the parliamentary party. Even if Johnson survives a vote of confidence, he will not be able to continue long. Thatcher won the first round in 1990, but the tide against her was too strong. The same would happen today. This week’s reboot and reshuffle do precisely nothing to alter this. That’s partly because they were overshadowed by the fallout from Johnson’s incendiary comments about Jimmy Savile. But it is also because they involve such minimalist, low-key changes. Even sympathetic observers see this as rearranging the furniture. There is no real strategy there, beyond survival, and even that looks fragile. A whips’ office purge of the kind Johnson carried out this week is a particular sign of weakness. It squanders a lot of accumulated knowledge about the party’s MPs, which will not help an embattled prime minister facing a very divided party. Reshuffles without sackings show a prime minister who is afraid of his MPs. That the only policy-related job in the reshuffle – Brexit promotion – should go to Jacob Rees-Mogg suggests that Johnson’s main concern is to solidify his support on the Tory right. Johnson is now governing from one day to the next, making it up as he goes along. He is good at creating distractions – the technique is at the core of his politics – but he needs a lot of them to survive. Last week’s flurry of ministerial policy announcements was part of that. So was the reshuffle. A possible end to Covid restrictions, another pander to the Tory right, distracted from today’s potentially difficult prime minister’s questions. Today a trip to Poland will do the job. Hints of a bigger reshuffle in the summer may help keep ambitious MPs in line. A recess next week may gain Johnson a brief breathing space. There will be plenty of propaganda informing us that No 10 is feeling more assured about the future. It will all be worthless. A prime minister who tries to hide in the bunker is ultimately doomed. In the end, MPs care more about their seats and their party than they care about a particular prime minister. That was what 1990 showed. The same thing will happen here, though we may have to wait until May. It could prove to be the one and only instance in his life in which the rules really will apply to Boris Johnson. Martin Kettle is a Guardian columnistBook now From an Orkney village engulfed in sand 5,000 years ago to a medieval city swept off a cliff and languishing in the depths of the North Sea, Britain is scarred with the haunting remains of places lost to memory. And yet, though we cannot see them, many of these places have had formative influences on its history, and their disappearances begin to explain why Britain looks the way it does today. Join Dr Matthew Green, as he guides you through key turning points in Britain’s history - the Black Death, Reformation, Enlightenment and more - and draws on four years of his original research to paint a vivid and detailed picture of a Britain that no longer exists. He will guide you through the sights, sounds and tribulations of vanished places, from the buried city of Trellech to the abandoned sea-mountain of St Kilda. Experience former settlements across the breadth of Britain and discover how these places came to meet their tragic fate. With the aid of striking maps, prints and photographs, Matthew will resurrect these lost towns and settlements, evoking their unique layouts and describing in dramatic detail the experiences of their former dwellers - many of whom tried, but failed, to resist the tides of change. This class will also explore how and why places are disappearing from Britain’s landscape today and what the past might reveal about the future. Course content The Neolithic period: how the coming of agriculture ended 2.5m years of nomadic hunter-gathering existence, producing settled communities like Skara Brae on Orkney, preserved in sand for over 5,000 years The Norman conquest: how some towns and cities born during the medieval urban boom failed, such as the ghost town of Trellech in the Welsh Marches, uncovered by moles in 2002 Medieval climate change: how the ravages of extreme weather, as the Medieval Warm Period gave way to Little Ice Age, laid waste to the cities of Old Winchelsea and Dunwich The Black Death: how the ghost streets of Wharram Percy in the Yorkshire Wolds were scorched into the grass following its abandonment after the Black Death Reformation and Renaissance: how places like the half-drowned city of Dunwich, with its ruined monasteries, captured enquiring minds Enlightenment: how self-sufficient societies, such as St Kilda in the Outer Hebrides, were doomed by philosophical voyagers in pursuit of ‘natural man’ War: how the demands of international war hollowed out some 20% of Britain’s landmass, including villages in Norfolk and Suffolk Brecklands This course is for … Anyone curious to learn more about Britain’s history Artists inspired by the haunting beauty of ruins and lost settlements Tutor profile Dr Matthew Green is a historian, writer and broadcaster with a doctorate from Oxford University. He has appeared in documentaries on the BBC, ITV and Channel 4, and has written historical features for the Guardian and Financial Times. He is the founder of Unreal City Audio, which produces immersive tours of London as live events, podcasts and apps. His first book was London: A Travel Guide Through Time. Follow him on Twitter. Matthew’s new book Shadowlands: A journey through lost Britain is released on 17 March 2022. If you live in the UK, you can purchase a book and ticket for the combined price of £64 including P&amp;P. Details Book now Dates: Monday 28 March 2022 Times: 6.30pm-9pm (BST) Price: £49 (plus £2.66 booking fee) or £64 for book + ticket (plus £3.30 booking fee) This masterclass is available globally. If you are joining us from outside the United Kingdom, please use this time zone converter to check your local live streaming time. 6.30pm BST | 7.30pm CEST | 10.30am PDT | 1.30pm EDT You will be sent a link to the webinar 2hr before the start time of 6.30pm (BST). Information on Guardian Masterclasses To contact us, click here. Terms and conditions can be found here. All Guardian Masterclasses are fully accessible - but please contact us if you have any queries or concerns. Returns policy Once a purchase is complete we will not be able to refund you where you do not attend or if you cancel your event booking. Please see our terms and conditions for more information on our refund policy.There are shades of Griffin Dunne’s underappreciated romantic comedy Addicted to Love in Amazon’s slick Valentine’s offering I Want You Back, stories of dumpees refusing to take no for an answer. But while there was a dark undercurrent disrupting the cutesy sight of Meg Ryan and Matthew Broderick flirting in Manhattan way back when, the Big Time Adolescence director Jason Orley is less interested in the murk and keen, if not a little insistent, that his characters be liked, if not unconditionally loved. It’s thus a far simpler, far more earnest film that one would expect from the spiky set-up that sees total strangers Peter (Charlie Day) and Emma (Jenny Slate) bond over being dumped at the same time, fixating on the exes who have moved on without them. Their upset quickly turns to anger when they discover that their former lovers have replaced them with newer, sexier alternatives, and so they hatch a plan to go undercover and destroy the burgeoning relationships. Peter becomes gym buddies with Emma’s ex Noah (Scott Eastwood) while Emma tries to come between Peter’s ex Anne (Gina Rodriguez) and her new beau Logan (Manny Jacinto). There’s something interestingly deluded and narcissistic about what drives the pair, a total denial of their immediate reality and a dogged insistence that they are better and more desirable than their exes’ new partners. It’s a heartbroken thought process that maybe some of us can vaguely relate to, but it’s the put-into-action plotting that elevates it into something wilder and less familiar. The combination of an R rating and the centering of two actors better known for playing comedy support than romantic leads would understandably have us expecting something riskier or raunchier, something closer to the Apatow-led boom in romcoms for adults. But the script, from the Love, Simon writers Isaac Aptaker and Elizabeth Berger, is too wary to really go there, playing it safe when some recklessness would be welcomed, a freak flag barely flying at half-mast. The uninventive schemes the two concoct are far too inoffensive and half-assed, and, especially on Day’s side, sometimes rather vague. There’s often not a clear reason why they’re doing what they’re doing, and a tighter, more carefully constructed script would have made us a little clearer on just what the point of so much of it is. Aptaker and Berger rely on a string of dog-eared comedy set pieces that we know too well at this stage – the drug scene, the threesome scene, the hiding in a bedroom scene, the karaoke scene, the club scene – and do very little to elevate them. The script feels a few punch-ups away from being as sharp and as funny as it could be, far too many lines falling flat, as if the first brainstormed joke (the “not this, but something like this” idea) was put in as a place-holder then they forgot to go back and change it (Eastwood’s character thinking that the line “get back on the horse” is “get back on the whores” is an example of a real clanger). In order for us to truly love the pair without reservation, Aptaker and Berger go to great, pained lengths to offset their deranged behaviour. The dream of Day’s character is to revolutionise retirement-home living (!) so we see him helping elderly people, while Slate’s character develops a friendship with a struggling middle-schooler who needs advice on dealing with a fractured parental situation. There’s such a strange reluctance to lean into the darkness at the film’s core that the script turns them into the nicest stalkers we’ve ever met, rather than something messier and more believable. It’s not the more interesting, and more amusing, film it could have been but even at a slightly stretched 111 minutes, it’s still consistently entertaining, thanks in large part to the cast, but also to Orley, who manages against all odds to make it look and feel almost like a glossy studio movie. Shot in early 2021 and hampered by Covid-19 restrictions, Orley does a nifty job at not clueing us into any of that (unlike so many other films made in the last two years) and together with an immensely charming throwback score from Siddhartha Khosla, it really does feel that much more alive than the majority of what’s come out since the Netflix romcom resurrection. Sitcom pros Jacinto and Rodriguez are both reliably strong, the latter allowed a more nuanced character arc than a film like this would often give her (refreshingly, neither the exes or their new partners are turned into easy villains). The deserved promotion of the leads from the sidelines to the main stage is a smooth transition, especially for Slate, a hugely capable comedic actor whose more recent projects haven’t always reflected her talent, something this film might hopefully shift. The one niggling issue, however, is that while Day and Slate make convincing beer-and-chips friends, sexual chemistry never really sparks, even in the last act, despite the script informing us of the power of the slow-burn romance. There’s a far better version of I Want You Back somewhere, a few script revisions in and maybe without that air-sucking Pete Davidson cameo, but even as it stands, it’s a far better version of a romantic comedy than we’re used to streaming of late. I Want You Back is available on Amazon Prime Video from 11 FebruaryFor fans of the terpsichorean arts, this documentary about the creation, rehearsal and debut of the 2019 work Mám, by Irish dance and theatre troupe Teac Damsa, will be a treat. That’s especially true given the pandemic disrupted Mám’s scheduled tour, so this may be one of the few chances for people to see some of it, although crucially not the whole thing. Instead, slow-cinema maestro Pat Collins (last seen with ethnology documentary Henry Glassie: Field Work) and no doubt longsuffering editor Keith Walsh have excerpted an assortment of moments and passages from the final staged version that they’ve montaged nimbly together, although sometimes the music heard doesn’t correspond to the dancing seen. Mám lacks any kind of story, and its creation was more about process than product for choreographer Michael Keegan-Dolan and his ensemble, and so the film’s fragmentary, sliced-view approach works just fine. Keegan-Dolan, best known for his work in ballet and choreography for the Royal Opera House, explains to his collaborators near the start that he wants to make something that evades the usual hierarchies of dance, opening up a space for the performers to be as instrumental in the creative process as either Keegan-Dolan or his key collaborator Rachel Poirier (she’s also his wife). Meanwhile, just as essential to the process is the input from bravura concertina player Cormac Begley, who pulls together the score in a parallel collaboration with stargaze, a musical combo using traditional instruments to make a heady sound that’s closest to contemporary classical but with bits of jazz and folk thrown in. For all the abstraction of the show, which involves animal masks, soft-shoe shuffling, manic twirling, and an interlude where dancer James Southward goes around snogging everyone on stage, there are some surprisingly emotional moments. For example, Keegan-Dolan enjoins the dancers to move as if they’re showing a beloved, dying relative everything about their craft in one frenzied performance, and this stirs up strong feelings. Elsewhere, Collins’s camera watches the catering team preparing to feed everyone as they work at the troupe’s rehearsal space in Kerry and that helps to enhance the sense of place that’s somehow embedded deep in the show’s own ineffable themes. • The Dance is in cinemas from 11 February.Germany has named the former Greenpeace chief Jennifer Morgan as its special climate envoy, as part of a promise to put the climate crisis “at the top” of the diplomatic agenda. The US-born Morgan, 55, who has been co-leader of Greenpeace International since 2016, will be the first person to hold the role in Germany. The appointment comes as Germany’s two-month-old coalition government, led by the Social Democrat chancellor, Olaf Scholz, aims to pursue more global cooperation to fight the climate emergency. The foreign minister, Annalena Baerbock, from the Green party, introduced Morgan as “the face of Germany’s international climate policy”. “Even in our foreign policy we are putting the climate crisis where it belongs: at the top of the agenda,” said Baerbock after Scholz’s cabinet approved Morgan’s appointment.The selection of Morgan caused a stir in Germany, with supporters hailing it a coup for Baerbock, while critics accused the foreign minister of blurring the line between lobbying and governing. Morgan’s US nationality also drew scrutiny, which Baerbock countered by saying the climate envoy was in the process of applying for German citizenship and that it suited the foreign ministry to have international staff. In the newly created role, Morgan will work initially as a special representative for international climate policy and once she has acquired German citizenship as state secretary in the foreign ministry. “I feel honoured by the trust you put in me and I take on this important role with pleasure and determination,” said Morgan, speaking in fluent German. “We are at a crossroads. The effects of the climate crisis are being felt everywhere – people and nature are suffering. “I want to bring my years-long experience in the climate movement as well as in thinktanks into politics in order to support and implement Germany’s goals as well as those of the EU and internationally.” Morgan, who takes on the role officially on 1 March, said her first foreign trip will be to Brussels, followed by a visit to Paris. Thomas Silberhorn, a lawmaker from the opposition conservative Christian Social Union party, condemned the appointment. “The government apparently has a problem differentiating between government, activists and lobbyists,” he said. Morgan has developed a reputation over three decades in the climate action arena as an uncompromising champion of those worst affected by global heating and least able to protect themselves against its ravages. She has attended every UN climate summit since 1995, and has close ties to the US climate envoy, John Kerry, and to the EU Commission’s vice-president, Frans Timmermans. Before becoming head of Greenpeace International alongside Bunny McDiarmid in 2016, Morgan worked for the Climate Action Network, WWF’s global climate change programme, and the World Resources Institute, among others. • The photograph accompanying this article was replaced on 9 February 2022. An earlier image showed Annalena Baerbock, and, while she was quoted in the caption, we intended to picture Jennifer Morgan.A grand, recent tradition of the Winter Olympics has bitten the dust after Norway’s men’s curling team took to the ice on Wednesday for their opening match in Beijing wearing plain dark blue trousers. In recent Games the elaborate designs on their trousers – often referred to as pants in American English usage – had become a highlight of the curling competition. The 2022 Norwegian men’s curling team had even teased supporters with a social media post in January saying: “We’re counting down the days, and so is our wardrobe it seems,” with a video of them in training wearing rather nondescript uniforms. Some had interpreted that as a cryptic clue that there would be a dramatic reveal of the team’s trousers when they opened their campaign with a round-robin match against Switzerland in Beijing. But it was not to be. Over the years, the outlandish trousers have proved such a hit with fans that there is even a Facebook page dedicated to the Norwegian Olympic Curling Team’s Pants, with nearly half a million likes. The team’s penchant for standing out on the ice began when Thomas Ulsrud first skippered them at the 2010 Vancouver Olympics. He went on to lead them again at Sochi in 2014 and at Pyeongchang in 2018. At each Olympics Norway’s curlers would arrive with a different set of trousers for each match, showcasing myriad eye-bursting designs. The team’s retirement in 2019 was marked on social media by the World Curling Federation, with them suggesting there were only two words to describe their contribution to the sport – “the pants”. After they retired, Ulsrud recalled on social media that before the Vancouver Olympics “we spent the whole pre-camp discussing if [the trousers] was a good move, or if we would end up as clowns,” concluding that they “ended up with both maybe”. Although the Ulsrud team claimed a world gold in 2014, and two European titles in 2010 and 2011, the trousers have not proved to be a particularly lucky Olympic omen. Norway achieved the silver medal when they first wore them in 2010, but have not appeared on the podium since. This year’s team of Steffen Walstad, Torger Nergaard, Markus Hoeiberg, Magnus Vaagberg and Magnus Nedregotten will hope to improve that record. They opened their campaign on Wednesday with a 7-4 victory over Switzerland. Hoeiberg is a veteran of the trousers-era, having competed in 2014 and 2018, and was part of the squad that played their match against Japan, scheduled to be on Valentine’s Day in Pyeongchang in 2018, in red-and-pink love heart-themed trousers. As well as the trousers, the new Norway team have a lot to live up to. The Ulsrud team were nothing if not entertainers. During the world men’s finals in Nova Scotia in 2015, facing an impossible situation in the final end on the way to defeat by Sweden, Ulsrud opted to roll his final stone on its side, drawing laughter from the crowd, his teammates and opponents. The men’s curling competition at the 2022 Winter Olympics lasts from 9 February until the gold-medal match on Saturday 19 February, one of the last sporting actions of the Games. And one that sadly won’t feature colourful trousers, no matter how far Norway progress.When you think of Steven Van Zandt’s acting work, your mind will automatically flick to The Sopranos. A vast, swaggering monument of a show, The Sopranos quite rightly holds the reputation of playing a pivotal role in the history of television. But let us also not forget that – 10 years ago this week – Van Zandt followed The Sopranos with another show. And it was a show which was every bit as important a milestone in TV’s evolution. That’s right, let us all wish a happy anniversary to Lilyhammer. You remember Lilyhammer. It was a Norwegian show about the messy misadventures of a mafia underboss living in the witness protection programme 100 miles north of Oslo. It ran for three seasons and Bruce Springsteen had a cameo in the final episode. If we are being completely honest, it wasn’t particularly good. But, when it debuted in 2012, it was the very first Netflix original series. And what better way to mark its 10th anniversary than rewatching it to see how Netflix has changed over the years? There isn’t any. So we did it. Here are our learnings. Lilyhammer was a strange choice to launch with This was back when there was a groundswell of prestige TV floating around, when Mad Men and Breaking Bad were redefining television on a weekly basis. Lilyhammer, however, was stilted and saggy. Tonally it couldn’t seem to decide if it was a quirky character piece or an out and out crime drama. And, although his spectrum of grunts and shrugs was well deployed in The Sopranos, having to operate as the emotional fulcrum of an entire show was proof enough that Van Zandt was really no actor. It’s even weirder when you consider what Netflix had coming up In 2011, Netflix realised that the best way to drive new subscribers was to offer original content. In March it hired David Fincher to help adapt the BBC series House of Cards for the service. And then, while it waited for that show to reach fruition, it co-produced Lilyhammer with the Norwegian public broadcaster NRK1. Lilyhammer beat House of Cards to screens by almost exactly a year. And so, when it comes to writing the history of how streaming services began to turn the tables on traditional broadcasters, an underwhelming drama about a mobster in snow will go down as the key series. Netflix is now much, much better at knowing what viewers want The streaming service’s biggest achievement this decade has been in how it analyses user data. It knows the type of shows you watch, the times you watch them, when you are most likely to check out, and a million other things. As such, it can confidently commission a new show and finesse it according to data to ensure that it will have a baked-in audience. You have to assume this technology was much more rudimentary a decade ago, because no algorithm in the world would suggest that the best show with which to launch a television revolution is a show about Silvio Dante in Norway. It also now knows how to win awards When House of Cards won its first Emmy in 2013, it completely upended the traditional broadcaster applecart. Until then, Netflix wasn’t even seen as television – at that point, people were still referring to House of Cards as a series of webisodes – and this is something it has maximised on ever since. At last year’s Emmys, Netflix blew the rest of the competition away, winning 44 trophies. Its nearest rival, HBO, won less than half that amount. With the best will in the world, the only way that Netflix could have won an award when it only had Lilyhammer would be if the Emmys initiated a new category entitled Most Unsatisfyingly Gimmicky Premise. But maybe, Netflix has gotten too good at what it does With success comes competition. This has been a decade of such extraordinary growth for Netflix that others were sure to join the fun. A decade ago, paying a monthly subscription for access to a streaming library seemed like a weird novelty. Now, every major television network has one, and each of them has something to offer. Disney+ has blockbuster franchises such as Marvel and Star Wars to tempt subscribers away. Apple TV+ is proving to be adept at comedy, with shows such as Ted Lasso and The Afterparty. HBO Max is dragging old favourites such as Friends and Sex and the City back out into the open air. Back when it was just a plucky underdog, showing people what Van Zandt would look like in the snow, Netflix had the run of the place. A decade on, and its ascendancy can no longer be guaranteed.Plans to end remaining Covid restrictions in England by 21 February have been announced by the prime minister, coming a month earlier than initially proposed. In an opening statement made during prime minister’s questions on Wednesday, he said: “Provided the current encouraging trends in the data continue, it is my expectation that we will be able to end the last domestic restrictions, including the legal requirement to self-isolate if you test positive, a full month early.” Guardian readers share their reactions to the proposal. ‘I do not trust Boris’ The relaxation of Covid restrictions in their entirety is laughably shortsighted. Of course, a transition to “living with Covid” is a must for every nation, but whereas others are emphasising caution and reasonable measures – such as face masks, contact tracing and isolation – this government is throwing away all measures, and for what? To save Boris, and Boris alone. Covid is not simply a respiratory disease. But Boris is done with pretending to care about vulnerable people, elderly people, or anybody besides himself. And when the next variant arrives, how soon will Mr Johnson show his true, science-doubting self? I do not trust Boris … or his Bollinger-laden fridge. Lena R, 28, Silversmith, West Midlands ‘This makes everyone less safe’ This [plan] makes everyone less safe – individuals can no longer make decisions on their own safety as that depends on others doing the right thing and isolating when sick, not to mention wearing a mask in public spaces and taking regular LFTs. This is no way to live: extremely high levels of disease, and long Covid a real possibility. I am continually amazed by how the government talk as though the pandemic is over. It is not. I desperately want it to all be over too but pretending it doesn’t exist seems very bizarre to me, and actually very dangerous as current things stand. Ultimately though, this should be taken for what it is – not a public health decision but a political decision designed to save Johnson’s job. Jude Geddes, 40, full-time carer of parent, Shoreham-by-Sea ‘I am worried for the future’ I had Covid over Christmas and it led to severe bronchitis and now long Covid. Extreme fatigue, muscle pain and chest pains. I am not even able to do the most basic of tasks. It has been horrible and is affecting hundreds of thousands of people. We do need to look to the future but rushing now just seems ridiculous and the only reason for doing it is to save Johnson’s skin and gain him some popularity no matter what the science says. It is awful and I am extremely worried for the future. Stuart, 40, Merseyside ‘People who have family in care homes are practically invisible’ I would like to know how this will affect the care and nursing home sector. My mother, who is in her late 80s and in frail health, has essentially been trapped in her nursing home for two years. The home has done its best to allow outdoor visits but this is obviously very difficult in practical terms given my mother’s poor health and the weather. Recently it has been a nightmare due to the highly infectuous nature of Omicron: every week one or more staff members catch it so the home closes again to visitors. My mother is too frail now to come down to the outdoor terrace. Her mental health is declining as she is so lonely without mine and my sister’s visits. I consider that people in my family’s situation are practically invisible. I would like to know how the specific regulations on care homes will be changed to firstly continue to protect residents but also make visiting easier. Anonymous ‘We need to encourage people to regain their lives’ [The decision is] fully justified by falling case numbers and death rates. We also need to encourage people to regain their lives, with recommendations that masks are no longer needed in all situations or we will be stuck with them for ever. John, 71, retired, London ‘In essence, I agree with the move’ A good idea that has come at a bad time. With everything going on at No 10, you can only see this move by Johnson as one thing: another “dead cat” distraction to turn the eyes of the masses off him. In essence, I agree with the move, as Covid seems to be dying down now and the vaccination programme has been a relative success, but it says a lot about our country and government when a move like this can only be viewed through the eyes of a cynic. Jacques, 26, recruitment consultant, London ‘Millions of people are at huge risk – are their lives expendable?’ I have chronic myeloid leukaemia and idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, an autoimmune disease. My consultant does not consider me to be at a hugely greater risk than the general population as my conditions are currently under control. However, there are millions of people who are at huge risk of becoming seriously ill and even dying should they catch Covid: people who have more severe types of leukaemia or those who have had bone marrow transplants, for example. Are these lives expendable? Do these people have to stay in a near isolated state to keep themselves safe? I understand the other health and financial implications of getting back to “normal” but why this could not be tempered by mask wearing and isolating if infected I cannot understand. It may even encourage people who have severe cold- or flu-like illnesses to be out and about. That will give rise to further infections that may require hospitalisation. There are no easy answers but I feel that the needs of too many have not really been taken into consideration. Karen Smith, 64, retired, north Devon ‘Workers will be coerced into going to work even if they’re infectious’ Removing the legal need to self-isolate after a positive test will lead to many service workers, through no fault of their own, being coerced into going to work even if they’re infectious. I fear for the knock-on effects this will have and will be avoiding indoor dining etc. My biggest concern is the effect of long Covid. While I may not be vulnerable, I fear these long-term effects. Losing clear thinking would mean losing the future career that I have worked hard for, and losing a sense of smell/taste would mean losing one of my biggest joys in life. I will continue wearing a mask in public settings, and will be eating out a lot less. This terrible proposal erodes my trust in government and my perception of safety. Tom, 25, PhD student, CambridgeBoris Johnson has announced his plans to abolish the last domestic Covid restrictions in England, including self-isolation for those infected with the virus, in less than two weeks. We would like to hear from those in frontline jobs such as retail, hospitality, education, healthcare and other public services about how they feel about the end of the restrictions. Will it affect your work? Do you have any concerns? Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.My friend and colleague Allan Hamilton, who has died of pneumonia aged 85, was a distinguished microbiologist at the University of Aberdeen. His work transformed the understanding of microbial corrosion in offshore oil installations and helped to solve it. He was born in Glasgow to Vernon Hamilton, an accountant with Glasgow Corporation Tramways, and Jean (nee Hood), who worked at Pettigrew’s store in the city. He attended Hutchesons’ grammar school and studied biochemistry at the University of Glasgow, graduating in 1958. He completed a PhD in 1961 and went to work for Unilever in Bedfordshire, investigating the safety of food and hygiene products. In 1969 Allan became a senior lecturer at the University of Aberdeen, where he researched energy transduction in bacteria. After uncovering new insights into how microbes corrode oil rigs, he and colleagues formed a company, Micran, providing mitigating services to the oil industry. In 1978 Allan established the department of microbiology at Aberdeen, becoming the first holder of its chair of microbiology. He selected and nurtured talented colleagues, taking pride in their attainments. Throughout his leadership the department was consistently one of the most highly ranked research units in the UK. Allan was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1980. Recognising the importance of bacteria to emerging biotechnologies, he orchestrated the rejuvenation of the National Collection for Industrial Bacteria, which had stored types of organisms for research and had been neglected and underfunded. He became its chairman in 1982 and steered its development until 1997. His vision not only ensured the survival of a national resource but saw it develop through the next generation of technologies to provide a range of important services. Allan married Evie Stewart in 1992. After his retirement in 1994, he and Evie moved to Ardrishaig, where he became a director of the Museum of Scottish Lighthouses (2004-09) and of the Kilmartin Museum (2015-17). Allan was also treasurer of the Microbiology Society. Allan had wide interests, including sailing, the arts, music, fine wine, whisky and fly fishing. He ably played the bagpipes at many a Burns night. He was great company and a wonderful host at home and on his boat. He is survived by Evie, and his stepdaughters, Marsali and Toto, and step-grandchildren Arty, Cora, Tala, Ruban and Hani.Boris Johnson has announced plans to abolish the legal requirement for people in England to self-isolate, even if they test positive for the coronavirus and have symptoms. The move, planned for later this month, would represent “an important step for this country as we move out of the pandemic”, said the prime minister’s spokesperson. “It shows that the hard work of the British people is paying off.” Throughout the pandemic, the UK government has often forged its own path out of step with its neighbours. Is Johnson’s latest move continuing England’s outlier position? In a way, yes. Many other countries plan to continue to enforce self-isolation and quarantine with penalties and fines. Still, England joins other European countries that are easing Covid-19 restrictions as infection rates drop and Omicron is shown to be less severe compared to previous variants. On Wednesday, the Czech Republic said people no longer have to show a vaccination certificate to enter bars, restaurants and cafes. And while the World Health Organization suggests that people who test positive should isolate for 14 days, many governments have cut isolation periods. Countries such as Germany and France have a 10-day isolation period in place, although in France, that can be reduced to five days with a negative test. Russia’s isolation period is now seven days. The UK recently cut the minimum time people with Covid in England have to spend in self-isolation to five days. In the US, health officials have also halved the isolation time for people with asymptomatic Covid from 10 to five days. Denmark appears to have some of the most relaxed isolation rules at present, with people allowed to leave the house four days after they test positive, providing they no longer have symptoms. The change in England will be a technical legal issue. Under the proposed rules, Covid will be treated in a similar way to flu, with guidance to stay at home but no penalties for going to shops, work or school. In several countries, including Sweden, isolation has been largely treated this way throughout the pandemic – as guidance and recommendations rather than law.A man found guilty of killing his fiancee and dumping her body in a cesspit in 2016 will die in prison having being sentenced to a whole-life order for murdering his first wife six years earlier. Ian Stewart, 61, killed Diane Stewart in 2010 and told family, friends and medical professionals that she had died after having an epileptic seizure, Huntingdon crown court heard, but on Wednesday a jury ruled that he was guilty of her murder. It was only after he was arrested on suspicion of the murder of Helen Bailey in 2016 that an investigation into Diane Stewart’s death was launched, and tests on her brain tissue – which she had donated to medical science – revealed that she may have suffered a lack of oxygen to her brain for up to an hour before her death. The judge, Mr Justice Simon Bryan, said Stewart would serve a whole-life order without any possibility of parole or conditional release. “It no doubt never crossed your mind that the donation of Diane’s brain for teaching and research would lead to your ultimate downfall, as it was to do,” he said. The judge added that there were “striking similarities” between the two murders, and that both had involved Stewart telling “a series of calculated and callous lies” and “acting out a charade”. A whole-life order was the only “just punishment for your callous and chilling murder of two separate woman who had the misfortune to be in an intimate relationship with you”, he added. The couple’s children, Jamie and Oliver Stewart, paid tribute to their mother in a joint statement released through police. “Our mum was amazing,” the said. “All the people we have spoken to and things we have heard since her death have only enhanced this feeling.” The pair said they had a “wonderful, caring upbringing”, adding that the past six years had been “really upsetting”. “We now look forward to recalling the many happy moments we had growing up as a family,” they said. During the three-week trial, a jury heard that Diane’s death in 2010 was recorded as sudden unexplained death in epilepsy (SUDEP), after Stewart said he had found his wife collapsed at their home in Bassingbourn, Cambridgeshire, in 2010. In 2017, Stewart was found guilty of killing Bailey, the author of the Electra Brown series, a year earlier. He drugged Bailey with his sleeping medication before hiding her body, along with that of her pet dachshund, Boris, in a 100-year-old cesspit concealed beneath the garage of their £1.3m property in Royston, Hertfordshire. After the guilty verdict in 2017, police reopened the case, and while the original postmortem had not treated Diane Stewart’s death as suspicious, later examination of brain tissue showed signs that “breathing had been restricted” for between 35 minutes and an hour before her death. A consultant neurologist estimated the risk of the 47-year-old having had a fatal epileptic seizure to be about one in 100,000; a Home Office pathologist said he would have expected to see injuries on the outside of a body of someone who had fallen on concrete during a fit, but no such injuries were found on the body. The court heard Stewart had delayed several times before ringing 999 on 25 June 2010, and said he had performed CPR before attempting to get help from a doctor and a nurse who lived opposite. He said he had tried CPR again, before finally ringing the emergency services. A paramedic who attended the scene said Stewart “appeared dissociative and was simply answering questions calmly”, and there were no signs of the bodily trauma that normally accompanied the administering of effective CPR. At his wife’s funeral, Stewart “seemed totally unbothered and seemed quite aloof”, said her friend Alexandra Bailey, while her sister Wendy Bellamy-Lee said he was “very calm”. Det Supt Jerome Kent, who led the investigations into both women, called Stewart a “master manipulator”. “He had the ability to convince agencies of his innocence and kept the truth of what happened from family and friends, keeping those lies going over months and years as well as through the court process,” he said. He added: “There is no typical victim of domestic abuse. The fact is, it can happen to anyone” After Diane’s death, Stewart inherited £96,000, which he said was for their sons’ future. He bought a red two-seater MG, but insisted the purchase was in her memory. The prosecution QC, Stuart Trimmer – the same barrister who prosecuted Stewart’s first trial – suggested Stewart did not do the probate paperwork for a further £50,000 he could have claimed because by the end of the year of her death he had already met Helen Bailey in an online bereavement group. Diane Stewart’s siblings, sister Wendy Bellamy-Lee and brother Christopher Lem, called her “a very special, caring and capable person” who would “always be greatly loved and hugely missed by her family and all who knew her”.Time to wrap up, here are today’s main stories: Goodnight. GW One of Britain’s largest trade unions has invited the governor of the Bank of England to work as a care worker for a day to witness how people cope on low pay. The GMB, which represents about 500,000 full and part-time workers, said Andrew Bailey should see first hand the challenges of making ends meet for people struggling on below average earnings – many of them low-paid women working in the care sector – after the central bank governor called for wage restraint to limit the rise in inflation. Bailey caused uproar last week when he suggested that workers should help curb inflation by refraining from making wage demands, on the same day the Bank of England announced the biggest fall in disposable income in three decades. The central bank forecast that inflation, which increased to 5.4% in December, was on course to hit 7% in April while its latest estimates found that earnings were increasing by 4% to 4.5%. Bailey said interest rates would need to rise further if wages increased in line with inflation, causing unemployment to rise and economic growth to slow. More here: Chief economist Huw Pill touched on this issue today, when he said the Bank would act if it became concerned that the jump in energy prices and imported goods was driving up wages or prices: In an attempt to protect their own real income from the unavoidable impact of higher external prices, the longer that firms try to maintain real profit margins and employees try to maintain real wages, the more likely it is that domestically-generated inflation will achieve its own self-sustaining momentum even as the external impulse to UK inflation recedes. Danni Hewson, AJ Bell financial analyst, says optimism that the pandemic could be easing, lowered geopolitical tensions and decent company results all lifted markets today: Tensions in the Ukraine are easing, the UK government is talking about a potential end to Covid isolation and a whole host of companies have delivered their own brand of good news. From Dunelm’s record first half profits to estimate-beating chicken sales for KFC’s parent company, there has been a remarkable feeling permeating through markets today which has pushed the FTSE 100 to a new post pandemic high. Results from Disney after the closing Wall Street bell will set the scene for Thursday... as will January’s US inflation data, she adds: “Of course, tomorrow could be an entirely different story, or it could have a Disney style happy ending. The mouse house reports after the bell tonight and whilst the numbers are expected to be good, particularly from the company’s theme parks, close attention will be paid to subscriber numbers for its streaming service. Netflix was pummelled after its last update with investors in no mood to cut tech giants any slack. And Disney has certainly been pumping out the content, intent on finding new audiences who wouldn’t normally plump for what it offers. With Amazon winning markets over because of a prime price hike there will be some who wonder whether Disney will start to reign back on its offers and speculating about what will happen to numbers if it does. In the City, the FTSE 100 share index has closed at its highest level in over two years. The blue-chip share index ended 1% higher at 7643, amid a global market rally in Europe, America and Asia-Pacific markets. Online grocery business Ocado rallied 6%, a day after shedding all its pandemic gains on concerns that the costs of building high-tech warehouses are eating into margins. Travel and hospitality companies were also among the risers, after Boris Johnson announced plans to abolish the last domestic Covid restrictions in England, including the requirement for people with the virus to self-isolate, in less than two weeks. IAG, which owns British Airways, gained 4.6% today, with broadcaster ITV up 4.3% and copper producer Antofagasta gaining 3.9%. The UK-focused FTSE 250 index jumped by 1.8%, with holiday operator TUI rallying 9.7% -- yesterday it reported that UK summer holiday bookings were up a fifth on pre-Covid levels. Michael Hewson of CMC Markets says: European markets have seen another strong session today, with the FTSE100 setting a new two year high, while the FTSE250 has also seen strong gains due to some outperformance in companies who are most exposed to the ebb and flow of the UK economy, and the announcement of a possible easing of Covid restrictions in England, at the end of this month. Travel and leisure have once again been out front with TUI, Wizz Air and easyJet helping to underpin the FTSE250. The Prime Minister’s announcement that Covid isolation in England rules could end at the end of this month has given a leg up to the likes of Whitbread, Cineworld and Kingfisher, while IAG is also higher, as reports circulate it could be forced by Brussels rules to spin off its UK operation British Airways, due to EU ownership rules. European markets had their best day in two months. Germany’s DAX and France’s CAC both rose by around 1.5%, as investors put aside the worries about inflation, interest rates and Ukraine that hit markets in January. Bank of England chief economist Huw Pill has doused expectations that the central bank would quickly begin active bond sales from its quantitative-easing program once interest rates hit 1%, Bloomberg’s Phil Aldrick reports: Addressing the Society of Professional Economists this lumchtime, Pill said: “1% is not a trigger. It’s a point of consideration.” More here. Germany’s new top central banker has suggested that eurozone interest rates could rise before the end of the year. Reuters has the story: The European Central Bank’s German policymakers openly discussed prospects for an interest rate hike on Wednesday, with new Bundesbank chief Joachim Nagel arguing that a move could come this year, as inflation remains uncomfortably high. The ECB last week walked back on a pledge not to raise rates in 2022 and policymakers are now looking at how best to dismantle unconventional policies that have kept the euro zone afloat for much of the past decade. Maintaining the Bundesbank’s historically conservative line, Nagel, who took charge of the German central bank in January, warned that acting too late in normalising policy could be especially costly. “If the (inflation) picture remains unchanged in March, I will be in favour of normalising monetary policy,” Nagel told German newspaper Die Zeit. “The first step is to discontinue the net asset purchases over the course of 2022. Then interest rates could be raised before this year is over.” ECB board member Isabel Schnabel, also a German, took a more measured view but also argued that a rate hike may be needed to offset the inflation shock. “Raising rates would not lower energy prices,” Schnabel said in a Twitter Q&amp;A. “But if high current inflation threatens to lead to a de-anchoring of inflation expectations, we may still need to respond, as our mandate is to preserve price stability.” More here: ECB may need to raise rates in 2022, new Bundesbank chief says And here are some highlights from Isabel Schnabel’s Q&amp;A, where she outlined the ECB’s strategy: The UK’s telecoms regulator has dropped its long-held belief that a merger between any of the UK’s big four mobile operators should be blocked at all costs, raising the possibility of a mega merger between Vodafone and Three UK. Ofcom previously maintained that such a reduction in competition would lead to higher-priced phones and bills for consumers and businesses. Under the former chief executive Sharon White, Ofcom was an outspoken opponent of Three UK’s attempted £10.25bn takeover of O2, which was blocked by competition regulators six years ago. Ofcom said on Tuesday it had now “clarified its position on mobile consolidation”. Months before the deal was blocked, White, who is now the chair of the John Lewis Partnership, delivered a scathing speech attacking the deal, saying that a move from four to three main players would “shift the balance of power” in the market. “Competition is the lifeblood of today’s telecoms market, spurring innovation, better coverage and fair prices,” she said. “The deal could mean higher prices for consumers and businesses.” But Ofcom has now softened its stance... Here’s the full story: The world’s biggest shipping company has reported record profits, thanks to surging demand from a rebounding global economy. Denmark’s A.P. Moeller-Maersk says 2021 was its most profitable year yet. It made pre-tax profits of $18.73bn last year, up from $3.3bn in 2020. Revenues surging 55% to $61.8bn, with an ‘unprecedented’ performance at its Ocean, Logistics &amp; Services and Terminals divisions as they battled supply chain bottlenecks. It benefitted from the jump in freight rates, as customers battled to get goods shipped around the world due to high demand and global supply chain disruption. Shareholders profited too, with $3bn of share buy-backs and dividends in 2021. A.P. Moeller- Maersk also predicted that 2022 would be strong, with the shipping situation expected to return to normal early in the second half of this year. Søren Skou, CEO of A.P. Moller - Maersk, says: Exceptional market conditions led to record-high growth and profitability in A.P. Moller - Maersk, however it also led to supply chain disruptions and severe challenges for our customers. We spent tremendous efforts in mitigating bottlenecks by expanding capacity across Ocean, improving productivity in Terminals and growing our global logistics footprint. We will continue these efforts as we see the current market situation persist into Q2. At the same time, we see conversations with customers change from procurement-led freight rate discussions to more holistic conversations on how we truly partner to keep supply chains running end-to-end. This clearly validates our strategy. Stocks have opened higher on Wall Street, as investors regain their risk appetite after last month’s wobbles. The Dow Jones industrial average of 30 large US stocks has gained 0.7%, or 271 points, to 35,734. Nike (+2%), Visa (+2%), American Express (+1.5%) and Microsoft (+1.5%) are the top Dow risers. Both the broader S&amp;P 500 and the tech-focused Nasdaq Composite are both up 1%. Every sector is higher, led by real estate, materials and firms providing discretionary goods and services to consumers. Craig Erlam, senior market analyst at OANDA, says confidence is building as investors come to terms with interest rates rising soon. It’s hard to pinpoint exactly what has changed; whether it’s earnings that are lifting the mood or the soothing tones of central bankers desperately trying to manage expectations. Perhaps it’s simply a case of investors coming to terms with the tightening environment and feeling more comfortable with it. Whatever the reason, investors certainly appear encouraged by the fact that the falling knife period looks to be in the rear-view mirror and we’re now seeing signs of stabilization. In recent week’s we’ve also seen periods of aggressive selling being bought into which has helped create the impression that the worst is behind us. Of course, that could change quickly if the inflation outlook worsens, as has repeatedly been the case in recent months. And we won’t have to wait long for the next hurdle on that front, with the US CPI data being keenly anticipated tomorrow. Rising borrowing costs are hitting demand for mortgages in the US. Mortgage applications to purchase a home dropped 10% last week, and were 12% lower than a year ago, according to the Mortgage Bankers Association. Joel Kan, MBA’s associate vice president of economic and industry forecasting, says the increase in borrowing costs is hitting demand. “Mortgage rates followed the U.S. 10-year yield and other sovereign bonds as the Federal Reserve and other key global central banks responded to growing inflationary pressures and signaled that they will start to remove accommodative policies, Those higher rates are deterring people from refinancing loans -- the MBA’s Refinance Index decreased 7 percent from the previous week and was 52 percent lower than the same week one year ago. Low supply of homes is also hurting mortgage take-up. Huw Pill is also worried that taking unusually large policy steps (such as large interest rate hikes, or cuts) could validate the narrative that the Bank is either slamming its foot on the accelerator, or the brake. This narrative was fuelled by the (perhaps necessarily) activist responses to the onset of global financial crisis and pandemic. It is not unique to the UK. But he then explained that there are occasions when aggressive action is needed. BoE chief economist Huw Pill also says he is “sceptical of efforts” to return interest rates to a pre-defined neutral rate (where borrowing costs are neither stimulating nor restricting the economy). Given the inevitable conceptual and empirical uncertainty, he says, it risks mis-calibrating monetary policy by picking the wrong value for r*. The Bank of England’s chief economist says that a ‘steady handed’ approach to interest rates is the best policy, given uncertainty over inflation, wage growth, and the energy crisis. In a speech titled “Monetary policy with a steady hand”, Huw Pill explain that international energy and goods prices are driving UK headline inflation higher, having “repeatedly surprised to the upside” in the last year. This has put the Bank’s Monetary Policy Committee in the “current, very uncomfortable position” of predicting inflation will peak over 7% in April, he tells the Society of Professional Economists conference. Those higher prices are also hitting UK real national income. Should they stabilise, then their impact on inflation will dissipate. Should they fall slowly in line with futures prices, inflation is forecast to fall below the 2% target by a meaningful margin at the policy-relevant horizon. But, Pill warns, there is considerable uncertainty: With the pandemic giving way to geopolitics as the driver of international energy prices, they are unlikely to become easier to forecast. And on wages, Pill says the Bank now sees underlying wage growth approaching 5% this year, as the labour market continues to tighten. The BoE’s ‘big call’ is that the stronger momentum in domestic wage and cost growth will ease beyond this year, as headline inflation falls and unemployment rises as energy prices hit incomes and economic demand. On that basis, Pill says, the easing of domestic inflationary pressures is achieved without the UK falling into recession, cautioning: But, by nature, it is also a call surrounded by uncertainty. Pill explains that if inflationary pressures ease, interest rates could stay lower for longer. But if there are signs of energy price driving up wage settlements, the Bank could tighten policy faster. Under our baseline paths for wages and energy prices, our published scenarios suggest that leaving Bank Rate unchanged at 0.5% indefinitely would – unsurprisingly – leave inflation above our 2% target at the policy-relevant horizon, whereas following the market-implied path to 1.2% by the end of this year would have left inflation somewhat below target. I leave it to you to draw any implications for where the MPC sees the path of Bank Rate headed. But I would emphasise that these scenarios, by nature, embody the underlying assumptions about energy prices and wage developments that I have discussed. Since the outlook for wages and energy prices is uncertain as I have emphasised, then the prospective path for Bank Rate is also uncertain. Were we to see evidence of second round effects in wage and cost developments, a tighter policy than otherwise might be required. Were energy prices to fall steadily in line with futures rather than stabilise as we assume, then – other things equal – more policy accommodation could be maintained. Given all this uncertainty, Pill argues, he voted for a 25-basis point interest rate rise last Thursday, which raised Bank Rate from 0.25% to 0.5%. But four of the nine MPC members wanted a steeper hike, to 0.75%, and were only narrowly outvoted. Pill says there may be occasions when monetary policy actions are needed: Recent history is littered with them: the global financial crisis and onset of the pandemic are cases in point. I would certainly not wish to rule out changes in Bank Rate of more than the usual 25bp in all circumstances. And given the inflationary pressures we currently face, I can certainly understand why colleagues on the MPC voted for a 50bp hike last week. But right now, Pill concludes that “a case can be made for a measured rather than activist approach to policy decisions”. On the Amazon news, Reuters points out that the Groceries Supply Code of Practice applies to retailers with an annual turnover of more than £1bn in grocery sales. Amazon does not break out figures for its UK grocery sales, so its designation under the code publicly confirms for the first time that its sales have crossed the 1 billion pound threshold. The code ensures grocers treat suppliers fairly. It restricts firms from making changes to supply contracts at short notice and also requires retailers to give an appropriate period of notice if they no longer want to use a supplier and provide reasons for ending the contract. All of Britain’s major supermarket groups, including market leader Tesco, Sainsbury’s, Asda and Morrisons, are subject to the code. The UK’s competition watchdog has announced that industry rules setting out how grocery retailers should treat their suppliers will now apply to Amazon. The Competition and Markets Authority has designated Amazon as a grocery retailer to protect suppliers, due to its increasing activity in the UK groceries’ sector, through its Amazon Fresh home delivery service and stores, and Fresh &amp; Wild Limited service. Adam Land, senior director for remedies, business and financial analysis at the CMA, said: “Households across the UK are increasingly using Amazon to buy food and other essential items. Today’s decision to designate Amazon helps to ensure a level playing field for companies active in the groceries sector as people’s buying habits evolve. “These rules mean that the thousands of companies supplying Amazon with groceries are now protected from potential unfair business practices. “We’ll continue to keep a close eye on the sector to make sure all major grocery retailers are bound by the same rules.” British households’ confidence in their financial outlook has fallen to its lowest in eight years, as the cost of living crisis hits. Polling company YouGov and economic consultancy Cebr have reported that consumer confidence dropped this month to the lowest since last March, as people worry about rising prices, tax increases and their job security. The index of households’ expectations for their financial situation in 12 months’ time tumbled by 4.5 points to 79.1, the lowest since October 2013. The drop in consumer confidence highlights the impact of the rising cost of living on household sentiment, says Sam Miley, senior economist at Cebr: Away from the headline indicator, consumers’ assessment of their finances over the coming year provides for a particularly stark reading - reaching a near nine-year low. Rising inflation and the planned uplift to National Insurance contributions are just two likely factors behind this weaker outlook. This sentiment is also mirrored in Cebr’s latest forecasts, with real disposable incomes expected to fall year-on-year and the household savings ratio set to narrow significantly.” Whether you’re renting or buying, the cost of painting your home will have risen, and it’s probably going to get worse. Dulux paint maker AkzoNobel increased its decorative paints pricing by 6% last year, and were 10% higher year-on-year in Q4, as it passed on some of the surge in raw materials costs to customers. Prices for Performance Coatings (used on industrial machinery, buildings, boats and aeroplanes) rose 8% in 2021, and by 14% year-on-year in Q4. AkzoNobel told shareholders that operating income jumped 16% last year, as “Significant price increases and volume increases” helped offset commodity inflation and supply constraints. But operating income in Q4 was down 16%, as raw material and other variable costs increased by €325m. It told shareholders that raw material cost inflation and supply constraints are “expected to gradually ease by mid-2022”. AkzoNobel CEO, Thierry Vanlancker said the company it ‘on track’ to offset rising costs (by raising prices): “With our full-year 2021 results we delivered a sixth consecutive quarter of revenue growth. Our teams were quick to act with strong pricing in response to around 770 million euros of raw material inflation. This extraordinary achievement allowed us to deliver a 2021 profit in line with prior year. As we continue to drive forward, we are on track to offset this headwind by Q1 2022. In other property news... the average cost of renting a home in the UK is approaching £1,000 a month, according to new analysis, as rents continue to climb amid soaring demand. Renters around the UK are now paying £62 more each month than before the pandemic, taking the average monthly rent to £969, according to property website Zoopla. This means that the average annual rent for people who are agreeing a new let is now £744 higher than it was in March 2020 before Covid. The rate at which rents are rising reached 8.3% in the final three months of 2021, which is a 13-year high. The increase in housing costs will put further pressure on households, who are already feeling the squeeze from rising energy bills and wider price rises. Rising rents will also make life difficult for people who are looking to get on the property ladder, at a time when the price of the average UK home reached a record high of £276,759 in January, which is £24,500 higher than a year earlier, according to Halifax. Over the past year, rents have risen in every region of the UK, Zoopla found, with the strongest growth of 10.3% seen in London, followed by Northern Ireland (10.2%) and Wales ( 9.8%). The increases were the weakest in Scotland, where they reached 4.8%, and north east England where they rose by 6%. However, rents in the capital are only £18 a month higher than they were in March 2020, because they fell during the pandemic. Renters including office workers and students are now returning to the centres of the country’s largest cities - including London, Manchester, Birmingham, Leeds and Edinburgh – after the ‘race for space’ during the pandemic saw many people look to move to commuter areas. Here’s some reaction: Housebuilder Barratt plans to build an extra 250 more homes than previously forecast, despite concerns that rising interest rates dampens the housing market. Barratt told the City it now expects to complete between 18,000 and 18,250 homes in the financial year to 30th June, an increase of 250 on its previous guidance. Barratt cited its strong order book position, the continued strength in housing demand, and expected further growth in construction activity at building sites, with 14% more houses being built than a year ago. That would beat the 17,243 homes completed last year (to 30 June 2021), and above pre-pandemic levels. Total completions in the last six months of 2021 are down 11% year-on-year, with revenues down 10%, due to the surge in activity in the second half of 2020 after the first lockdown lifted. Barratt is also confident that the market can handle higher interest rates - with the Bank of England having raised Bank Rate twice in the last two months. It says it is seeing strong demand, with “strong total forward sales” at 30 January 2022 of 15,736 homes, higher than the 14,289 homes on 31 January 2021. CEO David Thomas told Reuters: “Affordability for the consumer is in a relatively good place and that is because interest rates have been and continue to be so low,” “So once we understand that interest rates are rising - and we saw a base rate increase last week ... affordability remains more than historic benchmarks, but we will clearly keep that under review.” On Monday, Halifax predicted that prices will slow considerably this year, as households are squeezed by rising inflation. Susannah Streeter, senior investment and markets analyst, Hargreaves Lansdown, cautions that demand could soon peak: Barratt Developments is certainly making hay while the sun shines as first timers rush to get onto the ladder and other buyers trade up for bigger homes, desperate for more space to meet new hybrid work needs. But with indications that house price growth has slowed, there are still concerns this buoyant book of orders will start to thin out, particularly as the cost of living squeeze intensifies and rate rises come in quick succession. The cheap loan party isn’t expected to last forever, and as homebuyers reassess their spending priorities, house builders could soon be facing a more difficult trajectory. It isn’t immune to higher prices, with build cost inflation expected to reach 6% but it’s expecting to pass on those costs to customers with the overall effect on margins neutral or even positive. How long homebuyers will swallow higher prices is unclear, however the ongoing lack of affordable housing could provide a tailwind of resilience.’’ In the City, shares in airport services group John Menzies have jumped by 34%, after it rebuffed a takeover approach from a Kuwait firm. John Menzies says it has rejected an “unsolicited and highly opportunistic approach” from Kuwait’s Agility Public Warehousing, which valued it at around £469m. The bid was worth 510p per share, or roughly 50% above Menzies’ closing price last night. Shares have now jumped to 450p, their highest since January 2020, just before Covid-19 hit the global economy. Menzies started out as a single Edinburgh bookshop in 1833, before opening bookstores at railway stations and on high streets, and running wholesale newspaper and magazine distribution, and later cargo transport. It is now a ‘pure play’ aviation business, operating ground handling, cargo handling, cargo forwarding and plane fuelling services at over 200 airports in 37 countries. Having been disrupted by the pandemic, Menzies says it is now “well-positioned” for the recovery in the aviation sector - which it insists isn’t recognised in today’s offer. Menszies says its “pipeline of opportunities” is full, as it focuses on air cargo services, new fuelling operations and high quality ground handling, targeting emerging markets where margins are typically higher. Philipp Joeinig, Chairman and CEO of John Menzies plc, said: “The Board of Menzies has unanimously rejected this unsolicited and highly opportunistic Proposal, which we believe does not reflect Menzies’ true intrinsic business worth or its prospects. Menzies continues to make good progress with strong performance across a number of service lines, which together with productivity gains, saw the Group to finish last year strongly. This strong performance and momentum in 2021 has continued in 2022 with further contract wins and renewals alongside the continued recovery of global flight volumes. Merger talks between mutual insurer LV= and Royal London have broken down. It is the second time within two months that a deal to buy the 178-year-old firm, originally known as Liverpool Victoria, has collapsed. LV= began discussions with its fellow mutual Royal London at the start of the year, after its members blocked a planned takeover by US private equity firm Bain Capital in December. However, the company said in a statement to the London Stock Exchange that it had “become clear to LV= that our different mutual models mean such a merger would not be in the best interests of LV= members.” Seamus Creedon, LV=’s interim chair, thanked Royal London for its engagement, saying LV= looks forward to operating alongside it as part of a “vibrant mutual sector”. He added: “The strength of LV=’s business performance over the past 18 months combined with its operational progress has strengthened the board’s belief in, and commitment to, the continuation of our status as an independent mutual.” LV= had previously rejected an approach from Royal London last year, worth £10m more than Bain’s offer which would have ended LV=’s member-owned status. That approach was slammed as a “hand grenade” by LV=, as it struggled to persuade members, and outsiders, that the Bain deal made sense. Barry O’Dwyer, Group Chief Executive of Royal London, says today that it had engaged with LV= because it thought it didn’t have a future as a stand-alone firm. “Mutuals are owned by their customers and are run for their benefit. “Our offer to preserve LV=’s mutuality through a merger with Royal London was based on an understanding that LV= did not have a viable future as an independent company. LV= also announced a boardroom clear out on Monday, following its failed, controversial demutualisation plan. GlaxoSmithKline made £1.4bn from Covid-related sales last year, mostly from its antibody drug Xevudy, as it unveiled better-than-expected results ahead of what its boss Dame Emma Walmsley describes as a “landmark year”. Ahead of the spin-off and stock market flotation of its consumer arm this summer, GSK reported total sales of £34bn for 2021, similar to the previous year. The consumer healthcare business contributed £9.6bn, down 4% from 2020. GSK’s annual profit before tax fell to £5.1bn, from £6.4bn in 2020. In the final quarter of the year, turnover rose 9% to £9.5bn, slightly ahead of analysts’ forecasts, while earnings per share were also better than expected at 25.6p. Xevudy (sotrovimab), a monoclonal antibody developed by GSK in partnership with Vir Biotechnology, was approved by the UK drugs watchdog in early December. It is designed for people with mild to moderate Covid-19 who are at high risk of developing severe disease, and trials found it cut the likelihood of hospital admission and death by 79% in high-risk adults. Walmsley said: “This is going to be a landmark year for GSK, with a step-change in growth expected and multiple research &amp; development catalysts, including milestones on up to seven key late-stage pipeline assets. 2022 is also the year when we demerge our world-leading consumer healthcare business.” GSK’s vaccines sales dropped 10% to £1.8bn last year, as countries’ normal vaccination programmes were disrupted by the Covid-19 vaccination drive, hitting sales of the drugmaker’s shingles and meningitis jabs. Oliver Rakau of Oxford Economics flags that net trade probably slowed Germany’s growth in the last quarter of 2021: Here’s Claus Vistesen of Pantheon Macroeconomics on Germany’s trade data: Economist Daniel Lacalle shows how Germany’s trade surplus fell in December, with imports (+4.7% month on month) outpacing exports (+0.9%) Carsten Brzeski of ING says today’s trade data shows that ‘Brexit has left its mark on German trade’: Looking at export destinations, 2021 clearly marks a structural shift, illustrating current themes including reshoring, slowing of Chinese growth and different ways to deal with the pandemic. In 2021, the US was the single most important export destination for German exports, accounting for almost 9% of all exports. China comes in at number two but only marginally ahead of France. The importance of Poland, Hungary and the Czech Republic has increased to unprecedented highs, accounting for a higher share of total German exports than China, Russia and Japan together. Finally, Brexit has left its mark on German trade as the UK dropped out of the five most important trading partners list, with German companies exporting more to Austria than to the UK. Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. UK firms have missed out on a rebound in trade with Germany last year, as Brexit frictions and the pandemic continue to weigh on the economy. New data from the Federal Statistical Office shows that imports from the UK into Germany tumbled by 8.5% during 2021, the first year since the Brexit free trade deal was agreed in late December 2020, to €32.1bn. But other countries did much better. Total goods imports into Germany surged by 17.1% during the year to €1,202bn, as the easing of lockdown restrictions and vaccine rollouts spurred the global economic recovery last year. That included a 16.8% rise in imports from Germany’s fellow European Union members, and a 20.8% rise in imports from China last year. In December alone, German imports from the UK were down 18.2% year-on-year -- as there was a rush of stockpiling in December 2020 as firms prepared for possible Brexit disruption. The EU introduced checks on goods from Britain entering the bloc as soon as the Brexit deal came into effect, with experts warning that UK firms were losing their competitiveness. The UK delayed its checks on goods coming in until 2022. But even so, German exports to the UK fell by 2.6% during 2021, to €65.4bn. Total German exports rose by 14% in the year, even as the pandemic continued to cause disruption to global supply chains. Destatis says: Compared with the same month last year, exports to the United Kingdom dropped by 7.6% to 5.0 billion euros in December 2021. Imports from the United Kingdom were down 18.2% to 2.6 billion euros. In contrast, Germany’s exports to the US jumped by 18.0% during 2021, as the recovery in America’s economy spurred demand for industrial supplies, machinery and consumer goods. This chart shows the details: Destatis also reports that overall German exports were up by 0.9% month-on-month in December, with imports rising 4.7% compared with November 2021. After calendar and seasonal adjustment, exports were 6.8% and imports 23.5% higher than in February 2020, the month before restrictions were imposed due to the Covid-19 pandemic in Germany. In 2021 as a whole, exports increased by 14.0% and imports by 17.1% compared with the previous year. Exports were 3.6% and imports 8.9% above the level of the pre-Covid year 2019. This data rather chimes with the message from a group of MPs this morning, that the main impact of Brexit on UK firms had been “increased costs, paperwork and border delays”. There could be worse to come as new import controls are introduced. The cross-party Public Accounts Committee (PAC) reported that Brexit red tape has damaged Britain’s trade with the EU. The situation could worsen unless the government works with Brussels to reduce hold-ups at UK ports German factories have also been hit by the supply chain crisis, so will be hoping the EU’s new multi-billion chip production plan can help them. The €43bn scheme aims to overcome Europe’s dependency on Asian computer chip makers, as governments and businesses around the world battle shortages that experts believe could persist for much of the year. We’ll hear from Huw Pill, the Bank of England’s chief economist, later when he speaks at the Society of Professional Economists annual conference, on the “UK Monetary Policy Outlook.” European markets have open higher, with the FTSE 100 near a two-year high. Some commodity prices are also under pressure, with aluminium hitting its highest since 2008 on Tuesday. The agenda 9am GMT: Italian industrial production report for December Noon GMT: US weekly mortgage applications 1.10pm GMT: Bank of England chief economist Huw Pill speech: ‘UK Monetary Policy outlook” 3.30pm GMT: EIA weekly oil inventory figuresJimmy Anderson and Stuart Broad are insisting their omission from England’s squad to tour West Indies next month is “not the end of the road” and are focused on forcing their way back into the Test side, according to Andrew Strauss. “I’m not going to say anything other than they were disappointed and I wouldn’t expect anything otherwise,” Strauss, the England and Wales Cricket Board’s interim managing director of men’s cricket, said of their reactions when he delivered the news to them before the squad was announced on Tuesday. “They take great pride in representing England and they both wanted to be on that tour. There was no impression from either of them that they saw this as the end of the road. I fully expect them to prepare themselves for the summer and put their names in the frame for selection. “They were very hard conversations. All I can say is I hope they understood the thinking behind it and what we’re trying to achieve here, and also that they got the message very strongly that this isn’t the end for them, because we want them fired up and ready to go in the summer. “We know there’s going to be a lot of interest in the decision, but we feel like we’re doing it for the right reasons and this is going to help the England team to develop at a time when it really needs to develop quickly.” Anderson said he had “no intention of finishing” after the recent Ashes series and that after conversations with the captain, Joe Root, and other senior players, “the message is to keep going”. Last year Broad said he did not expect the team to be rebuilt after the Ashes “because it’s not an ageing team that needs rebuilding. This is a youngish team who need a bit of time and I see myself as a big part of our aim to become the best Test team in the world.” Broad and Anderson are England’s two most successful bowlers of all time, with a combined 1,177 Test wickets. But Strauss said the three-man selection committee for the West Indies tour – also including James Taylor and Paul Collingwood, the interim head coach after the dismissal of Chris Silverwood – decided “it would be remiss of us” not to take the opportunity to omit the bowlers as they try “to give the new director of cricket and coach options to choose from”. “We felt strategically it was an opportunity for both of them to be left out,” he said. “We see it is a strategic decision. In the end there was clarity that this was an opportunity we needed to take and that is not saying one or both of them will not feature this summer. They’ve given everything to England over a long period of time. I just feel like this is a moment when we had an opportunity to start projecting forward.” A number of players have been placed on standby to join the tour in case of injury or illness, but Strauss confirmed that neither Anderson nor Broad is among them. Root will move up to third in the batting order at his own request (he averages 38.66 in 53 previous innings at No 3, and 51.27 in 106 innings at No 4), with Ben Stokes under consideration to be promoted to four. Alex Lees, the uncapped 28-year-old Durham batter, will open with Zak Crawley. Strauss also confirmed that Jos Buttler had been available for selection, but that Ben Foakes is now considered the first-choice wicketkeeper. “Joe Root is very keen to bat 3 going forward, and that allows us to potentially tackle that top-order problem which has been a thorn in our side for a long time,” Strauss said. “With Joe moving up there’s going to be a little bit of a rejig in that batting lineup.” Strauss said Ollie Robinson, whose fitness was criticised by the bowling coach, Jon Lewis, during the tour of Australia, was working hard to improve his stamina. “His conditioning currently is not what it needs to be and I think he is beginning to understand how hard international cricket is, because you can’t operate at a level that is not 100%,” Strauss said. “He is working very hard at the moment to get that conditioning up.” Lewis will continue as bowling coach in the West Indies, with Marcus Trescothick, Jeetan Patel and Carl Hopkinson also in the coaching team.My colleague and friend James Hodsdon, who has died aged 74, spent his working life at GCHQ in Cheltenham and, after retiring in 2009, devoted himself to his passion for the history of the people and places of Gloucestershire, especially Cheltenham and its surroundings. James was born in Stratford-upon-Avon but grew up in Purley, Surrey, with his parents, Dennis Hodsdon, a trade union official, and Rosalind (nee Lowe), and his younger sister, Joan. He attended Wallington county grammar school and, after studying at Soas University of London and the University of St Andrews, with a doctorate in Arabic in 1972, he went to GCHQ, where he remained for 40 years, taking on occasional brief postings abroad. His historical research resulted in two outstanding contributions to the Gloucestershire Record Series (of which he was general editor, 2010-20): a historical gazetteer of Cheltenham, and an edition of Cheltenham manor court books. He wrote the Dictionary of National Biography’s entries on Joseph Pitt and Sir Christopher Hoddesdon (a distant relation), produced meticulously researched articles on interesting local subjects, such as the contribution of Captain Henry Skillicorne to the development of Cheltenham as a spa, and was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries in 2018. It was, however, the inspiration that his friendship and encouragement brought to fellow enthusiasts for which he will be best remembered. As trustee or officer he served on practically every local organisation involved in historical studies, including as a modernising chair of council of the Bristol &amp; Gloucestershire Archaeological Society, spearheading plans to celebrate its 150th anniversary. Very largely through his efforts, the Victoria County History, that venerable project to write the history of every English parish, remains active in Gloucestershire. When academic funding ended with a volume half-finished, James was instrumental in setting up a charitable trust which continues the task, and with which I am involved. His vision and drive led to three more volumes nearing completion (including on Cheltenham, of course), which were researched by younger academics and a stalwart group of volunteers. James was a delightful man to work for and with, the ideal blend of quiet diplomacy, sly humour and irresistible charm – all backed up by determination, wisdom and sincerity. He employed these qualities locally to the full, but also bestowed them on organisations at national level. He died of heart failure while doing volunteer gardening in Pittville Park in Cheltenham, about which he had written extensively. In 1969 James married Judie Bonsall, and both rose to senior positions at GCHQ. She and their three children, Amelia, Alice and Nicholas, and three grandchildren, survive him.Two people in England have been diagnosed with Lassa fever, and a third “probable” case is under investigation, the UK Health Security Agency has said. It is the first time cases of the potentially deadly infectious disease, caused by the Lassa virus, have been identified in the UK for more than a decade. One of the two confirmed cases has recovered, and the second is receiving specialist care at the Royal Free London NHS Foundation Trust. The “probable” case is being treated at Bedfordshire Hospitals NHS foundation trust, UKHSA said. The cases are understood to be within the same family in the east of England and are linked to recent travel to west Africa. Lassa fever is an acute viral haemorrhagic illness. People usually become infected with Lassa virus through exposure to food or household items contaminated with urine or faeces of infected rats. The virus can also be spread through bodily fluids. People living in areas of west Africa with high populations of rodents where the disease is endemic are most at risk of Lassa fever. Imported cases rarely occur elsewhere in the world. Such cases are almost exclusively in people who work in endemic areas in high-risk occupations such as medicine, or other aid workers. Dr Susan Hopkins, the chief medical adviser at UKHSA, said: “We can confirm that two cases of Lassa fever have been identified in England, and a further probable case is under investigation. The cases are within the same family and are linked to recent travel to West Africa. “Cases of Lassa fever are rare in the UK and it does not spread easily between people. The overall risk to the public is very low. We are contacting the individuals who have had close contact with the cases prior to confirmation of their infection, to provide appropriate assessment, support and advice. The UKHSA and the NHS have well established and robust infection control procedures for dealing with cases of imported infectious disease and these will be reinforced.” Most people with Lassa fever will make a full recovery. However, severe illness can occur in some individuals. The Guardian understands that the UK’s High Consequence Infectious Disease Network is already engaged with the treatment of the infected individuals. Symptoms are usually gradual, starting with fever, general weakness and malaise. After a few days there may be headache, sore throat, muscle pain, chest pain, nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, cough, and abdominal pain , according to the World Health Organization. In severe cases there may be facial swelling, fluid in the lung cavity, bleeding from the mouth, nose, vagina or gastrointestinal tract and low blood pressure. Deafness occurs in 25% of recovered patients. In half of these cases, hearing returns partially after one to three months. Before these cases, there had been just eight cases of Lassa fever imported to the UK since 1980. The last two cases occurred in 2009. There was no evidence of onward transmission from any of these cases. Dr Sir Michael Jacobs, a consultant in infectious diseases at the Royal Free London, said: “The Royal Free hospital is a specialist centre for treating patients with viral haemorrhagic fevers, including Lassa fever. Our secure unit is run by a highly trained and experienced team of doctors, nurses, therapists and laboratory staff and is designed to ensure our staff can safely treat patients with these kind of infections.”A blind salamander, a tap-dancing spider and a “fat” catfish that has been likened to the Michelin man are among a list of vanished species that one US-based conservation group is aiming to rediscover in the wild and help protect. The Texas-based group, called Re:wild, has drawn up a new list of the “25 most wanted lost species” as part of its quest to find species lost to science and possibly extinct. The most wanted list includes the “fat” catfish, which has not been seen in its known habitat in Colombia since 1957. The species is the only freshwater catfish in the world with rings of fatty tissue wrapped around its body, leading to it being described by scientists who have previously searched for it as “the closest a fish could get to the Michelin man”. Michael Edmondstone, communications and engagement lead at Shoal, a conservation group for freshwater species, said the organization is “tremendously excited by the prospect of the fish being found”. He added: “Everybody is hoping to learn more about it and, ultimately, put the right measures in place to ensure it can thrive for future generations.” The Togo mouse, lost from Togo and Ghana, is a ground-dwelling mammal that is still recognized by locals who call it “Yefuli” despite its last confirmed appearance being in 1890, while a blind amphibian that dwells in underground aquifers in the US, called the Blanco blind salamander, has not been seen since 1951. “The Blanco blind salamander has achieved near-mythical status among herpetologists, cave biologists and conservationists,” said Andrew Gluesenkamp, director of conservation at the San Antonio Zoo. Meanwhile, the Fagilde’s trapdoor spider, known for building horizontal traps and tap dancing in front of potential mates, is being sought after seemingly vanishing from its home range in Portugal in 1931. The new list also includes the big puma fungus, not seen in South America since the 1980s, and pernambuco holly, a tree species in Brazil not recorded since 1838. Re:wild, which has the actor Leonardo DiCaprio as a founding board member, is also continuing to search for Attenborough’s long-beaked echidna, named in honor of Sir David Attenborough, which hasn’t been spotted in 60 years and is one of just five existing species of monotreme, which is a group of egg-laying mammals found in Australia and New Guinea. A tree-dwelling kangaroo from Indonesia and a pink-headed duck from India are also being sought by the organization. Since starting its search for lost species in 2017, Re:wild has confirmed the rediscovery of eight species through expeditions and scientific analysis, including a type of giant tortoise in the Galapagos islands and the world’s largest bee, found in Indonesia. There are many more species lost to science, however, with an estimated 2,200 species across 160 countries missing for 10 years or more. The loss of habitat, pollution, rampant hunting and climate change is fueling what scientists have described as the Earth’s sixth mass extinction, and the first to be driven by one species, in this case humans. “When we launched the search for lost species, we weren’t sure if anyone would rediscover any of the wildlife on our most wanted list,” said Barney Long, Re:wild’s senior director of conservation strategies. “Each new rediscovery has reminded us that we can find hope in even the most unlikely situations and that these stories of overlooked, but fascinating, species can be a powerful antidote to despair.” Long said the organization was now looking to conduct research expeditions and devise conservation programs for rediscovered species. This article was amended on 9 February 2022 to clarify that a fungus is not a type of plant.What, a CBeebies Top 20 list (8 February) without Bing, especially the episodes where Flop is voiced by Mark Rylance? The irony, the joy of the “grownup” cuddly toys showing the parents how to parent. And the natural empathy with Bing as he messes up yet again or floods the nursery floor. Unmissable. Nicholas Michaelides Reigate, Surrey • Washing at the sink with a kettle of water and a flannel was a normal part of growing up in my family in the 1950s and 1960s (Letters, 8 February). My grandmother used to advise us: “Wash up as far as possible, wash down as far as possible and then wash possible itself.” Lesley Barnes Greenford, London • Our church does indeed allocate separate sides for those wishing to maintain social distance and for those who are happy not to (Letters, 8 February). However, due to high local Covid case numbers, we currently still ask everyone to wear a face covering. Catherine Burchell Organist and reader, St Mary’s Walkley, Sheffield • Now that Jacob Rees-Mogg has been appointed minister for “Brexit opportunities and government efficiency” (Report, 8 February), will he take the opportunity to bring his business interests back from Dublin to the UK? Chris Sumner Waltham Abbey, Essex • Jacob Rees-Mogg’s oxymoronic “government efficiency” role reminded me of the position of Jim Hacker as minister of administrative affairs in the sitcom Yes Minister. Madeleine James Box, Wiltshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Re the energy price crisis (Letters, 6 February), by the time I put the kettle on in the morning, my house has already used £1 of electricity overnight. It is almost impossible to use less than 6 kilowatt-hours (kWh) a day even if you only run basics such as fridge, freezer, television, phone chargers etc. But a household running a bare minimum of appliances pays the same price for electricity as someone heating a swimming pool. More, in fact, because of the effect of the daily standing charge. One way to ensure that all households can afford a basic, essential level of usage would be to make the first 5 kWh of usage per day, per household very cheap (or even free, the equivalent of the tax-free income band). Then charge a progressively higher rate the more you use. And, like income tax, it would be progressive and redistributive without costing the exchequer a penny. Sue Beesley Dutton, Cheshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Adrian Chiles rightly described Dylan Thomas’s grave as “an “extravagantly simple affair” in an overspill church graveyard in Laugharne (Do not go gentle into that hot tub! A luxury spa is the wrong way to remember Dylan Thomas, 3 February). Correspondence held by the National Archives in Kew reveals that Caitlin, Thomas’s widow, wrote to the Home Office in the 1950s requesting that his body be exhumed and reinterred in the garden of his boathouse overlooking the Taf estuary. Caitlin said that the modest cross in a “bleak extension” of a church graveyard was not fitting for “Wales’ foremost poet”. The Home Office agreed to grant a licence (to give effect to her wishes) on application and payment of a £2 fee. Caitlin submitted an application but, for reasons unknown, never paid the £2 fee. So the Home Office took no further action and Dylan Thomas’s body remained where it was originally buried. Perhaps Caitlin came to believe that the humble church graveyard was a fitting resting place for her husband. After all, she lies there with him, and her name is also inscribed on that modest cross. Mike Pender Cardiff • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Your editorial is correct in calling attention to the longstanding failure to fund enough training places for doctors and nurses (The Guardian view on repairing the NHS: ministers are the problem, 7 February). Last year, 59% of new registrations to the General Medical Council register in England had been trained by other countries, and this number continues to rise, highlighting how far short we are in fulfilling our commitment to the World Health Organization code of practice on the international recruitment of health personnel to ensure an adequate domestic supply of health workers so that we cease to weaken health systems in low-and middle-income countries by actively recruiting their precious doctors and nurses on such an industrial scale. The number of medical student training places in the UK needs to double. This should not be as expensive to Treasury as feared, as the current putative costs are artificially set and do not reflect actual expenditure incurred by student training, either in the universities or in the health service. Prof Rachel Jenkins Former director, WHO Collaborating Centre, King’s College London 1997-2012 • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Julian Coman’s article quotes a list, from the Labour’s Covenant pamphlet, of the places we need to invest in “where people from different backgrounds, meet talk, argue and laugh” (Politicians may have forgotten about ‘community’, but British people haven’t, 7 February). While the list is commendable, public libraries are a surprising omission. Many people once saw them as the heart of the communities they served. They provide all the facilities that Coman outlines, but like the BBC they also inform, educate and entertain. However, in recent years they have fallen foul of Conservative policies. In the austerity forced on local government, around 800 places lost that beating heart. This has happened when people need to be made aware of the dangers of misrepresentation and misinformation: dangers that threaten personal and public decision-making and could destroy our democracy. More than ever, communities require access to trustworthy and reliable information that a professional library service can provide. Moreover, the pandemic has clearly demonstrated that reading is perhaps more popular than ever. Communities still need the 21st-century equivalent of the Whitechapel library, recalled in Bernard Kops’s poem, where people including immigrants and working-class autodidacts found: “That door of the library was the door into me / And Lorca and Shelley said ‘Come to the feast.’ / Whitechapel Library, Aldgate East.” Bob Usherwood Emeritus professor, University of Sheffield • Julian Coman’s encomium for “community” is vital and timely. He stresses the community of spirit, but there are structural changes that can greatly aid that spirit. One of the problems is that many parts of our cities and other urban areas have, through intrusive infill development, ceased to be “townships” and become suburbs. This effect can be mitigated in minor but noticeable ways, such as by having signage at community borders showing the historic name of that community and by developing voluntary initiatives that popularise community identity. Sports teams are particularly significant in increasing this. The other key initiative is to utilise the existing legislation to establish urban parishes. Very few neighbourhoods have done so – and they have been mainly in “posh” districts. If local authorities were committed to aiding such initiatives and using their administrative capacity to bring together myriad local community associations, there is every possibility of establishing many urban parishes that can then become focal points for community identity and activity. Michael Meadowcroft Leeds • Julian Coman’s article raised an important issue. Having witnessed and participated in many of Blair’s and Heseltine’s communitarian regeneration initiatives around Hackney, it is clear to me that Labour will have to change its ways and devolve power at a very deep level if it has any chance becoming the party of community. The closest it has ever come to this is during Livingstone’s first reign at the Greater London council, along with the Scarman-inspired urban programmes. It is from that experience, and the remnants of its positive effects that can still be found here, that we should now be learning. Adam Hart Co-director, Vortex Jazz Foundation; former executive director (1996-2012), Hackney Co-operative Developments • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Lando Norris has announced a new deal that will see the British driver remain with McLaren until 2025. The contract is a strong statement of the driver’s confidence in the team as Formula One prepares to enter a new era. With the 2022 season’s car launches under way, Max Verstappen has also said he is raring to go and take on Lewis Hamilton for the world championship. The Dutch driver won the title for the first time last year and at the launch of his new Red Bull RB18 car was confident in his ability to defend his crown. New regulations for the coming season ensure there will be no guarantees as to how competitive any team’s car will be but Norris clearly believes, in that climate, that McLaren can compete for race wins and even championships. The 22-year-old is entering his fourth season in the sport and last year achieved the best performances of his career. He took his first pole in Russia and would have converted it to a win but for late rain. He did manage four podium finishes and came sixth in the final standings. Norris revealed that he had been in talks with other teams but has opted to stick with McLaren, whom he joined in 2019. “Which teams? That is something I can’t say but you can probably guess,” he said. “I had to look at all the options. There were little chats here and there, but that is all, and nothing went further than that. The fact that I would have had those opportunities but have chosen to stay with McLaren is a strong message that this is where I want to be.” After a tightly fought contest, Verstappen beat Hamilton to the title with victory in the final race in Abu Dhabi. It was a controversial finale given the intervention of the race director, Michael Masi, and there has been further furore regarding Verstappen’s win on social media during the past couple of days, specifically in relation to radio messages delivered by Red Bull’s sporting director, Jonathan Wheatley, to Masi during the chaotic final lap in which Wheatley made suggestions as to how Masi should deal with lapped cars, further adding to the sense among many – Hamilton supporters especially – that the race director was influenced in Red Bull’s favour. However, the radio messages have been public since F1 released them on video four days after the race in December, and the FIA responded to the social media storm by noting it had already taken them into account as part of the inquiry into what went on in Abu Dhabi, the findings of which will be presented on Monday. “We are aware of this and it is part of the investigation,” read a statement from the governing body. Verstappen has been consistent in his stance that he won the title fair and square and, as he enters his eighth year in F1, the 24-year-old is more than ready to do battle again. “I am just looking forward to getting back in the car and start driving, to see how everything is handling,” he said. “Personally I feel good, what is important is you prepare yourself in the best way possible physically but in terms of the car we don’t know, so I am curious to see how it will behave on track.” Christian Horner, Red Bull’s team principal, is bullish about his driver’s chances. “Max was just phenomenal last year, an outstanding season for him,” he said. “His confidence is going to be sky high for 2022.”The most important thing is that Chelsea are one game away from winning the lot. This was an uneven performance from the European champions and although they stopped Al-Hilal from pulling off a shock, they will have to sharpen up when they face Palmeiras in the Club World Cup final on Saturday. After all it is unlikely that the Copa Libertadores champions will be forgiving if Chelsea are this sloppy again. There was an anxiety to their play throughout this semi-final and Thomas Tuchel, who was unable to travel to Abu Dhabi after testing positive for Covid-19, must have been bouncing off the walls of his living room as he watched his side struggle to keep the errors at bay. “We spoke to Thomas at half-time,” Zsolt Low, Tuchel’s assistant, said. “He had the feeling that the players were nervous. Chelsea have never won this competition – that’s why the players felt pressure.” It was heavy going at times and Tuchel, who could yet fly out to the Middle East if he tests negative, will see room for improvement. The German is too astute not to know that Romelu Lukaku’s giftwrapped winner did not hide the fact that Chelsea still have problems with their record signing. The reality is that Lukaku’s only goals since giving that interview have come against Chesterfield and Al-Hilal, whose devastation at full-time spoke volumes, and the worry for Tuchel is that his expensively assembled attack still shows no sign of clicking. Once again there was little edge in the final third. Chelsea missed too many chances and their failure to kill off Al-Hilal almost proved costly, only for Kepa Arrizabalaga to deny Mohamed Kanno and Moussa Marega with two stunning saves in the second half. “We lacked freedom,” Low said, bemoaning Chelsea’s vagueness in possession, although it should be pointed out that Al-Hilal put up a good fight. Leonardo Jardim’s enterprising side had impressed en route to the last four, putting six past Al Jazira in the previous round, and the Saudi champions were not short of threats in the final third. Odion Ighalo was a familiar face up front, even if the former Manchester United and Watford striker is not the sprightliest mover these days, and Al-Hilal threatened at times, Marega causing problems on the right and Matheus Pereira a nimble presence between the lines. This was a test for Tuchel’s side. The Mohammed bin Zayed Stadium was a boisterous place at kick-off, the noisy contingent of Al-Hilal fans urging their side to upset the odds, and there was an understandable rustiness to Chelsea at first. There was less than a minute on the clock when Mateo Kovacic gifted Ighalo a shooting opportunity and it soon became clear how much this tournament means to teams outside Europe, Ali al-Bulayhi typifying Al-Hilal’s desire when he somehow hooked the ball away from Lukaku just when the striker was about to burst clear in the 11th minute. By that point, though, Chelsea had taken charge. Kovacic was smooth in central midfield and Chelsea were dangerous when Hakim Ziyech drifted inside from the right. Chances soon arrived. Ziyech sent a fizzing drive inches over from 20 yards and Lukaku was guilty of a poor miss, flicking César Azpilicueta’s low cross wide from close range. At that stage it felt like it was going to be another trying experience for Lukaku. The Belgian’s movement was cumbersome, he kept straying offside and there was no hiding his lack of confidence when he wasted a chance to release Kai Havertz midway through the opening period. In that context it was difficult to know what to think when Lukaku put Chelsea ahead in the 32nd minute. Kovacic started the move, driving forward, but Al-Hilal only had themselves to blame for failing to clear Havertz’s cross. Yasir al-Shahrani got himself into a horrible muddle at the far post and when the left-back’s messy clearance bounced off Al-Bulayhi, Abdullah al-Maiouf had no chance of stopping Lukaku from beating him from close range. Yet does a scrappy goal against limited opposition mean that Lukaku’s woes are over? The £97.5m striker was barely involved after the interval and rarely appeared to be on the same wavelength as Havertz and Ziyech. It was not convincing, even if Havertz and Ziyech both went close in the second half. Chelsea, who replaced Jorginho with N’Golo Kanté at half-time, faded as the contest wore on and were indebted to Arrizabalaga in the end. Tuchel will not be fooled.You could tell that Boris Johnson thought he had just about got away with it. The last prime minister’s questions before the February recess safely negotiated. Two whole weeks ahead in which he could try to stop his backbenchers from thinking about parties and get them to focus instead on why they may possibly want him to remain as their leader. An uphill struggle, admittedly. But at least he had bought himself some time. Right now, every day longer he remained in Downing Street was a bonus. The guilty smirk had been replaced by a wide grin. The toddler haircut ruffled totally out of place. The bullshit meter off the scale. The bouncing up and down as he waved his arms excitedly. All was well with the world. Well enough, anyway. True, it hadn’t gone wholly to plan. After announcing the end of Covid – come the end of the month, he wasn’t that bothered if people lived or died from the disease – Big Dog had rather come unstuck when Keir Starmer had asked him about Kwasi Kwarteng’s fraud gaffe. Saying he was tough on fraudsters when he had just written off £4.3bn in Covid loans that had been scammed off the government wasn’t entirely convincing. And the Labour leader had also made him look stupid by pointing out he hadn’t really understood the chancellor’s loan-shark scheme to lend money to the energy companies that was then clawed back over the next five years. Only a fool would expect him to know the details of his own policies. And come to think of it, where was the chancellor? Normally he was by his side, but today Rishi Sunak had deliberately placed himself at least six places away. Carefully avoiding the scene of the crime and all that. Still, at least they no longer had to pretend to get on. But the main thing was that it was over. Starmer hadn’t been at his sharpest and his six questions had now been and gone. And Johnson had survived mostly unscathed and could now operate on cruise control for the next 15 minutes. Then he would be out of the chamber. At least that was the plan until Fabian Hamilton got called to ask a question. The Labour MP kept it short and sweet. The Daily Mirror had just published a photograph of the No 10 quiz night party in December 2020, with an open bottle of prosecco and a Boris who looked as if he had drunk most of it. Though he could also have been at the alcohol-based sanitiser. That would be hardcore. So how did the prime minister explain this one? Tory MPs immediately grabbed their phones to check out the photo. Nadhim Zahawi was devastated. Last year he had insisted the quiz couldn’t have been a party because there had been no booze. So now he just looked a prize idiot. He should have known that when Big Dog had assured him it had been a staff training seminar, it was a lie. “He is completely in error,” mumbled The Suspect. What the error was, exactly, he didn’t say. Instead his florid complexion turned pasty white. Not because he knew precisely what was in the photo, but because he didn’t. There were so many pictures of him at parties that it was hard to keep track of what was what. Was this the one in which he was sweating heavily, stripped to the waist, while forming a conga with other members of staff? Or was it the one where he was dribbling while lying unconscious in the corner with red wine stains all over his shirt? Then a further thought struck him. If the Met had already seen this picture of what looked like a party and had decided it didn’t meet their prosecution threshold, then the other 299 photos of the 12 parties they were investigating must be damning. Or what if this was one of the photos he had so far managed to keep away from the police’s prying eyes? Suddenly, his idea to have a vanity snapper record his every imperial move didn’t seem quite so good. Though for the first time the country was getting value for money for him. He was so busted. Originally he had insisted the rules had been followed at all times. Then that he had been sickened and furious that various members of staff had been partying. Then that he had been at the parties that weren’t parties but work events. Now we had reached the point where The Suspect wasn’t going to resign even if he was found guilty and fined. Hell, he could do what he liked. Nobble the police. Have Sue Gray whacked. Top of the world, Ma! Thereafter The Suspect rather fell apart. He trotted out the usual lies about the cost of living, tax rises, employment and Brexit but his heart wasn’t really in it. He seemed curiously passionless. He didn’t even really quibble when Labour’s Ruth Jones said there was a similarity between him having got Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe condemned to an extended prison sentence and his Jimmy Savile comments that had incited the harassment of the Labour leader. Rather he just pretended it was nothing to do with him. He wasn’t there. He couldn’t have done it. It wasn’t his fault if people kept on misconstruing what he said. Such bad luck that it keeps happening to him. The same with the accident-prone Guto Harri. Who could have predicted he might need security vetting over Huawei? He was even lulled into agreeing with the catatonically stupid Natalie Elphicke that the lorry queues near Dover were all down to Brussels bureaucracy. One day she’ll wonder why Kent wasn’t a car park when the UK was part of the EU. The Suspect dived for the exit. To be mobbed by his new team of four permanent private secretaries. All of whom had been chosen for their lack of discrimination, personality and intellect. “You were brilliant,” they said in unison. For a moment, Johnson revelled in the flattery. Then he spotted the long faces and the lack of support elsewhere on his own benches and remembered he was on borrowed time. An evening with Marina Hyde and John Crace Join Marina Hyde and John Crace looking back at the latest events in Westminster. On Monday 7 March 8pm GMT | 9pm CET | 12pm PST | 3pm EST. Book tickets hereFirst they were hit by claims they planned to cull wallabies on the Scottish island they are buying, triggering uproar. Now the broadcaster Kirsty Young and her husband, the Soho House founder Nick Jones, have been hit by another hurdle: a formal objection from the Woodland Trust against their plans to chop down scores of trees on Inchconnachan, an idyllic, heavily wooded island on Loch Lomond. The couple’s quest to restore Inchconnachan, owned until now by the same aristocratic Scottish family for more than 700 years, to its wild, natural beauty is under fire from a host of influential critics. Local residents, the naturalist and broadcaster Chris Packham, the Scottish Society for Prevention of Cruelty to Animals and now the Woodland Trust have raised objections, urging the pair to heavily dilute their plans to strip the island of all its non-native species. A petition opposing a cull begun by one critic, Craig Morrison, had nearly 60,000 signatures by Wednesday afternoon. More objections may follow. NatureScot, the government conservation agency, is studying the pair’s plans. The island, once home to a now extinct population of capercaillies, is covered by a number of legally binding conservation designations, particularly to preserve its ancient oak forest, which the agency enforces. In its letter of objection, the Woodland Trust argues that established non-native species such as Norway spruce have legal protection, even in an ancient woodland. It argues the couple’s building plans will also involve the unjustified loss of irreplaceable veteran trees. Jones and Young bought Inchconnachan, one of a small cluster of islands off Loch Lomond’s western edge, for £1.6m in 2020. Uninhabited for more than 20 years, the island includes a derelict and ramshackle old cottage, rusting wooden and cast iron sheds, crumbling concrete paving and a disused pier. It is also overrun by invasive rhododendron. It also boasts the world’s most northerly mob of red-necked wallabies, of unknown size. Originally introduced on to the 42-hectare island as a single pair by its then owner Fiona Bryde Gore, the then Lady Arran, in the 1940s, it was estimated the troupe’s population had surged to more than 60 by 2009. If that was accurate, that quickly dwindled. A recent heat map study suggested there were as few as seven still alive. Jones is a multimillionaire thanks to his global empire of private members clubs, while Young is the former host of Desert Island Discs. Several weeks ago they unveiled plans to build a luxury timbered holiday lodge on Inchconnachan, and install a new boathouse and an interconnecting board walk across the island, in a lengthy planning application submitted to Loch Lomond and Trossach’s national park, the area’s planning authority. “The island is a beautiful and sensitive place, well protected for its historic woodlands, habitat and natural beauty but it is in a declining poor condition and under growing pressure from an increasing number of visitors, antisocial behaviour and grazing herbivores,” their application said. “We believe a bold, high-quality, comprehensive, sustainable and committed long-term plan is required to reverse the declining condition of the woodlands and to make this island world class, both in terms of its habitat and visitor experience.” But their plans to control the marsupials, without specifying how in their application, triggered an immediate response. Buried in one of the ecologists reports submitted to the national park, there is an explicit reference to culling the wallabies, along with the fallow deer and grey squirrel that roam Inchconnachan. “Wallaby continue to contribute a negative impact on the woodland ground flora and regeneration of this island,” it said. The other reports are less specific but make clear the deer and wallabies are voracious grazing animals that ignore exotic spruce but burrow into native blaeberry bushes, creating tunnels through the undergrowth. Deer are culled by being shot but Jones and Young now say they never planned to shoot their wallabies. Last weekend, prompted by Packham’s recommendation to find non-lethal ways of removing them, the couple confirmed they would instead investigate relocating them. The SSPCA, an animal welfare charity, argues even that is unwise. The SSPCA doubts the pair will find a zoo or safari park willing to rehome them, and believes that would also be inhumane. Culling is rejected out of hand. Ch Supt Mike Flynn, the SSPCA’s senior officer, urged the couple to hire wallaby experts to properly study their impact on the island. “We could not support efforts to relocate the wallabies unless there was clear evidence they were damaging habitat on the island,” he said on Wednesday. George Anderson, a spokesperson for the Woodland Trust, added: “The location is covered by a site of special scientific interest, a special protection area and special area of conservation designations – and it is in a national park. If ancient woodland isn’t safe here then something is far wrong. We call on the planning authority to reject this application.” A spokesperson for Jones declined to comment.For more live Premier League action, join Scott Murray right here. That’s your lot! Thanks for tuning in and also for your email and tweets. Congratulations to Chelsea for making it to the final. See you next time! “It’s interesting that you mention how great Mount’s hair is”, emails Gerry in NYC. “I agree (and, being bald, really couldn’t call anyone out for lacking in this area anyway), but I have noticed that his recent performances being a bit off have coincided with him moving to a more feathered, almost 80s-ish hairstyle. I think the hairspray might be weighing him down!” Chelsea were expected to romp past the Saudi side, but made tough work of this 1-0 win. Romelu Lukaku’s first-half goal was fortuitous, bouncing off Al-Shahrani’s hip, and the Blues were kept in the game in the second half by a series of sublime Kepa saves. One in particular, from a long-range Kanno shot, was ridiculous. “Chelsea looked tired,” says Jimmy Floyd-Hasselbaink in the E4 (!) studio, and it’s hard to disagree with that. Chelsea are through to the final of the Club World Cup. A wholly unconvincing display, and the other finalists, Brazilian side Palmeiras, will be licking their lips at that Chelsea performance. 90+2 min: Kepa is time wasting, which shows the nervousness with which Chelsea are approaching these final minutes. 90 min: A real clash of heavyweights as Rudiger comes together with Marega, with the German coming out on top. Not for the first time tonight. Three minutes added on here. 88 min: Chelsea make their final change: Sarr on for Alonso. 86 min: This has been a poor half from Chelsea, but they have at least wrestled back possession in these last five minutes or so. Al-Hilal’s subs haven’t quite had the right impact. They seem to be lacking in shape. 84 min: Not quite sure what the reasoning is in playing Mount on the right wing. The England midfielder is so much better in a central No 10 role, and he’s had a torrid time since coming on. Hudson-Odoi would have been a much more natural choice, but it’s hard to know if that is Tuchel’s choice or Low. 82 min: Two yellow cards to mention, one for each side. Kovacic is penalised for a late challenge inside Al-Hilal’s box, before Al-Bulayhi also goes into the book. 80 min: Ten minutes left, and Al-Hilal go for broke. Two attacking substitutions, Carrillo is a real threat on the right. 78 min: Chelsea break, and Lukuku beats the offside track. He’s in … but a heavy touch allows Jang to recover. Lukaku chooses to check his run, and wait for support. He lays the ball back to Mount, but Kanno gets a crucial block to keep the score at 1-0! 76 min: Ighalo gets beyond Thiago Silva, and goes down, but the referee isn’t interested. Furious protests from the former Watford man. 74 min: Mount really does have a lovely head of hair. 72 min: That’s a much-needed change for Chelsea, who have really let this game slip. Another chance comes for Al-Hilal, with Jang heading just wide from a corner. Thiago Silva looks around, bereft. 70 min: Ziyech goes down in a crumpled heap, hoping for a free-kick but to no avail. Al Bulayhi tries to drag the Moroccan up by his shirt, and Ziyech responds angrily, confronting the defender. Ziyech has a frustrating second half and he’s substituted for Mason Mount. 67 min: A double chance for Al-Hilal. The Saudi club are really motoring now! Marega bullies his way down the right wing, cuts the ball back to Ighalo. The Nigerian has his goalbound shot blocked, but the rebound falls to Kanno, who sends a swirling effort just inside the post, but Kepa dives across to make a wonderful one-handed save! Wow, sensational stuff from the Spaniard. Chelsea are clinging on here a bit! 64 min: A very professional foul from Cuellar, who stops Havertz in his tracks in midfield. Yellow card for the Colombian. 61 min: Golden chance for Marega, but Kepa rushes out to make a magnificent save. Matheus Pereira, who has really come alive this second half, slips a beautifully weighted pass down the side of Chelsea’s defence and Marega races onto it, steadies himself but sees a low shot saved by Kepa. That’s brilliant from the keeper, who has had almost nothing to do all game, but kept his concentration to quash the danger. 59 min: Ziyech fizzes a volley towards the top corner after a nice lay-off from Lukaku, but Almuaiouf makes a quality save to his right, getting both hands to the ball, and collecting the rebound. 57 min: Ighalo with his first sight of goal! Matheus Pereira finds a pocket of space in midfield and feeds the Nigerian, but Thiago Silva makes a great block to keep Ighalo’s shot out. 54 min: Penalty shout for Chelsea, as Christensen goes down after a fairly obvious pull-back in the box from Cuellar in the Al-Hilal box. The referee doesn’t spot it! 52 min: Kante looking a little rusty, it has to be said. A couple of passes have gone astray since the Frenchman came on at half-time. Very uncharacteristic. 50 min: Al-Hilal with their best period of possession in the game, with Kanno finishing the move with a powerful drive, just a yard or two over Kepa’s bar. 48 min: Havertz hits the post! The German flies down the left wing, holding off Al-Burayk with ease, and dribbles all the way to the six-yard box. Havertz’s touch is a little heavy but he manages to dink the ball over the keeper, only for the ball to hit the outside of the post, and bounce clear! It was an acute angle, in fairness. Peeeeeeep! The players are back out. One change for Chelsea: Jorginho has been replaced by Kanté. It’s not clear if that is because of an injury or a tactical switch. Regardless, it’s a straight swap. Half-time reading, here’s the Fiver, fresh out of the oven. It’s 1-0 but could be so much more. Concerning for Chelsea that Thiago Silva finishes the first half on the ground, rubbing his knee. The Blues will hope that is not a serious knock. He’s so vital to that defence. 45 min: Al-Hilal have a promising free-kick on the edge of Chelsea’s box, but they take it short, and Salem squirts a harmless shot towards Kepa. At least the Spaniard has made a save now! 42 min: Have been really disappointed with Matheus Pereira, Salem and Kanno, who all shone brightly in the 6-1 win over Al Jazira. The first half has just passed them by. 40 min: Really good hold-up play from Lukuku, who collects a lofted pass from deep, holds off Jang, and lays a perfect pass off for Ziyech, who has two shots blocked inside the box. Lukaku was actually marginally offside as the ball was played in, but the Belgian is purring at the moment, and has the Al-Hilal defence on skates. 38 min: Jorginho is a lucky boy, given a soft free kick, just as Marega was streaming away on the counter attack. 35 min: The first real bit of incision from Al-Hilal, as Al-Shahrani plays a deft flick to release Salem on the left wing. Salem cuts inside but blasts his effort high and wide from the top of the box. Better, though, from the Saudi Arabian side. 33 min: How will Al-Hilal respond? Kepa is yet to make a save in the Chelsea goal. Havertz bursts to the byline, and gets his cross in at the second time of asking. The ball bounces off Yasir Gharsan Al-Shahrani’s hip and lands kindly for Lukaku, four yards out. The Belgian makes no mistake, sweeping the loose ball into the net. An understated celebration for his first goal in a month. 27 min: Feels like this is only a matter of time for Chelsea. 25 min: It’s been a frustrating half so far for Lukaku, but you can see the Al-Hilal defenders are scared of the Belgian. Lukaku is fed a pass by Kovacic, and the striker shrugs off the attention of Ali Al-Bulaihi before unleashing a fierce drive, that is straight at Abdullah Al-Mayouf in the Al-Hilal goal. 23 min: Fifa’s president, Giovanni Infantino, is here, apparently walled into his hospitality area by a barricade of sponsored mineral water. 20 min: Another chance goes begging for Chelsea! Havertz stands a perfect cross to the back post, Azpilicueta arrives and could easily volley it goalwards but instead cushions a touch back towards the penalty spot, crucially behind Lukaku, who was bursting into the box. Are Chelsea being too reserved in committing numbers forward? There doesn’t seem to be a natural No 8, with the double pivot of Jorginho and Kovacic. 17 min: A bad miss from Lukaku! Azpilicueta swings a low cross in, and Lukaku is first to it at the near post, but doesn’t get any touch whatsoever, and the ball rolls harmlessly across Al-Hilal’s six-yard box. 14 min: Al-Hilal break on the counter-attack! Chelsea are caught short, as Matheus Pereira finds some room on the left wing, switching play to Marega. Marcos Alonso completely misses his clearing header, and the ball rolls over Marega’s boot! He was in! 12 min: Kovacic is a little lucky to avoid a caution after a nasty challenge on Ighalo. Should really be a yellow card, that, and Jardim lets the fourth official know his thoughts on the sidelines. 10 min: Ziyech is the latest to let fly, from the top of the D, but this one fizzes a yard over! Chelsea are getting closer. The Moroccan should really have hit the target, it fell so nicely onto his favoured left foot. 8 min: Thiago Silva lashes a long-range effort from 30 yards but it skews wide. 7 min: Al-Hilal have lined up in a 4-2-3-1 with Ighalo leading the line. Chelsea’s 3-4-3 is the formation Tuchel tends to favour, particularly in the Champions League. 5 min: Al-Hilal’s defence, led by South Korean centre back Jang Hyun-soo, are playing an awfully high line here. It’s a dangerous game, with Lukaku and Havertz both looking to get in behind. 4 min: Around 1,000 hardy souls have made the journey to Abu Dhabi from London. They are being drowned out by the Al-Hilal support though. 1 min: A nervy start for Chelsea, as Kovacic loses his footing at the base of midfield. Matheus Pereira pounces and Ighalo has plenty of time to steady himself for a shot on the edge of the box, but drags his shot badly wide, when he had options outside him! He holds his hands up in apology. Peeeeeeeep! And we’re off. The teams are out! Chelsea will kick off, with Romelu Lukaku leading the line. This tournament is acting as a test event for Robo VAR, which should be in use by the World Cup at the end of the year, and in domestic leagues by 2023-24. Decisions should be almost instant, by using 12 separate cameras making for a better experience for everyone. More details here. Riyadh is less than a two-hour flight to Abu Dhabi, so it’s no surprise to see Al-Hilal supporters out in full force. Both teams play in royal blue normally, and as the designated away team, it will be Chelsea sporting their changed yellow strip. Petr Cech, Chelsea’s current technical and performance advisor, and goalkeeper in the 2021 final, has been talking pitchside in Abu Dhabi: It is a memory that is a it of a regret. Back in 2012 we had the expectations to come back with the trophy but we missed some chances. We had to wait another 10 years. First-team coach Zsolt Low, deputising for Tuchel due to the German testing positive for Covid, has been full of praise for Cech in the build-up to today’s match. He’s an amazing guy and supports us very well in these days. Petr is all the time with us. He has a very good feeling for when we need him, when we don’t need him. When we need him he will always step up, but he doesn’t want to disturb us all the time and be part of every discussion and every meeting. He’s given us a lot of support and we’re very happy that he’s with us. Worth mentioning that the last time Matheus Pereira faced Chelsea, he scored two and provided two assists in a sensational 5-2 for West Brom last year at Stamford Bridge … Al Hilal: Al-Maiouf, Al-Shahrani, Jang, Al-Breik, Al-Bulayhi, Cuellar, Marega,Kanno, Matheus Pereira, Salem Al-Dawsari, Ighalo. Subs: Al-Owais, Al-Jadaani, Jahfali, Al-Obaid, Al-Mufarrij, Abdulhamid, Al-Yami, Carrillo, Al-Shehri, Michael, Al-Juwayr. Chelsea: Arrizabalaga, Thiago Silva, Rudiger, Christensen, Azpilicueta, Alonso, Kovacic, Jorginho, Lukaku, Ziyech, Havertz. Subs: Bettinelli, Mendy, Sarr, Chalobah, Barkley, Saul, Kante, Kenedy, Pulisic, Mount, Werner, Hudson-Odoi. Defeat in the 2012 Club World Cup final still smarts for César Azpilicueta. Chelsea, crowned Champions League winners just a few months earlier, were confident of securing a sixth successive triumph for a European side, but South American champions Corinthians upset the odds to win 1-0, thanks to a brilliant performance from Paulinho in midfield, a goal from Peruvian striker Paolo Guerrero and some sublime goalkeeping from Cássio Ramos, with Chelsea having a Fernando Torres goal disallowed, shortly after Gary Cahill was sent off. Azpilicueta, who joined Chelsea earlier that season and is now approaching a decade at the club, winced as he was reminded of that defeat this week. It remains the only trophy he is yet to win with the Blues. It’s very difficult to be in this tournament, after 10 years you realise how difficult. Hopefully the experience will help us in this tournament. I’m really motivated. In 2012 it hurt a lot and it’s the only competition the club hasn’t won. To win it first time for the club is huge, we have to make it everything for us. We’re representing Europe; we know it’s going to be difficult. A place in the final against Brazilian side Palmeiras is at stake, with Saudi Arabia’s Al-Hilal Chelsea’s semi-final opponents today. Al-Hilal enjoyed the biggest win in Club World Cup history as they beat Al Jazira 6-1 on Monday to reach this stage, with Odion Ighalo (formerly of Watford and Manchester United), Matheus Pereira (formerly of West Brom), Peruvian André Carrillo and powerful striker Moussa Marega (formerly of Porto) all getting on the scoresheet. They are tricky opponents, led by former Monaco manager Leonardo Jardim, but just two days rest since the last round will benefit Chelsea. The Londoners have, however, travelled to Abu Dhabi without Thomas Tuchel, who is still in quarantine after testing positive for Covid-19 last Friday. The manager could join up with the squad on Friday if he tests negative. Kick off is at 4.30pm GMT, or 8.30pm if you happen to be in Abu Dhabi.In the often acrimonious back-and-forth between Russia and Ukraine in recent years, “fulfilling Minsk” has become something of a meaningless mantra: all sides agree to abide by the 2015 Minsk accords in public, but neither has any real intention of implementing the provisions of the agreement. Yet in his intensive peacemaking efforts this week, the French president, Emmanuel Macron, appears to be pinning his hopes on a renewed attempt to breathe life into the seven-year-old agreement. “The solution of the Ukraine question can be only political, and the basis of the solution can only be the Minsk agreements,” said Macron in Moscow on Monday. The next day in Kyiv, Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, reaffirmed to Macron what he has been saying for months: Ukraine is committed to fulfilling the Minsk accords, as long as this happens in the way Kyiv interprets them. Privately, however, Ukrainian officials are more downbeat. “Minsk is impossible to fulfil. It would lead to the destruction of Ukraine as a state if we did,” said one high-ranking government official. The Minsk accords were signed in February 2015, after a 16-hour overnight negotiating session in the Belarusian capital. Of the four leaders involved: Russia’s Vladimir Putin, Ukraine’s Petro Poroshenko, France’s François Hollande and Germany’s Angela Merkel, only Putin is still in office. The document called for an immediate ceasefire in the conflict in eastern Ukraine, and did bring major military hostilities to an end, but the conflict has continued to simmer and little progress has been made on any of the political steps. The agreement calls for the withdrawal of foreign troops and mercenaries, as well as constitutional reform in Ukraine that would provide for decentralisation and elections in the current territories, which are financed and administered by Moscow. For a long time, the main stumbling block was over sequencing. Kyiv insisted the separatists should first disarm, while Moscow demanded political reform first. There is little appetite in Ukrainian society for any Minsk-based settlement that could give parliamentary seats to Russia’s proxies, and essentially give Moscow a say in the running of Ukraine. There is also the fact that seven years have elapsed since the accords were signed. A de facto line of control now snakes through the Luhansk and Donetsk regions, and since the coronavirus pandemic hit, crossings have fallen dramatically in number. “The people on the other side have spent eight years being subjected to propaganda about Ukraine, most of them have been given Russian passports. Their leaders are Russian citizens. How are we expected now to integrate them back, and have their representatives sit in Kyiv? It doesn’t make sense,” said the high-ranking official. Russia has given out more than 700,000 passports to residents of the territories, according to a recent statement by a Russian official. Critics of the Minsk agreement say Poroshenko signed it in 2015 because a gun was pointed at Ukraine’s head, as Kyiv’s forces faced total military defeat from an enemy that was receiving covert support from the Kremlin. “From my point of view, the Minsk agreements were born dead,” said Volodymyr Ariev, an MP from Poroshenko’s party. “The conditions were always impossible to implement. We understood it clearly at the time, but we signed it to buy time for Ukraine: to have time to restore our government, our army, intelligence and security system.” He said many of the points in Minsk were incompatible with the Ukrainian constitution, and that with Russia, Ukraine could not be expected to fulfil its demands. “Macron cannot compel Ukraine to do it Moscow’s way,” said Ariev. Asked during his press conference with Macron about Ukraine’s reluctance to implement the Minsk accords, Putin used a phrase that some interpreted as carrying sinister undertones: “Like it or not, you’ll have to tolerate it, my beauty.” The next day, Zelenskiy responded that Ukraine was indeed “tolerant”, as it put up with so much from Russia. But keen to avoid a Russian invasion, as well as to remove the looming threat of one which is eroding Ukraine’s economy, Zelenskiy is also pushing Minsk as a viable solution, at least in public. Mykhailo Podolyak, an adviser to Zelenskiy’s chief of staff, said the accords could still provide a viable roadmap if interpreted correctly. “Within the Minsk framework it is really possible to pass to peace through any difficulties, but the steps and their content can only be those that fully respect the sovereignty of Ukraine,” he said.Scotland Yard is considering whether to investigate Boris Johnson over the funding of his Downing Street flat renovation after Labour’s lawyers claimed there was a “reasonable suspicion” that he had broken anti-bribery laws. Solicitors on behalf of Labour wrote to the Metropolitan police commissioner, Dame Cressida Dick, last week suggesting the force was “duty-bound” to begin a formal investigation. They said the prime minister may have acted improperly by having “linked” a request for funds to cover the refurbishment works – which eventually cost at least £112,000 – with a promise to “promote a project” backed by the benefactor. Last month the Met announced a criminal inquiry into 12 alleged Downing Street parties, including several attended by Johnson, after initially saying it would not investigate until the completion of the Sue Gray report. A series of messages exchanged in November 2020 between Johnson and David Brownlow, a Conservative peer and donor, showed the prime minister seeking funds for the refurbishment while promising to consider plans for a “great exhibition”. Publication of the messages last month, as part of letters exchanged by Johnson and his independent ethics adviser, Christopher Geidt, prompted claims that Johnson had acted corruptly. Labour’s lawyers, from the firm Edwards Duthie Shamash, claimed the contents of the three messages showed Johnson “chose to link” the request for Brownlow to approve money to spruce up the No 11 flat with an assurance he was “taking some steps” on the great exhibition project, known as GE2. There is no suggestion of wrongdoing by Brownlow. Brownlow thanked Johnson for thinking about the plan. Seven weeks later, the peer secured a meeting with the culture secretary, Oliver Dowden, to discuss the idea further. The government has refused to publish the minutes of that meeting but a spokesperson said GE2 was an “idea that wasn’t taken forward”. Labour’s lawyers said that despite an investigation by the Electoral Commission finding the Conservatives failed to properly declare a £52,801 donation from Brownlow’s company Huntswood Associates Limited, and another inquiry by Geidt that found Johnson had acted unwisely, there were other “matters left uninvestigated and unconsidered”. They said the previous investigations had not looked at potential corruption or bribery by the prime minister, whether further messages were exchanged between Johnson and Brownlow and what action the prime minister took when he promised to “revert” in relation to the great exhibition project. Gerald Shamash said in the letter to the Met: “It is respectfully suggested that the known facts and the clear, sensible inferences to which some of those facts give rise create such reasonable suspicion that, were the suspect anyone other than the prime minister, the Metropolitan police would rightly consider itself duty-bound to investigate. “Indeed, if anything, the fact that the suspicion arises in relation to someone in such a high office makes it more, not less, important in the public interest that these matters are investigated.” Shamash said Johnson would have broken the Bribery Act if, in the course of carrying out a public function, he had requested financial help and carried out his duties as prime minister improperly, whether intentionally or not. DI Akshay Chibber, a staff officer to Dick, acknowledged receipt of the letter and promised “an appropriate response in due course”. A Met spokesperson said: “A letter was received and acknowledged on Friday 4 February. It is being considered by officers from the Met’s central specialist crime [unit]. No investigation has been opened.” Brownlow declined to comment. He has cooperated fully with the two investigations so far, conducted by the Electoral Commission and Geidt. A No 10 spokesperson said: “These allegations are categorically untrue and a clear misrepresentation of the facts. Lord Brownlow, separate to his work for the emerging Downing Street Trust, put proposals from the Royal Albert Hall, the national institution and charity, to the prime minister. This was passed to the lead department, DCMS [the Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport]. It is a matter of public record that no project was taken forward by the government.” The extent of Johnson’s contact with Brownlow about the flat funding came to light in December, when the Electoral Commission confirmed the existence of WhatsApp messages between them. The revelation appeared at odds with the prime minister telling Geidt in May 2021 that he knew nothing about where the money to fund the renovation came from. Johnson says he did not know Brownlow was a source of funding rather than an organiser. After nearly a year of the costs being met by a combination of Brownlow, Huntswood, the Cabinet Office and the Conservative party, the Electoral Commission said the Cabinet Office confirmed in March 2021 that Johnson had “paid all bills with the supplier personally”. The prime minister was forced to apologise for not divulging the messages to Geidt but said he did not recall them and that there were “security issues” that prevented him from accessing the messages on his phone. The WhatsApp exchange Johnson to Brownlow, 12.59pm 29 November 2020 Hi David I am afraid parts of our flat are still a bit of a tip and am keen to allow Lulu Lytle to get on with it. Can I possibly ask her to get in touch with you for approvals ? Many thanks and all best Boris Ps am on the great exhibition plan Will revert Brownlow to Johnson, 3.44pm Afternoon Prime Minister, I hope you’re both well Sorry for the delay I was out for a walk and didn’t have my ‘work’ phone with me. Of course, get Lulu to call me and we’ll get it sorted ASAP ! Thanks for thinking about GE2 Best wishes David Brownlow to Johnson, 4.10pm I should have said, as the Trust isn’t set up yet (will be in January) approval is a doddle as it’s only me and I know where the £ will come from, so as soon as Lulu calls we can crack on - DavidThere are still unanswered questions over how the refurbishment of Boris Johnson’s Downing Street flat was funded. As Labour demands an investigation into the prime minister by the Metropolitan police, here is what we know so far. Why was there such clamour over PM’s flat renovation? It is not uncommon for new prime ministers to want to renovate their grace-and-favour Downing Street flat. A £30,000 annual grant, funded by the taxpayer, is available to them. Fresh from his landslide election win in December 2019, Johnson and his then partner, Carrie Symonds, now his wife, pressed ahead with renovating the residence they inherited from Theresa and Philip May. The renovation, under the high-end designer Lulu Lytle, cost at least £112,000, and included gold-coloured wallpaper and fittings. But the source of the funding became the biggest controversy. The Daily Mail initially reported Johnson wanted to set up a Downing Street trust headed by the Tory peer David Brownlow, letting donors pay for the upkeep of various parts of the estate. In response, Johnson said he had met all the costs personally. But his former adviser Dominic Cummings said he had told Johnson the plan to have donors secretly foot the bill was “unethical, foolish, possibly illegal and almost certainly broke the rules on proper disclosure of political donations if conducted in the way he intended”. While Cummings certainly had an axe to grind, it prompted Johnson’s ethics adviser, Christopher Geidt, to launch an investigation. Lord Geidt concluded the prime minister acted “unwisely” to proceed with the renovations without “more rigorous regard for how this would be funded” given the trust never came to fruition, but said Johnson assured him he “knew nothing” about the source of the payments “until immediately prior to media reports in February 2021”. However, the Electoral Commission then opened an investigation into whether a £52,000 donation from Lord Brownlow’s company, Huntswood Associates Ltd, had been declared properly by the Conservatives. It concluded the donation was not declared properly and fined the party £17,000. It also revealed that WhatsApp messages were exchanged between Johnson and Brownlow in November 2020. This prompted Geidt to reinvestigate, given the suggestion Johnson had known about the source of the money, despite claiming otherwise. Geidt ultimately concluded in January 2022 that he still believed Johnson had not broken the ministerial code, but cast doubt on whether he would still have found in May the previous year that the prime minister took all steps to make the correct donation and seek advice when he first became aware of the payments. Is there any further scrutiny Johnson could face? The only other person who could have investigated Johnson was parliament’s standards commissioner, Kathryn Stone. However, she assured No 10 in January that she would not be launching her own investigation into whether Johnson broke the MPs’ code of conduct. It was believed that given Johnson’s flat is used in his ministerial capacity, Geidt’s role for investigating potential breaches of the ministerial code was the final hurdle for Johnson to clear. Given the content of Johnson’s messages with Brownlow only became public in January 2022, Labour is calling for the police to investigate Johnson and why he asked Brownlow to approve more redecorating funds in the same message as he promised to look at a project known as the “great exhibition 2”. What do we still not know? Labour wants to know if there were further messages from Johnson, particularly related to the “great exhibition 2”. There is no suggestion that Brownlow has failed to divulge relevant communications. Another question centres on how Johnson ultimately paid £112,549 direct to the supplier of the renovations, before the supplier returned the funds from Brownlow and the Cabinet Office.It’s 25 years since James Grant, who had recently been made redundant from his position as an executive at Granada TV, published his first Jack Reacher thriller under the pseudonym Lee Child. There are now more bestselling books than years separating the author from his former career. The stories follow the dealings of the eponymous Reacher, a demobbed military policeman, who wanders the US unencumbered by possessions save a toothbrush and a passport. Along the way he solves crimes and deals comprehensively, often violently, with the bad guys. Despite the apparently blokeish content, with its technical descriptions of weaponry, deadpan sentences and lengthy fight scenes, they are nevertheless popular among a number of impeccably distinguished British literary women – Kate Atkinson, Dame Margaret Drabble and Lady Antonia Fraser among them. (And to be fair, not just women: Philip Pullman and the great Japanese novelist Haruki Murakami are also admirers.) Now the books are to have a fresh life, with a new adaptation launched on Amazon this month. Screen versions have stuttered in the past. Fans found it hard to accept neatly proportioned Tom Cruise as Reacher for a pair of movies, since the hero, according to the novels, is 6ft 5in and built like a tank. Also, some of the books’ most salient and attractive features are not so much the twists and turns of plot, but Reacher’s quiet, dry wit; the texture of small-town America; and his passing interactions with waitresses and barbers and librarians – all things that need time to unfurl, a quality that TV can afford. It is likely that fans will be more satisfied with Nick Santora’s adaptations than with the films. In lead actor Alan Ritchson, the makers have found, in the words of Guardian television critic Lucy Mangan, a performer “the size of a house and roughly as expressive unless called upon to be otherwise” – in other words, someone absolutely perfect for the part. There have been subtle tweaks: in updating the story to the present day, to the world of Instagram and climate crisis, Reacher makes jokes about recycling. And instead of buying new clothes whenever he needs them and binning the old ones, as he does in the books, he shops at a thrift store. Lest he sound too much like a paragon of modern virtues, though, there’s also the violence – which ought, by rights, to be unpalatable on TV. In its original form, the fighting is rendered slowly: it is tracked move by move by the author so that it becomes stylised. In the adaptation, by contrast, it’s all over blessedly quickly, but it retains the stylised nature of Child’s prose original; there’s a choreographed grace to it that makes it seem as much like ballet as actual fighting. Asked why he liked Child’s novels, Murakami replied, with typical (and almost Reacher-like) economy: “Everything’s the same!” That’s a little unfair, since Child has played with various fictional points of view and techniques in the books. But in one essential, Murakami is right. Reacher’s calm triumph over the bad guys is always the same. If only real life were like that.Many people will share the mayor of London’s anger and disgust at the Metropolitan police’s glaring failures, including some within the service itself. On Wednesday, Sadiq Khan warned that Cressida Dick, its commissioner, has “days or weeks” to win back trust, signalling he is otherwise ready to oust her. For some, her command of the operation that led to the shooting of Jean Charles de Menezes in 2005 should have barred her from the top job in the first place. After 2017, when she took over, confidence in the Met fell steeply. An explosion in the use of stop and search unnecessarily alienated communities, with little evidence it has led to sustained falls in violence. Then came Sarah Everard’s murder by serving officer Wayne Couzens, and the crackdown on a vigil in her memory; the sharing of pictures of murdered sisters Bibaa Henry and Nicole Smallman by officers; the failure to catch serial killer Stephen Port, which a jury found “probably” contributed to the death of three of his four victims. These and a spate of other stories have devastated trust. Dame Cressida herself was criticised for hampering the inquiry into the murder of private detective Daniel Morgan, in a report warning of “institutional corruption” in the service. Last week, the emergence of vile misogynist, racist and homophobic messages exchanged between officers at Charing Cross station was added to this appalling catalogue. For the public, as for Mr Khan it seems, it is the Met’s calamitous response as much as the events themselves that have destroyed confidence. Following Couzens’s sentencing, it told women to wave down a bus if they had concerns for their safety. Nine of the 14 officers involved at Charing Cross are still serving; extraordinarily, two have been promoted. It appears that Ms Dick and those around her just do not get it – or do not care. Some parts of the community have long had reason to distrust the police. But the fear that officers cannot be relied upon to protect and serve, and that they may instead pose a threat, is now increasingly mainstream. The Home Office reappointed Dame Cressida last autumn. The assumption is that if Mr Khan formally expresses no confidence then her position would be untenable; in 2008 Sir Ian Blair resigned as commissioner after losing the support of the then mayor – Boris Johnson. But that is a matter of precedent and common sense, not of agreed procedure. The situation is further complicated by the fact that the Met is investigating No 10 over lockdown parties (its reluctance to do so having further hit its reputation). No one imagines it is easy for a leader to change an institution such as the police. But change can come only from the top. The leader sets the tone and the standards: she can reward whistleblowers, and punish or remove those who fall short. Dame Cressida must be aware that beyond the question of her duty, there is an institutional calculation to be made. The police in Britain enjoy operational independence, but politicians carry the can when it goes wrong. If the service cannot sort itself out, the temptation may be for a more hands-on approach. It would not be in the interest of the public or the Met for politicians to direct day-to-day policing. The more profound and urgent issue is that the police cannot afford to be regarded with fear or contempt. Good officers are appalled by the actions of some of their colleagues. When the public lose faith, it doesn’t merely sap morale; a difficult and dangerous job becomes still harder and riskier. Mr Khan is right to put Dame Cressida on notice. If she will not take action, she should make way for someone who will.Emma Walmsley is at the starting line. That may sound a churlish assessment of years of graft to get GlaxoSmithKline’s consumer products division fit for demerger this summer, but it’s roughly accurate. The “step-change in growth”, as the chief executive puts it, for the core pharmaceutical division has always been the main event and that race has barely started. More generously, one can say it was an achievement to avoid stumbles during the warmup stages. Elliott Advisors, the noisy activist in the wings, ultimately proved only a minor distraction. Other shareholders showed no appetite for regime change and backed Walmsley and her strategy. The fact that Unilever put £50bn on the table for the consumer division vindicated the thesis that the Sensodyne-to-Panadol unit is a store of riches (even if the stock market still has to endorse that valuation). GSK’s share price has improved by a third since its sickly level of £12 a year ago. Yet £20-plus is really a minimum definition of medium-term success given that GSK was at £18 before the pandemic disrupted demand for the group’s bestselling shingles vaccine. It ought to be possible. Wednesday’s bang-in-line numbers for 2021 were accompanied by a forecast of 5%-7% growth in sales in pharmaceuticals this year and 12%-14% in operating profit. Walmsley’s five-year promise was compound rates of 5% and 10% respectively, so it’s on pace. As ever, though, investors look ahead. Seven potential drugs, including biggies for a respiratory virus, hepatitis B and rheumatoid arthritis, receive critical read-outs from the labs this year, the first big test on Walmsley’s watch of the quality of the pipeline. Further out, she may need a big pharma deal to ignite the next round of innovation – or, at least, that’s the City’s view. But she’s in the hunt. Her position looks as secure now as at any time in the past year. Arm across the ocean So much for the idea that Arm Holdings would return in glory to the London Stock Exchange, carried aloft by local investors who regret their former luddite ways. Masayoshi Son, the chief executive of SoftBank, crushed dreams of a happy homecoming for Cambridge’s finest chip designer with a few brutal words on Tuesday: “We think that the Nasdaq stock exchange in the US, which is at the centre of global hi-tech, would be most suitable [for a listing]”. This twist in the plot, sadly, was always a hazard. SoftBank’s attempt to sell Arm to Nvidia of the US has been slowly collapsing for months, but it was never guaranteed that London would be chosen for an alternative disposal via IPO. Arm was plucked from the UK market in 2016 but sentiment doesn’t count for much. SoftBank is a semi-forced seller and will list the company where it thinks it will secure the highest price. Despite Nasdaq’s wobble in recent weeks, that place is probably still New York. For the London Stock Exchange – and the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, the cheerleader-in-chief for UK tech – there is a question of how hard to fight to try to persuade Son to re-think. It would be embarrassing to mount a campaign and fail. A secondary listing in London is a feasible runner-up prize, but even that isn’t guaranteed. Blame Theresa May and Philip Hammond, the prime minister and chancellor in 2016. In their post-Brexit confusion, they blessed Arm’s takeover in exchange for a few loose pledges from SoftBank about jobs and investment in the UK. If they had also insisted that any re-listing of Arm would have to be in London, Son might have signed. Mutual mystery A minor miracle must have taken place at Liverpool Victoria. It is only three months since the board of the LV= mutual insurer was telling its members that “significant investment” was needed “to be able to compete effectively in the future”. Since it wouldn’t be fair to use internal capital (because with-profits policies might expire before there was a return on the investment), a takeover by Bain Capital was deemed essential. Well, the Bain deal was shot down by members and now merger talks with Royal London have failed. But, it turns out, LV= thinks its troubles have evaporated. The performance of the business “has strengthened the board’s belief in, and commitment to, the continuation of our status as an independent mutual,” says Seamus Creedon, the interim chair. To put it mildly, this claim needs a fuller explanation given previous statements. And the most baffling part of all is that Mark Hartigan, the chief executive and chief advocate for the Bain surrender, is deemed the right boss to lead an independent future. There is a credibility shortfall.The “vast majority” of Conservative MPs support the government’s net zero climate plans despite increasingly vocal opposition from a small number of backbenchers, according to a Tory environment group. On Tuesday the Net Zero Scrutiny Group (NZSG) of 19 Conservatives was accused of attempting to derail the government’s green agenda, linking it to the cost-of-living crisis and calling for cuts to green taxes and an increase in fossil fuel production. But the Conservative Environment Network (CEN), which represents 123 MPs and 15 Tory peers, insisted the party’s rank and file remained committed to the government’s climate agenda. “The vast majority of Conservative MPs support net zero,” said Jack Richardson, from CEN. “They voted to enshrine the UK’s net zero by 2050 target in law and stood on a manifesto to deliver on that pledge.” The NZSG has gained widespread media coverage in the past month, arguing the government’s plans to reach net zero emissions by 2050 have been dreamed up by out-of-touch elites and would impoverish working people, “making them colder and poorer”. Two leading members of the NZSG have links to an organisation often described as “climate-sceptic”. The group’s chair has also been accused by a leading climate institute of using misleading and inaccurate information. More than half of its members were involved in the European Research Group (ERG), which successfully pushed for the Brexit referendum inside the Tory party. This has led to fears of a similar “culture war” campaign around net zero and the end of the cross-party consensus on the need for climate action. The 19 Conservatives in the NZSG group say they do not dispute climate science or the need to decarbonise. Richardson said the overwhelming majority of Tory politicians understood the necessity – and potential benefits – offered by a rapid reduction in emissions. “Net zero is not only about staving off the worst consequences of climate change but delivering new high-paid, skilled jobs across the UK through a new green industrial revolution. “We need to do it fairly, let the market lead, and ensure taxpayers get value for their money, but the economic reward will be substantial if we get it right.” A spokesperson for No 10 said the government remained “fully committed to reaching net zero by 2050”. “By reducing our reliance on fossil fuels, we will eradicate our exposure to the volatile global energy prices, which are currently hiking up household energy bills,” they added. Separately, the business secretary, Kwasi Kwarteng, set out new plans to accelerate the rollout of renewable energy projects by holding auctions for support contracts every year from 2023. The annual auctions will offer renewable energy developers more opportunities to develop their projects, and help make the UK “less reliant on volatile fossil fuels and [create] more homegrown power”, Kwarteng said. Dr Simon Cran-McGreehin, head of analysis at the Energy and Climate Intelligence Unit, said: “More frequent, annual auctions under the net zero target will provide a steady stream of opportunity to British renewables projects supporting jobs in levelling up areas.” Most experts argue the government’s current climate plans are inadequate and failing – pointing to proposals for an increase in coal mining, a new oilfield in the North Sea and a massive expansion of the roads network. Greenpeace’s head of politics, Rebecca Newsom, said the government should ignore the “small minority of misinformed” backbenchers. “The vast majority of the country, young and old, Labour and Conservative, gets that the climate crisis is an existential threat and supports the idea of acting fast if we want to avoid the worst … Any government that’s committed to protecting people from extreme weather, creating jobs and a thriving economy should have no time for this nonsense.”The Morrison government has passed the religious discrimination bill in the House of Representatives after a marathon all-night sitting, despite Liberal moderates defecting to help add more extensive protections for LGBTQ+ students. The Liberal MPs Bridget Archer, Trent Zimmerman, Katie Allen, Fiona Martin and Dave Sharma crossed the floor against the government, helping Labor and the crossbench add protections for LGBTQ+ students into the Sex Discrimination Act. The main bill received a third reading at 4am, officially passing the lower house with Labor support after Wednesday’s resolution by the opposition caucus to fight for amendments but not oppose the bill at the final stage. The human rights amendment bill, which now prevents religious schools discriminating against students on gender and sexuality, passed shortly before 5am – despite a last-ditch attempt from the government to defeat its own legislation. Labor and several of the government’s own members were galvanised by the Morrison government revealing it will protect gay students from expulsion – but not other forms of discrimination – without protecting trans students at the same time. Zimmerman told the house the parliament could not send a message by “omission” by moving to fix sexuality discrimination but not gender identity discrimination. “I could not live with myself if I didn’t seek to address those issues.” Earlier, the Morrison government defeated Labor amendments to the statements of belief clause by the narrowest margin. Despite Archer and Zimmerman voting against the government, shortly after 2.30am the speaker, Andrew Wallace, used his casting vote to break a 62-all tie to thwart Labor’s amendment to the controversial clause. Further amendments to ban vilification on the grounds of religion and discrimination in the provision of in-home aged care services were defeated, with Zimmerman joining the Coalition, Bob Katter and Craig Kelly on those votes. The Liberal MP Warren Entsch, who earlier told parliament he didn’t believe the bill was necessary and still had concerns about statements of belief and LGBTQ+ children, nevertheless voted against all amendments, claiming it was necessary to “bank the successes” of other changes to the bill. Labor’s fight to amend the package of legislation will now move to the Senate, where it hopes support from the Greens, Rex Patrick, Jacqui Lambie, Stirling Griff and Liberal defectors including Andrew Bragg will help it win amendments defeated in the lower house. Bragg has already called for the statements of belief clause, which protects religious statements even if they offend, insult or humiliate others on the basis of protected attributes, to be removed in its entirety. Scott Morrison called for the bill to pass in a speech at 12.50am, arguing it was necessary to provide “the freedom” that migrants come to Australia to access. The prime minister told parliament he “earnestly hoped [the bill] would unite this place” and be achieved with bipartisan support. Morrison thanked members for “their commitment to the children we are raising in this country, and the best interests of their welfare”. He noted concerns about LGBTQ+ students, promising the government amendment would prevent the expulsion of gay children and arguing there would be a “time and place” to consider transgender students after the Australian Law Reform Commission review to follow in six months. He revealed that the government will set up a new select committee for youth mental health in parliament, to be led by Allen and Martin. In later debate, Anthony Albanese reminded Morrison that he had committed to him in writing on 1 December to prevent “any form of discrimination against a student on the basis of sexuality or gender identity” and had done the same before the Wentworth byelection in 2018. The Labor leader suggested that voters in Wentworth, where Sharma faces a fierce challenge from the independent Allegra Spender, would remind the government of that commitment. Anna Brown, the chief executive of national LGBTQ+ lobby group Equality Australia, said the passage of the religious discrimination bill was a “dark [day] for our community”. The Greens leader, Adam Bandt, accused Labor of supporting “Scott Morrison’s hate bill, saying it’s terrible but then voting it into law”. “For all their strong speeches, not one single Labor MP voted with the Greens and crossbench to oppose the bill,” he said. Votes in the Senate will be tight, with Labor likely to need the Greens, three crossbench senators and at least one government senator for every amendment. Patrick, Griff and Lambie have all confirmed they oppose the bill. Griff is likely to vote for the LGBTQ+ student protection, as the successful amendment was moved by Centre Alliance MP Rebekha Sharkie. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Patrick told Guardian Australia: “I do not want any discrimination against LGBTQ+ people – children or staff.” Earlier on Wednesday Pauline Hanson offered the Coalition a Senate lifeline, promising that One Nation will vote for the legislation despite its claim it would oppose all government bills over its handling of the pandemic. Labor has resolved to “insist” on any amendments passed in either house until Liberal members help pass them or Morrison withdraws the bill, setting up a potential impasse if the Senate makes further amendments. Albanese indicated in caucus that a further meeting could reconsider in the event of an impasse – leaving a pathway to pass the bill before the 2022 election. In parliament, Albanese described the bill as “flawed”, warning that although he supports prohibiting discrimination on the grounds of religion, “I don’t support doing it at the expense of increasing discrimination against others.”The government’s plan to drop all Covid restrictions a month early has threatened to open a rift between unions and employers, with the TUC warning it could be a “green light for bosses to cut corners”. The prime minister’s announcement that all domestic Covid-19 restrictions in England, including the requirement for people with the virus to self-isolate, will be dropped from 21 February, sparked jubilation from pub and nightclub owners that life will return to moribund city centres, but one business lobby group warned that “conflict and confusion” will follow unless there is clear guidance. People with Covid will be expected to stay at home, as they would with flu, but without a legal requirement backed up by hefty fines. Rules are also being relaxed in Scotland and Wales, and Northern Ireland intends to ditch most remaining curbs this week. The TUC urged employers to carry out proper risk assessments to keep staff safe at work, including checking whether they have adequate ventilation. It also called on the government to keep statutory sick pay a right from day one (rather than reverting to day four, as was the case before the pandemic), to ensure that all workers are covered by it, and to increase the level of sick pay. At the moment, about 2 million people, mostly women, do not earn enough to qualify. The TUC’s general secretary, Frances O’Grady, said: “Today’s announcement is not a green light for bosses to cut corners. “It’s also vital that ministers fix our broken sick pay system once and for all. Workers who are laid low by Covid must be able to make ends meet – not pushed into financial hardship. It beggars belief that millions still don’t have access to decent sick pay. This is leaving the country vulnerable to new variants and pandemics.” The warmest welcome came from the Night Time Industries Association (NTIA), representing more than 1,400 nightclubs, bars, casinos and festivals, which said it was “extremely pleased”. Michael Kill, the NTIA chief executive, said: “The impact of Covid isolation periods on the hospitality and night-time economy workforce has been extremely challenging for businesses. These proposed changes would be a welcome relief and would go some way to helping the sector recover.” Phil Urban, the chief executive of Mitchells &amp; Butlers, which has 1,700 pubs and restaurants including Harvester and All Bar One chains, said: “Lessening restrictions has to be good news for the industry. The one thing that’s missing is consumer confidence and that change could be the start of rebuilding.” Tim Martin, the chair of JD Wetherspoon, said: “It will be a long road back to normality, but this is a good first step.” The CBI business group said the lifting of restrictions would “be a symbolic moment as we move away from crisis mode to learning to live with the virus”. A spokesperson added: “Maintaining confidence is key, so firms are likely to continue extra measures to protect their staff and customers, as they have done since the outset of the pandemic. And keeping Covid infrastructure in place, like free mass rapid testing and access to vaccines, will still remain essential.” The CBI added that while hybrid working was here to stay, lifting restrictions would help draw staff back to offices, because “trade in our city centres for some sectors has taken a heavy toll”. Claire Walker, co-executive director of the British Chambers of Commerce, said: “Businesses will welcome the removal of the self-isolation requirement if there is crystal clear guidance on what this means for firms and their legal responsibilities to employees and customers. “Without clear guidance, there is a real risk that this move could increase conflict and confusion in the workplace. Firms also need to understand the government’s plan should there be further public health challenges that require a return to restrictions.” The Federation of Small Businesses said many small firms would welcome the move, as long as it was safe. Its national chair, Mike Cherry, said: “We’re urging the government to bring back the workplace testing initiative, remove the lower earnings limit for sick pay entitlement and extend the current [statutory sick pay] rebate for small firms to cover all time away from the workplace.” Tom Ironside, director of business and regulation at the British Retail Consortium, welcomed the return to a more normal experience for customers, staff and businesses, but said retailers would need further details of the plans. In the capital, Transport for London passengers will still be required to wear masks when they travel onbuses, trains and the underground. A spokesperson for the London mayor, Sadiq Khan, said the decision to keep the policy in place when compulsory mask-wearing was dropped last month would remain in place when Covid legal restrictions are relaxed later this month.Betty Davis, the trailblazing raw funk pioneer of the 1970s who spent decades after a blistering music career out of the spotlight, has died at the age of 77. The vocalist and ex-wife of jazz legend Miles Davis died of natural causes, according to her close friend, Danielle Maggio, an ethnomusicologist focused on Davis’s work, and the Allegheny county communications director, Amie Downs, Rolling Stone reported. Known for her overtly sexual lyrics and raw, wild voice, Davis was an influential musician and significant figure in New York’s late-60s music scene. Nearly all her catalog was recorded between 1964 and 1975. She released three albums in the 1970s – 1973’s Betty Davis, 1974’s They Say I’m Different and 1975’s Nasty Gal – which gained her a reputation as a cult hero for explicitness and sensuous carnality years ahead of her time. Born Betty Mabry in Durham, North Carolina, in 1944, Davis grew up in North Carolina and Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, before moving to New York at 17 to enroll at the Fashion Institute of Technology. She worked as a model and club manager, mixing in the city’s social scene with such figures as Andy Warhol, Jimi Hendrix, Sly Stone and Eric Clapton. But she was most interested in music; she began writing songs at 12 and recording some in the late 60s, catching the eye of Miles Davis. The two married in 1968 and endured a tumultuous, violent year together. “Every day married to him was a day I earned the name Davis,” she says in a 2017 documentary on her life, Betty: They Say I’m Different. She would appear on the cover of the jazz legend’s 1968 album Filles de Kilimanjaro, and served as the inspiration behind his song Mademoiselle Mabry. A close friend of Hendrix, she is also credited with introducing Miles Davis to the rock music of his time and steering him into the jazz fusion era of his career on such albums as 1969’s In a Silent Way and 1970’s Bitches Brew. Though she kept his name, Davis never wanted to operate in her ex-husband’s shadow. “I wanted my music to be taken seriously,” she said later. “I wasn’t going to turn into a Yoko Ono or a Linda McCartney.” Davis recorded her most transgressive work in the 1970s, with carnal lyrics and a lascivious performance style that opened doorways for such artists who openly explored sexuality as Madonna and Prince. As the Guardian’s Stevie Chick put it in 2016, Davis “roared, growled and rasped, her voice like erotic sandpaper, making Janis Joplin sound like Dionne Warwick”. Her work later inspired a new generation of artists, such as Afro-futurist singer Janelle Monae, who has credited Davis as “one of the godmothers of redefining how Black women in music can be viewed” who “opened up a lot of doors for artists like myself.” Neo-soul singer Erykah Badu has said, “We just grains of sand in her Bettyness.” Her music was never commercially successful and Davis abruptly left the music industry after recording her last album Crashin’ From Passion in 1979. She moved to Pittsburgh and did not record new music. “When I was told that it was over, I just accepted it,” Davis told the New York Times in 2018. “And nobody else was knocking at my door.” Following the 2017 documentary, Davis released her first song in over 40 years, A Little Bit Hot Tonight, in 2019, sung by Maggio. • This article was amended on 9 February 2022. It was originally stated that Davis was born in 1945, rather than 1944; and that she left the industry after her 1975 album, rather than her 1979 album. A picture of a Betty Davis stage show was also incorrectly used rather than the real Betty Davis. These have all now been corrected.