The number of women in FTSE 100 boardroom roles has jumped to 39.1% from 12.5% 10 years ago, data has revealed, even as equality charities said progress for women in senior leadership roles was severely lagging. In 2020, 36.2% of boardroom roles on the index were held by women, climbing dramatically from 26.6% in 2016, the global data company BoardEx found. However, the Fawcett Society said the figures do not capture the “shocking lack of diversity” laid bare in its 2022 Sex and Power Index, with “women of colour, disabled women and LGBTQ people missing from positions of power”. Jemima Olchawski, the Fawcett Society’s chief executive, welcomed the progress but said: “The devil is in the detail here. In the majority of boardrooms men continue to be overrepresented. When we look at the most senior positions of CEO and chair the progress is painfully slow.” Women make up only eight of the chief executives at the UK’s top 100 listed companies, leading some observers to argue that while progress is being made on gender targets, advances on women in senior leadership roles have stalled. The business secretary, Kwasi Kwarteng, said the BoardEx figures were evidence the UK’s “voluntary, business-led approach” to equality is working “without the need for mandatory quotas” as deployed in countries such as Germany. However, the Fawcett Society pushed back, with Olchawski saying “the voluntary approach has real limits” that mean “the laggards can simply opt out”. She called for a government requirement for companies to publish actions plans. According to the FTSE 100 figures, the UK climbed to second in international ranking of 12 similar countries – behind only France on almost 44% – rising from fifth place last year. The data refers to boardroom roles at the 100 largest companies by market capitalisation listed on the London Stock Exchange. Laura Whitcombe, a global campaign manager at the 30% Club, said there has been some great progress but added: “To focus on the boards could distract from the fact that we’re not making much progress at the executive level. “The pipeline of women progressing throughout organisations – right up to the top, to those executives that form the executive committee – that pipeline has got a bottleneck.” Women in boardroom roles for the top 250 companies is lower, at 36.8%, compared with 33.2% in 2020. Olchawski said it is “shocking” there are no women of colour on the FTSE 100 chief executive list. “We must break down the barriers that prevent women, in all their diversity, rising to the top,” she said. The FTSE Women Leaders Review, an independent government-supported organisation that reports progress on women’s representation and suggests recommendations, increased its voluntary target for FTSE 350 companies from 33% to 40% of board positions by 2025. “We know there is much more work to do and no shortage of experienced, capable women, ambitious for themselves and their company across all sectors of business today,” said Denise Wilson, the chief executive of the FTSE Women Leaders Review, who also urged progress in leadership roles. The data showed that 72 of the UK’s top 350 companies are still below a previous 33% target for women on boards. Liz Truss, the minister for women and equalities, said: “It is excellent to see the progress being made but we know there is more to be done.” She said the government plans to put forward measures to advance workplace equality but gave no further details.Britain’s urban hedgehogs are showing signs of recovery, according to a new report, but rural populations have fallen by as much as 75% in some regions in just 20 years. The charismatic prickly creature, voted the UK’s favourite mammal in 2016, has experienced a dramatic fall in numbers since the turn of the millennium due to loss of habitat, attacks by dogs, vanishing prey and being killed by traffic. However, new analysis of hedgehog surveys has revealed a stark distinction between the fortunes of the town and country hedgehog, with clear signs the urban population has stabilised and may even be on the up. Counting the nocturnal mammal is difficult, with the total UK population believed to be about 879,000 in 2018. They are now listed as vulnerable to extinction in Britain’s red list for mammals and are the subject of significant conservation efforts, with campaigns to create “hedgehog highways” to connect habitats and more than 100,000 “hedgehog champions”. The State of Britain’s Hedgehogs 2022 report, produced by the People’s Trust for Endangered Species (PTES) and the British Hedgehog Preservation Society (BHPS), brings together data from five ongoing surveys, with the two urban counts showing an upward trend and an estimated 200,000 to 250,000 hedgehogs in suburban and inner-city green spaces. “We’ve known for a long time there has been a historic decline in hedgehogs. But the report highlights the difference between urban and rural populations,” said Fay Vass, head of the BHPS. “The rural populations are continuing to plummet. They’ve been declining by 30% to 75% across different areas of the countryside since the year 2000. In contrast, the urban hedgehog seems to have stabilised and might even be starting to recover after having previously also been in freefall. So that’s a glimmer of hope.” The outlook for rural hedgehogs remains bleak, according to the report. While the east Midlands and east of England are home to some of the country’s largest population densities, they have also experienced significant declines, falling 74% and 35% respectively since 1994. In the last decade, the loss has been a third and a quarter of their respective hedgehog populations, according to the report. The mammals, which have been in Britain for at least half a million years, are primarily threatened by habitat loss and the accompanying lack of prey such as beetles and earthworms. Conservationists are trying to better understand the declines in the countryside and are working with farmers to help them better manage their land for the animals. Hugh Warwick, an ecologist who is leading a national campaign to make hedgehog highways a legal requirement on new housing developments, said: “We’ve got a slight uptick [in urban populations]. That’s really exciting but we must be cautious. It’s got to be put in the context of a massively degraded situation already.” To help the animal’s recovery, Warwick encourages gardeners to embrace messier gardens. “We must get rid of the cult of tidiness. It’s an absurd cult, which is driven by gardening programmes and glossy magazines. Gardens should be a place that we share with nature,” he said. Researchers at Nottingham Trent University are also investigating the relationship between badger and hedgehog populations, with evidence that the presence of badgers negatively affects the prickly creatures. Most abundant in the south-west of England and south Wales, badgers prey on hedgehogs and compete with them for food. Find more age of extinction coverage here, and follow biodiversity reporters Phoebe Weston and Patrick Greenfield on Twitter for all the latest news and featuresScott Morrison’s efforts to politicise Australia’s complex relationship with China seems to be further soiling his own flagging reputation. Like a bull in the proverbial, he has spent the past fortnight bombarding the airwaves with hastily googled dossiers and cold war-era panics to suggest an Albanese government would become an antipodean branch office of the Beijing Politburo. Large sections of the national gallery have embraced his China pivot, breathlessly reporting the attacks on Labor, amplifying intelligence community blowback and catastrophising operational incidents that would normally demand sober assessment rather than tabloid splashes. But this week’s Guardian Essential Report suggests the Australian public is neither as excitable nor gullible as sections of the media, with Labor regarded as the party better placed to manage Australia’s relationship with China. These results will seem counterintuitive to those of us who follow politics closely and are conditioned to assume the Coalition has a national advantage on national security. But when this issue is laid out in the context of Australia’s interests rather than the generality, the China attack does not appear to be working. The most effective scare campaigns connect with disengaged voters in a concrete way. For all its artifice, the 2019 assault on Labor’s plans to rein in tax concessions spoke to the hip pocket. So too Keating’s “no GST” demolition of John Hewson in 1993. Howard scared voters on interest rates in 2004 and Labor nearly did the same from opposition with Medicare in 2016. When incumbents have won elections on national security scares, they have done so when the issue was already dominating the public discourse in a way that people saw a direct connection with their personal wellbeing. Robert Menzies’ “reds under the bed” demolition of Herbert Vere Evatt in 1955 was in the heat of the cold war where Australia’s loyalties were clear, Soviet spies were being expelled and his political opponents were literally splitting down the middle. Howard’s “turn back the boats” election in 2001 was prosecuted in the aftershocks of the September 11 terror attacks. The latest attacks on Labor over China are different. While Australian politics has moved from a broad consensus on engaging with China to a more adversarial outlook as Xi Jinping has consolidated power, there is not the same immediate heat in the issue. Indeed, according to another question in this week’s report, the vast majority of voters see China as a complex issue to be managed rather than a threat to be confronted. In other words, the clear majority of Australians support a position which is the polar opposite to the government’s current tub-thumping. In fact, the only group of voters who see the Coalition as being better equipped to manage the China relationship are those in the minority who see China as a threat to be confronted. In this context, you can make the argument the prime minister is really doing nothing but talking to his base. And not even all of the base. For those in business relationships with China or in industries with trade exposure, the relationship has far greater meaning than a set of politicised debating points. On our figures, that includes a majority of Coalition voters. The implications of these findings are clear for Labor as well. Rather than being drawn into defending every nuanced statement made in the party’s name over the past decade it can safely characterise this as simply another distraction with the very real potential to undermine the national interest. And let’s not ignore the political risk inherent in the China gambit. An estimated 6% of Australians identify as Chinese-Australian, with numbers concentrated in some of the more marginal Coalition seats, especially Sydney’s Banks and Reid where well-credential Asian Australian candidates are standing for Labor. Further muting the prime minister’s attacks is his own credibility as the attack dog. Morrison’s personal approval has deteriorated another five points into net negative over the past month (44% approve/49% disapprove), while Labor leader Anthony Albanese is in positive territory for the first time (42% approve/ 39% disapprove). And on a raft of personal attributes, the prime minister’s stocks are in freefall. Looking at these numbers, the China strategy appears more like a Hail Mary from a leader flailing for an issue to galvanise fear of likely change than a seriously constructed voter persuasion proposition. These are the figures of a leader who has burnt most – if not all – of his political capital, who the public see as untrustworthy, out of touch and lacking vision. When considering the mishandling of the China card, the diminished stature of the dealer cannot be discounted. Of course, the PM may have a grander plan, a constant drip, drip of “on-water incidents”, maybe a round of Petrov-style expulsions of Chinese diplomats or academics. Perhaps a Russian invasion of the Ukraine will further heighten local anxiety about the state of the world. More likely the only national defence consideration on this issue is the one to keep him in power. We know Morrison is at heart a marketeer, testing messages on the run and iterating them until they stick. It took him months of tortious analogy to come up with “the Bill we can’t afford”. But there’s a broader principle in design and innovation that he would be well served embracing: when it comes to China it is in the national interest for him to “fail fast” and move on to his next confected scare campaign. Anyone mention “union bosses”? • Peter Lewis will discuss the findings of the week’s Guardian Essential Report at 1pm on Tuesday – free registration hereWe are bringing today’s blog to a close now. Here is a summary of developments: Free Covid tests in England will end on 1 April and those who test positive will no longer legally have to isolate from this Thursday, Boris Johnson announced in his ‘living with Covid’ plan. Charities have warned the ending of mandatory coronavirus rules in England will cause “huge anxiety” to immunocompromised and disabled people, leaving them feeling “abandoned” and “forgotten”. Iran has returned 820,000 donated coronavirus vaccines, State TV reports. Mexico reported 98 Covid deaths and 4,832 new cases. Brazil reported 318 Covid-19 deaths and 37,339 new cases, the health ministry said. France has reported 17,195 new daily Coronavirus cases compared with 59,003 on Sunday. Italy reported 201 Coronavirus daily deaths and 24,408 cases. Trudeau said emergency powers were still needed following the blockades caused by the so-called ‘Freedom Convoy’. The UK recorded 38,409 new Covid cases and 15 more deaths within 28 days of a positive test on Monday, government data showed. That is compared to 25,696 cases and 74 deaths reported on Sunday. Over-75s and people with suppressed immune systems in the UK are to be offered another Covid-19 booster vaccination in the coming weeks to increase potentially waning protection, after advice from the government’s vaccines watchdog. Germany expects vaccinations with Novavax’s Covid-19 vaccine to begin across the country over the course of this week, the health ministry said. Britons can now only order a free box of lateral flow Covid-19 tests every 72 hours, according to the government’s website. South Africa’s health department said it was changing Covid vaccination rules to try to increase uptake, as inoculations have slowed and the country has ample vaccine stocks. International tourists and business travellers began arriving in Australia with few restrictions today. On Monday the country removed its final travel restrictions for fully vaccinated passengers. New Zealand will lift Covid vaccine mandates and social distancing measures after the Omicron peak has passed, its prime minister, Jacinda Ardern, said. Nurseries in England continue to be severely affected by the pandemic, with the latest official data showing record numbers of early years and childcare settings reporting Covid cases at the end of last month. Jordan’s prime minister, Bisher al-Khasawneh, tested positive for Covid-19 during an official visit to Egypt, state news agency Petra news agency reported. Mexico reported 98 deaths from Covid-19 and 4,832 new infections, the health ministry said. This brings the overall death toll to 315,786 and the number of cases to 5,418,257. More reactions to the lifting of all remaining Covid restrictions in England, as reported by PA Media. Charities have warned the ending of mandatory coronavirus rules will cause “huge anxiety” to immunocompromised and disabled people, leaving them feeling “abandoned” and “forgotten”. The scrapping of free universal testing has been described as “not only reckless but dangerous”, with one charity saying that vulnerable people may be forced back into isolation. People who test positive for coronavirus will no longer be legally required to isolate from Thursday, and free universal testing will be massively scaled back from 1 April. Phillip Anderson, head of policy at the MS Society said: Throughout the pandemic, universal free testing has been a crucial tool, helping many vulnerable people to continue living normal lives by providing reassurance that those they are meeting do not have Covid. Taking this away is not only reckless but dangerous, and instead of ‘restoring freedom’ may force vulnerable people back into isolation, with no support from the government whatsoever. If we are to truly move forward and live with Covid, the government must ensure that friends and family of vulnerable people can get free tests, and they must improve access to antiviral treatments for those at risk. Helen Rowntree, director of research, services and engagement for Blood Cancer UK, said: The Government is lifting restrictions without a plan to protect immunocompromised people, for whom the vaccines are proving less effective. The prime minister may want the country to get its confidence back, but this will cause huge anxiety among immunocompromised people and leave many of them feeling abandoned. This will lead to people finding it more difficult to live their daily lives and, sadly, some people dying from Covid. James Taylor, director of strategy at disability equality charity Scope, said: Disabled people having to rely on the personal choices of others and having no control over their own freedom and safety isn’t ‘living with Covid’, it’s living with fear. The prime minister claims that we are moving towards protecting ourselves without losing our liberties, but what he fails to consider are the liberties of disabled people, Many will be feeling forgotten by this announcement. Ending self-isolation and phasing out testing will leave some disabled people ‘rolling the dice’ every time they leave the house, go to work or meet friends. Even going to the supermarket could be a life-threatening situation. Free tests have meant that anyone can access them whenever they need to, allowing people to test before visiting disabled relatives in care homes or carers to test before working with disabled adults and children. Putting a cost on Covid tests will create a barrier for some people, especially those struggling with their finances during a cost of living crisis. Lynda Thomas, chief executive at Macmillan Cancer Support, said: It is promising to see that extra Covid-19 jabs will be offered to people who are immunosuppressed, including many people living with cancer. But it’s implausible that two years into the coronavirus pandemic, the Government is still making significant changes to guidance and plans which affect half a million people, without consulting with them or the organisations which represent them. It is critical that the Government urgently identifies who will be included in the at-risk groups and who will be eligible for free testing to enable them to quickly access the antibody treatments they need. It is unfair and unacceptable to make these people wait. Jennifer Gonzales fears that Boris Johnson’s decision to lift all remaining Covid restrictions will end in “disaster”. The 56-old-year home educator says: “Covid is still here so we should carry on self-isolating if we get it. It is too soon to be changing that now.” Her view is typical of much of the nervousness in Horsham on Monday afternoon as the prime minister set out plans to lift restrictions. The West Sussex market town has the highest rate of Covid in England at 930 cases per 100,000 people. Speaking in Horsham’s Swan Walk shopping mall, Gonzales says she is also worried about the end of free testing. “Even with free testing, a lot of people haven’t been using it and if you have to pay for it even fewer will. We will be mingling with people with no restrictions who may not know they’ve got it. I think that will be a disaster.” You can read the full report here. Charley Piringi in Honiara reports: Frontline health workers in Solomon Islands have warned that its health system is on the brink of collapse as the country struggles to deal with a devastating outbreak of Covid-19. A senior doctor and two nurses at the National Referral Hospital (NRH) in the capital of Honiara have told of how there are no beds for Covid patients – leading to people dying on the floor of the wards – as well as a lack of facilities and staff shortages that have led to Covid-positive nurses being recalled to work and probationary nurses tending to critically ill patients solo, when they should be supervised by a more senior nurse. People are dying on the floor, the hospital is overcrowded … Sick people and dead bodies were all over,” a senior doctor at NRH said. “The morgue is full. It’s a sad experience. I have never seen this before.” Read more here. Boris Johnson’s ‘living with Covid’ strategy “fails to protect those at highest risk of harm from Covid-19, and neglects some of the most vulnerable people in society”, the British Medical Association (BMA) has warned. PA Media reports that Dr Chaand Nagpaul, BMA council chair, said: We recognise the need, after two years of the pandemic, to begin thinking about how we adjust our lives to manage living alongside Covid-19, but as the BMA has persistently said the decision to bring forward the removal of all protective measures while cases, deaths and the number of people seriously ill remain so high is premature. Living with Covid-19 must not mean ignoring the virus all together - which in many respects the Government’s plan in England seems to do. On the one hand the Government says it will keep monitoring the spread of the virus, and asks individuals to take greater responsibility for their own decisions, but by removing free testing for the vast majority of the population on the other, ministers are taking away the central tool to allow both of these to happen. Far from giving people more freedom, today’s announcement is likely to cause more uncertainty and anxiety. Crucially, it will create a two-tier system, where those who can afford to pay for testing - and indeed to self-isolate - will do so, while others will be forced to gamble on the health of themselves and others. After a bruising two years in which the UK failed to prove its resilience to a pandemic, the government hopes to re-cast the nation as a scientific superpower: a country that has built on the lessons of the crisis to deliver better research, more precision healthcare, and a more streamlined pathway to new drugs and vaccines. But the government’s decision to substantially cut back on free Covid testing, as part of Boris Johnson’s “living with Covid” strategy, already threatens to undermine pioneering trials and coronavirus surveillance that are the envy of other nations. Together, they are crucial for understanding how drugs keep patients out of hospital, how immunity is holding up in vulnerable care homes and hospitals and how the epidemic is unfolding around us. Read more here. Iran has returned 820,000 doses of coronavirus vaccines donated by Poland because they were manufactured in the United States, state TV has reported. Mohammad Hashemi, an official in the country’s Health Ministry, was quoted as saying that Poland donated about a million doses of the British-Swedish AstraZeneca vaccine to Iran. However, he added that when the vaccines arrived in Iran: ...we found out that 820,000 doses of them which were imported from Poland were from the United States. The Associated Press reports that Hashemi said: ...after coordination with the Polish ambassador to Iran, it was decided that the vaccines would be returned. In 2020, Iran’s Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei who has the final say on all state matters, rejected any possibility of American or British vaccines entering the country, calling them “forbidden.” Iran now only imports Western vaccines that are not produced in the US or Britain. This reported rejection of the vaccines comes as Iran struggles with its sixth wave of coronavirus infections as authorities say the aggressive Omicron variant is now dominant in the country. According to official figures, Iran has had more than 135,000 deaths from Covid-19 - the highest national death toll in the Middle East. It says it has vaccinated around 90% of its population above age 18 with two shots, although only 37% of that group has had a third shot. Brazil has reported 318 Covid-19 deaths and 37,339 new cases, the health ministry said. This compares with 406 deaths and 40,625 cases reported on Sunday. The South American country has now registered 28,245,551 cases since the pandemic began, while the official death toll has risen to 644,604, according to ministry data. Here is a round-up of some of the Covid developments around the world from Agence France-Presse: Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau defends his use of emergency powers to end weeks-long trucker-led protests over Covid restrictions, warning; “This state of emergency is not over.” Hong Kong will launch a vaccine pass scheme this week, officials say, as hospitals struggle under an Omicron-fuelled outbreak and the finance hub sees record-high departures. Novak Djokovic’s season, derailed in January when the world number one was deported from Australia before the Open, starts in Dubai. Coronavirus has killed at least 5,884,689 people since the outbreak emerged in China in December 2019, according to an Agence France-Presse tally, compiled from official sources on Monday. The United States has recorded the most Covid deaths with 935,335, followed by Brazil with 644,286 and India with 512,109. Taking into account excess mortality linked to Covid-19, the World Health Organization estimates the true death toll could be two to three times higher. France has reported 17,195 new daily Coronavirus cases, Reuters reports. This compares with 59,003 on Sunday. Health and the handling of the Covid-19 pandemic are a significant drag on the coalition vote, with one in three Australians less likely to vote for the Morrison government due to the level of public hospital funding, according to new polling. An Essential poll, commissioned by the Australian Medical Association, found voters who had traditionally supported the Coalition on health and hospital funding were now deserting them. Support in this key area had dropped, with 34% now questioning the government’s record. Only the Morrison government’s handling of the climate crisis and cost of living pressures registered greater levels of disapproval. Of those polled, 37% were less likely to vote for the government on climate, while 38% were not supportive of Morrison on cost of living. You can read the full report here. The Canadian prime minister, Justin Trudeau, has said emergency powers are still needed despite the progress police made in bringing an end to weeks-long protests by truckers and others angry over Canada’s Covid-19 restrictions. Lawmakers in parliament will vote on Monday night whether to allow police to continue to use emergency powers. Trudeau said there were some truckers just outside Ottawa that may be planning further blockades. His public safety minister noted there was an effort to block a border crossing in British Columbia on the weekend, the Associated Press reports. Trudeau said: The situation is still fragile, the state of emergency is still there. Even though the blockades are lifted across border openings right now, even though things seem to be resolving very well in Ottawa, this state of emergency is not over. There continues to be real concerns about the coming days. The prime minister said he was confident lawmakers would vote to continue to allow police to use the emergencies act, which allows authorities to declare certain areas as no go zones following the protests by the so-called ‘Freedom Convoy’. It also allows police to freeze truckers’ personal and corporate bank accounts and compels tow truck companies to tow away vehicles. Peter Walker outlines what the end of Covid restrictions means for people in England. France has 2,905 people in intensive care units for Covid-19 which is down by 18, Reuters reports. Italy has reported 201 Covid-19 daily deaths compared with 141 on Sunday, the health ministry has said. A further 24,408 cases were recorded compared with 42,081 on Sunday. More details from Boris Johnson’s “living with Covid” plan which was announced today can be found over at the politics blog here. Free Covid testing will end for the general public in England from 1 April and positive cases will no longer legally have to isolate from this Thursday, Boris Johnson has announced. Unveiling his “living with Covid” strategy, the prime minister told the House of Commons it was time for the pandemic response to be wound down. The strategy will end the availability of free PCR and lateral flow tests for the vast majority of people, apart from some symptomatic vulnerable and very elderly people. For more live updates from the UK, head over to our politics blog. Bulgaria’s prime minister Kiril Petkov has announced that the mandatory coronavirus “green certificate” will no longer be required for entry to restaurants, shopping malls and other public venues from 20 March. The health pass - a digital or paper certificate showing an individual has been vaccinated, tested negative or recently recovered from the virus - was made obligatory for most indoor spaces in the country last October. Its introduction sparked a series of protests in Bulgaria, the EU’s least vaccinated member state. Petkov told reporters today: We managed to pass through the Omicron wave without massive closures of schools or businesses... Our forecasts show that around March 20 it would be possible to end all restrictions in the country linked to the Green Certificate. Bulgaria will begin to ease coronavirus restrictions from 24 February, with access to shopping centres, cinemas, gyms and bars no longer restricted to people with a green certificate. The UK’s prime minister, Boris Johnson, is preparing to make a statement to MPs to unveil the government’s long-term strategy for living with the virus, in which he will announce the plan to end all Covid restrictions in England. For more live updates from the UK, head over to our politics blog. I will continue here with global coronavirus news, and the top Covid lines that emerge in the UK. The UK recorded 38,409 new Covid cases and 15 more deaths within 28 days of a positive test on Monday, government data showed. That is compared to 25,696 cases and 74 deaths reported on Sunday. Hello! I’m Léonie Chao-Fong with you on the live blog today. Thanks for following along for all the latest coronavirus developments. If you’ve just joined us, here is a quick snapshot of all the most recent news stories. Over-75s and people with suppressed immune systems in the UK are to be offered another Covid-19 booster vaccination in the coming weeks to increase potentially waning protection, after advice from the government’s vaccines watchdog. Germany expects vaccinations with Novavax’s Covid-19 vaccine to begin across the country over the course of this week, the health ministry said. The government hopes the new protein-based Nuvaxovid will help sway a sizeable minority that remains sceptical of the novel mRNA technology used in the most commonly used vaccines. Britons can now only order a free box of lateral flow Covid-19 tests every 72 hours, according to the government’s website. It comes ahead of Boris Johnson’s announcement later today that all remaining Covid restrictions in England will be lifted this week as he unveils the government’s long-term strategy for living with the virus. South Africa’s health department says it is changing Covid vaccination rules to try to increase uptake, as inoculations have slowed and the country has ample vaccine stocks. International tourists and business travellers began arriving in Australia with few restrictions today. Australia closed its borders to tourists in March 2020 in an effort to reduce the local spread of Covid, but on Monday removed its final travel restrictions for fully vaccinated passengers. New Zealand will lift Covid vaccine mandates and social distancing measures after the Omicron peak has passed, its prime minister, Jacinda Ardern, said on Monday. Nurseries in England continue to be severely affected by the pandemic, with latest official data showing record numbers of early years and childcare settings reporting Covid cases at the end of last month. Jordan’s prime minister, Bisher al-Khasawneh, has tested positive for Covid-19 during an official visit to Egypt, state news agency Petra news agency reports. All other official meetings have been cancelled, Jordan’s information minister said, including a scheduled meeting with Egyptian president, Abdel Fatah al-Sisi. Over-75s and people with suppressed immune systems in the UK are to be offered another Covid-19 booster vaccination in the coming weeks to increase potentially waning protection, after advice from the government’s vaccines watchdog. The Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI) has formally advised a rollout of an additional booster this spring for groups of people seen as most vulnerable to severe coronavirus. The recommendation is that additional boosters should be offered to people aged 75 or over, and residents in older people’s care homes, and anyone aged 12 or above who is immunosuppressed. The announcement came just before Boris Johnson’s formal unveiling of plans to end all domestic coronavirus restrictions across England including mandatory self-isolation. A decision on the precise plan was delayed at the last minute amid tensions between the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, and the health secretary, Sajid Javid, over funds for free Covid-19 testing. Groups seen as being at the greatest risk of severe coronavirus are also likely to be offered a further booster jab this autumn, before an expected rise in infections over winter, the JCVI added. As Hong Kong battles its worst coronavirus outbreak, pleas for the city’s large proportion of unvaccinated older population to get their jabs have been issued by authorities, medical experts and concerned family members. While younger Hongkongers have largely embraced the vaccination programme, the majority of residents aged 80 and above are resisting, South China Morning Post reports. Forty per cent of Hong Kong residents aged 70 and above remain unvaccinated, even though jabs became available to them last February. Many of those have cited concerns about the safety of the shots or lack of trust in the government. Sit Pui-yu, 72, said he will not take a Covid-19 vaccine even if his refusal would mean he was no longer able to access restaurants or markets. He told the paper: The government has never truly taken consideration of the elderly in every single measure and policy it has carried out since the start of the pandemic. I have lost trust in the government, so I have no confidence in its vaccination programme. Hong Kong reported 7,533 new Covid cases on Monday, a record high, and a further 13 deaths including a 11-month-old child. The provision of free lateral flow tests in the UK has been rationed ahead of the announcement of the government’s “living with Covid” plan, according to reports. Members of the public can now only order a free box of lateral flow Covid-19 tests every 72 hours, according to the government’s website. On Sunday, the website allowed people to order a box of tests every 24 hours. It has now been updated to say that people can order “one pack every 3 days”. The update comes ahead of Boris Johnson’s announcement to scrap most PCR testing and restrict free lateral flows, probably to older age groups. Here’s the full story on how tensions between the UK’s chancellor, Rishi Sunak, and the health secretary, Sajid Javid, have led to delays over signing off the government’s strategy to end all remaining Covid regulations in England, by my colleagues Jessica Elgot and Rowena Mason: Plans to sign off the government’s strategy to end all remaining Covid regulations in England have been delayed at the last minute amid tensions between the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, and the health secretary, Sajid Javid, over funds for free Covid testing. Cabinet ministers were told of the delay as they arrived at No 10 on Monday morning amid the final wrangling over the “living with Covid” strategy expected to be announced to the House of Commons in the afternoon. A government source said there was still no agreement between the Treasury and the Department of Health and Social Care on the extent of the testing cutbacks, although another source at the DHSC insisted Javid had accepted the fiscal position that most testing must end. The source denied Javid was seeking new money and said that instead he wanted to “reprioritise” his existing budgets by moving funds from other areas within the department to cover the additional testing. “DHSC are absolutely not asking for additional funding, they want to reprioritise within the existing budget,” the source said. Last week, the Guardian reported that the Treasury was driving efforts to reduce costs from an estimated annual £15bn, with an opening suggestion of cutting the budget by more than 90%, to £1.3bn. Javid is said to want to fund enough testing to ensure the survival of the Panoramic antiviral drugs trial, which officials believe would need free lateral flow tests for over-50s and vulnerable adults under 50 until at least September. The Scottish unit of French vaccine-maker Valneva has received a grant of up to £20m to partly fund the research and development (R&amp;D) of manufacturing its Covid-19 vaccine VLA2001, the company said. Valneva will receive the funds from Scotland’s national economic development agency Scottish Enterprise. The first grant of up to £12.5m will support the company’s efforts on its inactivated, whole virus coronavirus vaccine candidate. The second round of up to £7.5m will be used for Valneva’s other vaccines. The announcement comes after the UK government decided to scrap its agreement to buy 100m doses of Valneva’s Covid vaccine, amid allegations of a breach of agreement that the company has strenuously denied. “Rogue” antibodies that attack the lining of blood vessels may contribute to deadly blood-clotting in some coronavirus patients, according to a new study. Researchers at the University of Michigan studied the blood samples of nearly 250 patients hospitalised for Covid-19. They found higher-than-expected levels of “antiphospholipid autoantibodies”, which can trigger blood clots in the arteries and veins of patients with autoimmune disorders, in about half of the patients. While antibodies typically help the body neutralise infections, autoantibodies are antibodies produced by the immune system that mistakenly target and sometimes damage the body’s own systems and organs. In patients with autoimmune disorders, they can trigger blood clots in the arteries and veins. In Covid-19 patients, these clots can block vessels, triggering strokes, causing long-term damage to organs and lung problems that impair patients’ ability to breathe. More research is indeed but researchers say the study may lead to screening and treatment for Covid-19 patients at greatest risk of blood clots, both during the initial infection and later, among those who suffer from long Covid symptoms. We’re gonna have to individualise treatment for long Covid patients, Dr Jason Knight, a rheumatologist at Michigan Medicine and co-author of the study, said: There’s not gonna be a long COVID pill that is universally successful. Our education correspondent, Sally Weale, looks at Covid-19 figures in nurseries in England: Nurseries in England continue to be severely affected by the pandemic, with latest official data showing record numbers of early years and childcare settings reporting Covid cases at the end of last month. As the government prepared to lift remaining Covid restrictions, government statistics published on Monday revealed more than 5,000 settings reported one or more cases of Covid in the week beginning the 24 January. The total was slightly lower a week later, dropping from 5,189 to 4,559, but the National Day Nurseries Association (NDNA) said the figures showed staff and children were still catching and becoming ill with Covid. Purnima Tanuku, NDNA chief executive, said NDNA survey data for the second week in February showed absence rates for staff and children beginning to drop. “This will be a major relief for nurseries and parents but with absence still around 9% this shows the impact of the pandemic is not completely over for settings or children.” It was also confirmed by Ofsted that as of today nurseries and childminders would no longer be required to report to the watchdog if there was a confirmed case of Covid. “While settings will be relieved that the administrative burden of reporting cases will be eased … it shows that staff and children are still catching and being ill with Covid-19,” said Tanuku. “Nurseries are still telling us that Covid is impacting on how they staff and resource their setting and this must be taken into account by Ofsted inspectors when any visits take place; either by allowing deferrals or taking into account the pressures that settings and staff are under.” The Queen is expected to speak by telephone with Boris Johnson and conduct virtual audiences this week, a day after testing positive for coronavirus. The 95-year-old monarch, who is experiencing mild cold-like symptoms, is self-isolating at Windsor Castle where she expects to be at her desk continuing “light duties” over the coming days, Buckingham Palace has said. She is due to speak to the prime minister on Wednesday for her regular weekly update and is planning to go ahead with other virtual diplomatic audiences scheduled with foreign ambassadors, the palace said. Here’s an interesting thread from Dr Adam Kucharski, an associate professor in infectious disease epidemiology at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, on where the pandemic goes from here. A post-infection so-called “honeymoon period” can follow after an epidemic has peaked and begins to decline, he writes. As immunity accumulates in a population, we may end up in a situation where R (the effective reproduction number) drops considerably below one. In short, we shouldn’t assume that post-Omicron levels of infection are where things will stay for good, he writes. In the UK, a cabinet meeting where the prime minister’s plan to lift all remaining domestic Covid restrictions in England was set to be rubber-stamped has been delayed, PA news agency reports. The meeting, due to take place on Monday morning, has reportedly been shifted to the afternoon while Boris Johnson receives more briefings. The plan is still expected to be signed off, the agency understands. As part of Johnson’s “Living with Covid” plan, the legal requirement for anyone with Covid to isolate will be ditched a month earlier than planned. Free PCR and lateral flow tests for all will be axed to rein in public spending, which could be a point of contention between senior ministers. The tests will reportedly be kept for the over-80s. On Sunday, the prime minister told the BBC the UK spent two billion on testing in January alone and that such high expenditure did not need to continue. The national contact tracing service is also expected to be wound down and schoolchildren will no longer be told to get tested twice a week. Our Berlin bureau chief, Philip Oltermann, reports on the rollout of Novavax’s Covid-19 vaccine in Germany: Germany will offer its population a new protein-based Covid-19 vaccine comparable to conventional flu jabs this week, in the hope of swaying a sizeable minority that remains sceptical of the novel mRNA technology used in the most commonly used vaccines. About 1.4m doses of the Nuvaxovid vaccine developed by the US biotech company Novavax are to arrive in Germany this week, the country’s health minister, Karl Lauterbach, confirmed last Friday. A further 1m doses are to arrive the week after, with the German government’s total order for the year 2022 amounting to 34m doses. Novavax’s product has until now only been used in Indonesia and the Philippines, but was permitted for use in the EU last December. It is still awaiting authorisation in the US, as some concerns about the company’s production capacity persist. Unlike the novel mRNA vaccines produced by Pfizer/BioNTech and Moderna or viral vector made by AstraZeneca and Johnson &amp; Johnson, Nuvaxovid is a protein subunit vaccine. It contains a non-infectious component on the surface of the Sars-CoV-2 virus, which induces a protective immune response when the body’s immune cells come into contact with it. Novavax announced last Junethat its vaccine had proven more than 90% effective against symptomatic infections with the Alpha variant, in trials including nearly 30,000 volunteers in the US and Mexico. The company says its product is similarly effective against the Delta and Omicron variants, especially after a booster shot administered six months after the second jab. Germany’s Paul Ehrlich Institute notes that the data proving the vaccine’s efficacy against more infectious variants remains limited. Surveys in Germany suggest a considerable interest in the Novavax jab among the 19.8 million people in the country who have so far declined to take a jab against Covid-19. Out of 4,000 unvaccinated hospital workers surveyed in Berlin, 1,800 expressed an interest in the protein-based vaccine. In the northern states of Lower Saxony, the health ministry said 6,000 people had put their name on a waiting list for Nuvaxovid by early February. Some scientists question whether the new vaccine will prove a game changer in a country whose overall vaccination rate has been flatlining around 75% for months. Lars Korn, co-author of a current survey of anti-vaxxer attitudes conducted by the University of Erfurt, told public broadcaster ZDF that two-thirds of respondents would continue to completely reject any form of vaccination. Our Berlin correspondent, Kate Connolly, reports on how recent analysis of autopsies in Germany show how most people whose deaths were attributed to Covid-19 died of the virus. Analysis of autopsies in Germany carried out on Covid-19 patients has shown that 86% of people died as a direct result of the virus, rather than from other causes. Data from 1,129 autopsies on Germany’s DeRegCOVID register which was started in April 2020, have come to the definitive conclusion that most people whose deaths were attributed to Covid – even those of a higher age who would be more likely to have other conditions – died of Covid rather than with Covid. The data has been collected from 29 different locations, most of them university clinics or hospitals, throughout Germany, of deaths that occurred up to October 2021. The number of men who died considerably outweighed the number of women by 1.8 to 1. Among men, the majority were aged 65-69 and 80-84, while the majority of women who died were over 85. Pathologists said they hoped the analysis would help them to gain more information about the illnesses’ development. The evidence shows that during the first two waves of the virus, half of the patients who died, according to those who underwent a postmortem did so within two weeks of their first symptoms appearing. In the third wave, this had reduced to 41%. The main cause of death was irreversible damage to lungs due to acute adult respiratory distress syndrome (DAD/ARDS) followed by multiple organ failure. DAD/ARDS was frequently responsible for those deaths which occurred in the first two weeks, while multiple organ failure was more likely to occur in those patients who died from two to five weeks after their first symptoms occurred. The third most likely cause of death was bacterial or fungal infections in the lungs. In the remaining 14% of patients, Covid 19 accompanied other conditions. However, the researchers stressed their results were a conservative estimate. The fatal heart attacks and heart failure that killed patients with coronavirus may well have been a direct result of the infection, they said. In a statement, Saskia von Stillfried from the Institute for Pathology at the University Hospital RWTH Aachen said: The results confirm the evaluations on death certificates that majority of the Covid 19 patients died of and not with Covid 19. She said this was in line with data collected by the government disease control agency, the Robert Koch Institute. Hello everyone. It’s Léonie Chao-Fong here again, taking over the live blog from Tom Ambrose to bring you all the latest global developments on the coronavirus pandemic. Feel free to get in touch on Twitter or via email. We start with some breaking news. Jordan’s prime minister, Bisher al-Khasawneh, has tested positive for Covid-19 during an official visit to Egypt, state news agency Petra news agency reports. The agency quotes Jordan’s information minister as saying coronavirus tests after a meeting between Khasawneh and his Egyptian counterpart proved positive. All other official meetings have been cancelled, the minister added, including a scheduled meeting with Egyptian president Abdel Fatah al-Sisi. The prime minister will isolate at home after returning to Jordan, the report said. Here is a round-up of the day’s top Covid news stories so far: South Africa’s health department says it is changing Covid vaccination rules to try to increase uptake, as inoculations have slowed and the country has ample vaccine stocks. Hong Kong confirmed on Monday that its vaccine bubble will be expanded to include shopping malls and supermarkets, but said exemptions and random inspections would happen at some sites. International tourists and business travellers began arriving in Australia with few restrictions today.Australia closed its borders to tourists in March 2020 in a bid to reduce the local spread of Covid, but on Monday removed its final travel restrictions for fully vaccinated passengers. New Zealand will lift Covid vaccine mandates and social distancing measures after the Omicron peak has passed, Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern said on Monday. In the UK, anti-vaxxers will be banned from “harmful and disruptive” protests outside schools and vaccination clinics after Priti Patel accepted an amendment to a bill due to be debated in parliament this week. Boris Johnson will proclaim that the lifting of all remaining Covid restrictions in England this week marks a “moment of pride” when he unveils the government’s long-term strategy for living with the virus, despite concerns from scientists, health experts and Labour that the move is premature. Companies will have to pay for testing and decide policies on self-isolation for staff, a business minister has said in advance of Boris Johnson’s formal announcement that all remaining domestic Covid restrictions in England will end. A vast majority of Japanese people think the rollout of booster shots against Covid is too slow and give mixed reviews to Prime Minister Fumio Kishida’s handling of the pandemic, polls show. That’s it from me, Tom Ambrose. I’ll be back tomorrow but, for now, I’m handing over to my colleague, Léonie Chao-Fong, who will be along shortly to continue bringing you all the latest coronavirus news from around the world. South Africa’s health department says it is changing Covid vaccination rules to try to increase uptake, as inoculations have slowed and the country has ample vaccine stocks. The government is shortening the interval between the first and second doses of the Pfizer vaccine from 42 to 21 days and will allow people who have received two doses to get a booster three months after their second shot as opposed to six months previously, Reuters reported. It will also offer the option of “mixing and matching” booster jabs, with adults who were given one dose of Johnson &amp; Johnson’s vaccine being offered either a J&amp;J or Pfizer booster two months after their J&amp;J shot. Adults who received two doses of Pfizer will be allowed J&amp;J as well as Pfizer as a third dose. “The decision regarding which vaccine to administer as a booster should be guided by vaccine availability,” the health department said, adding that if both vaccines were available at a vaccination site, then using the same vaccine was preferred. An exception could be made if somebody requests a different booster dose or has a history of experiencing an adverse event following immunisation. South Africa has recorded the most coronavirus infections and deaths on the African continent. International tourists and business travellers began arriving in Australia with few restrictions today. Australia closed its borders to tourists in March 2020 in a bid to reduce the local spread of Covid, but on Monday removed its final travel restrictions for fully vaccinated passengers. Tearful British tourist Sue Witton hugged her adult son Simon Witton when he greeted her at Melbourne’s airport, the Associated Press reported. “Seven hundred and twenty-four (days) apart and he’s my only son, and I’m alone, so this means the world to me,” she told reporters. Travellers were greeted at Sydney’s airport by jubilant well-wishers waving toy koalas and favourite Australian foods including Tim Tams chocolate cookies and jars of Vegemite spread. Federal Tourism Minister Dan Tehan was on hand to welcome the first arrivals on a Qantas flight from Los Angeles which landed at 6.20am local time. “I think there’ll be a very strong rebound in our tourism market. Our wonderful experiences haven’t gone away,” Tehan said. Danielle Vogl, who lives in Canberra, and her Florida-based partner Eric Lochner have been separated since October 2019 by the travel restrictions. She said she burst into tears when she heard about the lifting of the restrictions, which will allow them to reunite in April. “I actually woke him up to tell him, because I thought it was big enough news to do that,” Vogl told Australian Broadcasting Corp. “He couldn’t believe it. He was like ‘Are you sure, is this true?’ and I’m like ‘Yes, it’s happening. This is over now; we can be together again’,” she added. Lochner was not eligible for an exemption from the travel ban because the couple weren’t married or living together. “It’s been a very long and very cruel process for us,” Vogl said. Tourism Australia managing director Phillipa Harrison said she expected tourist numbers would take two years to rebound to pre-pandemic levels. “This is a really great start,” Harrison said. “This is what the industry had been asking us for, you know, just give us our international guests back and we will take it from there.” Companies will have to pay for testing and decide policies on self-isolation for staff, a business minister has said in advance of Boris Johnson’s formal announcement that all remaining domestic Covid restrictions in England will end. Ahead of the prime minister’s scheduled statement on the government’s long-term strategy for living with coronavirus, Paul Scully said free testing would be phased out, arguing the money spent on it could be used better elsewhere. “We don’t test for flu, we don’t test for other diseases, and if the variants continue to be as mild as Omicron then there’s a question mark as to whether people will go through that regular testing anyway,” Scully told Times Radio. “But if employers want to be paying (for) tests and continuing a testing regime within their workplace, then that will be for them to pay at that point,” he said, adding that while the impact on the virus on clinically vulnerable people was a concern, “we’re not going to be having a testing regime for the next 50 years”. Under a plan being rubber-stamped by the cabinet on Monday morning, and outlined by Johnson in a Commons statement and subsequent press conference, the legal requirement for anyone with Covid to isolate will be ditched a month earlier than planned. Hong Kong confirmed on Monday that its vaccine bubble will be expanded to include shopping malls and supermarkets, but said exemptions and random inspections would happen at some sites. The government will launch a controversial “vaccine passport” on Thursday that allows only inoculated people to enter places such as supermarkets and clubhouses, a move some critics say raises privacy concerns in the Asian financial hub. The plan requires those aged 12 and above, except for those with medical exemptions, to have taken at least one dose of a vaccine in order to enter the specified premises. The final stage of the scheme, by the end of June, will see those older than 18 required to have had three vaccine doses, authorities said. Amid concerns over how the system will be policed and implemented, authorities said certain exemptions would be granted those who must pass through shopping malls during commutes and also for those ordering takeaway food. Random inspections will also be performed at some venues, amid limited resources. In the UK, anti-vaxxers will be banned from “harmful and disruptive” protests outside schools and vaccination clinics after Priti Patel accepted an amendment to a bill due to be debated in parliament this week. An opposition motion to grant councils the power to take tougher action to dispel anti-vaxx campaigners was passed by peers in the House of Lords last month. On Monday, the home secretary signalled that she would not seek to strike out the amendment when the police, crime, sentencing and courts bill returns to the Commons this week. The bill is undergoing “ping-pong”, whereby changes to the proposed legislation are debated by each house until MPs and peers come to an agreement. Patel will also table her own amendment, requiring a report on the nature and prevalence of “spiking” to be produced by the government. The practice has been a particular concern of ministers in light of warnings that drink and drug spiking have reached “epidemic” levels in the UK. Recent evidence submitted to the home affairs select committee showed that up to 15% of women and 7% of men had been spiked with alcohol or drugs. An amendment by Lord Coaker, a Labour peer, requires a similar report and has already been passed, but Patel will not accept it because she says it is too narrow, in that it only covers incidents related to sexual assault. Hong Kong was set to report 7,533 new Covid cases on Monday, a new record high, broadcaster TVB reported. It comes as the city battles to contain a surge in cases that has overwhelmed its healthcare facilities. A vast majority of Japanese people think the rollout of booster shots against Covid is too slow and give mixed reviews to Prime Minister Fumio Kishida’s handling of the pandemic, polls show. Anger over the Japanese government’s handling of the pandemic helped sink the administration of Kishida predecessor Yoshihide Suga, and Kishida faces a crucial election for the upper house of parliament in July, Reuters reported. About 73% of respondents to a Kyodo news agency opinion poll over the weekend felt Japan’s rollout of booster shots has been far two slow, though 54.1% approved of how it had tackled coronavirus overall. As of Friday, only some 12% of the population had received booster shots even though nearly 30% of the country is 65 or older and at greater risk without the protection of the booster, even with Kishida repeatedly promising to accelerate the programme. Kishida told a news conference last week that he has yet to receive the booster, but should get one early in March. Nearly half of respondents to the two-day telephone survey said it was “too early” to loosen border controls, which have among been the strictest among wealthy nations but were slammed by businesses and educators, a move set to take place in stages from 1 March. About 45.7% said the decision, which will open borders to foreigners except for tourists, came too early, Kyodo said, while 34.9% said it was “appropriate” and 16.3% saw it as too late. Boris Johnson will proclaim that the lifting of all remaining Covid restrictions in England this week marks a “moment of pride” when he unveils the government’s long-term strategy for living with the virus, despite concerns from scientists, health experts and Labour that the move is premature. The legal requirement for anyone with Covid to isolate will be ditched a month earlier than planned, while free PCR and lateral flow tests for everyone will be axed to rein in public spending and attempt to restore people’s confidence that life can return to normality. The tests will reportedly be kept for the over-80s. The national contact tracing service is expected to be wound down and schoolchildren will no longer be told to get tested twice a week. Fresh guidance is expected to be issued, similar to that already published about seasonal flu, designed to let individuals make their own judgments about the risk of catching or transmitting Covid. Following meetings over the weekend the cabinet will be assembled to rubber stamp the plans on Monday before a Commons statement by the prime minister and a press conference in the evening, likely to feature the government’s two leading pandemic advisers, Chris Whitty and Patrick Vallance. The changes will be announced on Monday and start to come into effect from later in the week. Hello and welcome to the global Covid live blog. My name is Tom Ambrose and I will be bringing you all the latest coronavirus headlines from around the world over the next couple of hours. We start with the news that New Zealand will lift Covid vaccine mandates and social distancing measures after the Omicron peak has passed, Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern said on Monday. The announcement comes as protesters occupying the parliament grounds again clashed with police. Inspired by truckers’ demonstrations in Canada, thousands of protesters have blocked streets near the parliament in the capital Wellington for two weeks with trucks, cars and motorcycles, piling pressure on the government to scrap vaccine mandates. Ardern refused to set a hard date, but said there would be a narrowing of vaccine requirements after Omicron reaches a peak, which is expected in mid to late March. “We all want to go back to the way life was. And we will, I suspect sooner than you think,” Ardern said at a weekly news conference. “But when that happens, it will be because easing restrictions won’t compromise the lives of thousands of people â not because you demanded it,” she said, addressing protesters. The demonstrations began as a stand against the vaccine mandates but have since spread to become a wider movement against Ardern and her government. On Monday, eight people were arrested for disorderly behaviour and obstruction, with human waste thrown over some police officers.Colombia has decriminalised abortion during the first 24 weeks of pregnancy, adding to a recent string of legal victories for reproductive rights in Latin America. The South American country’s constitutional court ruled five against four to decriminalise the procedure on Monday evening. The decision follows a series of rulings in Mexico and Argentina that lowered barriers to abortion. Previously, abortion in Colombia was allowed only where there was a risk to the life or health of the pregnant mother; the existence of life-threatening foetal malformations; or when the pregnancy was the result of rape, incest or non-consensual artificial insemination. “We celebrate this ruling as a historic victory for the women’s movement in Colombia that has fought for decades for the recognition of their rights,” said Erika Guevara-Rosas, Americas director at Amnesty International, in a statement. “Women, girls and people able to bear children are the only ones who should make decisions about their bodies.” “Now, instead of punishing them, the Colombian authorities will have to recognise their autonomy over their bodies and their life plans,” Guevara-Rosas, went on to say. As the ruling was handed down, protesters in favour of access to abortion clad in green – the colour adopted by the pro-choice movement – celebrated in front of Colombia’s constitutional court in downtown Bogotá, the capital. Anti-abortion protesters also demonstrated against the ruling. Abortion rights groups, collectively known as the Green Wave, sued to have abortion removed from the penal code. The movement had previously seen the constitutional court decide not to rule on the matter several times in the past two years. Reproductive rights groups estimate that as many as 400,000 abortions are performed each year in Colombia, with only 10% carried out legally. During 2020, at least 26,223 unsafe abortions were carried out across Colombia, according to Profamilia – a local reproductive healthcare provider. According to Causa Justa, a Colombian women’s rights coalition, at least 350 women were convicted or sanctioned for abortions between 2006 and mid-2019, including at least 20 girls under the age of 18. Latin America, a traditionally conservative region with a powerful Catholic and evangelical Christian lobby, has some of the world’s most restrictive abortion laws, often banning the procedure outright. In El Salvador, dozens of women have been jailed for homicide after suffering obstetric emergencies. “We applaud the constitutional court’s legal and political courage in recognising that women and girls are not second-class citizens,” said Paula Avila-Guillen, an international human rights lawyer and executive director of the Women’s Equality Center, based in New York. “In constitutionally protecting our autonomy over our own bodies and lives, the court is changing the lives of millions of vulnerable women and girls disproportionally harmed by abortion restrictions.” “We celebrate with Colombia’s Green Wave movement as the country becomes the third Latin American country to decriminalise abortion in the last two years,” Avila-Guillen said. “We know this will have a ripple effect in other countries in Latin America that have yet to take this step toward human rights and social justice.” Mexico’s supreme court decriminalised abortion last year, while parliamentarians in Ecuador last week eased regulations which now allow access to abortion in cases of rape. “While today we are celebrating this historic decision, the Green Wave is strong and growing, and the fight for reproductive rights and justice will not end until every person can access high-quality sexual and reproductive healthcare when and where they need it,” said Eugenia Lopez Uribe, the International Planned Parenthood Federation’s regional director for Americas and the Caribbean region, in a statement.Britney Spears has landed a “record-breaking” publishing deal for a tell-all memoir about her rise to fame, her relationship with her family and her experience living under a conservatorship for more than a decade. Page Six reported on Monday that publisher Simon &amp; Schuster had secured the deal for the pop star’s memoir for as much as US$15m (£11m, A$20.8m) after a massive bidding war involving multiple publishers. An unnamed source told Page Six that “the deal is one of the biggest of all time, behind the Obamas”. The president and first lady signed a deal worth an estimated US$65m to write multiple books for Penguin Random House in 2017. Guardian Australia has reached out to Simon &amp; Schuster for comment. The deal comes months after Spears successfully fought a court-ordered conservatorship, which had been put in place by her father, Jamie Spears, for almost 14 years. The conservatorship, typically for older or infirm people who can no longer make decisions for themselves, was instigated in 2007 after a period of mental illness for Spears. Rumours spread that the singer was being held in the conservatorship against her will, which lead to the creation of the #FreeBritney movement. In 2021 Spears gave public testimony about the conservatorship for the first time, telling a Los Angeles judge that she had been forced to work by conservators despite begging for breaks, and that she had no control over her finances, was denied her wish to marry her boyfriend, and was barred from removing her birth control despite her wish to have a third child. “I’ve been in shock. I am traumatised,” Spears said. “I just want my life back.” The judge suspended her father from the conservatorship in September, before it was lifted entirely in November. Spears said soon after that she believed her family members “should all be in jail” for the “demoralising and degrading” treatment she says she experienced under the arrangement. Spears recently publicly condemned her sister, Jamie Lynn, who made allegations about the singer’s mental health while promoting her own memoir on Good Morning America. Jamie Lynn alleged in the interview last month that Spears had once locked them both in a room while holding a knife and described her behaviour over the years as “erratic, paranoid and spiralling”. In response, Spears accused her sister of “sell[ing] a book at my expense”. Her lawyer issued a strongly worded cease-and-desist to Jamie Lynn, asserting that Spears would “no longer be bullied” by her family. “Although Britney has not read and does not intend to read your book, she and millions of her fans were shocked to see how you have exploited her for monetary gain. She will not tolerate it, nor should she,” the letter read. Last week, Spears was invited to US Congress to discuss her conservatorship legal battle, with two members of the House of Representatives writing to her to ask her to speak about her “empowering” story and “the emotional and financial turmoil you faced within the conservatorship system”.Mask rules are set to be relaxed in Australia’s three biggest states, with authorities also considering removing isolation requirements for household contacts of Covid-19 cases as part of a “big shift” towards living with the virus. The Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, announced that from 11:59pm on Friday, the public health recommendation for Victorians to work or study from home will be removed and masks will only be required in certain settings including public transport, hospitals and primary schools, and for workers in hospitality, retail and large events. It aligns with a similar plan which will take effect in New South Wales from Friday. “We’re going to a situation on Friday where there are essentially no Covid rules, or so few that it’s unrecognisable to what it was a year ago, and indeed what it was two years ago,” Andrews said on Tuesday. The Queensland premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk, also said her government would relax the requirement to wear masks in most indoor settings, from 6pm on 4 March. She told parliament the state was now confident that the peak of the Omicron wave had passed. “Mr Speaker smiles are back. We can put our masks away,” she said. Queensland will also scrap density limits for private homes, weddings and funerals and there will be no limits in food courts, hairdressers, gyms, private venues and universities from 4 March. Meanwhile, Andrews revealed he was in discussions with the NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, on a plan that would allow asymptomatic household contacts of Covid-19 cases to leave isolation to attend work. “That could be connected to third doses, although that would be more an honesty thing – you wouldn’t be able to prove it, Andrews said. “It will be another way of trying to encourage people to go and get a third dose. “What we know as we head into winter, we’ve got to do everything we can to try and have a better outcome when it comes to furloughing [and] as RATs become more and more available.” Workers in several critical industries including emergency services, education, food distribution, transport and freight were given an exemption from isolation requirements when a family member tested positive in mid-January. They are required to wear a mask at all times, travel directly to work and take regular rapid antigen tests. The federal health minister, Greg Hunt, said this system had proved effective. “It has worked well with our nurses. People have been very responsible. If they’ve had symptoms, they’ve not come to work.” Hunt said. Andrews defended the decision to extend mask rules for students in grades three to six as the vaccination rate among the age group is lower than anticipated, among other considerations. According to data from the department of health on Monday, 54.2% of Victorians aged 5 to 11 years old have had one dose of a Covid-19 vaccine. Just 344 of the more than 7,000 vaccine doses administered on Monday were for children in the age group. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning From Monday Victorian public hospitals will be able to resume all surgery, with capacity to be assessed based on staff levels and Covid-19 demand. Private hospitals will be able to resume surgery at up to 100% capacity. In announcing the new settings, health minister Martin Foley also extended the deadline for some workers required to receive three doses of the Covid-19 vaccine. The third dose deadline for education workers who had their second dose on or before 25 October will be extended by a month to 25 March, while fully vaccinated workers who are not yet eligible will have three months and two weeks from the date of their second dose. Workers who are recent international arrivals must get a third dose within four weeks of arrival. “We’re balancing the need to support our health system with the benefits of easing restrictions in a careful and sensible way,” Foley said. Australian Associated Press contributed to this report.Equality advocates have blasted the prime minister, Scott Morrison, for backing a “divisive and unnecessary” push by Tasmanian senator Claire Chandler to allow sporting groups to exclude transgender people from single-sex sports. Campaigning in the Tasmanian marginal seat of Lyons on Tuesday, Morrison said he thought Chandler’s proposed private member’s bill to amend the Sex Discrimination Act was “terrific” and he had encouraged her to pursue it. Under Chandler’s “save women’s sports” bill, which she introduced to the Senate earlier this month, changes would be made to the Sex Discrimination Act to “clarify” that the operation of single-sex sport on the basis of biological sex was not discriminatory. While the bill has little chance of being debated in the House of Representatives before the election, Morrison said he supported the legislation, which has been criticised by equality advocates. “I support it, as Claire knows. I think it’s a terrific bill and I’ve given her great encouragement,” Morrison said. “Claire is a champion for women’s sport and I think she’s been right to raise these issues in the way that she has. Well done, Claire.” But Charlie Burton, from Equality Tasmania, said the bill would strip transgender people of their “right to live as we are, casting us into an unequal, uncertain and unsafe status in the eyes of the law.” Burton said transgender women had been playing women’s sport and accessing women’s services for many years without any of the problems predicted by Chandler. “Tasmanian sporting organisations have been actively seeking guidance on how to be more inclusive, not less, with strong support from the Tasmanian government,” Burton told Guardian Australia. “We reject attempts to sow fear and division about policies that have worked well and have made Tasmania a better place for everyone.” Anna Brown, the chief executive of Equality Australia, said sporting groups had been working hard for decades to ensure inclusivity for trans and gender diverse people, saying “sport should be for everyone”. “In supporting this cruel, divisive and unnecessary bill, the prime minister once again underestimates the community’s support for trans and gender diverse children,” Brown said. “The Senate must act decisively and with the same conviction as their lower house colleagues by standing for the inclusion of trans kids by rejecting this bill in its entirety.” Brown said that the Sex Discrimination Act already allowed for discrimination on the grounds of sex, gender identity or intersex status by excluding people from competing in sport, where strength, stamina and physique was relevant. “Instead of considering how these exemptions could be narrowed, the Chandler bill would go further, and for the first time allow discrimination against children under the age of 12 years,” she said. According to the bill’s explanatory memorandum, the legislation intends to “ensure that organisers are not limited in their ability to operate single-sex sport by the threat of complaints of unlawful discrimination”. “The primary policy intent of the Bill is to acknowledge that categorisation by sex is a necessary and important mechanism to provide sporting participation and competitive opportunities for females. “It seeks to ensure that women’s single-sex sport is protected and encouraged, and that a male person is not entitled to demand inclusion into women’s sport on the basis of gender identity.” In introducing the bill, Chandler said that clubs faced the risk of legal action as the Sex Discrimination Act had “been used as a weapon” to pressure sporting organisations to allow males to play women’s sport. The prime minister’s support for Chandler’s push comes after the Coalition’s recent failed attempt to legislate religious discrimination laws after attempts to ensure transgender students were protected from discrimination. Five Liberal MPs crossed the floor to ensure the protection of gender non-conforming students under the Sex Discrimination Act, prompting the government to shelve its religious discrimination bill after a backlash from religious groups and faith-based schools. Burton said the debate over the treatment of trans children that accompanied the religious discrimination bill had seen “overwhelming” public and parliamentary support for protecting young trans people from discrimination, suggesting Morrison was “out-of-step with a country that prides itself on a fair go for everyone.” “In the past few weeks the prime minister has shown a complete lack of empathy for trans and gender diverse Australians and now he is using us as a political football. “We completely reject the cynical abuse of trans people as a weapon in the prime minister’s political and electoral game playing.” Brown also pointed to the “overwhelming outpouring of support”, including from within the Coalition, shown towards trans and gender diverse children during the debate on religious discrimination laws. “We know an overwhelming majority of people in Australia believe that trans and gender diverse people deserve the same rights and protections as other Australians, a fact that the Prime Minister failed to understand when he refused to fulfil his promise to protect trans kids in religious schools during the Religious Discrimination Bill debate.” North Sydney MP Trent Zimmerman, one of the five MPs who crossed the floor against the wishes of Morrison, published a letter and drawing on Facebook on Monday from a young constituent thanking him for “crossing the floor for my trans bro”. “After two weeks in Canberra coming home and finding this in my mail today meant the world to me,” Zimmerman said. Morrison made the remarks in support of Chandler’s bill while campaigning in the eastern Tasmanian seat of Lyons, where he announced an $804m Antarctica package to be spent over the next decade. The prime minister said the package ensured “Australia had eyes” on Antarctica, where China was becoming increasingly assertive. “Where others who have different objectives to us, well, it’s an opportunity for us to be there and make sure that we’re protecting Antarctica from more exploitative interests,” he said. Morrison also spoke about Russia’s incursion into Ukrainian territory, saying threats of violence were “being used to seek to advantage a nation’s position over others”. “Russia should step back, it should unconditionally withdraw, back behind its own borders and stop threatening its neighbours,” Morrison said. “It’s unacceptable, it’s unprovoked, it’s unwarranted, and Russia should understand that by seeking to invade another country, that this cannot advantage them, and it would seriously and significantly cost Russia.”If you were a disadvantaged child today in an Australian school, chances are high that a majority of the other children in your school would also be disadvantaged. Your school would most likely need more resources to have experienced special education experts; it probably would not have qualified mathematics and science teachers, and nobody to teach music. In this respect, Australia is an outlier among the richest countries in the world. No other wealthy nation concentrates disadvantaged children into disadvantaged schools like we do. That concentration effect has increased the socio-economic segregation between schools and has widened the achievement gap between affluent and poorer children that has been evident in international education comparisons and was confirmed by the latest Naplan data. Ten years ago, the Australian government launched the Gonski review of funding for schooling, a landmark proposal to correct the flaws in how our national resources are spent in education. A decade later, we are back to the debates about what effect money has on student achievement. Critics have claimed the Gonski review offered a flawed model for school funding and has therefore not achieved its aims. It is time to forget that review, they insist. We argue that Australia needs to fund schools according to the original Gonski review recommendations now more than ever. Here is why. The funding formula for schools in Australia was fundamentally flawed prior to the Gonski review in 2011. That is why the review was commissioned. The flawed formula meant that when more money was pumped into education, schools that needed funding the least were getting more funding while schools serving mostly disadvantaged students were not. Gonski’s solution to fixing persisting inequalities in Australian education correctly assumed that funding schools more fairly would benefit not just children with disadvantages but indeed all children. This was based on recommendations offered by the OECD, evidence by international research and advice by our own education experts. The evidence is overwhelming that money matters in education, especially for disadvantaged students. For example, Nobel prize-winning economist David Card has established a causal relationship between education expenditure and student achievement. Furthermore, recent meta-analysis found positive impacts from increased school funding on student outcomes. Ten years on from the Gonski review being debated in public, the question is: Were the recommendations from the Gonski review right, and are they still relevant today? The answer requires consideration of the two aspects crucial to success of any reform. Firstly, the quality of the recommendations, and then how accurately and successfully those recommendations were implemented. The Gonski review recommended that students, via the school they attend, should receive the funding they need to succeed calculated on their individual circumstances. This is the needs-based school funding model that is the internationally adopted standard in all high-performing education systems today. The model recommended a base level of funding for each student with additional loadings funded for students dependent on their individual characteristics, including disability and socio-economic status. Not surprisingly, public schools receive more of this funding given they enrol more than four out of five disadvantaged students. There is overwhelming Australian and international research showing that family background is a major factor explaining student achievement. Consequently, students’ socio-economic circumstances need to be considered when schools are resourced. The specific loadings in the funding formulas were designed to allow schools to better support students who face the sorts of disadvantages that affect their learning before they even arrive at the front gate of their school in the morning. This principle of needs-based funding of schools is as sound today as it was a decade ago – if not more, given that economic and educational inequalities will continue to play a destructive role in the post-pandemic recovery. Unfortunately, while the reforms and recommendations were right, their implementation has failed to deliver on the promise of the Gonski review. So, what went wrong? States and territories have implemented the Gonski’s recommendations inconsistently and the special funding deals for non-government schools were not removed. Most significantly, the commonwealth government put a straitjacket on the reforms on day one by declaring that no school would lose any money. That meant money that could have flowed to underfunded schools continued flowing to overfunded non-government schools. It is important to keep in mind that the extra funds that were allocated to schools started to flow in 2015 and only started as a trickle. Since then, schools serving disadvantaged students have seen significant increases in funding, not just because of the extra money but also thanks to Gonski’s changed funding formula. The Gonski funding reforms and the extra money has improved the services and support that many schools are now able to offer. But the fact is that all disadvantaged public schools, at least in New South Wales, are still underfunded. At the same time, during the past decade, public money to private schools has increased at five times the rate of public schools. The Gonski review had the potential to be an absolute gamechanger in Australian education 10 years ago. The momentum to make those much-needed reforms in school funding was watered down by ideological debates and political posturing. Consequently, the Gonski’s recommendations were not implemented as intended, and we can only speculate what the situation in our education would be today if we had kept the promise. • Pasi Sahlberg is professor of education policy at the University of NSW • Adrian Piccoli is honorary professor at the University of NSW and former NSW education ministerJapanese women have outperformed men in medical school entrance exams for the first time since universities admitted they had deliberately failed female applicants to inflate the number of male doctors. According to new government data, 13.6% of female candidates passed exams at 81 medical schools last spring, compared with 13.51% of men. It is the first time that women have fared better than their male counterparts since the education ministry started keeping records in 2013. The latest results are a reversal of those over the previous eight years, when the pass rate among men exceeded that of women by up to 2.05 percentage points. Japan’s academic world was shaken in 2018 by revelations that several medical schools had deliberately marked down female candidates, triggering accusations of institutional sexism and demands for greater transparency. Ten of the country’s most prestigious schools admitted that they had systematically discriminated against women to ensure a sufficient number of men were admitted. The gender-based manipulation of results came to light after Tokyo Medical University was alleged to have offered a place to the son of a senior education ministry official in return for a favour. The schools said they had deliberately failed female candidates due to concerns that women were more likely to quit their medical careers to start families amid a nationwide shortage of doctors. Of the schools that were found to have discriminated against female candidates, six had higher acceptance rates for women than for men in 2021. A higher percentage of women than men had passed at a small number of schools the year after the scandal, but this is the first time the trend has extended nationwide. An education ministry official said the data proved that women were no longer at a disadvantage when they applied for places at Japan’s highly competitive medical schools. “It has become clear that the acceptance rate will not be low only for female applicants,” the official told Kyodo news agency. The proportion of female doctors in Japan is still significantly lower than in other developed economies, however. A 2018 survey by the health ministry found that just 21.9% of doctors were women, the lowest share among countries belonging to the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, in which the average was 46% in 2015.Facebook has filed court documents rejecting claims by Australian billionaire Andrew Forrest that it should be held liable for cryptocurrency scam ads bearing Forrest’s unauthorised image, in part arguing the company’s terms of service protect it from liability. The social media giant has argued in court documents filed in California in January that because Forrest has a Facebook account, he has agreed to the company’s terms and conditions, which they allege protect it from liability. Forrest launched civil proceedings against the social media giant in the superior court in San Mateo, California, alleging Facebook’s failure to stop scam ads appearing on the platform constituted a “misappropriation of likeness”, “aiding and abetting fraud” and “negligent failure to warn”. The ads began appearing in March 2019. These ads use images of celebrities or other well-known people in the regions they are targeting. They are presented as a news story claiming the celebrity has made a “big investment” and the banks are shocked by how well that investment has done. If you click on the ad, it takes you to a fake news story that includes a link claiming to be a cryptocurrency investment scheme. Forrest has separately commenced criminal proceedings in the Western Australian magistrates court alleging that Facebook has breached federal money laundering laws by failing to stop the ads. Those proceedings are expected to be mentioned for the first time in March. In the US court, Forrest has argued his reputation has been damaged by the scam ads and Facebook is not merely a platform, but the publisher of the ads. Forrest argues this is due to how Facebook actively targets users for ads based on their location and interests, and other information. “Facebook is not simply providing neutral tools for bad actors to carry out fraudulent schemes. Instead, Facebook is utilizing its sophisticated method of collecting data, and then using that data to engage its users for longer periods of time with information, advertisements, and other material, irrespective of what that content is,” the court filing states. “Facebook is directly involved with developing and enforcing a system that subjects its users to illegal content.” In its response, filed in court, Facebook has argued that it cannot be held liable on a number of grounds, including that it is protected by section 230 of the US Communications Decency Act, which limits the liability of websites for third-party content posted on those websites. Facebook has argued the claims were “the classic kinds of claims that [have been] found to be preempted by section 230” and uniformly rejected by US courts. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The company has also argued that because Forrest has a Facebook account and has agreed to the company’s terms of service, he cannot claim the company is liable. “Specifically, section 4.3 of the TOS makes clear that Facebook is ‘provided ‘as is’’, that Facebook ‘make[s] no guarantees that [the platform] always will be safe, secure, or error-free’, and that Facebook ‘do[es] not control or direct what people and others do or say’ and ‘[is] not responsible for their actions or conduct (whether online or offline) or any content they share (including offensive, inappropriate, obscene, unlawful, and other objectionable content)’.” Forrest’s next response is due on Tuesday, with Facebook’s subsequent response due in March, ahead of a hearing in mid-April. Both Republicans and Democrats in the US have called for reform of section 230 in the past few years. Most recently, following the revelations of the Facebook whistleblower Frances Haugen, House Democrats introduced a bill which would remove the liability protections for companies with over 5 million users in situations where personalised algorithms serve up harmful content to users. Although it will not comment on the cases, Facebook has previously told the Guardian that it takes “a multifaceted approach to stop these ads” and is “committed to keeping these people off our platform”.This blog is closing now but you can continue to follow our live coverage on our new liveblog here. Thanks for reading Lithuanian prime minister Ingrida Šimonytė has said Russian president Vladimir Putin’s move to recognise two separatist pro-Moscow regions in Ukraine puts “Kafka &amp; Orwell to shame”. Putin just put Kafka &amp; Orwell to shame: no limits to dictator’s imagination, no lows too low, no lies too blatant, no red lines too red to cross. What we witnessed tonight might seem surreal for democratic world. But the way we respond will define us for the generations to come.” Lithuanian foreign minister Gabrielius Landsbergis also tweeted that Russia’s recognition of Donetsk and Luhansk “proves a total contempt for international law &amp; UN charters.” He added that Russia “must be recognised for what it is: a state outside international rules &amp; civilised norms,” and he called for other nations to respond with sanctions. The United States is coordinating with allies and will announce new sanctions against Russia on Tuesday, according to a Reuters report citing US officials late on Monday. The initial sanctions are reportedly in response to Moscow recognising the breakaway republics of Donetsk and Luhansk in eastern Ukraine as independent and sending “peacekeeping” forces there. However it’s unclear how significant the sanctions will be. The US earlier said it would not be imposing a broader sanctions package on Russia as its actions on Monday had not constituted a further invasions. US ambassador to the United Nations, Linda Thomas-Greenfield, speaking after a UN security council meeting on Monday evening, said: Tomorrow, the United States will impose sanctions on Russia for this clear violation of international law and Ukraine sovereignty and territorial integrity. We can, will, and must stand united in our calls for Russia to withdraw its forces, return to the diplomatic table and work toward peace.” Earlier on Monday, Joe Biden signed an executive order to prohibit trade and investment between US individuals and the two breakaway regions that Russia had recognised as independent. Earlier we reported Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy gave a televised address in the early hours of the morning, saying Ukraine is “not afraid of anyone or anything” after Russian president Vladimir Putin recognised separatist regions of eastern Ukraine as independent and then ordered in forces. “Ukraine most certainly considers these last Russian actions as the violation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of our country,” he said. “All responsibility for all the consequences connected with the decision mentioned above lies on the Russian political leadership”. Watch the highlights from his address in the video below. After a tense 90 minutes, the United Nations security council meeting has come to an end. It was an extraordinary war of words as representatives from the United States, the UK, France, Germany, India, Ireland, the UAE, Kenya and Ghana all emphatically urged peace and diplomacy in a bid to avert war in Ukraine. Addressing the session, US ambassador Linda Thomas-Greenfield cast doubt on Putin’s assertion that the Russian troops would take on a “peacekeeping” role in the Donetsk and Lugansk areas. He calls them peacekeepers. This is nonsense. We know what they really are. Referring to Putin’s recent allegations, the ambassador said his words amounted to a “series of outrageous, false claims” that were aimed at “creating a pretext for war.” Putin wants to travel back to a time when empires ruled the world. This is not 1919,” she added. The UK’s permanent representative to the UN, Dame Barbara Woodward, highlighted the humanitarian impact of a possible invasion. The actions Russia has chosen today will have severe and far-reaching consequences. First, to human life. An invasion of Ukraine unleashes the forces of war, death and destruction on the people of Ukraine,” she said. In seeking to redraw borders by force, Russia’s actions show blatant contempt for international law.” After about an hour we finally heard from Russia ,with Vasily Nebenzya calling the prior statements a “direct verbal assault” and saying they would go “unanswered”. Nebenzya also attacked the west for “nudging” Ukraine towards conflict and accused other nations of overlooking the plight of those in the Donbas. Most of you did not find any place for the nearly four million residents of Donbas ... Our western colleagues have been unashamedly cramming weapons into Ukraine.” Russia then alleged Ukraine was on the brink of “military adventure”. Allowing a new bloodbath in the Donbas is something we do not intend to do.” Finally, Ukraine’s ambassador Sergiy Kyslytsya took the stand, insisting that his country’s borders remain “unchangeable” despite Russia’s actions. We are on our own land. We are not afraid of anything or anyone, we owe nothing to anyone and we will not give away anything to anyone. There should be no doubt whatsoever. The international borders of Ukraine are and will remain unchangeable. We demand from Russia to cancel the decision on recognition and return to the table of negotiations. We condemn the order to deploy additional Russian occupation troops to the territories in Ukraine. We demand immediate and complete verifiable withdrawal of the occupation troops. The United Nations is sick. That’s a matter of fact. It has been hit by the virus spread by the Kremlin. Will it succumb to this virus?” Nicaraguan president Daniel Ortega has controversially defended Russia’s stance over Ukraine, saying president Putin was right to recognise two regions controlled by Moscow-backed separatists as independent, Reuters reports. Ortego, a long-time opponent of US influence in Central America, defended Putin’s move to recognise the independence of Donetsk and Luhansk during a speech in Managua. “I am sure that if they do a referendum like the one carried out in Crimea, people will vote to annex the territories to Russia.” Ortega also said Ukraine’s attempt to join the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) represented a threat to Russia. If Ukraine gets into Nato they will be saying to Russia let’s go to war, and that explains why Russia is acting like this. Russia is simply defending itself.” The selloff on Asian stock markets has deepened – and the rush to safe havens has accelearted – in the past hour so as investors become more and more jittery about the Ukraine crisis. The Nikkei is now off 2.3%, the ASX in Sydney has slumped 1.6%, and the Kospi in Seoul has retreated 1.75%. Bitcoin is down 6% at $36,633. Markets are also down heavily in China but the situation there has been complicated after tech stocks were hammered in the wake of news that state-owned firms and banks have been to told to start a fresh round of checks on their financial exposure and other links to Ant Group, which is owned by Jack Ma’s Alibaba. The Hang Seng has been worst hit, down 3.2%, while Shanghai is off 1.25%. In contrast, Brent crude oil rose 2% to $97.21, touching a new seven-year high on worries Russia’s energy exports could get disrupted, and spot gold hit a new six-month top of $1,911.56. Ukraine has responded. “It is with unease that I will now remove my mask”, Sergiy Kyslytsya says in his address, not because of Covid but because of “the virus that has hit the UN - the virus that is spread by the Kremlin.” Kyslytsya adds: We are on our own land. We are not afraid of anything or anyone, we owe nothing to anyone and we will not give away anything to anyone. There should be no doubt whatsoever. The international borders of Ukraine are and will remain unchangeable. We demand from Russia to cancel the decision on recognition and return to the table of negotiations. We condemn the order to deploy additional Russian occupation troops to the territories in Ukraine. We demand immediate and complete verifiable withdrawal of the occupation troops. The United Nations is sick. That’s a matter of fact. It has been hit by the virus spread by the Kremlin. Will it succumb to this virus?” Russia’s ambassador to the United Nations has responded to the string of emphatic pleas from world leaders and delegates at the security council meeting to de-escalate conflict in Ukraine. “I’ll leave the direct verbal assault on us unanswered,” Vasily Nebenzya told the meeting in New York. Nebenzya pointedly blamed Ukraine for sabotaging the Minsk agreements by not speaking to the Moscow-backed separatists in the east. Ukraine has been in conflict with pro-Russian breakaway rebels in eastern Ukraine since 2014. The Minsk accords were thrashed out in 2015 to end hostilities. Nebenzya also attacked the west for “nudging” Ukraine towards conflict and accused other nations of overlooking the plight of those in the Donbas. Most of you did not find any place for the nearly four million residents of Donbas ... Our western colleagues have been unashamedly cramming weapons into Ukraine.” Russia alleged Ukraine was on the brink of “military adventure”. Allowing a new bloodbath in the Donbas is something we do not intend to do.” China has given a very short address to the security council meeting. “All parties concerned must exercise restraint and avoid any action that may fuel tensions” and “seek reasonable solutions to each other’s concerns,” Zhang Yun said. He added that Beijing welcomed and encouraged “every effort for a diplomatic solution”. Kenya has delivered an emphatic plea to Russia to pursue diplomacy and not conflict. Martin Kimani said: We meet tonight on the brink of a major conflict. … diplomacy is failing … territorial integrity of Ukraine stands breached... Multilateralism lies on its deathbed tonight. Ghana’s representative to the UN, Harold Agyeman, says his country “deeply regrets the decision of the Russian Federation to turn its back on the Minsk agreements” and reiterated that Ghana “supports the internationally recognised borders of Ukraine”. Japan has joined the growing list of countries to publicly condemn Russia’s recognition of two breakaway regions in Ukraine as independent and its decree to build military bases there, a senior government spokesperson said on Tuesday. “These actions violate Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, violate international law and are utterly unacceptable,” said chief cabinet secretary Hirokazu Matsuno. He said Japan is monitoring the development with serious concern and will take actions depending on the actual situation, including deploying sanctions. India has called for “restraint on all sides” even after entry of Russian forces in eastern Ukraine, urging for all sides to help maintain peace and security. The UAE similarly called for restraint, avoidance of civilian casualties and a return to the Minsk agreements. Ireland’s UN representative, Geraldine Nason, says Ireland’s support to Ukraine is “unwavering”. “Ukraine has the same fundamental right as every other foreign state,” she says while calling Russia’s recent actions a “flagrant violation of international law”. Nason commended Ukraine for its restraint and said Russia’s continued actions serve to “further raise tensions”. The UK’s permanent representative to the UN, Dame Barbara Woodward, is now addressing her colleagues, highlighting the humanitarian impact of a possible invasion. Putin’s order to deploy troops into Ukraine “will have severe and far-reaching consequences,” Woodward said, warning of the dire consequences of war, death and destruction on the people of Ukraine. Russia’s actions “make a mockery” of the commitments it previously made to the Minsk agreements and is a “blatant contempt to international law”, she added. The actions Russia has chosen today will have severe and far-reaching consequences. First, to human life. An invasion of Ukraine unleashes the forces of war, death and destruction on the people of Ukraine. In seeking to redraw borders by force, Russia’s actions show blatant contempt for international law. Russia has brought us to the brink. We urge Russia to step back.” Thomas-Greenfield has just wrapped up her address. Putin wants to travel back to a time when empires ruled the world. This is not 1919.” President Putin asserted that Russia today has a rightful claim to all territories, all territories from the Russian Empire, the same Russian empire from before the Soviet Union from over 100 years ago ... In essence, Putin wants the world to travel back in time, to time before the United Nations, to a time when empires ruled the world. But the rest of the world has moved forward. It is not 1919. It is 2022. The United Nations was founded on the principle of decolonisation, not recolonisation, and we believe the vast majority of UN member states and the UN Security Council are committed to moving forward not going back in time.” The US ambassador to the UN said the consequences of Russia’s actions will be dire across Ukraine, Europe and the globe. “President Putin has torn the Minsk Agreement to shreds. We have been clear that we do not believe he will stop at that,” said Thomas-Greenfield, referring to the agreements of 2014 and 2015 that aimed to end conflict between the Ukrainian army and Russian-backed separatists in eastern Ukraine. US ambassador to the UN Linda Thomas-Greenfield is now addressing the meeting. Referring to Putin’s order of troops into eastern Ukraine on “peacekeeping duties”, she said: This is nonsense. We know what they really are.” Thomas-Greenfield said Russian recognition of regions in eastern Ukraine is “clearly the basis for Russia’s attempt to create a pretext for a further invasion of Ukraine”. “No one can stand on the sidelines,” she added while calling Russia’s actions a violation of the basic principle of international law. Rosemary DiCarlo, United Nations under-secretary-general, is addressing the UN security council emergency meeting. DiCarlo said she was “deeply concerned” regarding recent developments, citing 3,331 ceasefire violations in eastern Ukraine over recent days and urged for more negotiations. DiCarlo has urged the key players to work towards a diplomatic solution to the crisis, describing the the next hours and days as “critical”. The Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) has issued a statement following Russia’s recognition of Ukraine’s Donetsk and Luhansk region as independent. This step is a breach of international law and fundamental OSCE principles and runs counter to the Minsk agreements. As all OSCE participating States, Russia has undertaken commitments to respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of others. We call on Russia to immediately rescind this decision. The recognition will only fuel further tensions and will separate the populations living in these regions from the rest of their country, Ukraine. The UN security council emergency meeting is just about to get underway. After some behind-the-scenes arguments, the meeting will be an open briefing. Stand by for the latest developments. You can follow at this livestream US secretary of state Antony Blinken says US personnel will regularly return to continue their diplomatic work in Ukraine and provide emergency consular services, Reuters is reporting. All US state department personnel are now out of Ukraine having relocated to a hotel in Poland, US secretary of state Antony Blinken has annoucened. Earlier in the evening, the Biden administration ordered all remaining state department personnel out of Ukraine and to Poland after the embassy previously relocated from Kyiv to the western city of Lviv. Ukraine’s foreign minister Dmytro Kuleba said he will meet with US secretary of state Antony Blinken in Washington over the deepening crisis in Ukraine after the pair spoke again. “Taking into account the dynamics of the situation, I had another call with Secretary Blinken ahead of our tomorrow’s meeting in Washington, DC,” he wrote on Twitter. Russian president Vladimir Putin’s decision to send troops he called “peacemakers” into breakaway regions of Ukraine has not as yet constituted a further invasion that would trigger a broader sanctions package, a Biden administration official told Reuters. The United States will continue to pursue diplomacy with Russia until “tanks roll,” another official said. Putin’s recognition of the Donetsk People’s Republic and Luhansk People’s Republic in eastern Ukraine as independent and his order to send in troops was met with widespread condemnation from the west. However, one administration official told Reuters sending Russian troops into the separatist regions was not a departure from what Russia had done already, which was why it did not trigger broader sanctions. Speaking to reporters on a conference call, the official said: This isn’t a further invasion since it’s territory that they’ve already occupied. Russian troops moving into Donbas would not itself be a new step. Russia has had forces in the Donbas region for the past eight years... They are currently now making decisions to do this in a more overt and ... open way. Russia continues to escalate this crisis that it created in the first place. We’ll continue to pursue diplomacy until the tanks roll, but we are under no illusions about what is likely to come next.” China’s embassy in Ukraine has told its citizens and companies to refrain from travelling to “areas where the situation remains uncertain”, the Guardian’s Vincent Ni reports. The embassy also advised Ukraine-based Chinese citizens to stock up on daily necessities such as food and drinking water. In the short warning posted on the Chinese embassy in Kyiv’s website and its Wechat account, the embassy did not mention the latest development. Rather, it said the situation in eastern Ukraine “has had significant changes”. The rare warning comes as Russia recognised the Russian-controlled territories in southeast Ukraine as independent states. Stock markets in Asia Pacific are seeing big losses as the trading day picks up speed on Tuesday against a backdrop of looming conflict in Ukraine. The Nikkei has dropped nearly 2% in Tokyo, the Kospi is down 1.36% in Seoul and Sydney is off by 1%. Gold, on the other hand, is up again as investors seek its safe haven quality. It rose 0.2% at $1,909.54 per ounce. Brent crude oil is up 1.7% at $97.09 a barrel. Ukraine’s president Volodymyr Zelenskiy gave a televised address in the early hours of Tuesday morning, Ukraine time, ruling out any territorial concessions and calling for peace. Zelenskiy’s remarks followed a tumultuous day in which Russia appeared to be moving closer to an invasion, with Vladimir Putin recognising two Russian-backed separatist regions in eastern Ukraine as independent and ordering forces to the region. Zelenskiy said Ukraine was committed to peace and diplomacy while describing the actions of the Russian federation as a violation of Ukraine’s integrity and sovereignty. The Kyiv Independent news outlet reports Zelenskiy as saying: We are dedicated to the peaceful and diplomatic path. We are on our land. We are not afraid of anything and anyone, we don’t owe anything to anyone, we will not concede anything to anyone. It’s not February 2014, but February 2022. It’s a different country. There’s a different army. There’s a single goal: peace. He added Ukraine is expecting “clear and effective” steps from its allies to act against Russia while calling for an emergency summit of the leaders of Ukraine, Russia, Germany and France. Zelenskiy also accused Russia of wrecking peace talks and ruled out making any territorial concessions, Reuters reports. The United Nations security council has scheduled an emergency meeting for Monday night and the US has moved to impose sanctions against Russia. Ukraine’s request for an emergency meeting of the United Nations security council is set to go ahead for 9pm EST. Washington Post reporter John Hudson has shared a copy of Ukraine’s formal request for the meeting. In it, it condemn’s Russia for threatening “international peace and security.” Ukraine’s foreign minister Dmytro Kuleba has just confirmed Britain will enforce “severe sanctions” upon Russia in the face of any illegal action after speaking with his British counterpart, UK foreign secretary, Liz Truss. Russia has acquired the right to build military bases in Ukraine’s two breakaway regions under treaties signed by President Vladimir Putin with their separatist leaders, Reuters is reporting. Putin on Monday officially recognised the two breakaway republics of Donetsk and Luhansk in eastern Ukraine. He later announced he was ordering troops to the region on a “peacekeeping mission”, defying western warnings that such a step would be illegal and kill peace negotiations. Under the two identical friendship treaties, submitted by Putin for ratification by parliament, Russia has the right to build bases in the separatist regions and they, on paper, can do the same in Russia. The parties commit to defend each other and sign separate agreements on military cooperation and on recognition of each other’s borders. The 31-point treaties also say Russia and the breakaway statelets will work to integrate their economies. Here is the moment Putin signed a cooperation agreement with the separatist republics of Luhansk and Donetsk at the Kremlin on Monday, recognising the independence of the two breakaway regions in eastern Ukraine. US ambassador to the United Nations, Linda Thomas-Greenfield, says she supports Ukraine’s call for an urgent meeting of the UN security council. We must all stand with Ukraine in the face of Russia’s brazen attempt to usurp Ukraine’s sovereign territory. There can be no fence-sitters in this crisis.” US Congressman Gerry Connolly says the ordering of Russian troops into Ukraine is not a “peacekeeping” operation. Connolly told CNN’s Wolf Blitzer: This is not a peacekeeping operation, and we need to stop enabling Putin with even the use of that word. These are units of the Russian military who are using the pretext of the independence of Russian-occupied sovereign territory of Ukraine to further that occupation and to expand it. Right now, Russia’s surrogates and Russian troops occupy about a third of Donetsk to Luhansk. What he proposes to do immediately is to extend that to the remaining two-thirds. That is an invasion by any sense of the imagination. Here’s a quick recap of Zelenskiy’s televised address to the nation, held during the early hours of Tuesday morning. Ukraine’s president accused Russia of wrecking peace talks and has ruled out making any territorial concessions, Reuters reports. Zelenskiy added Ukraine was committed to peace and diplomacy after Russia formally recognised two Russian-backed separatist regions as independent on Monday evening. The president said Ukraine was expecting “clear and effective” steps from its allies to act against Russia and called for an emergency summit of the leaders of Ukraine, Russia, Germany and France. Zelenskiy says “we are not afraid” after Russia officially recognised two breakaway regions of eastern Ukraine as independent, Reuters reports. Zelenskiy says he expects “clear support” from the west. We don’t owe anyone anything and we won’t give anyone anything.” Ukraine’s president Zelenskiy says Ukraine is a supporter of a political and diplomatic settlement, Reuters reports. Ukraine’s foreign minister Dmytro Kuleba says he spoke to the European Union’s Josep Borrell and was assured that the EU’s response would be decisive and united. Kuleba added that Ukraine shared the assessment by western leaders that Russia’s decision to move troops into the Donbas was illegal. We also have an update on the upcoming UN security council emergency session. After some behind-the-scenes arguments, the UN security council is now going to be an open briefing, Guardian reporter Julian Borger tell us. As Zelenskiy calls for peace, unusually large columns of military vehicles and hardware are moving through Donetsk, the largest city of the self-proclaimed republic in eastern Ukraine, Reuters is reporting. A Reuters witness said they saw columns of military vehicles including tanks in the early hours of Tuesday on the outskirts of Donetsk, the capital of one of the breakaway east Ukraine regions. It comes shortly after Putin ordered his military to enter the Russian-controlled areas of southeast Ukraine following a decision to recognise the territories as independent states. Ukraine’s president Zelenskiy is currently hosting a televised address, calling for peace in the region while describing the actions of the Russian federation as a violation of Ukraine’s integrity and sovereignty. Zelenskiy says he is waiting for clear and effective steps of support from our partners. Russian president Vladimir Putin’s move to recognise breakaway eastern Ukrainian territories as independent appears to be the opening salvo of a larger potential military operation targeting Ukraine, nearly a dozen US and western officials have told CNN. “This is Potemkin politics,” a senior administration official told reporters on Monday, using a phrase meaning a move to hide a weakness. “President Putin is accelerating the very conflict that he’s created.” The US expects Russian troops could move into the Donbas region of Ukraine as soon as Monday evening or Tuesday, after Putin recognised the two pro-Moscow territories as independent, a senior US official familiar with latest intelligence told the network. There will be an emergency session of the UN security council at 9pm EST in New York on Monday evening EST, it has been confirmed. Russia, the current council chair, announced that it will be a meeting behind doors. The US, UK, France, Ireland, Norway and others are pushing for it to be public. US secretary of state Antony Blinken says a “swift and firm response” to the Kremlin’s recognition of the so-called Donetsk and Luhansk People’s Republics as independent requires a “swift and firm” response. “We will take appropriate steps in coordination with partners,” Blinken added. British prime minister Boris Johnson is set to chair a meeting of the UK’s emergency committee Cobra on Tuesday morning to discuss the latest developments in Ukraine, Downing Street said. The meeting, which is scheduled to take place at 6.30am GMT, will be used to “coordinate the UK response”, including agreeing a “significant package of sanctions to be introduced immediately”, according to a No 10 spokesperson who spoke to PA Media. It comes after foreign secretary Liz Truss said the UK will announce new sanctions against Russia on Tuesday “in response to their breach of international law and attack on Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity”. A No 10 spokesperson said: The Prime Minister will chair a COBR at 0630 tomorrow morning to discuss the latest developments in Ukraine and to coordinate the UK response including agreeing a significant package of sanctions to be introduced immediately. US president Joe Biden has signed an executive order to prohibit trade and investment between US individuals and the two breakaway regions of eastern Ukraine recognised as independent by Russia on Monday, the White House said in a statement late on Monday. The declaration by Russian president Vladimir Putin “contradicts Russia’s commitments under the Minsk agreements”, “refutes Russia’s claimed commitment to diplomacy” and “undermines Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity” the statement reads. Economic measures include the prohibition of “new investment” by an American, wherever located, and the “importation into the United States, directly or indirectly, of any goods, services, or technology from the covered regions”. The executive order also prohibits: New investment in the so-called DNR or LNR regions of Ukraine by American, wherever located; The importation into the United States, directly or indirectly, of any goods, services, or technology from the so-called DNR or LNR regions of Ukraine; The exportation, reexportation, sale, or supply, directly or indirectly, from the United States, or by aa American, wherever located, of any goods, services, or technology to the so-called DNR or LNR regions of Ukraine; And any approval, financing, facilitation, or guarantee by an American, wherever located, of a transaction by a foreign person where the transaction by that foreign person would be covered by these prohibitions if performed by an American or within the United States. Earlier we reported that Vladimir Putin ordered his military to enter the Russian-controlled areas of south-east Ukraine following a decision to recognise the territories as independent states. We now have video released by Ukraine appearing to show a column of military vehicles with their headlights on moving in convoy along a road. The officials said it was not possible to tell if the troops belonged to the regular Russian army, or were from Russian-controlled separatist units. People evacuated from Donbas arrived in Nizhny Novgorod, Russia, today as hundreds poured out of railway stations after leaders of the Donetsk and Lugansk People’s Republics announced a mass evacuation of civilians to Russia. Evidence suggests that the sudden evacuations of the Russian-controlled areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions were planned and are likely to have been designed to set the stage for a formal Russian intervention, writes the Guardian’s Moscow correspondent Andrew Roth from Russia’s frontier with Ukraine. Australia’s prime minster Scott Morrison says the suggestion that Russian troops in Ukraine’s breakaway regions are peacekeeping is “nonsense”, according to a Reuters report. The UN security council is set to meet publicly on Ukraine in a matter of hours with a meeting scheduled for 9pm EST on Monday, Reuters reports citing a Russian diplomat. Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskiy says he is was “urgently” preparing an address in the early hours of Tuesday on Russia’s recognition of Russian-backed separatist regions as independent, Reuters reports. Canada has condemned Russia’s decision to recognise two eastern Ukrainian regions controlled by separatists as independent and will impose sanctions in response, foreign minister Melanie Joly said on Monday, according to a Reuters report. Ukraine’s foreign minister Dmytro Kuleba has asked the UN security council for an urgent meeting. “Ukraine has requested an urgent meeting of the United Nations Security Council due to Russia’s illegal actions. We have already sent the request to the Council,” Kuleba tweeted in the early hours of Tuesday morning local time. Hello it’s Samantha Lock with you as my colleague Lauren Aratani signs off. The Biden administration has ordered all remaining state department personnel out of Ukraine and to Poland, according to Bloomberg’s White House reporter Jennifer Jacobs. The embassy had previously relocated from Kyiv to the western city of Lviv. Here’s a quick summary of what happened today: Vladimir Putin recognised the independence of two breakaway territories in eastern Ukraine, Luhansk and Donetsk. Multiple leaders have condemned the recognition and called it a violation of the Minsk peace deal that was signed in 2015. He ordered troops into the territories for what is being called “peacekeeping duties”. In response to Russia’s recognition of independence for the two territories in eastern Ukraine, leaders in the US and UK have promised retaliation. UK officials said they will announce details of sanctions against Russia tomorrow morning, while US leaders have said limited sanctions will be likely. In a televised address lasting an hour, Putin gave an exhaustive rant on the state of Ukraine, telling the Russian public that Ukraine has nuclear weapons and is being heavily influenced by the West. Ukraine has rejected as “fake news” a claim from the Russian army that it killed five “saboteurs” attempting to cross the border in the Russian region of Rostov. Ukrainian officials said not a single soldier had been killed and their forces were not present in the Rostov region. The Russian president was speaking at an impromptu meeting of Russia’s national security council, where top officials lined up to echo nationalist talking points, such as the baseless claims of genocide in eastern Ukraine and drawing parallels with Russia’s 2008 war with Georgia. The meeting was broadcast on Russian state television: Putin said it was “happening spontaneously, because I wanted to hear your opinions without any preliminary preparation” – a line at an eye-rolling distance from the staged nature of the event. Earlier in the day Putin’s spokesman said talk of a summit between the Russian president and Joe Biden was premature. The two leaders could arrange a call or meeting at any time but there were no concrete plans for a high-level encounter, he said. I’m handing the blog over to my colleague, Samantha Lock. Stay tuned for more live updates. A No. 10 spokesperson said: “The Prime Minister will chair a COBR [cabinet meeting] at 6:30 am tomorrow morning to discuss the latest developments in Ukraine and to coordinate the UK response, including agreeing a significant package of sanctions to be introduced immediately.” KYIV — Ukrainian officials say Russian troops may have already entered separatist territory this evening as part of what Vladimir Putin claims is a “peace-keeping mission” to the Luhansk and Donetsk people’s republics. The officials say local people in the town of Makiivka, 15kms west of rebel-held Donetsk, have seen what appear to be Russian armoured vehicles on the move. One source - who declined to be named - said “a huge convoy of Russian armoured personnel carriers and other equipment has been travelling for one and a half hours”. It was spotted heading north towards the city of Yasynuvata, also in the Donestk region. Video released by Ukraine tonight appears to show a column of military vehicles with their headlights on moving in convoy along a road. The officials said it was not possible to tell if the troops belonged to the regular Russian army, or were from Russian-controlled separatist units. Emmanuel Macron released a statement condemning Russia’s recognition of two territories in eastern Ukraine as independent. “By recognizing the separatist regions of eastern Ukraine, Russia is violating its commitments and undermining Ukraine’s sovereignty,” Macron said. “I condemn this decision. I called for an emergency meeting of the UN Security Council and European sanction.” The White House just released some details on the call Joe Biden had with Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskyy. In a statement, the White House said Biden reaffirmed his commitment to Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity and condemned Putin’s decision to “purportedly recognize the ‘independence’” of two territories in eastern Ukraine. Biden updated Zelenskyy on the US’ plan response, “including our plan to issue sanctions”. “President Biden reiterated that the United States would respond swiftly and decisively, in lock-step with its Allies and partners, to further Russian aggression against Ukraine,” said the statement. The White House also released a statement on Biden’s call with French president Emmanuel Macron and German chancellor Olaf Scholz, saying the leaders “discussed how they will continue to coordinate their response on next steps”. US secretary of state Antony Blinken said in a statement that the US condemns Vladimir Putin’s recognition of two territories in eastern Ukraine as independent. “This decision represents a complete rejection of Russia’s commitments under the Minsk agreements, directly contradicts Russia’s claimed commitment to diplomacy, and is a clear attack on Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity,” Blinken said, adding that the move is a “flagrant disrespect for international law and norms”. Blinken repeated an earlier announcement from the White House that Joe Biden will be signing an executive order authorizing limited sanctions in the region Putin declared independent. “Our support for Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity as well as for the government and people of Ukraine is unwavering,” Blinken said. “We stand with our Ukrainian partners in strongly condemning President Putin’s announcement.” Vladimir Putin has ordered “peacekeeping operations” to the Donetsk People’s Republic and Luhansk People’s Republic, the two territories in eastern Ukraine that Putin recognized as independent today. There are already approximately 190,000 Russian troops along the Ukrainian border, the US reported on Friday. Read our full story here: At the end of a tense 10-hour meeting of EU foreign ministers in Brussels, the bloc’s foreign affairs chief, Josep Borrell, said those attending had been closely watching the televised Russian security council where Vladimir Putin had discussed recognition of the independence of the eastern Ukrainian territories of Donetsk and Luhansk. There remain differences of opinion among the 27 member states on what level of sanctions will be imposed on Russia over recognition. But Borrell said he would table the complete prepared package of punitive measures at an extraordinary meeting of ministers for them to decide by unanimity, and that Russia should be warned that there would be a “strong and united” response. He said: “I will certainly put on the table the sanctions package that has been prepared. We have a package prepared. This package has certain components that can be implemented with certain degrees depending on the level of aggression.” Borrell said recognition by Russia of the independence of the eastern territories of Ukraine would be a breach of international law that the EU would not ignore. The EU will also hit Belarus with the same level of sanctions as Moscow faces should Russian troops invade Ukraine from Belarusian territory, Borrell said. The former Spanish foreign minister said Russia was turning Belarus into a satellite state. The EU has threatened “severe costs and massive consequences” in the event of a further Russian incursion into Ukraine. The package has yet to be made public but it would involve a block on exports of key electrical components on which Russia is reliant, potentially an import ban on Russian oil and gas, and the freezing of assets of individuals and companies affiliated to the government in Moscow. The UK foreign secretary, Liz Truss, said that sanctions against Russia would be announced tomorrow. Nato secretary, Jens Stoltenberg, released a statement condemning Russia, specifically saying that Russia has violated the Minsk agreements, “to which Russia is a party”, referring to the peace deal made in 2015 following the annexation of Crimea. Russian has denied it is responsible for carrying out the peace deal. “Moscow continues to fuel the conflict in eastern Ukraine by providing financial and military support to the separatists. It is also trying to stage a pretext to invade Ukraine once again,” Stoltenberg said in his statement. “Nato supports the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine within its internationally recognised borders. Allies urge Russia, in the strongest possible terms, to choose the path of diplomacy, and to immediately reverse its massive military build-up in and around Ukraine, and withdraw its forces from Ukraine in accordance with its international obligations and commitments.” The UK foreign secretary, Liz Truss, released a statement that suggests the UK is prepared to take action against Russia for recognising the independence of two territories in eastern Ukraine. “This step represents a further attack on Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, signals an end to the Minsk process and is a violation of the UN charter. It demonstrates Russia’s decision to choose a path of confrontation over dialogue,” Truss said. “We will coordinate our response with allies. We will not allow Russia’s violation of its international commitments to go unpunished.” The Guardian’s Luke Harding, who is in Kyiv, said that Ukraine’s president, Volodmyr Zelenskiy, will address the nation shortly. His speech will be carried live on all Ukranian TV channels, officials in Kyiv say. The White House released a statement rebuking Russia’s recognition of independence for two eastern Ukrainian territories. The White House press secretary, Jen Psaki, said in the statement that Joe Biden will be issuing an executive order that will “prohibit new investment, trade, and financing by US persons to, from, or in the so-called DNR and LNR regions of Ukraine”. The executive order will also allow the imposition of sanctions against “any person determined to operate in those areas of Ukraine”. “We will also soon announce additional measures related to today’s blatant violation of Russia’s international commitments,” Psaki said in the statement. “To be clear: these measures are separate from and would be in addition to the swift and severe economic measures we have been preparing in coordination with allies and partners should Russia further invade Ukraine. “We are continuing to closely consult with allies and partners, including Ukraine, on next steps and on Russia’s ongoing escalation along the border with Ukraine.” Biden had calls with Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskyy and a separate one with French president Emmanuel Macron and German chancellor Olaf Scholz earlier this afternoo, the White House confirmed. Details of the calls have not been released. Ukraine’s prosecutor general has opened a criminal case in connection with Vladimir Putin’s move to change the country’s borders. Irina Venediktova said she had been forced to act after the Russian president this evening recognised the Luhansk and Donetsk people’s republics as independent. Both were Ukrainian territories, she wrote on Facebook. Venediktova said she had initiated a case under part two of article 11o of Ukraine’s criminal code. It forbids deliberate calls to change Ukraine’s borders. “I don’t have the right to react emotionally,” she posted. “ I can’t joke, speak in any language except for the procedural, or send curses to the address of strangers – all this law does not allow me to do.” She said Ukrainian prosecutors would pursue the case vigorously. And she hinted that Russian officials responsible for the calls would find themselves subject to travel bans. “Going shopping for members of this club abroad will be difficult – we promise,” she wrote. Reaction to Putin’s recognition of independence in two Ukrainian territories continues to pour in from European leaders. In a joint statement, Ursula von der Leyen and Charles Michel, the presidents of the European Commisson and European Council, said: “The recognition of the two separatist territories in Ukraine is a blatant violation of international law, the territorial integrity of Ukraine and the Minsk agreements. “The EU and its partners will react with unity, firmness and determination in solidarity with Ukraine”. Alar Karis, the president of Estonia, said: “Estonia will never accept the illegal decision by Russia to recognise Donetsk and Luhansk regions. They are an internationally recognised part of Ukraine, like Crimea. Clearly, Moscow is not serious about diplomacy but is looking for casus belli.” The Latvian prime minister, Arturs Krišjānis Kariņš, said: “The decision taken by the president of the Russian Federation to recognise the independence of Luhansk and Donetsk, the Ukrainian territories outside the government’s control, is a continuation of the attack on Ukraine’s independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity that began in 2014 by unlawfully changing borders in Europe. “In a gross violation of international law, under a fabricated pretext, and by spreading false information, Russia seeks to induce a change in Ukraine’s political leadership and foreign policy course by violent means. “While utterly condemning Russia’s actions, Latvia urges the international community to take the strongest possible measures to stop Russia’s aggression and offer assistance to Ukraine. “We call on the international community to action through putting in place robust economic sanctions against the Russian Federation and persons responsible for encroachment on Ukraine’s statehood.” Vladimir Putin’s declaration that Russia will recognise the independence of the breakaway regions of eastern Europe was greeted in the US and Europe with dismay and warnings of sanctions, write Julian Borger and Daniel Boffey. There was also alarm at Putin’s warnings of further action against Ukraine as a whole, questioning the country’s legitimacy and presenting a direct threat to Russia. Boris Johnson said Putin’s decision to recognise the Donetsk and Luhanks regions was “plainly in breach of international law. It is a flagrant violation of the sovereignty and integrity of Ukraine.” The UK prime minister also described it as an “ill omen” and a “dark sign” that things are moving in the wrong direction. Olaf Scholz and Emmanuel Macron expressed German and French “disappointment” after having been informed of the decision by Putin before his speech, according to a Kremlin account of the call. As Putin staged his security council meeting, and ahead of the Russian leader’s televised address, Joe Biden summoned his top national security officials at the White House, including the CIA director, William Burns, and the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff, Gen Mark Milley. It was not immediately clear whether Putin’s declaration would mean the cancellation of a potential summit between Biden and Putin. The Kremlin had earlier played down the prospect of the summit as “premature”, while the US made clear it would not take place if Russia invaded. Some helpful analysis from Sam Greene, a professor at King’s College London and director of the university’s Russia Institute. Greene on Twitter called Putin’s televised address that preceded his formal recognition of two eastern Ukrainian territories “unbelievably dark and aggressive”. “I’ve watched a lot of Putin speeches, and I don’t think I’ve ever seen on quite like this,” Green said. “This is a speech designed not to make people happy, but to make them angry.” The Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, said he had discussed “the events of the last hours” with Joe Biden and was beginning a meeting with the country’s national security and defense council. He said he planned to have a conversation with Boris Johnson. A look at the implications if Russia were to invade Ukraine: In London, the British prime minister, Boris Johnson, said Vladimir Putin’s decision to recognise the two separatist Ukrainian republics was “plainly in breach of international law. It is a flagrant violation of the sovereignty and integrity of Ukraine.” He also described it as an “ill omen” and a “dark sign” that things were moving in the wrong direction. After a long-winded speech lasting nearly an hour, Vladimir Putin said he w recognise the independence of two territories of eastern Ukraine, the Luhansk People’s Republic (LPR) and the Donetsk People’s Republic (DPR). Following a televised address to Russia aired on the country’s state-run news channel, Putin joined the leaders of the LPR and DPR to sign a decree recognising the independence of the two territories. “Those who took the path of violence, bloodshed and lawlessness did not recognise and don’t recognise any other solution to the Donbas problem besides the military,” Putin said. “Therefore, I believe it is necessary to take a long overdue decision to immediately recognise the independence and sovereignty of the Donetsk People’s Republic and Luhansk People’s Republic.” Russia has controlled and armed the two states since the outbreak of fighting in southeast Ukraine following a revolution in Kyiv in 2014, but wanted to keep them in Ukraine with the right to veto crucial decisions such as membership in Nato. Ukraine has said it will contest any decision by Russia to recognise the territories’ independence and would recognise the move as a Russian decision to exit the Minsk agreements, the peace deal signed in 2015 that appears close to collapse. Putin is over 50 minutes into his televised address to Russia. After speaking on the history of Ukraine and Russia, Putin is now talking about the state of Ukraine today, saying that the country is “being controlled from the outside”. “Ukraine has become a colony of puppets,” Putin said. “Ukrainians squandered not only everything we gave them during the USSR, but even everything they inherited from the Russian empire. Even the work created by Catherine the Great.” Putin told the nation that Ukraine was “preparing military action against our country” and that the country would develop nuclear weapons. The president then pivoted a rant about Nato, saying that Nato is “commanding” Ukrainian troops and that the organisation the actual “aggressor”. Seems like the bulk of Putin’s televised address, which has been going on for more than 20 minutes, has so far been mostly a review of Ukraine and Russia’s history. Putin said that Russia was “robbed” by the collapse of the Soviet Union and that Ukraine “has never had traditions of its own statehood”. Vladimir Putin is speaking in a televised address right now. Putin has been speaking at length about Ukraine’s tied history with Russia, saying Russia created Ukraine and calling Lenin the “author and creator” of Ukraine. Putin made a direct threat to Ukraine, saying Russia is “prepared to show you what real decommunisation looks like”. I have been talking to a senior official from an east European country after Putin’s staged security council meeting. The official expressed concern about splits in allied resolve in the face of a Russian recognition of Luhansk and Donetsk “independence”. ”It might be not a direct invasion, but instead … recognition, then maybe dragging on some days or weeks before Russian so-called ‘peacekeepers’ enter Luhansk and Donetsk occupied territories,” the official said. “Then it’s a grey zone, where you are not sure if that triggers sanctions, especially for for some European Union countries which are further from from the front line.” The Russian president, Vladimir Putin, told the leaders of France and Germany on Monday that he intends to sign a decree later today recognising the two pro-Russian breakaway republics in eastern Ukraine, the Kremlin said in a statement on Monday evening. “In the near future, the president plans to sign the order,” the Kremlin said. According to the Kremlin, the German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, and the French president, Emmanuel Macron, “expressed their disappointment with this development of the situation” but “indicated their readiness to continue contacts”. Earlier on Monday, Scholz said that Russia would be breaching the 2015 Minsk peace accords if it were to recognise the independence of east Ukraine’s rebel republics. In a call with Putin, the German leader warned that “such a step would be a gross contradiction of the Minsk agreement for a peaceful settlement of the conflict in east Ukraine and a unilateral breach of these deals from the Russian side.” The EU on Monday evening also urged Putin not to recognise the Donbas as an independent. “We call upon President Putin to respect international law and the Minsk agreements and expect him not to recognise the independence of Luhansk and Donetsk oblasts,” the blocs foreign policy chief, Josep Borrell, told journalists after a meeting of EU foreign ministers in Brussels, according to the Reuters news agency. Vladimir Putin will address the nation in a video address Monday night, the Kremlin said. Meanwhile, the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has called an emergency meeting of Ukraine’s national security and defence council. After the meeting in Russia Ukraine’s foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, warned against formal recognition of the separatist regions and said he has asked UN Security Council members to discuss “de-escalation” and “practical steps to guarantee the security of Ukraine”. This likely sets the stage for a meeting of the Security Council where Ukraine can put its case to the world. Any of the current members can request an urgent meeting, which has to be held within 24 hours of the formal demand going in. Russia is currently president and so may be able to control whether the meeting is closed or open. However western member countries that have been pushing hard for a diplomatic resolution to the crisis are likely to group together in a show of strength, to try and ensure the cameras of the world’s media can record the gathering, one envoy said. Kuleba warned that any move to give the territories official status would represent a dangerous escalation. “Not only Ukraine, the entire world now closely follows Russia’s actions regarding the recognition of the so-called ‘L/DPR’. Everyone realises consequences. A lot of emotions out there, but it’s exactly now that we all should calmly focus on de-escalation efforts. No other way.” Ukraine claims that under an agreement signed as part of efforts to remove nuclear weapons from the country in the post-Soviet era, the west undertook to protect the country from external attack. The Budapest memorandum was signed by three nuclear powers – Russia, the US and the UK – in December 1994, but Moscow has brushed aside the treaty as irrelevant. Ukraine’s former defence minister, Andriy Zagorodnyuk, said any attempt by Russia to expand the territory controlled by pro-Moscow separatists would mean a full-scale war with Ukraine. The historic borders of Luhansk and Donetsk regions are much larger than the exiting pro-Moscow-run areas. Key Ukrainian cities include the port city of Mariupol, Kramatorsk – where Ukraine’s army has its eastern HQ – and numerous villages. “Those regions are regular towns where people live regular lives. Any attempt to occupy those areas would be direct violent aggression by Russia onto Ukraine. There would be war,” Zagorodnyuk said. He added: “There would some attacks, resistance, deaths, casualties, losses. And there would be trials against Putin as a war criminal.” He continued: “Ukraine has lots of weapons there and Ukraine is not going to give it up just like that. Why the hell should we? It’s like someone comes to UK and says, ‘Now I think this town should belong to France’. Obviously it’s going to be a very nasty process, dramatic and tragic. “The legal consequences of that are exactly as if the Russian go to Kyiv. It’s the same territory of the same sovereign state.” Vladimir Putin will address the nation in a video address Monday night, according to Reuters. The address will be on Rossiya-24, the state television channel. It is unclear when the address will be aired. Vladimir Putin has said he is considering recognising the Russian-controlled territories in southeast Ukraine as independent states in what would be a pivotal decision, scuttling an existing peace agreement and possibly triggering tough new sanctions from the west. In an extraordinary meeting of his security council broadcast on national television, the Russian president said he would make a decision later on Monday following a choreographed back-and-forth with his top advisers designed to prepare public support for the decision. “We’ve been negotiating for eight years,” Putin told his aides at one point. “We’re at a dead end.” In turn, each of Putin’s top advisers stood at a lectern and delivered a speech that ended in favour of recognition of the separatist states in Ukraine’s Luhansk and Donetsk regions, which have been at war with Kyiv since 2014. It ended in a made-for-TV cliffhanger. “I have heard your opinion – a decision will be made today,” Putin said. Russia has controlled and armed the two states since the outbreak of fighting in southeast Ukraine following a revolution in Kyiv in 2014, but wanted to keep them in Ukraine with the right to veto crucial decisions like membership in Nato. Ukraine has said it will contest any decision by Russia to recognise the territories’ independence and would recognise the move as a Russian decision to exit the Minsk agreements, the peace deal signed in 2015 that appears close to collapse. Putin may still choose not to recognise the two states’ independence, using the staged debate with his advisors to show the western leaders that they are running out of time to negotiate. But it appears more likely he will follow the unanimous advice of his aides and close allies to recognise the two territories in a dangerous shift of the status quo. The decision could either freeze the conflict in southeast Ukraine or reignite it, depending on the Ukrainian response and whether Putin seeks to take further territory. Joe Biden is meeting with his national security team today. Eyewitnesses saw the US defense secretary, Lloyd Austin, the secretary of state, Anthony Blinken, and the US army general Mark Milley go into the White House this morning. Our central and eastern Europe correspondent, Shaun Walker, reports that if Putin decides to recognise the two territories based on their 2014 borders – as his interior minister has suggested he do – that would likely lead to war. Shaun writes: The territory currently controlled by the so-called people’s republics is less than half of the territory of Donetsk and Luhansk regions, but both entities claim sovereignty over the whole regions. In the summer of 2014, the Ukrainian army took back control over many towns that had initially been seized by Russia-backed separatists. If Russia recognises the territories in those borders, it raises the threat of a potential military campaign to retake them. Here is a summary of events so far, on a day when fears of a Russian invasion of Ukraine reached boiling point. Ukraine has rejected as “fake news” a claim from the Russian army that it killed five “saboteurs” attempting to cross the border in the Russian region of Rostov. Ukrainian officials said not a single soldier had been killed and their forces were not present in the Rostov region. Vladimir Putin promised to take a decision on whether to recognise two breakaway territories in eastern Ukraine later on Monday, after leaders of the self-declared republics appealed to the Kremlin to recognise their independence in co-ordinated statements on Russian state TV. The Russian president was speaking at an impromptu meeting of Russia’s national security council, where top officials lined up to echo nationalist talking points, such as the baseless claims of genocide in eastern Ukraine and drawing parallels with Russia’s 2008 war with Georgia. The meeting was broadcast on Russian state television: Putin said it was “happening spontaneously, because I wanted to hear your opinions without any preliminary preparation” – a line at an eye-rolling distance from the staged nature of the event. Earlier in the day Putin’s spokesman said talk of a summit between the Russian president and Joe Biden was premature. The two leaders could arrange a call or meeting at any time but there were no concrete plans for a high-level encounter, he said. Western officials believe Putin is now poised to invade, as they said the Russian military build up continues. Ukraine’s foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, urged the EU to impose sanctions on Russia now, a call backed by Lithuania, whose foreign minister said Ukraine was under attack. But foreign ministers meeting in Brussels declined to follow this path. Instead the EU high representative on foreign policy, Josep Borrell, repeated his promise the EU would act “at the right moment”. That’s all from me, Jennifer Rankin, as I hand over the blog to Lauren Aratani. Vladimir Putin’s “commitment” to invade Ukraine will lead to a humanitarian crisis, UK defence secretary Ben Wallace warned, Nicola Slawson reports from London. She is following Wallace for our UK politics live blog, as he speaks to the House of Commons. Wallace said: I believe he is in danger of setting himself on a tragic course of events leading to a humanitarian crisis, instability and widespread suffering, not just of Ukrainians but also of the Russian people. The defence secretary also warned of continued “false flag” operations orchestrated by the Kremlin, which he described as of “strong cause for concern that President Putin is still committed to an invasion”. Russia continues to be ready to attack Ukraine and has increased troop numbers in the region, the defence secretary has said. Wallace told MPs: In the last 48 hours, contrary to Kremlin assurances we have see a continued increase in troop numbers and a change in … position including from holding areas and potential launch locations. All the indicators point to increasing numbers and readiness of Russia forces and, not surprising to many of us, the pledge to withdraw Russian troops from Belarus at the end of their joint military drills on February 20, were not carried out and the exercise has now been extended until further notice. Russian forces are now “poised to invade” if President Vladimir Putin gives the order, western officials believe, with more troops heading closer to Ukraine’s borders in both Russia and Belarus. Two-thirds of 110 battalions are positioned within 50km of the border – up from half a week ago – and of those half are “tactically deployed” in temporary locations close to Ukraine. The officials said they believed “the diplomatic path was not over” and that the purpose of French president Emmanuel Macron’s dialogue with Putin on Sunday “was to continue to engage President Putin in dialogue and diplomacy”. But they argued the continuing military buildup was not consistent with any easing of the crisis. Russian forces have “moved from being in a position to attack to being poised to attack. That is not consistent at this point with the Russians engaging in a diplomatic de escalation”. Military sources added that Russia could maintain troops this close to the border only “for a matter of days” but said they could retreat to staging areas further back. It would eventually become necessary to rotate personnel if Russia wanted to maintain a constant presence near Ukraine for several months. Vladimir Putin says a decision on whether to recognise two breakaway republics in eastern Ukraine will be taken later on Monday. This ends the live broadcast of the Russian security council. More from the ongoing Russian security council meeting, including a moment when one senior official, the head of foreign intelligence Sergei Naryshkin, appears to veer off the script. Dmitry Medvedev, a former Russian president, has backed the recognition of the two-self proclaimed people’s republics during the unscheduled meeting of the security council, writes Pjotr Sauer in Moscow. Medvedev, now deputy chairman of the security council, said: There are no signs of improvement, the only way out will be to recognise the legal personality of these territories. Duma speaker Vyacheslav Volodin, as well as speaker of the Federation Council Valentina Matvienko, also urged Putin to recognise the two pro-Russian proxy republics. Putin is expected to make a decision on the recognition of the breakaway proxy states later during the meeting. The head of the Russian security service, the FSB, has told Vladimir Putin the situation in two breakaway republics in eastern Ukraine is deteriorating, Reuters reports. Alexander Bortnikov, head of the FSB, is speaking at a televised meeting of Russia’s security council being chaired by the Russian president. Here are tweets from correspondents following the meeting: Russia’s former president Dmitry Medvedev, who filled in for Putin from 2008-12, has also taken the floor. Now deputy chair of Russia’s security council, he claims the majority of Russians would support independence for the two breakaway regions in eastern Ukraine. Valentina Matvienko, another member of the security council, is now echoing Putin’s earlier (completely unfounded) claim about genocide in eastern Ukraine. And on the question of the seating arrangements... The leaders of two-self proclaimed people’s republics formally asked Vladimir Putin to recognise their independence in a coordinated appeal on Monday, a move that is set to further inflame the situation in eastern Ukraine. “Russia’s recognition of Luhansk will allow the prevention of the loss of life of citizens of the republic, 300,000 of whom are Russians,” Luhansk People’s Republic leader Leonid Pasechnik said in a video aired on Russian state television. Russia has issued passports to hundreds of thousands of residents of the separatist-held enclaves, Almost simultaneously, Denis Pushilin, the head of the Donetsk People’s Republic, went on Russian state television to also ask Putin to recognise it as an independent state. Speaking on Monday to Russia’s national security council, Putin said the idea should be considered: Our goal is listen consider our colleagues and determine our next steps in this direction, bearing in mind both the appeals of the leaders of the DNR and LNR to recognise their independence. Both separatist leaders have claimed that the Ukrainian army was planning an assault to retake the Donbas regions, claims flatly denied by Ukraine and rejected by the west. The DNR and LNR only hold about half of the Donbas region, but claim the right to territory controlled by Ukraine. Observers have warned that if Putin moves to recognise the territories, it could further escalate the situation in the region. Russia’s State Duma last week backed a resolution calling for diplomatic recognition of the two pro-Russian proxy states. Putin initially put the decision to recognise the states on hold, saying the Kremlin preferred to solve the current standoff through the Minsk peace process. Russian president Vladimir Putin is now speaking at an impromptu meeting of Russia’s national security council. Jake Sullivan, the US national security adviser, has been talking about why the administration sent the UN high commissioner for human rights a letter warning of Russian kill lists of Ukrainians to be executed after an invasion, and to crush civilian resistance with lethal force, reports Julian Borger in Washington. Sullivan told NBC’s Today show: We believe that any military operation of the size, scope and magnitude of what we believe the Russians are planning will be extremely violent. It will cost the lives of Ukrainians and Russians, civilians and military personnel alike. But we also have intelligence to suggest that there will be an even greater form of brutality because this will not simply be some conventional war between two armies. It will be a war waged by Russia on the Ukrainian people, to repress them, crush them, to harm them. And that is what we laid out in detail for the UN because we believe that the world must mobilise to counter this kind of Russian aggression, should those tanks roll across the border, as we anticipate they very well may do in the coming hours or days. The Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe has announced an emergency meeting on Ukraine, as the frantic search for a diplomatic solution continues. In a tweet the OSCE’s secretary general Helga Schmid said dialogue channels were needed, including the Trilateral Contact Group, a forum for Russia, Ukraine and the OSCE officials to discuss the conflict. During Emmanuel Macron’s call with Vladimir Putin late on Sunday, they agreed the Trilateral Contact Group should meet “in the next hours”, according to the French readout of the discussion. Some important context on the “request” from the self-proclaimed Donetsk People’s Republic for military aid, from the Guardian’s Moscow correspondent Andrew Roth. Lithuania’s foreign minister has said “Ukraine is already under attack” and announced a joint visit with his Estonian and Latvian counterparts to show solidarity. Gabrielius Landsbergis has been urging the EU to launch sanctions against Russia now, a path other member states decided not to take at a meeting of foreign affairs ministers earlier on Monday on Brussels. Events could soon require them to think again. Veteran French ambassador Gérard Araud sums up the situation: Unfortunately it seems that Russia has put in place all the elements to launch a strike against Ukraine: the army is ready, the alleged provocations have been committed, the expected calls for help have been made. All that is missing is the green light from Putin. More from Ukraine’s foreign ministry on the Russian claims to have foiled an attack, via Luke Harding in Kyiv. Not a single one of our soldiers has crossed the border with the Russian federation and not a single one has been killed today. Ukraine’s ministry of foreign affairs and ministry of defence said the Russian claim was “fake”, reports Luke Harding from Kyiv “It’s not true,” a spokesperson said, adding a full statement would be released shortly. The Ukraine military has robustly rejected Russian claims of a foiled border raid into Russia as “fake news”. Ukrainian military officials say their forces are not present in Russia’s Rostov region, Reuters reports. A leader of one of the breakaway regions in eastern Ukraine has appealed to Moscow for financial and military support, according to Russian media. Eduard Basurin, head of the self-proclaimed Donetsk People’s Republic, said “moral support” was his first priority, followed by financial and military help. “People living here must know that no one can betray us behind our backs,” he said on a YouTube video picked up by the RBK website. No official statement has been made, points out Moscow correspondent Pjotr Sauer. In helpful timing for the separatists, Putin has convened an emergency meeting of his security council, which would be the venue to agree such aid. Western analysts see this – and Russia’s claims to have killed five Ukrainian army “saboteurs” – as part of the Kremlin’s script to create a pretext for an invasion. Russian military officials have said five people who tried to breach Russia’s border have been killed, Reuters reports. Russian officials have said Russian troops and border guards prevented “saboteurs” from breaching their shared border, according to Russian wires cited by Reuters. Ukrainian armed vehicles were destroyed in Russia’s Rostov region, according to the reports. According to the Interfax news agency, the clash took place around 6am Moscow time in the Rostov region near the Russia-Ukraine border. FSB border guards discovered an alleged “sabotage group” and called for help from Russia’s Southern army district. A unit of the Russian army destroyed two Ukrainian army vehicles alleged to have crossed the border to evacuate the “saboteurs”, according to an official statement given to Interfax. The “attack” took place near the village of Mityankinskaya, across from the rebel-held so-called Luhansk People’s Republic, Luke Harding reports from Kyiv. Russian state media reported last week that a Ukrainian “shell” had landed across the border in the same area. Ukraine’s defence minister Oleksii Reznikov said earlier on Monday that his military was not engaged in any acts of sabotage, and had been given strict instructions not to return fire. He said Moscow had created numerous fake stories and videos in recent days, in order to give Vladimir Putin a pretext to attack Ukraine. This post has been amended to clarify that Russian news reports claim Ukrainian army vehicles crossed the border to evacuate the “saboteurs”. Photos of a temporary accommodation centre at a school sports hall in Russia for evacuees from the separatist-controlled regions in eastern Ukraine: During a break in the meeting of EU foreign affairs ministers in Brussels, the Lithuanian minister Gabrielius Landsbergis told reporters that the continued presence of Russian troops in Belarus had been a focus of discussion, and the government in Minsk is no longer seen as an independent actor. Belarusian troops are receiving their commands now more and more from the Russian political decision makers and less from Belarusian and that means that there’s low, very low, levels of independence in the Belarusian army. Diplomatic sources said the European Commission had proposed imposing further sanctions on Belarus during the meeting of ministers, with the support of Germany. Landsbergis said he welcomed France’s efforts to secure a summit between US president Joe Biden and Vladimir Putin that he did not believe the Russian leader wanted to de-escalate. It’s very difficult to imagine, you know, having a nice diplomatic conversation, when we don’t have any leverage. If they are shelling the contact line [in the Donbas region], if they’re attacking Ukrainian institutions with the cyber attacks and still building up the troops, that puts us in a very difficult situation. So we have to be very clear, if we want to have a meaningful discussion, that, first of all, the escalation has to stop. Joe Biden asked Emmanuel Macron to make the offer of a summit between Biden and Vladimir Putin to the Russian president, Reuters reports, citing a French presidency official. The French official described Macron as a facilitator, adding: We’re slowly changing the course of things. We’re creating a diplomatic perspective the Kremlin accepts. Western leaders are showing “unbelievable naivety” if they think a summit between Joe Biden and Vladimir Putin can avert war now, according to the respected Russian politics analyst Tatiana Stanovaya. In a post on her Telegram account, following late-night diplomacy between Putin and Emmanuel Macron, she argues the train has already left the station. “Everything has already been decided,” she said, following the west’s refusal to give the Russian president security guarantees - namely a veto on Nato expansion and rollback of the alliance’s forces to pre-1997 borders. “Just talking on the phone and exchanging concerns will not stop anything,” she writes. “Everything is already starting up.” Long-term observers of Russian politics hope she is wrong … The UK foreign secretary Liz Truss has repeated warnings that a Russian invasion of Ukraine is “highly likely”, following a meeting with Nato secretary-general Jens Stoltenberg. Air France has become the latest airline to cancel flights to Kyiv as a “precautionary measure” in response to western warnings of an imminent invasion. The airline said it was cancelling two flights to Kyiv on Tuesday in a statement to Reuters, while monitoring the “geopolitical situation”. Ukraine’s infrastructure minister Oleksander Kubrakov said ten airlines had adjusted their flight schedule, although he insisted it was safe to fly into his country. Germany’s Lufthansa has said it is stopping flights to Ukraine, following an earlier announcement from Dutch airline KLM. German chancellor Olaf Scholz will speak to Vladimir Putin by phone on Monday afternoon, a German government spokesperson has announced, adding that the intensifying conflict was an “extremely dangerous situation”, Reuters reports. The spokesman said sanctions against Russia would be put in place after further territorial infringements of Ukraine, adding that western countries would decide what would qualify as territorial infringement. This will be a key question for the EU and US, with Lithuania already calling for the immediate imposition of sanctions. A Russian human rights activist has said Russians are afraid to protest against war with Ukraine, as he described being forcibly dragged away from his one-man picket. Lev Ponomarev was speaking to the independent radio station Echo Moskvi about his detention following a one-man protest against war with Ukraine. He said he didn’t even have time to protest before police arrested him, while a colleague was attacked after a few seconds. He told the police he would go himself, but they dragged him away, he said, twisting his arms from behind. But “fortunately” they didn’t beat him, he said. I’ve taken the quotes from the Radio Echo Moskvi twitter feed and it is not clear when or where his protest took place. Video footage on Sunday shows six people in Moscow being dragged away from a protest against war, as soon as they unfurled banners. If Vladimir Putin has already decided to invade Ukraine, can he be stopped? Ukraine’s former defence minister Andriy Zagorodnyuk thinks he can – if the west is ready to be decisive and spell out the consequences of war. Zagorodnyuk thinks war can still be averted: So, what are the options and is it too late to stop it all? We believe, even with the very short time available, that it is still possible to stop Putin from starting war. But that largely depends on the steps made by world leaders in the next day or two. We know from studying the Russian decision-making process for years that they always choose from a few options available. While being very persistent with his end goals, Putin has adopted an agile approach: when he meets serious resistance, he will step back and adjust his actions. World leaders need to demonstrate to Putin that this will not be a quick victorious war, but a disaster that will lead to Russian political isolation, sanctions that will destroy its economy, and a humiliating military defeat. Ultimately, it could mark the end of Putin’s political career, leaving his place in history as the architect of Russia’s decline instead of a period of grandeur. The steps the west could take to persuade him of this are clear. Sanctions must be imposed to stop Russia having an active role in the global economy. Russia makes a lot of money from the west, its businesspeople reside in the UK, US and Europe, it is a member of western capital markets, a major supplier of commodities, and enjoys the perks of that involvement. At the same time, it violently challenges the very principles upon which western democracies are founded. Russian society needs to understand that the west will stop it. The sanctions must not just be hard, they must be devastating. Read his full piece here: Leave Putin in no doubt: Russia will be economically crippled – and he may be tried for war crimes Russia’s security service, the FSB, has claimed that a shell from Ukraine completely destroyed a border guard post in Russia’s Rostov region but caused no casualties, the Interfax news agency reports. The incident occurred 150 metres from the border between Russia and Ukraine, Interfax cited the FSB as saying. Here is the Guardian’s central and eastern European correspondent, Shaun Walker, on the report: Moscow has over the last few days blamed Ukraine for a number of incidents involving Ukrainian shells allegedly exploding in Russia’s border region of Rostov, reports Pjotr Sauer in Moscow. Kyiv previously denied that it was responsible for the shellings, calling for an independent investigation into the incidents. Tensions in the Donbas continue to rise, despite reports by French officials that President Emmanuel Macron and his Russian counterpart Vladimir Putin agreed to work for a ceasefire. Denis Pushilin, head of the self-proclaimed Donetsk People’s Republic, said on Monday that the situation in the Donbas was “critical”, claiming Ukrainian forces continued to shell Donetsk outskirts, accusations Kyiv repeatedly rejected. France’s foreign minister Jean-Yves Le Drian has said he will hold talks with his Russian counterpart Sergei Lavrov later on Monday, as attempts continue to defuse the crisis over Ukraine. Le Drian is updating EU foreign ministers in Brussels, after last night’s late phone calls between Emmanuel Macron and Vladimir Putin. France, which has taken the diplomatic lead in Europe’s talks with Moscow, has been keen to reassure EU allies that it is not freelancing. Ukraine’s defence minister Oleksiy Reznikov has said there was no sign of Russian forces withdrawing from the border and that Moscow-backed rebels continue to shell Ukrainian positions, reports AFP. Speaking to reporters in Kyiv, Reznkiov said 14 attacks had been recorded, 13 of them from weapons banned under the Minsk agreements. One Ukrainian soldier had been wounded. Reznikov said any move by Russia to recognise the breakaway Donbas regions could pave the way for Moscow to create a pretext for invasion. According to Interfax Ukraine, he said an invasion could be presented as sending in peacekeepers. If tomorrow or the day after tomorrow or the day after that, they [Russia] recognise these terrorist groups that call themselves republics, they will directly violate the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Ukraine. This will already be a violation of generally recognised norms of international law, and this will mean that, in fact, this is there is a pretext … for a potential invasion, through some kind of introduction of some kind of peacekeepers or something like that, they would call it. Over 60,000 people have crossed into Russia from the two-self pro-Russian proclaimed proxy states since regional leaders announced a mass evacuation on Friday, Russia’s ministry of emergency has said, reports Pjotr Sauer in Moscow. In a call with Emmanuel Macron on Sunday, Vladimir Putin blamed Ukraine for the evacuation of the Donbas citizens, saying that because of Ukraine’s actions “civilians in the Donbas are suffering, and have to then have to be evacuated to Russia to protect them the from growing violence”. Ukrainian officials have repeatedly dismissed any intention of mounting an attack in the eastern Donbas region while US president Joe Biden said it “defies basic logic” for Ukraine to try to reclaim the Donbas territory with an estimated 150,000 Russian forces now massed on their nation’s borders. Western officials continue to warn that the Russian-backed separatist leaders have been reporting false events and staging incidents intended to provide Moscow with an excuse to start an offensive in Ukraine. Over the weekend, pro-Moscow separatists repeatedly accused the Ukrainian military of shelling in eastern Ukraine, accusations Kyiv flatly denied. The Ukrainian military said on SundayRussian-backed separatists in the Luhansk region had opened fire with heavy artillery on their own capital with the aim of blaming the Ukrainian military. Evidence suggests that the sudden evacuations of the Russian-controlled areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions were planned and likely to have been designed to set the stage for a formal Russian intervention, writes the Guardian’s Moscow correspondent Andrew Roth from Russia’s frontier with Ukraine. But the situation for new arrivals is chaotic, as his report reveals. For the women, children, and others who are being evacuated, the result is undeniably real and traumatic, as they arrive by the hundreds in a neighbouring region that appears unprepared for the tide of evacuees. In the early chaos of that effort, some said they felt like pawns in a larger game. “Maybe they’ll shoot and then it will quiet down,” said Viktoria from Donetsk, who was also at the tent camp on the border. “I think it’s a farce, though. Like when there’s a fuss and then that’s all … a staged event.” More than 300 evacuees were sent to the Krasny Desant sanatorium just 20 miles from the border. Inside, children ran through the hallways as their parents filled out intake forms and received small handouts such as sim cards. The grounds were patrolled by police, including at least one officer with an automatic rifle (they forced a Guardian correspondent to leave the sanatorium). In a nearby church, Natalia Chetveryakova, 61, said the seaside camp had housed evacuees in 2014 when the war began in eastern Ukraine and had even hosted refugees in 2008 after the Georgian war. Some said they were happy to be placed so close to the border and were thankful for the stipend of 10,000 roubles (£95) that the Russian government has promised to give to evacuees. Others expected better conditions. Beckoning us into her room, where she was staying with her daughter and granddaughter, Sonya, seven, Lyudmila Barskaya showed off the spartan but liveable conditions with an air of resign. “Here are the beds, and that’s all there is,” she said. “All you can do is cry. I understand that it’s like this for us. But nothing more for the children?” All you can do is cry’: Donbas evacuees face uncertain future in Russia Vladimir Putin will convene an extraordinary meeting of the Russian Security Council on Monday, his spokesman has said, reports Pjotr Sauer in Moscow. “This will be a big Security Council. There will be a speech by the head of state as well as other speeches,” Peskov said. Composed of Russia′s leading state officials and heads of defence and security agencies and chaired by the president of Russia, the security council acts as a platform for determining and coordinating national security policy. Here is Moscow correspondent Oliver Carroll on the meeting of Russia’s security council: Vladimir Putin’s spokesman Dmitri Peskov has said it’s “premature” to talk about specific plans for a summit between the Russian president and Joe Biden. Peskov said Putin and Biden could meet if they consider it necessary, but emphasised that “it’s premature to talk about specific plans for a summit” and no concrete plans were in place. Earlier, Emmanuel Macron’s office said the Russian president had agreed in principle to attend a summit with Biden aimed at de-escalating the Ukraine crisis, amid further US warnings that war is imminent. Peskov also described the situation in the Donbas region of Ukraine as “extremely tense”, adding that Putin was due to address Russia’s security council imminently. According to the Tass news agency, he said: The situation is really extremely tense, and so far we do not see signs of a decrease in the level of tension. Provocations and shelling are becoming more intense, of course, this causes very deep concern. Despite repeated Russian claims, reporters on the ground have seen no evidence of shelling by Ukrainian forces on the local population. Lithuania’s foreign minister Gabrielius Landsbergis is urging the EU to move forward with sanctions on Russia, after Moscow broke its promise to move troops out of Belarus at the end of military exercises. He is joining the EU’s 26 other foreign ministers for talks in Brussels that will be dominated by the Ukraine crisis. Ukraine’s foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, who is joining the meeting, is also repeating Kyiv’s call for EU sanctions now, Politico’s Suzanne Lynch reports. While there is pretty firm consensus that the EU would impose sanctions if Russia invaded Ukraine, it is less clear the bloc will agree on restrictive measures in the current situation. From the Guardian’s world affairs editor in Washington: Vladimir Putin and Emmanuel Macron agreed there is a need to continue dialogue on Ukraine, reports the Interfax news agency via Reuters. In an earlier statement on the overnight call, the Kremlin said the presidents “considered it expedient to intensify the search for solutions through diplomatic means through the foreign ministries and political advisers to the leaders of the countries participating in the Normandy format”. Here’s a round-up of the key developments in the Ukraine crisis. The French president, Emmanuel Macron, has invited Vladimir Putin and Joe Biden to attend a summit aimed at de-escalating the Ukraine crisis, and the leaders have agreed in principle, amid further US warnings that war is imminent. The proposal for the summit – which will proceed only if Russian does not invade Ukraine – followed a flurry of phone calls Macron made in an attempt to de-escalate tensions, including with Boris Johnson, Biden and two calls with Putin. The US administration signalled its willingness to work towards a diplomatic solution, but has reiterated its view that Russian forces have been ordered to proceed with an invasion of Ukraine. In a statement, White House press secretary Jen Psaki said: “We are always ready for diplomacy. We are also ready to impose swift and severe consequences should Russia instead choose war. And currently, Russia appears to be continuing preparations for a full-scale assault on Ukraine very soon.” European Union foreign ministers are meeting in Brussels on Monday, with EU foreign policy chief Josep Borrell saying the EU supports the summit proposal. Meanwhile, the US claims Russian forces are “creating lists of identified Ukrainians to be killed or sent to camps” in the event of an invasion, according to a leaked letter sent by the US to the UN human rights chief, Michelle Bachelet The US administration has reportedly prepared an initial package of sanctions against Russia that includes barring US financial institutions from processing transactions for major Russian banks. Reuters is reporting the measures aim to hurt the Russian economy by cutting the “correspondent” banking relationships between targeted Russian banks and US banks that enable international payments. The sanctions will be implemented only if Russia invades, despite Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy earlier calling for sanctions to be brought in before Russia takes such action. Satellite images appear to show new deployments of Russian troops and armoured equipment to farms, forests and fields, with some sitting just 15km from the border with Ukraine. The images, which were captured on Sunday, show “a change in the pattern of the previously observed deployments”. Russian troops in Belarus numbering 30,000 were supposed to finish up military exercises on Sunday, but it was announced they would be extended as tensions continue to rumble. Meanwhile, the Ukrainian military accused Russian-backed forces of committing 80 ceasefire violations in separatist regions throughout Sunday. That’s all from me, Elias Visontay. Now it’s over to my colleague Jennifer Rankin to take us through the next chunk of the day. Germany’s foreign minister, Annalena Baerbock, has accused Russia of playing an “irresponsible” game with peoples’ lives in eastern Ukraine. Baerbock also called on Russia to come back to the negotiating table, and said that because Russia had created the “crisis” it must help solve it, according to Reuters. Baerbock made the comments in Brussels on Monday morning as she arrived for a meeting with her EU counterparts. Russian troops conducting military drills in Belarus will return to their bases when there is an “objective need” to do so, according to a Reuters report citing the Belarusian defence ministry. The ministry said on Monday the troop withdrawal would depend to a large extent on a pullback of Nato forces from near the borders of Belarus and Russia. Russian troops in Belarus numbering 30,000 were supposed to finish military exercises on Sunday, but it was announced they would be extended as tensions continue to rumble. The European Union supports the latest attempt to arrange further talks between Washington and Moscow to find a diplomatic solution following a Russian military buildup near Ukraine’s borders, EU foreign policy chief Josep Borrell said. According to Reuters, Borrell made the comments in Brussels before a meeting of EU foreign ministers on Monday. He said: Summit meetings, at the level of leaders, at the level of ministers, whatever format, whatever way of talking and sitting at the table and trying to avoid a war, is badly needed. We will support anything that can make diplomatic conversations the best way, the only way to look for a solution to the crisis.” Earlier, the French president, Emmanuel Macron, invited Vladimir Putin and Joe Biden to attend a summit aimed at de-escalating the Ukraine crisis, and the leaders have agreed in principle, Macron’s office announced, amid further US warnings that war is imminent. Alienated civilians, ruined homes and Ukrainian soldiers on the frontline. An image gallery from photojournalist Gaëlle Girbes. See the full image gallery here: Ukraine’s military has accused Russian-backed forces of committing 80 ceasefire violations in separatist regions throughout Sunday. However, there were no casualties among Ukrainian forces as a result of the alleged violations, according to a statement released a short time ago. The accusation follows days of increased shelling in eastern Ukraine, and amid the continued Russian military presence along the border the countries share and the evacuation of some residents in the separatist-controlled Donetsk and Luhansk regions to Russia. Russian forces are “creating lists of identified Ukrainians to be killed or sent to camps” in the event of an invasion, according to a letter sent by the US to the UN human rights chief, Michelle Bachelet, the Washington Post has reported. The undated letter cites Russia’s conduct in parts of Ukraine it already occupies and says recent information suggests further abuses are being planned, which have previously included “targeted killings, kidnappings/forced disappearances, unjust detentions, and the use of torture”. The message, from the US ambassador to the UN, Sheba Crocker, warns that a Russian invasion of Ukraine would create a “human rights catastrophe” with credible information that Russian forces were also likely to “use lethal measures to disperse peaceful protests or otherwise counter peaceful exercises of perceived resistance from civilian populations”. Read more: Welcome to our live coverage of the Ukraine crisis. I’m Elias Visontay and I’ll be bringing you all the latest developments. The French president, Emmanuel Macron, has invited Vladimir Putin and Joe Biden to attend a summit aimed at de-escalating the Ukraine crisis, and the leaders have agreed in principle, amid further US warnings that war is imminent. The proposal for the summit – which will proceed only if Russian does not invade Ukraine – followed a flurry of phone calls Macron made in an attempt to de-escalate tensions, including with Boris Johnson, Biden and two calls with Putin. Here are the other key events you may have missed overnight. The US administration signalled its willingness to work towards a diplomatic solution, but has reiterated its view that Russian forces have been ordered to proceed with an invasion of Ukraine. In a statement, White House press secretary Jen Psaki said “We are always ready for diplomacy. We are also ready to impose swift and severe consequences should Russia instead choose war. And currently, Russia appears to be continuing preparations for a full-scale assault on Ukraine very soon.” Meanwhile, the US claims Russian forces are “creating lists of identified Ukrainians to be killed or sent to camps” in the event of an invasion, according to a leaked letter sent by the US to the UN human rights chief, Michelle Bachelet The US administration has reportedly prepared an initial package of sanctions against Russia that includes barring US financial institutions from processing transactions for major Russian banks. Reuters is reporting the measures aim to hurt the Russian economy by cutting the “correspondent” banking relationships between targeted Russian banks and US banks that enable international payments. The sanctions will be implemented only if Russia invades, despite Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy earlier calling for sanctions to be brought in before Russia takes such action. Satellite images appear to show new deployments of Russian troops and armoured equipment to farms, forests and fields, with some sitting just 15km from the border with Ukraine. The images, which were captured on Sunday, show “a change in the pattern of the previously observed deployments”. Russian troops in Belarus numbering 30,000 were supposed to finish up military exercises on Sunday, but it was announced they would be extended as tensions continue to rumble. The Kremlin’s extension will be seen as an ominous sign in Ukraine. The US embassy in Russia told Americans in the country to “have evacuation plans” amid reports of “threats of attacks”, escalating the growing US-Russia tensions that some are already likening to a new cold war. Russia hit back at the embassy’s alert on Sunday, which said attacks in cities such as Moscow and St Petersburg were a possibility and urged American citizens to be alert and “avoid crowds”.Ben Roberts-Smith ordered the mock execution of an unarmed civilian during an SAS training drill in 2012, a former comrade has told the federal court in Sydney. The court also heard on Tuesday that Roberts-Smith discussed “blooding” soldiers on their first tour of Afghanistan – having them kill a person on operation – and said to a comrade that another fellow soldier should not register a bullying complaint against him: “You tell that cunt he better not saying anything, or I’ll get him charged for war crimes.” Roberts-Smith, a recipient of the Victoria Cross, is suing the Age, the Sydney Morning Herald and the Canberra Times for defamation over a series of reports he alleges are defamatory and portray him as committing war crimes, including murder, as well as acts of bullying and domestic violence. The newspapers are pleading a defence of truth. Roberts-Smith denies any wrongdoing. On Tuesday, a former SAS comrade, anonymised before court as Person 19, appeared under force of subpoena as a witness for the newspapers, to give evidence on his service alongside Roberts-Smith. He told the court that during a training drill at the Lancelin barracks, his SAS patrol, led by Roberts-Smith, was conducting a “live-fire” exercise, training for an assault on an Afghan village. The exercise involved other soldiers dressed as Afghan non-combatants. He said that, towards the conclusion of the drill, the soldiers were standing in a semi-circle inside a mock compound, similar to those found in Afghan villages. One soldier was acting as an Afghan national, dressed in traditional clothing, and constrained, kneeling, facing a wall. Person 19 told the court Roberts-Smith said to a new soldier on the patrol, Person 10, “I want you to shoot the PUC”. PUC is a military acronym for “person under control”. “I remember that distinctly, it was unusual, I remember seeing the look on [the kneeling soldier’s] face. I remember Person 10 saying ‘bang’ or they shot the ground, to the effect that they had shot the person,” Person 19 said in his evidence. It is unlawful under international humanitarian law, and against the rules of engagement for Australian troops, to shoot a person under control who does not pose any threat. Person 19 also told the court of instructions given by Roberts-Smith and another senior SAS soldier, Person 31, about assaults on compounds during another 2012 training drill. Person 19 said Roberts-Smith and Person 31 had said drones watching the Australians’ actions would be “pushed off to observe another area so they weren’t observing what was happening in the compound”. “The officers would be kept outside the compound until we would be ready to receive them.” Person 19 told the court: “at which stage Mr Roberts-Smith said, ‘that’s when any people that we suspect of being enemy combatants, we take them into a room and shoot the cunts’.” Person 19 said the soldiers were told they could carry with them weapons or radios – known as “throw-downs” – which could be placed on the bodies of those killed, and “it could be submitted as evidence that they were killed during the assault”. Person 19 could not recall which of Roberts-Smith or Person 35 said which words about throw-downs but they were speaking collectively. Person 19 told the court Roberts-Smith had used the term “blooding” during a conversation at a Perth cafe in 2012. “I heard Mr Roberts-Smith say Person 10 needed to be blooded, to blood the rookie. He needed to prove himself. He then said I didn’t need to prove myself as I’d already done previous deployments.” Person 19 said he understood blooding to mean “new members of the troop or patrol who had never deployed before or had never shot anyone had to prove themselves by showing they had the … fortitude to shoot a prisoner if required”. Person 19 told the court that Person 10 had contacted him, while on deployment in 2012, alleging Roberts-Smith had punched him following an operation. Person 19 told the court he spoke with Roberts-Smith about the potential complaint, and said Roberts-Smith said: “You tell that cunt he better not saying anything, or I’ll get him charged for war crimes.” Last year, in his evidence to the court, Roberts-Smith said he never heard the term “blooding” until after he left the military, and said he had only heard of the term “throw-downs” in the context of them “being used by other nations”. Person 19 also told the court he met several times with journalist Chris Masters, a respondent in the case whom he regards as a friend, and discussed SAS matters, including rumours within the regiment that Roberts-Smith did not deserve his decorations. It was put to Person 19 he was giving evidence to support Masters’ defence in this case. “No. If I had a choice, I wouldn’t be here,” Person 19 said. During cross-examination, Person 19 said Masters had told him that Andrew Hastie – a former captain in the SAS and now the assistant defence minister – had had an “altercation” with Roberts-Smith in Afghanistan. Hastie is scheduled to give evidence later in this trial. Person 19 was also forced to defend his own military service in court. In 2012, five days before he was due to deploy to Afghanistan, Person 19 was court-martialled for taking body armour, ammunition and grenades off a military base in his private car, which was then stolen and involved in a fatal accident. Person 19 was prohibited from deploying to Afghanistan. Two years later, Person 19 was dismissed from the military for signing a false declaration about his living arrangements with his then girlfriend in a military-funded house, and was convicted of “recklessly gaining a financial advantage”. He was sentenced to 42 days confinement in a military prison. Under cross-examination, Arthur Moses SC, put it to Person 19 that he resented Roberts-Smith for raising the ammunition issue up the chain of military command. “You harbour anger towards him because he had to raise the issue of ammunition in your vehicle,” Moses said. “No,” Person 19 said. With the witness out of the room, Moses told the court Person 19 was “a witness with no credit” who was inconsistent in his evidence. “He flip-flops, especially when he gives evidence about hotly contested conversations.” Later, Moses put to Person 19 that he was “quite willing to swear a false statutory declaration”, and his evidence could not be relied upon. Person 19 said: “I lost a 14-year career to a couple of very silly errors of judgment.” Moses asked whether he was disappointed he was barred from going to Afghanistan in 2012. “It ruined my career,” Person 19 said. Moses said Person 19’s evidence was designed “to damage Mr Roberts-Smith”. “I completely reject that statement,” Person 19 said. “You’re giving false evidence to the court,” Moses said. “I disagree,” Person 19 responded. The trial, before Justice Anthony Besanko, continues.There’s a time when it’s no longer winter, but it seems unwise to speak of spring. Before blossom, before warmth is a turning point felt rather than observed. This year it was distilled and formalised for me on an Imbolc pilgrimage to the Uffington White Horse in Oxfordshire, led by the apothecary Charlotte Pulver, the druid Chris Park and the singer-naturalist Sam Lee. I found myself barefoot in a chalk spring, shedding tears for a woman I’ve never met while hugging her sister, and later crouched in candlelight and heart-rhythm in the cramped chamber of the 5,500-year-old long-barrow of Wayland’s Smithy. The next day in the Sam Wanamaker playhouse (the exquisite little sibling of London’s Globe theatre), we gorged on words and music as Robert Macfarlane and Johnny Flynn performed new songs inspired by the oldest of stories, The Epic of Gilgamesh. Those were songs of tree-felling and regret, quests and exploitation, pandemic and plague, love and death, and the dizzy moments on which great events seem to hinge and spin. I came home changed, to find home changed too. In my absence, a song thrush had begun making town-crier proclamations at first light and last, and the hazels had bloomed with male catkins long and louche, and female flowers like tiny passion-coloured explosions. A couple of days later, I join a tree-planting session in Kirby Misperton, North Yorkshire, on a farm bequeathed to the Yorkshire Wildlife Trust. It seems an unlikely reserve at first: stark fields and an embanked, straightened beck, two miles from the concrete slabs of an abandoned fracking operation, closer still to the site of the camp established by protesters. A place in need of healing. It’s a day’s work for 12 of us to get a thousand bare-rooted whips into the ground: rowan, hawthorn, blackthorn, alder buckthorn – we’re creating scrub rather than forest. I sing some of the new songs as I tuck in roots and my fingers break up clods of soil to pack around them. At dusk, a more fitting herald comes: a blackbird on a high hedge, head back, pouring gold from his own dark and atavistic well of inspiration. “Awake!” he cries. “Unfurl, take root and sing at the world to come.” • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryWindfall-tax the rich, Rowan Williams, former archbishop of Canterbury proclaims. Start with a one-off seizure from the top 1% and then bring in a 1% wealth tax that could yield at least £70bn a year. Time at last for the poor to inherit the Earth – or at least a little sliver of it. The last two Covid years have seen tidal waves of wealth wash into the pockets of those already possessing it, just as the cost-of-living disaster drains funds from low- and middle-income households. The pandemic should open our eyes to an already grossly unequal country suddenly engulfed in extra unearned excess. Williams’s forceful words are actually moderate in the context of what’s happening right now: property prices are rising at the fastest rate on record and the stock market is rocketing, while low earners fall into debt. “Spiralling inequality,” he says, is “deeply damaging to our collective morale and trust”. The super-rich with “vastly disproportionate rewards” should welcome a windfall tax not as a burden but as an “opportunity to build a sustainable economy that works for everyone”. That’s optimistic. But if the rich don’t see his commendable plea in that light, surely the top 1% can be ignored electorally? There are only 250,000 households in this bracket, owning a minimum of £3.6m (although many are worth vastly more). And squeezing the very rich is electorally popular: Denis Healey denied saying he’d squeeze them “until the pips squeak”, though he did it. Yet the electoral power of plutocrats is not in their puny voter numbers but in the command they hold of the ears of Tory ministers – especially those hyper-donors who allegedly buy their way into Boris Johnson’s secret “advisory board”. Keir Starmer, in the Observer, asks why nothing is done to clean up London as the “money-laundering capital of the world”? He suggests “Perhaps the answer can be found in the Tory party’s accounts”. The Tories operate in a world of extreme money, bolstered by Conservative party co-chairman Ben Elliot, whose luxury concierge service, Quintessentially, has helped him bring in a stack of mega-rich – and at times questionable – donors since Johnson appointed him in 2019. Meanwhile, the government turns a blind eye to the extraordinary winnings made by some in the Covid years. What will voters think of six companies alone making £16bn in excess profit from Covid? Rio Tinto, recently in the news for blowing up two ancient Aboriginal caves in Western Australia, is handing out a $16.5bn (£12bn) dividend. FTSE mining companies have made £42bn in extra profits. The big four banks are expected to announce annual profits exceeding £34bn – and pay £4bn in bonuses. Shares in the manufacturer Premier Foods, home to Mr Kipling, have risen by 237% during the pandemic. Gambling profits have soared. These are just a few examples. As everyone knows, while energy bills scorch households, oil and gas profits are rocketing, putting $38bn in profits into share buybacks for investors, not green investments. Labour would windfall-tax that excess: companies drilling in the North sea that can’t flee abroad to avoid tax. Labour’s last windfall tax, highly popular in its 1997 manifesto, recouped £5.2bn from privatised utilities sold off too cheaply in the 1980s. That shows what can be done if backed by public opinion. In this explosion of asset values, Williams is calling for a windfall tax on wealth of a much greater magnitude. He is right that extraordinary times call for radical remedies. National debts are stretching towards second world war proportions – and yet unlike in wartime, the government is making no call on private wealth contributions. In wartime, wealth was conscripted, so why not now? Covid greatly widened the wealth gap, the Resolution Foundation tells me, which will have profound consequences for social mobility and income inequality in the future. Instead, Tory MPs clamour for tax cuts, ignoring stricken public services. NHS waiting lists will rise for years. Despite urgent skill shortages, further education funding will still be far behind 2010 levels by 2025. Teachers and nurses are paid less in real terms than in 2010. Pupils have 9% less spent on them in real terms than in 2010, their music, arts, sport and drama devastated. Early years are perilously neglected. “We don’t promise the moon on a stick,” the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, said recently, boasting of his prudence. Indeed he doesn’t. To him, “build back better” is all moonbeams. A one-off windfall tax of 10% on UK wealth would yield £1tn, says Prof Arun Advani of Warwick University. That’s how relatively little taken from relatively few, just once, could fund the regeneration of everything around us that matters. But that’s probably only useful as a thought experiment in this most tax-averse country, where we are taxed less than our EU neighbours. Ed Miliband’s modest mansion tax was a lesson in how reasonable steps are blown away by lobbyists and thinktanks funded by the rich. Take inheritance tax, the fairest and most hated: only one in 20 estates pays, mostly those worth more than £1m – yet the rich and their newspapers scare ordinary homeowners that it’s coming for them. Would they do that to something branded a “wealth windfall tax” on individuals? Follow the dictum of Jean-Baptiste Colbert, Louis XIV’s finance minister: pluck maximum feathers from the goose with minimum hissing. The Institute for Fiscal Studies’ deputy director, Helen Miller, lists less hiss-inducing tax reforms with her elegant TaxLab showing how taxes are raised, with grotesque anomalies. Council tax revaluation would see bills in the north of England fall by 20%, because southerners pay a fraction of their true property values. Levelling up capital gains and rents so that all unearned income pays the same tax and national insurance would stop plutocrats disguising their income. Basic fairness is the first step, but a loud shout from a former archbishop for windfalling the wealthy is welcome. Deliberate misinformation means too few know about undertaxed riches cascading into the pockets of the few, bolstering the life chances of their heirs. Polly Toynbee is a Guardian columnistThe stereotype is that farmers are up with the crowing cockerel, but that’s only really dairy farmers. Most days it is not until 7.45am that you’ll find Rachel Hallos swinging open the door of Beeston Hall Farm in Ripponden, Yorkshire. Beeston Hall is a hill farm overlooking Baitings reservoir, which lies in the valley of the River Ryburn. The 800-hectare (2,000-acre) farm consists of steep fields demarcated by dry stone walls that crumble in a squall. The hill is crested by heather-covered moorland that turns purple in summer and copper in autumn. Hallos lives in a traditional Pennines farmhouse made out of handsome slabs of grey Yorkshire gritstone. A Brontë house, for Brontë country. Inside, wan light streams through single-pane windows on to a well-trodden oak staircase that creaks. Hallos steps outside, dressed in a padded waterproof coat and wellies. She is met by a cacophony of noise. Her terrier Jack yaps with shrill urgency. Jim, a border collie, barks incessantly. Hallos feeds the dogs and then the two scrawny black-and-white cats, which sleep in the outbuildings and yowl for treats at the kitchen window. She fills a sack with hay that is sweet-smelling and almost yeasty, from the fermentation process that takes place when it is stored in plastic for the winter months. She hoists the sack on to her shoulder like Father Christmas and takes it to feed Aiden and Danny, her dun geldings. It is late October 2021. Autumn is Hallos’s favourite season. The trees around the reservoir are gold-flecked, ochre and vermilion. Her herd of 200 cows and calves and flock of 400 sheep are out in the fields. The cows will return when the frost sets in; the sheep stay out all winter. Hallos usually feels a sense of quiet satisfaction this time of year. The autumn calves are grazing beside their mothers in the fields. The sheds have been power-hosed and disinfected, ready for winter. There’s a bit of breathing room, after the rigours of summer: the never-ending hay baling and attending to the newborn calves and lambs. In autumn, Hallos can start to plan for the spring calves and lambs. Which tup will go with which sheep, and which bull with which cow? The farm overlooks West Yorkshire moorland. But this autumn feels different. Hallos just bought in a load of straw, for the herd’s winter beds, and beef nut to supplement their diet in winter, when the grass stops growing and the last of the summer hay has been eaten. Feed has gone up by £90 a tonne. Diesel for the tractors has increased by 20p a litre. When she last ordered the diesel, Hallos asked for a quote, but the supplier told her they couldn’t give her one, because the prices change every day. “The costs are getting a bit scary,” she says. Because they are tenant farmers, they can’t rely on land rents to subsidise their farming operations. Because they are primary producers, they can’t pass on their costs to anyone below them in the supply chain. Their calves and lambs are taken twice a year to Skipton auction market, and the price they get is the price they get. Already Hallos, who is 51, and her husband, Steve, 60, live a frugal life. They pay themselves just £250 a month each out of the business as a stipend, to cover their household expenses. Hallos’s one frivolity is a fortnightly manicure, so you can’t see the muck under her fingernails, and also because it makes her feel good. Their two grownup children, Anna, 22, and Sam, 25, work on the farm, and receive the minimum wage. Hallos is worried about how she will heat the farmhouse this winter. In September, energy prices increased by 12%. In April, they will increase by 54%, an average of £693 a year a household. “It’s a beautiful house, but cold and draughty,” she says. In addition to these increased costs, Beeston Hall Farm will lose its EU-funded basic payment scheme grant of £60,000 a year in 2027, as part of the UK’s post-Brexit transition. But Hallos is always ebullient, no matter what she faces. She does this job not for the money, but for the love of it. “How lucky we are,” she says, in a broad Yorkshire accent. “It’s hard work. But we can walk outside and take pride in what we do. We keep a nice tidy farm with healthy animals. A lot of people just jump in their car and go to work. It’s a sense of belonging.” * * * They bring in the first lot of cattle in the first week of November. Sixty spring-calving cows and calves amble down from the top of the hill into the sheds, which have been prepared with fresh straw that is replaced daily. The rest of the herd will return over the coming weeks. Many herds stay out all winter, but in this part of the world, and this landscape, the grazing season is short. The pedigree salers and charolais cattle feeding in the sheds where they are housed over winter. Ripponden is windy and wet. When it rains, water streams off the hills. The soil here is clay and peat bog, which turns to mulch in winter. If left out in winter, the cattle’s manure could leach into the water supply. And besides, there’s nothing for the herd to eat: when the temperature drops beneath 6C, grass stops growing. Hallos is considering replacing the grass in the lower fields, which is Yorkshire fog, with a genetically modified variant that is hardier and sweeter, but she’s not sure. “We’re a traditional farm,” she says. “It’s old-fashioned grass.” Theirs is a pedigree herd of salers and charolais. Salers have curly red-brown coats, calve easily and produce high-quality, lean meat, although not as much as the golden-coloured charolais, which grow quicker and produce a high number of saleable cuts. Sam drives a tractor down the cattle shed, blasting fresh hay over the tops of the cows and calves. Sometimes, the calves dance in the spray. Later, they will eat the straw, which scratches the rumen, their largest stomach compartment, and aids digestion. Hallos surveys the herd carefully, watching for any signs of sickness or stress. This is called stockmanship. “A lot of a farmer’s time,” Hallos says, “is just looking. Is there one cow in the corner, facing the other way? You can tell from their eyes and ears that they’re sad. If that happens for a few consecutive days, you think: something’s not right.” Stockmanship is knowing when a cow is being bullied by the rest of the herd, or when she is lame, or in pain. Cows can be bullies. One might block another from eating; the victim will grow thinner and weaker. When that happens, Hallos pulls the cow out of the herd and places her with the younger calves, so she can eat and build her strength back. Short-faced heifers are playful. They like to tug at Hallos’s sleeve. Even Oakley the bull is gentle enough, if you treat him right. More than anything, he loves to have his coarse hide scratched, especially on his back. Sometimes, he will drool with pleasure. Farmers can’t afford to be sentimental, but they all have their favourites. Steve’s was Octavia. “She was a leader,” Hallos says. “You could get the rest of the herd to follow her, if you’d give her bits of corn.” Narissa was hers. “I just loved her. She was a queen. She would stand in the field with so much presence.” They used to do the show circuit together. Hallos trained her to stand square and straight for the display, to walk around the pen when called upon, to be calm and content in the trailer home. She grew lame as she got older. It’s a stiff climb to the higher grazing land, up on the moor, and Narissa would strain herself to get up there. It wasn’t fair on her. Hallos couldn’t bear to take her to market and see a stranger lead her away. “Not like that,” she says. “She produced a calf for us every year. She did her bit. More than her bit.” On their last day together, Hallos had a few quiet words with Narissa. She told her thanks for the good times. Hallos then handed her over to the slaughterhouse man. She trusted him and knew that when they arrived at Narissa’s final destination, a 10-minute drive away, he would back up the trailer, lead her out, and then it would happen. It would be quick. “People think that farmers don’t care,” says Hallos. “But we want it to be right for them. We do.” * * * For Britain’s shepherds, Bonfire Night is traditionally tupping time, when the males impregnate the ewes for an April lambing. Hallos’s flock is a mixture of Scottish blackfaces and texels. The blackfaces are a hill breed most commonly found in the north of England and Scotland. They have black faces, curling horns and a shaggy, coarse coat. They are hardy and well suited to the whipping wind and sideways rain of a Yorkshire hillside in winter. The texel is a Dutch breed that is faster-growing and bred for meat. They live in the greener ground, closer to the farmhouse, which is more sheltered from the elements; the blackface are up on the moor. The tups can smell when the ewes are in heat. It’s best to get them going early in the day, so that they have calmed down by the evening. Rachel and Anna lead the tups into a sheep crush, which sounds painful, but is simply a metal enclosure, and paint their genitals in either pink or purple, so that they will know which tup has mounted which ewe. It’s a sunny autumn day. Afterwards, the newly impregnated ewes gambol over the hills, and the weary-looking tups swagger home alone, through the fields, tails swinging from side to side. * * * In mid-November, Hallos travels to Scotland to collect a bull from a cattle sale. The bull came from Northern Ireland, which, in a post-Brexit economy, is a more complicated transaction than it used to be. “No one knows what paperwork you need,” she says. Hallos is a gregarious presence who’s a regular at the cattle sales of Scotland’s south-west coast. She knows everyone and everyone knows her. But the atmosphere is grim. One experienced farmer tells her that he’s just aiming to be in the second wave of farmers that go bust, not the first. These conversations tug at her like fleece on a barbed wire fence. When Hallos and her husband took Beeston Hall on after the death of Steve’s father in 2000, the finances were a mess. The bank wanted to repossess. Anna was just a baby at the time. Hallos found the number for the head of the bank’s agricultural department and pleaded with him to give them a chance. “We thought: ‘What have we got if we walk away, apart from debt? We might as well fight it out.’” It took them a decade to get out of that debt, and another decade to earn enough money to throw up the outbuildings they needed to house their livestock, and purchase equipment. Even now, Beeston Hall is far from profitable. It will probably never be profitable, unless they diversify, like many farmers across the UK. In 2018, they bought a holiday cottage next door, which provides a much-needed second source of income. Her landlord, Yorkshire Water, wants the family to continue to diversify. Hallos is considering selling beef directly to consumers, but it’s not as straightforward as simply keeping back some calves for slaughter. “We aren’t a factory floor,” she says. “It’s a long process.” Beeston Hall doesn’t “finish” its calves, meaning fatten them up before slaughter, instead it sells them at 11 months old to a finisher. This is because it’s not a mixed farm, that grows barley or wheat, which could be fed to the animals. To pivot to a direct-to-consumer model would require a complete restructuring of their business model. What Hallos doesn’t understand, after all these years, is what has happened to our food system. “How have we got it so wrong?” she says. “Because when something becomes too cheap, you don’t value it. But then there are genuine issues in this country where people can’t even afford it when it’s as cheap as it is. So how do you ever get people like us, who are right at the bottom of the supply chain, to get a fair price for our meat?” Anna leads the ewes off the hills for pregnancy scans. The UK has some of the cheapest food in the world, largely due to the colossal buying power of our supermarket chains, which compete with each other to drive down prices. “Farmers have always been a pawn in the retail price war,” says Tom Bradshaw, the vice-president of the National Farmers’ Union (NFU). “Because they are often small, disparate producers. They don’t have the power to influence up the supply chain.” Hallos agonises all the time over whether it’s the best thing for Anna and Sam to continue the family business, or whether it wouldn’t be better for them to do something more stable. Consumer price inflation has reached 5.1%, the highest rate since September 2011. “We’ve got our borrowing down as much as we possibly can, but there’s only so long you can hold tight,” she says. * * * In late November, Hallos arranges the provisional sale of six heifers to another farmer, for finishing, subject to health checks. They go for £1,500 apiece. “That’s a good price,” she says, “which is helpful, bearing in mind that everything else is getting expensive.” Diesel has gone up from 58p to 79p a litre. Hallos is also a representative for the NFU, and she spends weeks driving around farmers’ annual general meetings, canvassing the mood. These meetings typically take place in the backroom of a pub, and they almost always go the same way: the farmers want to vent. Sometimes, they feel like therapy sessions. Arable farmers are stressed out because fertiliser prices have gone up from £200 to £700 a tonne. Fruit and vegetable growers are stressed because gas to heat the greenhouses is up by 17%, and they can’t get hold of CO2 to extend the shelf life of their produce, due to an international shortage. After Brexit, EU workers have returned to the continent, and UK farmers can’t recruit labour to replace them. And inflation keeps going up. Steve climbs a gate. “We’ve never seen the uncertainty we’re seeing now,” says Bradshaw. The main driver of anxiety is the end of the common agricultural policy – 2021 is the first year in which EU payments to farmers have been cut; 42% of English farms rely upon the policy to be profitable. The Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs is piloting the sustainable farming incentive, which will pay grants to farmers that meet certain biodiversity and environmental obligations, but details are vague. “They’re still making the policy,” says Dr Ruth Little, a lecturer in human geography at the University of Sheffield. “But this is the biggest change to agriculture in over a generation, and agriculture works on long timescales. The worst thing for farmers is uncertainty. If you don’t know what you have to deliver, how are you supposed to plan?” Tenant farmers such as Hallos are most vulnerable to this post-Brexit period of adjustment. “They don’t have the asset base to get through this period of change,” says Bradshaw. Hallos feels the pressure, even if she tries to stay upbeat. “Just tell us what you want from us,” she says. “Because none of us know any more.” She has asked Sam and Anna to try to find a replacement source of income for their £60,000 basic payment. Anna is working shifts in the local pub, while Sam grits roads and works as a contractor, using their equipment on neighbouring farms. At one meeting in a pub in South Yorkshire, a young farmer asks Hallos when the general public will stop blaming them for everything: climate change, food prices, the rest of it. She tells him that most of the population have subcontracted their ability to feed themselves out to a small group of people called farmers. She tells him that they need to get better at explaining what they do on their farms, and how they look after their animals, to the public. She tells him not to be disheartened. “There was a silent epidemic of mental health problems in the agricultural sector pre-Covid,” says Little. “Covid plus Brexit uncertainty is a perfect storm. There needs to be support mechanisms in place for the agricultural sector.” She is particularly worried about farmers who may not want to embrace the government’s environmental-centred approach to farming. “We’re moving from a system where farmers like to produce good stock and have tidy fields, and part of their identity is about being a good farmer, meaning, a good food producer,” says Little. “This new system sets them up more as environmental stewards rather than food producers. People need to see themselves in the future of agriculture. We need to think about the reasons why people farm.” Hallos drives home in the dark, down winding country roads. It’s pitch-black, and cold. As she’s driving, sleet starts coming down. “It’s definitely winter. Here we go.” * * * The weather in December is awful. Horizontal rain that makes your nose stream and your lips go numb. Rachel, Sam, Steve and Anna go to fetch in the last of the cows from the moor. The breeding cows know what’s coming, and start to trot home. Their calves follow. Crossing the A58, which traverses the farm, is always hairy, but they manage it OK. The cows bring themselves into the field and straight into the shed. They remember the way, from years gone past. “As if to say,” says Hallos, “thank God for that. We’re home.” The cows are able to pick their way home without prompting because they have hefted to the moor. “Hefted,” Hallos says, “means an animal understands the boundaries of the land, without there being physical barriers. It’s their sense of belonging. They know the routes and where to go to shelter from the weather. They know that because their mother taught them.” Jim the border collie. In mid-December, Anna finds a sheep dead in a field. There’s no explanation: this just happens sometimes. It might be a heart problem, or cancer. In heavy snowfall, sheep may hide beside a drystone wall. The snow blows over the top of them, and they get stuck. They die standing up. Anna fetches a tractor, puts the dead sheep into a bucket fixed to the front, and drives it home. She stores it in an outbuilding and slings a tarp over it. Hallos rings the knackerman, who collects and disposes of dead livestock. Normally, he would arrive the following day, but he’s struggling with staff shortages, due to Covid. He takes a week to collect it. * * * Hallos is sitting in her kitchen, having a cup of tea and thinking about how much she’s looking forward to Christmas, when she gets a phone call from a private number. It’s a representative from the Animal and Plant Health Agency, a government department. A breeding cow she sold a few weeks ago was slaughtered, and the butcher found lesions inside it, meaning that it has bovine tuberculosis. Hallos’s stomach flips. She wants to say it’s a mistake, but the man on the end of the phone is clear. This has never happened to her before, in two decades of livestock farming. The impact on the business will be catastrophic. Best-case scenario, the entire herd has to be tested for TB. If the tests come back negative in 60 days, normal business can resume. Worst-case scenario, TB is found to be endemic throughout the entire herd – all the animals will have to be slaughtered. “We don’t own any land,” says Hallos. “Everything we own is walking around in the fields.” To make matters worse, it’s a nightmare trying to get hold of a vet, due to a nationwide shortage. The vet eventually arrives on a frigid January morning. All of the cows are brought out of the sheds and walk into a cattle crush. The vet shaves two small sections of the animal’s neck, and then pinches the skin together to measure the thickness. She performs the tuberculin skin test, injecting a combination of proteins into the skin of the neck. If the cow has been exposed to TB, this will trigger an immune response, and a lump will develop at the injection site. Three days later, the vet returns to check for lumps. It’s bad news. One of the cows has a lump on her neck. But the test result is inconclusive, meaning the vet has to return in March to do it again. Until she passes the test, none of the herd can leave the farm. Rachel quarantines the cow with her calf in a side shed. To make matters worse, they lose the sale of the six heifers. It’s a £9,000 loss, plus the associated costs of raising the heifers into cows. Hallos is trying to stay positive. She looks out of the living room window and sees four lambs in the front field. They’re running. For a moment, she wonders if a fox has got into the field and is chasing them, but then she realises that they are playing. It’s a beautiful, sunny day, and the animals take pleasure in it. She resolves to take pleasure in it also. * * * Hallos brings in the hoggs from the fields. They are what’s left of last year’s spring lambs – the females who have been kept back for breeding. They are in to be haybitten. Because the lambs have never eaten hay – only grass or milk from their mothers – if offered, they will refuse it. But in the depths of winter, when the ground freezes and the grass stops growing, the farmers drive hay out into the fields to supplement the diet, especially when the sheep are carrying lambs and need extra energy. “If you don’t haybite them,” Hallos says, “the sheep will refuse to eat the hay and grow thinner and thinner.” Leading them into the shed, where they will live for a month, Hallos can smell the lanolin in the wool. A greasy, sour odour. She’s sensitive to smell; she can’t bear to eat roast lamb, because it reminds her of lambing season, and how the violent stench of afterbirth lingers on your clothes and your hands, no matter how much you wash. All the sheep have to be sheared in the summer, for welfare reasons. Blow flies lay their eggs in the wool, and maggots hatch and cause fly strike, an infection that can prove fatal if untreated. In pre-pandemic times, Hallos would take the wool to the British Wool Marketing Board, and it would auction it off to be spun into carpets for cruise ships and hotels. But when the pandemic started, the global wool market crashed. Hallos will get pennies on a tonne, if she’s lucky. “You think: ‘Hang on a minute. We’re meant to be living in a world where we want to use more sustainable materials. Why aren’t we doing anything with all this wool?’” A blackface hogg has climbed on top of the corn feeder and towers above the other animals. She is totally still, as watchful and imperious as a shaman officiating at a ceremony. There’s always one hogg that likes to dominate the rest. Like cows, sheep can be bullies, but they can also be arrogant, playful and smart. The sheep in the fields recognise the noise of the tractor in winter, and know it means Steve is bringing them hay, and they race over and jostle for prime position. In a fortnight, Hallos will scan the sheep, to see which are carrying lambs, and how many. The ones that aren’t pregnant will be sold. The frost will drain off the hills and the first leaf buds will appear on the trees around the reservoir. Hallos will prepare for the arrival of the spring calves and the lambs. She will deal with the vet, and the outcome of the TB scare, whatever may come. Hallos ponders the farm’s future. She will build up the farm, bit by bit, like a drystone wall that has collapsed in a gale. Dug deep, for a strong foundation. Stones stacked neat and flush as books on a bookshelf. But even a talented and conscientious farmer such as Hallos cannot protect her farm from the buffeting winds of Covid, Brexit, an increasingly globalised supply chain and inflation. The wall crumbles even as she restores it by hand. Another gust might bring down the whole thing. “It’s so demoralising sometimes,” says Hallos. “You think: ‘What is the point?’ But then you have to pick yourself up.” There are animals to be fed, and attended to. Sheep to be sheared, hay to be stacked, and then, when it is all over, a horse ride across sloping country fields on a sun-dappled evening. No other life would bring such joy. No other life would bring such difficulty.The number of people homeless in England is predicted to jump by a third by 2024 as councils warn of a “tidal wave” of need caused by benefits freezes, soaring food and energy bills and the end of Covid eviction bans. More than 66,000 more people will be homeless by 2024, with the bulk of the increase being among people forced to “sofa surf”, according to annual forecasts by the housing charity Crisis and Heriot-Watt University. There will be 8,000 more people rough sleeping and 9,000 people forced into unsuitable temporary accommodation. The chief executive of Crisis, Matt Downie, described the findings as “a huge cause for concern”, as a survey of 155 English councils also found that nine out of 10 town halls expect to see an increase in evictions from private rented homes over the next year. Eight out of 10 fear increases in homeless children. “We are expecting a tidal wave, to put it mildly,” an official at one council in southern England told the researchers. “It is going to be a very, very busy couple of years.” Councils in London, where living costs are highest, are predicting the biggest surge. The bleak projections come as government measures to prevent homelessness during the pandemic unwind. Core homelessness in England – a concept which captures the most acute forms of homelessness – is estimated to have totalled 203,400 in 2020, down 5% on 2019 levels. This was primarily due to the widely praised “Everyone In” initiative during the pandemic which saw rough sleepers housed in hotels. But this measure is now predicted to rise to 270,000 by 2024 and reach close to 300,000 by 2036, unless further countermeasures are taken. Evictions slumped during the pandemic, as ministers paused court proceedings, but are now increasing again. There were more than 14,000 possession claims between October and December last year, a 42% rise on the previous quarter. Energy price rises this spring forecast at over 40% will hit single-adult households on low incomes hardest. They could be forced to spend 54% of their income on bills compared with 6% for a middle-income family, according to estimates by the Joseph Rowntree Foundation. “It doesn’t have to be like this,” said Downie. “The protections put in place during the pandemic helped thousands of people off the streets and prevented many more from facing homelessness. It would be shameful for this progress to unravel before us, at a huge human cost and a financial one for the local councils left to foot the bill.” In December, the government announced a £316m homelessness prevention fund for councils for the next financial year that it said would protect tens of thousands of people from homelessness. It was welcomed by Crisis and the founder of the Big Issue, John Bird. But Crisis is calling on the government to further increase the Local Housing Allowance – the amount the state will pay to cover rent for people on benefits – so it truly covers the cost of rent across the country. The allowance was rebased at 30% of market rents in spring 2020 but was frozen from April 2021. It also repeated its call for more social housing to be built. Only 5,955 new homes for the cheapest social rents were provided in England 2020/21, down from nearly 40,000 a year a decade ago. A Department for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities spokesperson said: “Government interventions have prevented almost 450,000 households from becoming homeless since 2017. “This year, councils have been given an extra £65 million to support low income households with rent arrears. “We’re also banning no-fault evictions, and a £316 million homelessness prevention grant will help people who are homeless or at risk of losing their home to find a new one, get help with evictions or move into temporary accommodation.”Flooding, power cuts and destruction to homes continue to impact people in parts of the country after three named storms struck the UK in a week. In Ashford in the Water, Derbyshire, cars remain stuck in a flooded road after Storm Franklin hit on Sunday. Martin Crapper, 62, said people in “countless cars” were trapped “in the freezing cold flood water in the dark” on the main road from Matlock to Buxton. The health and safety manager said that mountain rescue had to help an elderly man on Sunday evening. “Then there were other people who got stuck, and they didn’t venture out [of their cars] – they waited for four or five hours for rescue to come and drag them [the vehicles] out.” He added that local people “tried to help as best as possible with cups of tea and opening [their] homes for warmth and shelter”. The council closed the road on Sunday evening, but some drivers have ignored the signs and continued driving through the area, Crapper said, creating “huge tidal waves causing more risk to trapped cars”. “The trouble is, it’s on a blind bend, so with the dark, you come round the corner and you’re in it before you know it.” Crapper explained that though the area is aptly named and tends to flood, it’s the worst flooding he has witnessed in the five years he’s lived there. “Last January was bad, but this is even worse. My neighbour next door but one, he’s lived here for over 10 years – he’s never seen anything like this,” Crapper said. Pippa Palmer, 59, was at home sheltering from Storm Eunice in London on Friday when she heard a “deafening” cracking noise. “I was sitting there trying to reassure my dog that nothing was wrong. He’ll never believe another word,” Palmer said. In the garden four doors down from Palmer, a research strategist, is a giant mimosa tree: “It is 25 ft, 7.6 metres. It’s bloody huge,” she said. After hearing the crash, Palmer said she went into the garden and just saw a branch down. “I thought, that made a loud noise. Then I turned around and was like, oh my Christ there’s a tree on my house.” The 25-ft tree is now horizontal, having crashed through three fences in neighbours gardens. “The top boughs hit my house with almighty force,” Palmer said, adding that she has filed an insurance claim and that people are coming tomorrow to start “carving” the tree up. “It has crashed through my bathroom roof and crushed my artist’s studio in the garden. The tree’s holding the roof on to the studio. We’re worried about what’s gonna happen when the tree is taken off.” When the power went off in Yvonne Turner’s home in Aberdeenshire on Monday morning, it was the third time in as many months. Fortunately, it was just for a few hours this time, but recent storms Arwen, Corrie and Malik have seen their area cut off for days on end. “We are feeling quite fed up,” Turner, 58, said, explaining that outages keep occurring because trees are knocked over on to power lines. For Turner, losing power is “doubly a pain” as it also means having their water supply cut off, as the domestic supply is pumped from a borehole. Finding drinking water during Storm Arwen proved difficult: all the supermarkets had “completely sold out”. “We had a bit of a struggle, but eventually found a welfare van in town, and we were able to get some water on the second day. When you have no electricity and no water, and it’s wintertime, it’s quite tough.” As Turner grows her own produce and keeps livestock, the frequent power cuts are particularly stressful. “We fill our freezer with produce at the end of the season and it lasts for the rest of the year. So when the power goes down for several days, it’s really quite a problem – we’re faced with losing all of our year’s work.” In Gloucestershire, Douglas Campbell, 63, has been without power for more than 72 hours after Storm Eunice hit on Friday. Campbell, a 63-year-old company director, and his family of four moved to a nearby hotel on Sunday, as the property was “uninhabitable”. “Everything is fired by electricity, so no hot water, no light, no heat, no nothing. It’s been a terrible time,” he said, adding that he’s been “reliably informed” by his provider, Scottish Power, that electricity will be back by 11pm on Monday. “We had no choice but to move out.” “We waited because we hoped and hoped that it would get better but by the time Sunday morning came, there was no way to boil water or have a wash,” Campbell said, adding that they were doing everything with “candles, like the dark ages”. “It was hopeless so we had to move on.” The 63-year-old said the storm has not damaged their home, but two trees in the garden have been uprooted. “It’s the worst storm in recent memory,” Campbell, who has lived in the area for 30 years, said. “[The power] is due to be restored at 11pm on Monday, but it’s taken them a very, very long time,” Campbell said. “If it doesn’t come back on today, we’ll have to try and ring the bell a bit harder. But at the end of the day, I suppose thousands of people are in the same boat.”It might be termed the Winter Olympics, but until last weekend (12 to 13 February) Beijing 2022 had seen no real snow and was relying entirely on artificial snow and snow cannon. Then temperatures plummeted to -22C with heavy snow and blizzard conditions causing poor visibility. Thirty-three out of the 87 competitors in the men’s giant slalom were unable to finish and many other events were postponed. Meanwhile, in the city of Petrópolis in the Rio de Janeiro state of Brazil, intense and torrential rainfall caused landslides and devastating flooding on Tuesday 15 February. About 25.8cm of rain fell in just three hours, the normal volume for the entire month of February. At least 100 people have died and many are still missing, with 500,000 forced to leave their homes. Finally, a deep area of low pressure brought damaging winds to northern parts of Europe last week, the second to hit the region in a matter of days. Known as Storm Zeynep in Germany, the strong winds uprooted trees damaged roofs and buildings, and caused significant disruption to transport. The Netherlands, Denmark, Belgium, Germany and northern France experienced the worst of the conditions with wind gusts in excess of 80mph. Three people were killed in the Netherlands, with other fatalities also reported in Germany and Belgium. • This article was amended on 22 February 2022. Petrópolis is in Rio de Janeiro state, not São Paulo state as an earlier version said.If 1960s housing was known for concrete panels, the 1980s for cartoonish pediments, and the 2000s for tacky (sometimes fatal) clip-on cladding, the current epoch will be remembered for bricks. But not just any old brick. It is a yellowish, biscuity brick, whose particular patina falls somewhere between a digestive and a Hobnob. It is a brick that summons strains of the traditional London stock and Cambridge gault, suggesting a crunchy, crumbly, wholesome goodness, no matter what actually lies behind the facade. It is the comforting Hovis ad of cladding choices, a no-nonsense cooked clod of clay, which comes with an unlikely name: Mystique. The irrepressible rise of the Mystique brick can be traced back to its use on one particular housing project in Cambridge, which won the Stirling prize in 2008. With its combination of terraced streets, mews houses and courtyards, the Accordia development was a refreshing bolt of common-sense design that would influence the next decade and more of British housing. In an age when new blocks of flats looked increasingly cheap, the low-rise buttery brickwork suggested a new era of weight, depth and permanence, a return to front doors on the street, housing as it used to be. Almost 15 years later, two of the architects of Accordia – Alison Brooks and Feilden Clegg Bradley Studios (FCBS) – have been working together again, joined by a younger firm, Gort Scott, in an altogether tougher context. They have swapped leafy Cambridge for the gritty South Kilburn estate in Brent, the poorest borough in west London, and exchanged an enclave of million-pound homes for the 235 council flats of Unity Place. But the Mystique is back, in bigger quantities than ever. Alison Brooks, who lives nearby and has worked on the estate for 12 years, building two other projects (also in Mystique), says the first task was to restore the street network. She describes the previous 1960s blocks as “moated”, set back on a podium of car parking that effectively blocked access between the streets. A new pedestrian route now runs through the site, where avenues of cherry trees frame a playground, forming a picturesque vista that terminates in the gothic revival facade of St Augustine’s church – affectionately known as the “cathedral of north London”. The bulk of the scheme follows the new London vernacular, a kind of politely proportioned, stripped-back Georgian architecture, synonymous with recent housing in the capital. Citing a popular precedent, the architects took inspiration from the desirable mansion blocks of nearby Maida Vale, replacing the 18-storey slab and four-storey walk-ups with a higher-density arrangement of six to eight storeys that frame private courtyard gardens. Brooks’s trio of buildings depart from the norm: they are kinked and chamfered, with oversized mansard roofs clad with champagne-coloured terracotta tiles, and screened balconies that dance across the facades. Across the street stand the two more sober L-shaped blocks by FCBS and Gort Scott. The former reflects Brooks’s slanted geometries at its upper storeys, while the latter enjoys inset balconies and is crowned with a sharp white concrete colonnade around its top two levels, echoing the tracery of the church. The aim, says George Wilson of FCBS, was “similar themes done slightly differently”, with a consistent material palette – the acres of Mystique brick, offset with metallic beige metalwork – livened up by tweaks to the massing. The location of a mains water pipe beneath Brooks’s site, for example, led to one block being cut into a quirky triangular flatiron shape, adorned with balconies on its prow and topped with a cornice. Another of her blocks features green-glazed bricks and long, broad balconies overlooking the courtyard, breaking up the oatmeal mass of the rest of the scheme. While attention has been paid to creating a good streetscape, the design of the flats themselves seems like a bit of an afterthought. The majority are dual aspect, but there are some floors of some single-aspect flats reached from gloomy double-loaded corridors (ie with doors to apartments on both sides), with uninspiring layouts. The result can feel as if the homes have been squeezed inside a predetermined envelope, rather than the blocks designed around the best possible internal configuration. The architects weren’t retained in the design-and-build process, so there is some of the usual bodging, like doors to balconies in common areas that have been replaced with unopenable fire vents, making them impossible to access. The inclusion of a district heating system in the basement also now seems questionable – in vogue at the time of design, the general consensus has since moved on from them being as beneficial as once thought, as they sometimes lock residents into costly contracts. The project is the latest phase in the regeneration of the South Kilburn estate, which has had as chequered history as any such schemes. Once home to Victorian terraces, the 48-hectare site was mostly cleared in the postwar years, an action justified by bomb damage and overcrowding, and replaced with modernist slabs, some built with the “Bison block” system of prefab concrete panels craned into place. In the right light they have a charm that, to a degree, recalls the Hungarian modernist Marcel Breuer, but they were built without the correct rubber seals, leading to years of cold, damp, draughty misery for residents. “You could spill a bucket of water on the 10th floor,” says Leslie Barson, who has worked on the estate for 29 years, running a home education centre and community kitchen, “and someone on the fourth floor would get a damp patch.” Successive attempts to fix the estate brought their own problems. The Blairite New Deal for Communities in the 2000s was an unmitigated disaster, with more than £50m spent on the estate, and hardly anything to show for it. A probe into misconduct resulted in the resignation of the programme’s chief executive, and the sacking of his deputy, in 2006. Several blocks built since then have been plagued by construction flaws. Granville New Homes, built by contractor Higgins in 2009 and bought by Brent’s housing company for £17.1m, has suffered from leaks and cladding issues, leaving an estimated repair cost of £18.5m. Ironically, Higgins has since been chosen to repair defects to another block, Merle Court, built just around the corner in 2012. Last year, a window crashed to the pavement from a fifth-floor flat at Bourne Place, built by Denne for L&amp;Q in 2013. It was described as “another day of stress and terror” by residents, who had long complained of loose-fitting balcony doors falling from their hinges. The list goes on: a catalogue of calamities that regularly makes the pages of the Kilburn Times, featuring tenants who feel “trapped” in what they say are “defective and neglected” housing association homes. “There are seven housing associations on the estate and they don’t talk to each other,” says Barson. “When rats run from one block’s bins to another, they won’t do anything because it’s someone else’s problem.” Barson and her colleagues at the Granville community centre have been battling for a decade to get the residents’ voices heard in the process of regeneration, with some success. The Victorian building where they have run a community kitchen since 2014 will now be saved, although it will be swamped by further flats, and she is critical of the lack of proper community space in the new developments. “Kids from different blocks could play together before,” she says, “but now all the gardens are gated. There is a new ‘hub’ for council services, but nowhere you can have a birthday party or a coffee morning.” Pablo Sendra, a housing activist and academic at UCL, has been working with residents to develop an alternative community-led plan for part of the estate that has yet to face the wrecking ball (PDF). Working with architects, social scientists and a quantity surveyor, they have shown how two of the 1960s blocks that didn’t use the concrete panel system (William Dunbar and William Saville houses) could be eminently retrofitted and, along with some infill development, provide a higher proportion of social-rented homes than the council’s demolish-and-rebuild strategy, with a fraction of the embodied carbon cost. But the council refuses to reconsider. “The older buildings just don’t work,” says councillor Shama Tatler, lead member for regeneration. “No matter how much money we put into refurbishing, it’s impossible.” She cites the 2019 estate-wide ballot, in which 84% of residents voted to press ahead with regeneration, although critics point out the survey didn’t differentiate by block, and the question posed a blunt “yes or no” to improvements. To Brent’s credit, it is doing better than many London boroughs. There is a commitment to rehouse everyone on the estate, and there will be a net increase in social-rented units, from 1,568 to 1,626, along with 155 shared ownership homes – cross-subsidised by 1,356 flats for market sale. Unity Place is the best of the bunch so far, and it is something of an anomaly in being 100% social rented, after Brent secured £111m from the mayor of London’s pot for “genuinely affordable” homes, £30m of which funded this. It sounds like a big win, until you realise that the council bought the development from Telford Homes and Notting Hill Genesis for £92m in 2019 – having sold them the site for just £3m a few years earlier. It is an indictment of the lack of central government funding for so long that local authorities have been left having to buy back market homes with mayoral handouts, while housebuilders continue to laugh their way to the bank, often leaving leaky, dangerous, shoddily built blocks in their wake.When Ambika Mod was cast in This Is Going to Hurt, Adam Kay’s TV adaptation of his diaries as a junior NHS doctor, it was late 2020 and health workers were facing a new Covid wave. “It felt like, now more than ever, it was an important story to tell,” she says. “I was filled with fear because of the sheer responsibility.” Mod plays Shruti Acharya, a junior doctor under the tutelage of Adam (played by Ben Whishaw). “It’s so rare to see a well-written, complex, young south Asian female character,” she says. “Her arc is so brilliant.” The character is an amalgamation of people Kay worked with. “I share a lot in common with Shruti,” says Mod. “We’re both young Indian women, we’re both children of immigrants, so Adam was really receptive to my thoughts. I remember him saying: ‘If Shruti doesn’t make sense to you, she’s not going to make sense to anyone.’” The series, set on the obstetrics and gynaecology ward of a London hospital in 2006, follows Adam and Shruti as they negotiate an under-resourced NHS. We see, in excruciating detail, the personal sacrifices staff are expected to make. The pandemic meant shadowing real doctors was impossible. Instead, Mod read books and articles, watched documentaries, listened to podcasts, and called friends of friends who are currently junior doctors. She was struck by the physical toll the job takes: “They will often not pee for 12 hours, they might not drink any water, or they won’t have sat down from the moment they start their shift to the moment they finish. Those minute details really helped when we were on set.” Visceral scenes show the doctors’ exhaustion (Shruti studying through the night, Adam asleep at his steering wheel), how that can lead to compassion fatigue and compromised decision-making, and the way intrusive thoughts can haunt you when things go wrong at work. “Tiredness is not something to be underestimated,” Mod says. “In Shruti’s case, it’s a large factor in her mental decline.” It’s heavy stuff. Yet this is Mod’s first serious acting role. Until Shruti came along, she was a comedian. “I’ve wanted to be an actor since I was a kid, but I found comedy and it swept me away,” she says. She was part of the Durham Revue (“like the Durham version of the Footlights”), whose alumni include Nish Kumar, and it was there that she discovered: “There’s no better feeling than standing on stage and making people laugh.” After university, she got a day job and did standup and improv at night, plus sketch comedy with Andrew Shires under the moniker Megan from HR. A successful Edinburgh fringe in 2019 saw their seance-themed show scouted by Soho theatre. Their style is “really silly”, she says. “We’ve never gravitated towards big issues … our objective is to just make people laugh.” This Is Going to Hurt, despite tackling racism, abusive relationships and mental health crises, is cut through with a dark humour familiar to medical professionals. “Comedy was definitely my way into this role,” Mod says. “Shruti is nowhere near the funniest character in the show but it was about finding moments where I could add levity.” In live comedy you’re often doing everything yourself. Playing Shruti, Mod was one piece of a puzzle. Whishaw helped her acclimatise: “He was everything that you would want the voice of Paddington to be. He’s so talented, lovely and humble. In the same way that Adam took Shruti under his wing, he really looked after me. I mean, in a much kinder way!” Shruti’s storyline is intense, but experts were provided to help Mod understand her character’s mindset. Medical details had to be realistic, too. There were three medical advisers on set, while the prosthetics team created convincing components of childbirth, surgery and bloodshed. To portray a forceps delivery, the actor playing the mother lay on the top half of a bed with her legs hidden, and a fake lower body was installed: “It looked like her legs and her vagina. You would never have guessed it wasn’t real.” Shruti conducts multiple caesareans, so Mod had the chance to mimic the procedure. “All the layers that would be in a real body, we actually had to cut through. I loved that. Whenever I was going to do a caesarean I was buzzing.” Some viewers have been shocked by the graphicness: “But childbirth is not an aesthetic experience. It is messy and gory.” After filming, Mod returned to standup, where she does “self-deprecating” material. She loves it but realised being a full-time comedian is not her goal. “I did have a bit of an identity crisis. Am I a comedian? Am I an actor?” she says. “But in my heart of hearts, I really do want to be an actor.” Many writer-performers such as Rose Matafeo, Mae Martin and Aisling Bea have created their own hugely successful TV shows recently. “That’s something I hope to pursue some day,” she says. Until then, Mod’s being bombarded with messages about This Is Going to Hurt. Those from NHS staff are “humbling”, with many praising the accuracy of the show. “That means the world. That was our intention first and foremost. Obviously, you want to make good television, but this show is so much bigger than any of us.” This Is Going to Hurt is on BBC iPlayer.The government has shown a “total lack of understanding of how food production works”, introduced “completely contradictory policies” on farming, and risks “repeatedly running into crises” through the lack of a post-Brexit plan for UK farming, the leading representative of British farmers will say today. Minette Batters, president of the National Farmers’ Union, will make a scathing attack on ministers’ failures, unprecedented in recent memory in its ferocity from a farming leader. Her withering assessment of the government’s actions reflects widespread anger and alarm among many sections of the UK’s farming and food production industries, one of the country’s biggest manufacturing industries and employers. Farmers have suffered from plunging exports and reams of new red tape owing to Brexit, staff shortages as EU seasonal workers have left, and the prospect of floods of cheap low-quality imports after post-Brexit trade deals. Batters will highlight the fate of the pig industry – which is facing near-collapse under rising costs and staffing shortages – and warn that similar disasters will hit other branches of farming unless the government acts. She will tell the NFU conference in Birmingham: “We need a plan that pre-empts crises, rather than repeatedly runs into them … this country needs a strategy and a clear vision for what we expect from British farming. We have completely contradictory government policies. It is raising the bar for environmental standards at home but pursuing trade deals which support lower standards overseas. It is claiming to value domestic food production but making it difficult to find workers to harvest or process it. It is stating there are many export opportunities for British food but failing to prioritise the resources to open up those new markets.” She will call for “certainty, commitment and consistency” in government policy, and point to the successes of British farmers in raising animal welfare and food production standards, improving the environment and pushing to reach net zero greenhouse gas emissions. But, in excerpts from her speech distributed on Monday night, she pulled few punches in criticising ministers for their lack of planning, and failure to respond to recent problems in farming. Pig producers are looking after 200,000 pigs that should have been sent to slaughter, but cannot be because of a lack of staff in abattoirs. Keeping the pigs on their farms costs farmers dearly, wiping out their potential profits. About 40,000 pigs have had to be culled, which creates a further cost to farmers, as well as being a waste of resources. This “disaster” in the pig industry “should have and could have been avoided”, according to Batters. The situation for pig farmers “truly is an utter disgrace”, she will say. “This is down to the government’s poorly designed change to immigration policy and what I can only say appears to be its total lack of understanding of how food production works and what it needs.” The prime minister, Boris Johnson, angered many farmers last year when he appeared to make a joke of the crisis in pig production, telling the BBC that pigs raised for food were destined to die anyway. This appeared to ignore the costs to farmers, and their distress at having to put down healthy animals for no purpose. George Dunn, chief executive of the Tenant Farmers Association, also called for more focus from ministers, particularly in relation to the reforms to post-Brexit subsidies, which will see farmers paid “public money for public goods” through the replacement of EU subsidies with environmental land management contracts (ELMs), whereby farmers are paid for reaching certain environmental improvement goals. Dunn said: “We need to see a bit more strategy from the government as to how its various policy strands fit together into a consistent whole. ELMs is only one part of a panoply of initiatives including support for new entrants, farming resilience, food policy, standards in trade, regulation and enforcement and supply chain measures which at best continue to be developed in silos. Currently, it feels like there are few threads bringing the patchwork quilt of initiatives together. Farmers need to plan for the long term and want to be in line with wider public policy – however, until that becomes clearer we run the risk of a lack of alignment.” The NFU wants the government to invest in British farming to sell more homegrown food within the UK, and help farmers to export it; to ensure farmers can get a fair deal with supermarkets, which currently often use their market dominance to squeeze farmers’ profit margins; to reform immigration policy to allow more seasonal farm workers; and to reform farm subsidies in a way that encourages food production as well as meeting environmental objectives. Batters will say: “Above and beyond everything, we need to all be working to the same objectives and aiming for the same outcome. There needs to be a plan. A plan which enables Britain to keep on farming and to continue to be world leaders in high quality, safe and sustainable food.”Sanjeev Gupta’s GFG Alliance metals empire has launched an action in London’s high court in a last-ditch attempt to reclaim a prized aluminium smelter in northern France from a US private equity fund. Two GFG Alliance companies have filed a legal claim against a fund controlled by American Industrial Partners (AIP), which has run the smelter in Dunkerque since October after gaining approval from the French government. The claim is centred on a complex series of loan agreements, but GFG’s court filings suggest the case may prompt further scrutiny on operations controlled by Gupta. AIP alleged in September that it was unable to accept payments from GFG related to the loans because of an allegation that GFG companies may have broken Romanian law, the court filings suggest. The complex battle over ownership of the smelter has added to the pressure on Gupta amid protracted financial problems that were triggered by the collapse of its main lender, Greensill Capital, in March last year. Before its collapse, Greensill had employed former prime minister David Cameron, who repeatedly lobbied government ministers on its behalf. Gupta’s companies are also facing criminal investigations in several countries. The UK’s Serious Fraud Office (SFO) is investigating “suspected fraud, fraudulent trading and money laundering” in relation to GFG and Greensill, while Paris prosecutors have said they are looking into several allegations of misuse of corporate assets and money laundering. German authorities looked at GFG during their investigations of Greensill in March 2021. The Dunkerque smelter, thought to be the largest in Europe, was an important asset for Gupta because it was still profitable, and high aluminium prices in recent months have made it even more attractive. However, days after announcing that they had taken control in October, AIP executives arrived at the site and informed surprised managers that they were the new owners. They have been running the site ever since. In the particulars of a claim signed by Gupta, the GFG companies argued that AIP was acting “in bad faith, oppressively and/or otherwise unconscionably” in order to “appropriate” the smelter. AIP has not yet filed its response to GFG’s claims. However, GFG’s filing said that AIP claimed it was unable to accept a loan repayment because of “an unparticularised allegation that Romanian law had been contravened”. The filing also described four separate requests for “KYC” (know-your-customer) information from GFG by AIP between July and September. KYC checks are required by companies under anti-money-laundering (AML) laws. The court case comes amid scrutiny of GFG’s operations in Romania, where it runs a large steelworks in Galati, a port city on the river Danube. A Czech government minister last year called for an investigation into the sale of carbon credits worth £40m from a Czech steelworks to GFG’s company, Liberty Galati. The Financial Times on Thursday reported that GFG companies had routed transactions through a Romanian bank owned by Gupta, the Bucharest-based Banca Romana de Credite si Investitii (BRCI). A GFG Alliance spokesperson said: “None of the funds tendered to repay the [loan] facility with AIP had any connection with BRCI.” The spokesperson said it was GFG’s opinion that AIP had “unlawfully expropriated the valuable aluminium smelter”, and said GFG had been able to “pay all liabilities owed to AIP under a financing agreement”. In a statement, BRCI said it was a “completely independent banking institution with a fully independent board of directors”. It also said it has “a strong AML and compliance function that has served it well over many years”. GFG says it employs as many as 35,000 people across the world in steel, aluminium and energy, with 5,000 people in the UK. However, several key assets are under threat, on top of the criminal investigations. HM Revenue and Customs this month filed in the courts to shut down four Liberty Steel companies in the UK over unpaid tax. A spokesman for AIP declined to comment. • This article was amended on 22 February 2022. An earlier version incorrectly said that German authorities “are also investigating” GFG. To clarify: German authorities looked at GFG during their investigations of Greensill in March 2021.GPs and women are still ignoring key symptoms of ovarian cancer despite better awareness of the disease, a charity has warned, prompting fears that yet more patients will be diagnosed late and “die needlessly”. Symptoms include frequently having a swollen tummy or feeling bloated; pain or tenderness in the tummy or the pelvis; having no appetite or feeling full quickly after eating, and an urgent need to pee or needing to pee more often, according to the NHS. However, Target Ovarian Cancer is concerned that despite successful campaigns to boost awareness of the disease, many are still failing to act on the vital signs. “Key symptoms are being ignored – both by those experiencing them and their GPs,” a spokesperson said. A poll of 1,000 women for the charity found 79% did not know that bloating was a symptom, while 68% were unaware abdominal pain was a sign, and 97% did not know feeling full was another. Most women (99%) did not know that needing to pee more urgently was also a sign, while evidence suggests women can often be told by their GP that their symptoms are more a symptom of irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), Target Ovarian Cancer said. The survey also found 40% of women also incorrectly believed ovarian cancer could be picked up by screening for cervical cancer. Ovarian cancer kills about a third of women with the disease in the first year after diagnosis, and is often diagnosed in the late stages. There are about 7,500 new ovarian cancer cases in the UK every year. “These figures are incredibly disappointing,” said Annwen Jones, the chief executive of Target Ovarian Cancer. “We know we’ve shifted the dial in the past 10 years through the dedication of thousands of Target Ovarian Cancer’s campaigners, but it is not enough. Knowing the symptoms is crucial for everyone. “We need to make sustained and large-scale government-backed symptoms campaigns a reality. Progress is possible. If we do this, fewer people will be diagnosed late, fewer will need invasive treatment, and, ultimately, fewer will die needlessly from ovarian cancer.” Katy Stephenson, 47, from Bury St Edmunds in Suffolk, was diagnosed with early-stage ovarian cancer last year. “I had been experiencing symptoms like bloating and needing to wee more urgently for a few months, but I’d put it down to being peri-menopausal,” she said. “I had a fluke diagnosis when I was admitted to hospital with appendicitis. If that hadn’t happened, the cancer probably would have spread, and I hate to think about what would have happened.” Dr Victoria Barber, a GP in Northamptonshire and advocate for early diagnosis of ovarian cancer, said: “Symptoms do appear early on in ovarian cancer, and your GP wants to hear from you if you’re experiencing any of them, if they are new for you and if they do not go away. Similarly, it’s vital that GPs are knowledgable on ovarian cancer and know how to advise patients who have concerns.”Kate Garraway: Caring for Derek 9pm, ITV “The person he is now, in many ways, is a stranger.” Kate Garraway finally welcomes her husband, Derek Draper, home after 374 days in hospital with Covid-19. In this follow-up to last year’s emotionally frank Finding Derek, they continue to share the reality of how the virus rocked their lives – despite this exhausting journey, there is hope and gratitude. Hollie Richardson This Is Going to Hurt 9pm, BBC One Always telling his story with equal measures of humour and heart, Adam is kept busy tonight with Jason Orange’s cousin in the labour ward, the loss of a patient who hates him and an awkward meet-the-parents situation. All the while, the hospital is crumbling, and an emergency caesarean still haunts him. HR RuPaul’s Drag Race UK Versus the World 9pm, BBC Three With Baga Chipz still flying the flag for Britain, this spin-off series sees drag queens from around the world compete against each other. In the fourth round, the queens must show off their best celebrity impressions, with Katie Price, Michelle Keegan and Clara Amfo joining the judging panel. HR The Gilded Age 9pm, Sky Atlantic If you can bear to make it past the seemingly endless opening titles again, the pleasant if slightly tepid period drama trots into its mid-season. Tonight, Nathan Lane guest stars as society gatekeeper Ward McAllister – over whom Bertha goes giddy trying to impress. HR Cheaters 9.50pm, BBC One The warm comedy continues to pack more awkward moments into its 10-minute episodes than should be allowed. As Josh and Fola bumble their way through bumping into each other on the street, Esther is excited about her school reunion. Zack, meanwhile, turns to Google in an attempt to make sense of his voyeuristic vase moment. Hannah Verdier Mel Giedroyc: Unforgivable 10pm, Dave Another trio of celebrities join the panel show that has sneakily monetised sitting around telling anecdotes. David Haye recalls making someone sick in a gym, Bill Bailey relates a tale about losing a dog on a mountain and Rosie Jones atones for her first brush with public disapproval. Jack Seale Live sport Uefa Champions League football: Chelsea v Lille 7pm, BT Sport 2. The last-16 first-leg tie from Stamford Bridge. Atlético Madrid v Manchester United is on Wednesday at 7pm.Top story: Putin ‘creating a pretext for war’ Hello. Warren Murray once again presenting the news you need. UN security council members have blasted Russia after Vladimir Putin officially recognised two breakaway areas of Ukraine and ordered his troops to go in as purported “peacekeepers”. Addressing an emergency session of the council held in the last few hours, the US ambassador Linda Thomas-Greenfield said: “He calls them peacekeepers. This is nonsense. We know what they really are.” Thomas-Greenfield accused Putin of making a “series of outrageous, false claims” that were aimed at “creating a pretext for war … Putin wants to travel back to a time when empires ruled the world. This is not 1919.” We have rolling coverage at our Ukraine crisis live blog. Russia’s security council representative, Vasily Nebenzya, claimed the west was “nudging” Ukraine towards conflict and accused other nations of overlooking the plight of those in the Donbas. Ukraine’s ambassador, Sergiy Kyslytsya, replied that his country’s borders remain “unchangeable” despite Russia’s actions. “We demand from Russia to cancel the decision on recognition and return to the table of negotiations.” As Shaun Walker writes, Putin on Monday performed in an angry, absurdist double-billing on Russian television – first, snapping across a vast room at his assembled security council, effectively daring any of them to disagree with him; then afterwards, making a national address hectoring Ukraine as “a colony with a puppet regime” that had no historical right to exist. The TV spectacle carries on from a series of clumsy, readily debunked fake films supposed to show Ukrainian aggression but actually based, for example, on purloined recordings of Finnish military exercises from years ago, and pre-staged footage of “evacuations” from supposedly besieged areas of Ukraine held by Russian-backed rebels. As we send today’s briefing, Boris Johnson is due to be chairing a Cobra meeting about the UK response including immediate sanctions. Earlier on Monday, Joe Biden signed an executive order to prohibit trade and investment between US individuals and the self-declared Donetsk and Luhansk republics that Putin recognised. The US announced potential sanctions against anyone operating within the Moscow-backed territories. A senior administration official said more US sanctions would be announced on Tuesday, and would be proportionate to Russian actions overnight. * * * Farmers blast Brexit policies – The government has shown a “total lack of understanding” of British food production and risks “repeatedly running into crises” through the lack of a post-Brexit plan for farming, Minette Batters, president of the National Farmers’ Union, will say today. The savaging of ministers’ failures comes as farmers suffer plunging exports and reams of new red tape, staff shortages from EU workers leaving, and the prospect of floods of cheap low-quality imports. Batters will highlight the fate of the pig industry – producers are looking after 200,000 pigs that they can’t get slaughtered, and around 40,000 have had to be culled, about which Boris Johnson made jokes. Batters will tell the NFU conference in Birmingham: “We have completely contradictory government policies. It is raising the bar for environmental standards at home but pursuing trade deals which support lower standards overseas.” * * * ‘Tidal wave’ – The number of homeless people in England is predicted to jump by a third to 66,000 by 2024, as councils warn of a “tidal wave” of need caused by benefits freezes, soaring food and energy bills and the end of Covid eviction bans. Councils in London, where living costs are highest, are predicting the biggest surge. The projections come as government measures to prevent homelessness during the pandemic are unwound. The government has announced a homelessness prevention fund for councils but the housing charity Crisis is calling on the government to further increase the local housing allowance – the amount the state will pay to cover rent for people on benefits – so it truly covers the cost of rent across the country. * * * ‘Progress is slow’ – The number of women in FTSE 100 boardroom roles has jumped to 39.1% from 12.5% 10 years ago, data has revealed. However, the Fawcett Society says the figures do not capture the “shocking lack of diversity” laid bare in its 2022 Sex and Power Index, with “women of colour, disabled women and LGBTQ people missing from positions of power”. Jemima Olchawski, the Fawcett Society’s chief executive, said: “In the majority of boardrooms men continue to be overrepresented. When we look at the most senior positions of CEO and chair the progress is painfully slow.” Women make up only eight of the chief executives at the UK’s top 100 listed companies. * * * Ovarian cancer going undiagnosed – GPs and women are still ignoring key symptoms of ovarian cancer despite better awareness of the disease, a charity has warned. Symptoms include frequently having a swollen tummy or feeling bloated; pain or tenderness in the tummy or the pelvis; having no appetite or feeling full quickly after eating; and an urgent need to pee or needing to pee more often, according to the NHS. Katy Stephenson, 47, from Bury St Edmunds in Suffolk, told of being diagnosed with early-stage ovarian cancer when admitted to hospital with suspected appendicitis. “If that hadn’t happened, the cancer probably would have spread, and I hate to think about what would have happened.” Target Ovarian Cancer has called for more government support for awareness campaigns. * * * Hedgehogs claw way back – Britain’s hedgehogs are showing signs of an urban-led recovery, according to a new report. Overall they have been experiencing a dramatic fall in numbers due to loss of habitat, attacks by dogs, vanishing prey and being run over. Fay Vass, head of the British Hedgehog Preservation Society (BHPS), said rural populations had been declining by between 30% and 75% since the year 2000. “In contrast, the urban hedgehog seems to have stabilised and might even be starting to recover … So that’s a glimmer of hope.” The total UK hedgehog population was believed to be about 879,000 in 2018. They are primarily threatened by habitat loss and the accompanying lack of prey such as beetles and earthworms. Hugh Warwick, an ecologist, encourages gardeners to keep messier, hedgehog-friendly gardens rather than succumbing to the “cult of tidiness driven by gardening programmes and glossy magazines”. Today in Focus podcast: Democrats’ crime conundrum While US Democrats struggle to follow through on promises of police reform, Republicans are trying to keep voters’ attention on rising crime rates. Lauren Gambino reports. Lunchtime read: ‘Quite fed up’ – Britons on the storms “Last January was bad, but this is even worse. My neighbour next door but one, he’s lived here for over 10 years – he’s never seen anything like this.” Flooding, power cuts and destruction to homes continue to impact people in parts of the country after three named storms struck the UK in a week. Sport What price an Olympic gold medal these days? We know about the blood, sweat and tears, but the costs paid by the 15-year-old figure skater Kamila Valieva in pursuit of the glittering prize rose exorbitantly over the past week in Beijing. The already unstable Olympic currency of values, integrity and humanity devalued further. Team GB’s Winter Olympics curling success has drawn a new generation to the ice, with Scotland’s rinks inundated with inquiries since the weekend’s medal-winning performances. Novak Djokovic returned to competition for the first time since his deportation from Australia last month, defeating the wildcard Lorenzo Musetti 6-3, 6-3 to reach the second round of the Dubai Duty Free Tennis Championships. Romelu Lukaku has mostly been a conundrum since returning to Chelsea last summer and, while the £97.5m striker has not done much talking off the pitch since that ill-advised chat with Sky Italia at the end of December, nothing summed up his struggles more than when he produced a performance of record-breaking anonymity against Crystal Palace last Saturday. Christian Eriksen has stepped up his push to return to frontline football after another impressive friendly run-out for Brentford. Business Oil has jumped to a seven-year high, safe havens rallied and US stock futures dived after Vladimir Putin ordered troops into eastern Ukraine. Asian stocks have fallen while the safe-haven yen rose as much as 0.2% at one point to a nearly three-week high of 114.50 per dollar. Understandably the FTSE is tracking to open lower this morning while the pound is sitting on $1.358 and €1.203 at time of writing. The papers The late edition of the Guardian today leads with “Putin scorns west as Russian troops enter eastern Ukraine” – earlier versions had Putin on a “collision course with west” after recognising the breakaway regions of Ukraine. The Express kept Covid as its splash – “Boris: time to get our confidence back” – but updated its late-edition Ukraine headline to “‘Bloodshed’ warning as Putin sends in troops”. The Mail as well stays with the end of restrictions in England: “Boris throws off shackles” – it also updated its Ukraine headline to reflect Putin’s troop deployment. The i is more glass half empty about the post-restrictions era with “New Covid plan: pay for your own test” – the front page also says “UK to hit Russia with sanctions as Putin ‘orders troops into Ukraine to keep peace’”. The Mirror says “Lateral blow” about the end of free testing and accuses Boris Johnson of a “bonfire of virus safeguards”. Its front-page picture is of fiery Russian exercises in Belarus – the accompanying words in the late edition, “Putin orders troops in”. The Metro has “PM: now it’s over to you” and its final edition has a strapline across the bottom of page one: “‘Troops cross border’ as Putin backs Ukraine rebels”. The Telegraph has “Putin warns of bloodshed as he moves troops into Ukraine” while the Times says simply “Putin sends tanks into Ukraine”. Sign up The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekendAccording to police in the Indian state of Uttar Pradesh, it was suicide. The young Muslim man they had brought into their custody had, out of despair, killed himself in the police station toilets. But, as photos of the scene emerged, so too did suspicions. The 22-year-old man, Altaf, was 165cm (5ft 5in) tall and weighed 60kg (9.5 stone), but the toilet tap he had supposedly hanged himself from was just 76cm off the ground and made of flimsy plastic. And why, as the police later claimed in court, was the CCTV in the police station mysteriously not working that day? Family and friends tell a very different story: that Altaf, a Muslim man living in the town of Kasganj, was in love with and planned to marry a Hindu girl. That powerful local Hindu vigilante groups opposed to interfaith unions found out and reported him to the police. And that on 9 November 2021, Altaf was arrested and tortured to death in police custody and his family pressured to keep quiet. “The police murdered my son and then gave me money to say he was depressed and took his own life,” says Altaf’s father, Chand Miya, an illiterate mason who has taken the case to the state high court. “But I will not stay quiet, I want justice.” Last Friday, the courts ordered Altaf’s body to be exhumed and a new postmortem examination to be carried out. Altaf was not the first to die in such circumstances in Uttar Pradesh, India’s most populous state, which is holding a high-stakes election this month. In six cases examined by the Guardian of deaths in custody and police shootings of suspects, allegedly in self defence, from 2018 onwards, those accused of carrying out and covering up killings are the same: the Uttar Pradesh police, under the rule of the state’s chief minister, Yogi Adityanath, and his Bharatiya Janata party (BJP) government. The victims of these alleged unlawful killings were all from the communities that Adityanath’s government, with its sectarian Hindu nationalist agenda, is accused of routinely targeting and oppressing: Muslims, who make up 20% of the state’s population and who have been subjected to increased lynchings, hate speech and prejudicial legislation, and Dalits, who are at the bottom of India’s oppressive Hindu caste system and were previously referred to as “untouchables”. The elections will decide whether to return Adityanath’s state government to power for another five years. It is being seen as a referendum on Hindu nationalist politics – the push for India to become a Hindu, rather than secular, nation – on both a state and national level, and is happening against a backdrop of rising religious intolerance and anti-Muslim hate speech in India. Not long after he took office in 2017, Adityanath, a hardline Hindu monk, made it clear that his agenda would be twofold: a fierce promotion of Hindu nationalism and a tough crackdown on crime. “Agar aparadh karenge, toh thok diye jayenge [If anyone commits a crime, he will be knocked down],” he said in June 2017. From that point on, lawyers, activists and ex-police officers allege that “thok denge” – slang for “shoot them” – became unofficial policy in Uttar Pradesh. Police allegedly began carrying out “instant justice”, maiming or executing those they deemed to be criminals, and were professionally rewarded for doing so. Lawyers and families of victims describe an atmosphere of terror in Uttar Pradesh, where Muslims and lower-caste men are picked up on the streets and killed with alleged impunity by police, either in what are known as “encounter killings”, in which officers fatally shoot their captives and claim it was in self-defence, or in police custody, where they are beaten or tortured to death. The same police accused of the murders are often then responsible for the investigations. Subsequently, police reports are often not lodged, evidence and CCTV footage routinely disappears, charges filed to the courts are watered down to “accidental death” and some cases disappear altogether. “The police are now mercenaries of the Yogi government,” says Rajeev Yadav, an activist running for a seat in the forthcoming election in Azamgarh, which has a large Muslim population and has experienced multiple “encounter killings” by police. *** In the past five years, according to the government, there have been more than 8,700 shootings by police in the state, including more than 3,000 incidents when allegedly escaping suspects were shot, often in the knees, and more than 150 deaths. There are rarely any eyewitnesses to these encounters, according to human rights organisations that have examined many of the cases. Not a single officer who fatally shot someone in Uttar Pradesh in the past five years has faced disciplinary action. Two former police officers told the Guardian that in their experience most so-called “encounter killings” were falsified by police. In the case of Kamran, a 40-year-old Muslim water-seller from Azamgarh, police claimed he was apprehended on his way to commit a crime in Lucknow, 200 miles from his home, and then killed after a shootout with an anti-terrorism unit. But a lawyer, Ashma Izzat, says the evidence, including a leaked police photograph that appears to show him alive and in police custody – a direct contradiction of the police account of events – demonstrated the events in November 2021 were covered up. Kamran’s body was returned to his family with signs of torture. “He had a perforated eye, dark bruising around his neck and body, a broken collar bone and leg, and four of his front teeth knocked out,” said his 87-year-old father, Nasim Ahmed. Police later filed a report that Kamran had been an absconding criminal in multiple cases with a 25,000 rupee (£250) reward on his head. But Kamran made daily visits to the police station to deliver water as part of his job, including on the day he was killed. Uttar Pradesh has the highest number of deaths in police custody in the country. Officially, there have been 23 deaths over the past three years but Mehmood Pracha, one of the few lawyers who has taken cases of custodial killings to India’s highest court, said this was likely to be a “significant undercount”. “The police hide these custody deaths when they can get away with it, and won’t even tell the family,” says Pracha. In several cases, grief-stricken families said they have been pressurised or threatened by police to withdraw charges and stay silent. Faisal Husain, an 18-year-old Muslim vegetable seller from Unnao, was among those allegedly beaten to death in police custody in May 2021. The case is now in the supreme court and the Guardian listened to recordings of threats and offers of money made to Hussain’s sister, Khushnuma Banu, 28, over the phone, to pressure her to withdraw the case. In another two cases of killings in custody examined by the Guardian, the police had not given families details of the postmortem examination, despite them being legally bound to do so. Police claim that Arun Valmiki, a 30-year-old Dalit man from Agra, died of a heart attack in police custody in October 2021, but withheld the postmortem report from his family, who allege he was tortured and electrocuted to death by police. “Police put pressure on me to say that my brother had heart problems but it’s not true – he was strong and healthy,” says his brother Sonu Narwal. Ziauddin, a 38-year-old Muslim businessman, died in police custody in March 2021 after being picked up by police for alleged theft. The police claimed he died from a heart attack during questioning despite him being in robust health. When Ziauddin’s body was returned to his family, it was covered in torture wounds, including cigarette burns, bruises around his neck and across his body, and signs he had been electrocuted, visible in photographs viewed by the Guardian. Despite almost a year of requests, the police continue to withhold the postmortem report from his family and have not submitted the legally mandated “charge sheet” to the courts. The family say they were offered money by the police to withdraw the case. “He was the most kind, honest, gentle man, who had never committed a crime,” said Alauddin, Ziauddin’s father. “I feel so terrible that he was murdered and we will never get justice for him.” The Uttar Pradesh government denied all the allegations. “There are judicial systems in place and no extrajudicial killings have taken place. This narrative is totally false and we deny such baseless accusations,” it said in a statement. Prashant Kumar, the additional director general of police in Uttar Pradesh, said the Uttar Pradesh police strictly follow all procedures and guidelines laid out by the courts and the National Human Rights Commission. Kumar described a “zero-tolerance” approach to custodial killings in which guilty officers are always suspended and jailed. However, in several of the custodial death cases examined by the Guardian, junior officers were suspended but none were in prison. No senior officer or government official under the Adityanath government has faced disciplinary action for either “encounter killings” on the street or deaths in police custody. Kumar said there was no religious or caste bias in the police force, and no culture of silencing victims. “How can we distinguish between our own citizens? It is not possible and it is wrong,” he said. “No government can ask us to do anything which is wrong or illegal.” Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:‘He catapulted artists to a global audience’ Kanya King, Mobo awards founder I met Jamal in the early days when SBTV was just starting. He would be on the Mobo red carpet capturing social media content. This was at a time when people didn’t realise the power of content, especially from talent underrepresented by the mainstream. He was always so keen to ensure that he got the most interesting interviews, the best music videos, the best freestyle. Jamal was passionate about pushing his scene and culture and that’s what made him so special. When it came to what he wanted to achieve for his community and culture, he set the bar high and never missed it. Growing up, he was surrounded by talented musicians but their work was hard to find and he found a way to showcase the music he enjoyed and support artists through being an early adopter of YouTube. He catapulted artists to a global audience at a crucial time when not many did not showcase their work. When I started the Mobo awards in 1996, it was extremely rare to have any Black CEOs in a position of influence in the music industry. We all had to overcome so many obstacles but we had a camaraderie through a common goal of trying to push the next generation to continue elevating Black news and culture. Jamal carried that fighting spirit. He had that same belief that we had, about fighting for your dream scene. We wanted any young person from any background to be able to think big and be inspired. He was such a dynamic, driven and inspirational person. Post-SBTV, you saw the arrival of Link Up TV and GRM Daily. Jamal created friendly competitiveness that pushed the scene forward. Even though he was young, he leaves behind a powerful legacy that defined and will shape Black music and culture for generations to come. ‘I couldn’t believe SBTV had seen my little video’ Nadia Rose, musician In summer 2015 I put out my first music video. SBTV wrote an article about it, which was crazy, I couldn’t believe SBTV had seen my little video. Afterwards, Kane Chattey, a writer at SBTV, asked if I wanted to put my next music video on the platform. I did and that was my first time going viral. Jamal was fully behind that decision and SBTV heavily supported me. From then on I put out all my videos on SBTV and built a relationship with Jamal. In the music and entertainment industries, it is rare to find people like Jamal. He had a clean heart and was so genuine. It didn’t matter how small a win was, he’d always be the first to congratulate me and I would almost always soon after find out he had something to do with it. He really kept you motivated, whether it was seeing what he was doing himself, or what he would say to you. At least 90% of the UK music scene has had Jamal do something with them or their careers. He was a cultural architect, a powerhouse. In one of our last meetups, we went to the V&amp;A museum. It was so dope. As much as I was learning about the artefacts, I was learning about Jamal. He was cracking so many jokes that day, he was always so charismatic and had great energy to be around. You couldn’t leave his space feeling down or negative. He always had positive vibrations. ‘SBTV made me feel like I could achieve anything I wanted to’ Not3s, musician As a kid I was watching SBTV for the longest time. People like Devlin, the times Ed [Sheeran] was on there, Krept and Konan – there were a lot of people in the scene that I recognised through it. For me, it was inspiring and motivating because it allowed me to know that even though I come from a background similar to those that are on this channel, or to the person that ran and owned the channel, I could still achieve anything that I wanted to achieve in life. SBTV always made me feel like I could do something – even before I became an artist. The first time I ever met Jamal Edwards was after the GRM Rated awards, before I was ever nominated for one – I just went there as a spectator. I was outside and said hello to him. He didn’t know exactly who I was until we messaged after, and from then we stayed in touch. Today I was going through my messages from him and I realised how consistently he’d message me about what I was doing, how many times I was mentioned in his [Instagram] story. He was proper there, no matter what. He was always there to check for everyone. The whole time I’ve known him, that’s what I’ve seen. He was there to make sure that all the dreamers – and all those that are motivated to do something different from what they might be stuck in in their environments – know they’re capable of pushing. With words, music, sounds, they’re capable of reaching a whole other level. Just off a dream. That’s something that he would let everybody know and explore to the best of their abilities with his help and his platform and his channel. He didn’t need to start up a channel or platform. He could have lived his life, gone to uni and kept on with himself – but no, he cared so much about everybody else. From overground to the underground, from the Ed Sheerans to the Devlins to the Ghetts, the Krept and Konans, he cared about the whole spectrum. He never let anybody’s colour get in the way of whatever he was doing. He never let anybody’s situation in life get in the way of what they were capable of doing. It’s inspiring for all of those coming up that might want to create something like his, or being a creative in general. It’s proper sad. It’s definitely gonna have a deep effect on the scene as a whole. ‘He was forever breaking down barriers’ Lady Leshurr, musician Jamal Edwards was a pioneer, entrepreneur, culture shifter and made a huge impact in UK music that gave us up-and-coming artists exposure all around the world. He helped so many of us that went off to do some great things and become successful. He always helped his people and was forever breaking down barriers and helping the kids have a better future by funding and opening up youth centres and partnering with the Department for Education to encourage young people to undertake apprenticeships. Such a heart full of gold. ‘My timeline is full of charities praising him for helping behind the scenes’ Rupa Huq, MP for for Ealing Central and Acton Jamal Edwards was a force of nature, once met never forgotten. He worked hard to push the boundaries of Black British music from his teens onwards. With a camera given to him by his mum Brenda and a YouTube channel, he democratised the platforms by which young people could get their music out to a wider public. His contribution to the way we make music today is immeasurable – demystifying the music biz with the SBTV platform that allowed kids to get out their music direct without unnecessary stultifying layers of bureaucracy. Yet he was never bombastic and showy or self-aggrandising. He was the opposite – always giving back to his community. I joined him at council functions like the opening of a youth centre and switching on the Christmas lights – but he first came to me as a punter at my MP advice surgery with ideas about a youth work charity he was setting up. He championed youth expression through the arts, be it recording studios in youth clubs on estates, or our recently opened community arthouse cinema in a repurposed semi-derelict library on Acton high street. He was there just the other day. My timeline today is full of charities I work with as MP mourning his passing and praising him for helping out behind the scenes – Acton Homeless Concern, Ealing Soup Kitchen, Ealing Wildlife Group. It’s almost a quasi-Diana thing: we only knew about many of her charitable works after her death. The mural to Jamal – unveiled only last year – is a site where flowers are being laid today, analogous to the David Bowie wall in Brixton that’s now a shrine. Except Jamal has been taken from us sooner than either. He still had so much more to give. He may be gone but never forgotten. ‘He would listen and always be ready to help’ Miraa May, musician He was the kind of person who if he felt like you were talented, he would just back you. He wouldn’t wait for anybody else to co-sign you before he lent you a helping hand. In my case, he gave me a platform to be able to sing rap songs on guitar and it not translate in a bad way. SBTV A64 was one of the first co-signs I got from anyone that was like: she’s sick, we really mess with her. His SBTV Summer Cookout was one of my first performances where I felt like wow, this is a really big crowd. That’s one of the biggest reasons why now I’m able to go on stage and be really comfortable. And it’s not like he would invite us one year and then not invite us again. He was a constant friend. He would listen and always be ready to help. If we needed anything and we hit him up, he wouldn’t air [ignore] you. And he didn’t want anything in return, which is something that you don’t find in this industry at all. He’s in the top three people who pushed UK music and the culture forward. A lot of people including myself would not be here without him. Everybody who he has given a platform, you can always go back and look at their humble beginnings and see where they are now. It only takes one person to give you a platform, to believe in you and say: I’m going to shout about it and let everyone know. That’s something that doesn’t come without some sort of payment these days. With him, it was just very pure. He brought so many people together. I remember watching all of the rappers sharing one stage and there were no issues. He was one of the first people to give us a platform – and give us a party. Somewhere where everyone can go and be celebrated. He was a pioneer. He was one of the people – if not the person – who started what a lot of us are running on now. ‘Jamal worked to turn around racist opinions of young Black lives’ Vie Marshall, music journalist I was one of the early Black music journalists and club organisers in this country. It’s taken a whole lot of us to open the door, and Jamal propelled everything we started to a level we could only dream of. When I was working on [magazines] Hip-Hop Connection and Blues &amp; Soul, we either had to be very militantly revolutionary or obsequious in the face of people who assumed the worst. I started the first regular rap night, Muthaland, and we had to go out of our way to assure everybody that there wasn’t going to be violence and drug taking. Those were times where everything was a battle – for Black people and young Black kids to be seen as humans with something good to contribute to the world. It’s taken a lot for people to inch their way in. And then Jamal comes along, with his finger on the internet’s pulse, possibly influenced by people like So Solid Crew, where you were able to see people from the streets being successful. He was upset that he wasn’t seeing people that had talent get into the mainstream. A lot of people get into the music industry or media in a self-serving way because they have ambitions for themselves. And from everything I saw of him, it was selfless and community-driven. He used his good karma to put a lot of people on. ‘Jamal discussing mental health helped save lives’ Owen Jones, journalist It was in the run-up to the 2015 election when I appeared with Jamal Edwards on a Sky One special on young people and voting, and he crackled with passion, insight and humanity. With mainstream politics, media and increasingly pop music so dominated by the privileged, it’s notable that it’s hip-hop and grime which have produced outspoken voices of working-class young people such as Jamal. It’s those young people who understand the significance of youth centres – a decade ago, London had 299, but now has just 166 – which is what drove his passion to re-open them. Given the particular stigma among men attached to discussing mental health, it’s no exaggeration that celebrated icons like Jamal speaking out has helped save lives. A generation has lost one of its most compelling voices: but his legacy will have inspired so many more.Hundreds of thousands of tonnes of surplus food that could be going to hungry families is going to waste as supermarkets restrict who their suppliers can give it to, according to food distribution charities. Several independent charities, which are grouped together under the Xcess network, say they struggle to source unwanted edible food from manufacturers and processors because of supermarkets’ rules about the handling of their own-label products. At least 200,000 tonnes of own-label food fit for human consumption ends up as animal food or is used to generate energy, according to research by the sustainability group Anthesis, because of difficulties in getting it to the right place. Mark Game, the chief executive of the charity The Bread and Butter Thing, a food club that hands out heavily discounted food parcels to 25,000 registered members, said: “Retailers hold the cards – unless they say yes to manufacturers, they just can’t give [the food] out. “Demand constantly outstrips supply and we are having to let people down, and if we had this food we could do more.” David France, the manager of the Lancaster-based community food club Eggcup, said it was impossible to get hold of the food without the retailers’ permission. “As a fairly new organisation with a tremendous level of growth, we have not been able to establish relationships with larger organisations,” he said. “It is ridiculous how much food is being thrown away because retailers have contracts with larger [charities], which aren’t always able to use that surplus.” About half the food we buy every year comes from supermarkets’ own brands, and it is estimated that they make up more than 72% of edible surplus food in supermarkets’ supply chains, according to the Anthesis research. However, with suppliers often packing own-label products for multiple retailers, it is not clear who has ownership of the waste, and it is difficult to get permission from each supermarket involved to hand on unwanted items. Wrap, the government-backed recycling body, highlighted the issue last summer and issued new guidance calling on retailers to rethink rules that largely limit the redistribution of their unwanted own-label foods to two large charities, FareShare and Company Shop. It called on retailers to share information so that their suppliers are automatically mandated to directly hand surplus food to a list of smaller charities, including The Bread and Butter Thing, which have already passed tests showing they meet established standards on food safety and redistribution. Since then, only Sainsbury’s has changed its setup to enable all its own-label suppliers to pass on goods directly without signing numerous local agreements. Tesco and Asda currently only allow suppliers to hand out surplus own-label food to small charities via FareShare and Company Shop or if audited by FareShare. Morrisons allows its suppliers to give direct handouts to a wider number of named groups but charities and suppliers say they have to cut individual deals rather than gaining easy access via a national mandate. Game said the change from Sainsbury’s was welcome but many suppliers would not separate out waste food by the supermarket it was packed or processed for, as this added costs and time for hard-pressed businesses. He said a step change in the handling of food waste would not be possible until all the major grocers changed their approach. Andy Mitchell at Worldwide Fruit, which supplies a wide range of produce including apples, pears and nectarines to big supermarkets, said: “We supply FareShare but they can only take a certain amount of volume.” He said working directly with The Bread and Butter Thing had enabled the company to increase the amount of edible surplus food it redistributed by a third. It had been able to work with the charity to deal with more difficult-to-process waste, such as end-of-season fruit that was not usually economic to pick or produce and was packed in a way that did not suit FareShare’s systems. “Having more than one charity in the mix makes a significant difference in the flexibility to take product,” he said. A spokesperson for Asda said it was in the process of changing its systems to meet Wrap guidelines: “We are already adopting the broader elements of the Wrap guidelines and onboarding charities such as The Bread and Butter Thing and City Harvest and others so they can receive food direct from our suppliers as well as from our stores, depots and FareShare as they do already.” A Tesco spokesperson said: “We are fully compliant with Wrap’s food donation guidelines and are part of their working group which helps to create the guidance. “Our food donation programme is the largest of its kind in the UK and to date we have provided more than 135m meals to FareShare, supporting thousands of independent charities and food banks in communities across the UK.” A spokesperson for Morrisons said: “We work with hundreds of small independent food distribution groups up and down the country, together with the larger groups such as The Bread and Butter Thing on a national and regional level. Both of these initiatives allow for surplus own-label food to be redistributed in a thoughtful and impactful way.”Robert Edric’s memoir of his Sheffield childhood opens with one of the best set pieces I’ve ever read in this kind of book: an absolute masterclass in how to set a scene. It is 1968 or thereabouts, and in the small rented house the author shares with his family, something even more than usually unnerving is happening. Why, wonders 12-year-old Robert, has his father, a man whose vanity, bullying and tendency to show off conceal all manner of unspoken insecurities, chosen to come home early from work today? What on earth is going on? The situation can’t possibly be good: for obvious reasons, his son cherishes the 90 minutes between his arrival from school and the sound of his dad at the door. But… oh dear. In truth, the merest glance provides an explanation. His father, who is bald, is proudly sporting a toupee. Edric senses he must tread carefully. When his father overrules his mother, who’s busy pretending that her husband simply has a “new hairstyle”, and proceeds to show his son how his expensive “Crown Topper” is stuck to his head with special double-sided tape, the boy tries hard to appear impressed. “You can hardly see the difference,” he says, feigning a search for the invisible seam between the toupee and his father’s real hair (it’s not even remotely invisible, for while the toupee is gingery, what remains of his father’s hair is grey). Edric already knows in his gut that this wig is an “explosive charge” placed at the centre of his home. What, for instance, will happen when people outside the family notice it? (And frankly, how could they not?) Mockery is bound to follow. Worse, he and his siblings and their mother will henceforth be complicit in an embarrassing charade. The wig will never be mentioned again. It will just sit there, either on his father’s bonce, or draped over the polystyrene head supplied by Crown Topper, until the end of days. It is the weave of doom. This is the first time Edric, who is best known as a novelist, has written autobiography, and his approach – once the wig is out of the way – is singular. My Own Worst Enemy reads like a kind of inventory, each short chapter devoted to one aspect of working-class life in Sheffield in the 1960s. He writes about smoking and drinking and the grammar school that separates him from his peers; about his extended family, and the various kinds of house in which its members live, whether newly built by the council, or Victorian and arranged around a shared yard and an outside loo; about Fine Fare, the supermarket where he gets a Saturday job as a teenager, and about the holiday camp on the east coast to which they travel every summer. The detail is incredible, a film running before the reader’s eyes. Whether he is describing an onyx cigarette lighter or a spinning leather chair, you realise all that you have forgotten, but he has not, and you feel both grateful and just a little alarmed. Though Edric eventually escaped his tyrannical father – the book’s central character, and a coercive controller avant la lettre – this is principally a social history and therefore a book that is, in ways both straightforward and profound, about loss. I appreciated Edric’s lack of sentimentality. I wouldn’t say that he’s cruel about his people, a tribe he will one day leave far behind (thanks to his grammar school teachers, the first men he’s able truly to respect, he will get a place at Hull University, his arrival at which draws this memoir to a close). But he won’t make excuses for them: here they are, warts (toupees) and all. People fall out, and don’t speak for years. Both adults and children are cruel to those who are different, or poorer than them, or more desperate. A mother passes off her daughter as her sister. A divorced father struggles not to cry. In some ways, everything is out there, entrails on a plate. Edric’s father makes no effort to hide from his mother “the fancy piece” he has begun driving to work every morning. Men are always fighting, and vomiting all over their front doorsteps. In other ways, though, much is deeply buried, utterly concealed. People don’t talk, not really. Every little house is a locked box, impenetrable to outsiders, and sometimes even to insiders, too. The 60s, of course, are happening elsewhere. Not that elsewhere really exists, for Edric. Even the Peak District, which borders Sheffield in the most startling way, vast housing estates suddenly giving way to moorland, is a far-off realm for him (he sees it only once a year, from the windows of the charabanc that takes the Fine Fair staff on their works outing). As for the city, though we hear it – the steel industry is still going strong, and “the beating of distant machinery could always be heard” – we don’t really see it, or not much of it. If Jane Austen gave us two inches of ivory, Edric works on a single roof slate. I’m from Sheffield, too, and I recognised a lot that he describes; the house he grew up in, reached through a kind of tunnel between the terraces, is built to the same design as my granny’s. But with this book, geography is really neither here nor there. Its beautiful topography has to do with the hills of the heart, and the canals of the soul; with the great rivers of memory and experience that sometimes bind us tightly together, but far more often separate us, making us feel so very lonely and misunderstood. My Own Worst Enemy: Scenes of a Sheffield Childhood by Robert Edric is published by Swift Press (£14.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyIf you can’t answer these three questions, the cat will die. So pay attention. Who walked on the moon – was it Alan Bean or Hugh Jass? Obviously not Hugh Jass. Who had more heads – Simon and Garfunkel or the Wu-Tang Clan? Come on, this isn’t Mastermind. A good therapist says: “Our time is up” or “Oh, boo-hoo”? Idiot! It was obviously the first option. Welcome to Cat Burglar (Netflix), an interactive cartoon in which you, the viewer, are asked increasingly tricky questions so that our hero, Rowdy Cat, can get past security dog Peanut to his goal – the priceless painting in a museum. Once he’s nicked the cat-faced approximation of the Mona Lisa, Rowdy will be so obscenely rich he’ll realise his dream of having a concert pianist play for him while – get this – they are both inside his stretch limo. But now look what you’ve done. You’ve answered three questions incorrectly, and Rowdy is dead, floating to heaven on cartoon wings. Outside the pearly gates is a sign for newcomers that reads: “Neutered? Your testicles are waiting.” Result. But no! Peanut who, we must suppose, can fly, snips Rowdy’s wings. The cat falls straight to hell, where the devil uses Rowdy as a ball on his infernal pool table. Rack ’em up, Satan, while I call the RSPCA. Up pops a box on screen: Try again. You have a chance to redeem yourself. You go back to the start, where Rowdy is on the street outside the museum selecting a way of breaching the wall. Rowdy has three lives, which, as a cat, must make him feel short-changed, but that’s how this Netflix drop works. If you attempt to watch Cat Burglar in the normal Netflix manner, splayed on the sofa, the cat comes on screen shouting at you in an accent straight out of Top Cat. Don’t just sit there, you muppet: interact! Cat Burglar was created by Charlie Brooker, along with a few geniuses including one who worked on BoJack Horseman. Four years ago, Brooker had a stab at TV interactivity with an episode from his Black Mirror series called Bandersnatch. The drama unfolded as though you were in Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland, making decisions at choice points that changed the course of the adventure – though, if you didn’t choose in 10 seconds, a default decision was made for you. Bandersnatch reportedly offered one trillion paths to take. The average viewing time was 90 minutes, though adepts could cut that to 40 minutes by making the right choices. By comparison, Cat Burglar is minimally interactive. Viewers must answer general knowledge questions at points they have to pass in order to get Rowdy to his goal. It’s like Who Wants to Be a Millionaire? – if you were both viewer and contestant and couldn’t phone a friend. There’s no attempt here to match the interactive sophistication of video games such as, say, Life Is Strange, where the player gets embroiled in fetch quests and must choose from different dialogue boxes during conversations that have both short and long-term effects on the unfolding narratives. There is no strategic balancing act, only frustration that, if you answer wrongly, Rowdy loses a life. The chief pleasures of Cat Burglar aren’t really the interactive ones at all. Rather, the joy comes from the brilliantly observed homages to cartoons of the golden era before health and safety became a thing and cartoon violence was of exquisite imagination. At one point, Rowdy is doing a high-wire walk into the museum compound, but a bird snips the phone wire in two. Rowdy, witlessly, holds the pieces of wire together before realising his mistake. There’s a split second in which his hapless gaze confronts the viewers’ – like Gromit’s when Wallace has done something stupid, or Sylvester the cat before he plummets to oblivion – then Rowdy is electrocuted. As Rowdy gets fried, the orchestra strikes up a rumba, angel wings sprout from his body and the cat ghost starts shaking a pair of maracas. The incidental music, too, is a note-perfect nostalgia trip for screwball cartoon fetishists. There’s a bongo roll whenever Rowdy starts his run-up, pizzicati when he tiptoes into the museum, sarcastic trumpet wa-wa-wahs when he gets his comeuppance. The credits don’t read Tex Avery or Fred Quimby, but their spirits haunt the show. It took my daughter and me about half an hour to get to the end – and then only after some minor unpleasantness when she was poised to give the answer Cumberbatch to the question “Which is a type of dad clothing?” (Correct answer? Cummerbund). But we’ll be going back to the beginning – there’s a superb fight involving a guillotine in the Hall of Ancient Weapons between Peanut and Rowdy that cries out to be seen again. And again.I transferred my gas and electricity accounts to Sainsbury’s Energy a few days before my supplier, Igloo, went into administration. At the time, I was told my outstanding Igloo balance of £197 would be applied to my account. In December I kept chasing and was eventually told a cheque had been sent on 31 January. It has not arrived. All subsequent emails have been ignored – including those to the CEO’s office. LR, by email We have been getting a great many letters along these lines in recent months, but I have to say I think you are being a bit harsh on Sainsbury’s Energy. More than 25 suppliers have collapsed since the energy crisis hit, with all the affected customers moved to one of a handful of suppliers that have, in effect, been paid to take them on by the regulator Ofgem. Inevitably, it takes a great deal of work to move a whole customer base from one business to another, complete with credit and debit balances, and direct debit payments that arrived before and after the day the supplier failed. I’m all for consumers asserting their rights, but in this case, it was fair to give the supplier time to resolve this. Your balance was always going to be credited to your new account under the Ofgem rules, and Sainsbury’s Energy told me this week that this has now happened. Spare a thought for people whose transfer was not so straightforward – those who dispute what they owe, or are owed by their old supplier that is now managed by administrators. Many of them face long waits for a resolution. We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at consumer.champions@theguardian.com or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Please include a daytime phone number. Submission and publication of all letters is subject to our terms and conditionsThe federal immigration minister, Alex Hawke, has failed to appear in the New South Wales supreme court, despite being named as the first defendant in a case that will determine whether the NSW Liberal party branch can continue to operate beyond 28 February. Hawke did not appear or send a legal representative to the court on Tuesday, as it considered an urgent application tied to the Liberal party’s long-running saga over preselections for federal seats in NSW. Scott Robertson SC, appearing for the plaintiff, Liberal state executive member Matthew Camenzuli, told the court considerable efforts had been made to reach the minister, including the service of court documents, emails and phone calls. Justice John Sacker noted Hawke’s absence and that the case had received considerable publicity in the media. There is no legal requirement for a defendant to respond to a civil summons but as Sacker noted they should be given an opportunity to put their case. The second and third defendants, the NSW Liberal party president, Phillip Ruddock, and the federal president, John Olsen, were represented by senior counsel, but have indicated they do not intend to make submissions. The case, brought by Camenzuli, is ostensibly about the interpretation of the NSW party’s constitution and whether its governing body, the state executive, can continue to exist beyond 28 February, due to a delayed annual general meeting. Camenzuli wants a declaration from the court that the state executive remains validly elected. The court agreed to hear the case on Thursday. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Last week the state director, Chris Stone, presented legal advice to an extraordinary meeting of the NSW state executive suggesting federal party intervention was required to reappoint members of the state executive until the party’s postponed annual general meeting was held in March. The stalled AGM is part of a much broader factional power struggle that has left the NSW Liberal party hamstrung and without candidates in nine winnable seats just months before a federal election. They include North Sydney, Mitchell and Farrer, which have sitting MPs (including Hawke himself) as well as Warringah, Hughes, Dobell, Bennelong, and Parramatta. Hawke is prime minister Scott Morrison’s representative on the NSW vetting committee for candidates, and has been blamed by some party members for the impasse. One expressed surprise at his absence from today’s court proceedings. “It’s an extraordinary state of affairs that a federal minister would not appear in court,” the senior Liberal party member said. Internal critics say that to date, Hawke has failed to make himself available to review the possible candidates for preselection, stalling the process. Some members of the party accuse him and Morrison, who are leading figures in the centre right faction in NSW, of attempting to engineer a crisis that will require federal intervention. This would enable Morrison to have a greater say over candidates. NSW factional leaders, on the other hand, have been attempting to negotiate a deal which will fill the nine seats administratively without the need to have plebiscites. Others in the party, including Camenzuli, are outraged that factional organisers are attempting to bypass plebiscites which were recently inserted into the party’s constitution. With 90% support from the 29-member state executive required to endorse appointments, the factional organisers have struggled to pass their complex peace deal. The future of the NSW Liberal branch now comes down to the supreme court’s interpretation of the constitution. The federal branch is due to consider intervention again on 3 March. Attempts to contact Hawke were unsuccessful.Australians can expect higher petrol and gas prices and more volatile financial markets as a result of Russia’s aggression towards Ukraine but Australia’s economic rebound is unlikely to be derailed without a major escalation of hostilities, economists say. Russian president Vladimir Putin ordered his nation’s troops into two renegade regions of neighbouring Ukraine on Monday (local time). In response, investors trimmed their exposure to riskier assets. Stock markets in Asia fell, with Australia’s benchmark ASX200 index ending down 1%, while equivalent gauges in Hong Kong earlier lost as much as 3% and Tokyo’s 2%. Oil prices rose 2.8% and touched seven-year highs on Tuesday. Saul Eslake, an independent economist, said rising crude costs were the most obvious initial effect of Russia’s actions against Ukraine. “The world might assume that Russian oil will not be available to the market either because the Russians choose not to make it available or the West chooses not to buy it or in some other way impedes the trade in oil,” Eslake said. Local petrol prices are already at record highs, reaching a national average of $1.791 cents per litre in the week to 20 February. In New South Wales on Tuesday, prices were averaging $1.816 a litre for E10 petrol, while in Melbourne E10 was $1.727 a litre. As investors become more jittery, the Australian dollar also tends to fall against the US dollar, Eslake said. Since commodities are typically priced in the US currency, the price of oil in local terms will also be higher, once the delay of about a week feeds through. Gas prices may also increase. While most of Australia’s liquefied natural gas (LNG) exports are based on long-term contracts to Asian customers, there may be a spike in regional prices if Qatar – the world’s second largest LNG exporter behind Australia – diverts shipments to Europe to cover for Russian shortfalls, Eslake said. Gas’s share of Australia’s electricity market has been declining as renewables push out fossil fuels. Still, to the extent gas sets electricity prices, a higher cost of that fuel would also translate into higher wholesale power prices. However, Gareth Aird, head of Australian economics at Commonwealth Bank, said the turmoil in Europe was unlikely to have a material impact on the national economy beyond the short-term fizz in financial and commodity markets. “In terms of what is going to be driving the macro Aussie economy this year, [the European tension] is not going derail that,” Aird said. The drivers include the tight labour market, households loaded up with savings, and rising inflation and wages. “The story of the Aussie economy is pretty much locked in this year and that stuff overseas won’t impact our domestic conditions,” he said. Eslake agreed, adding he does not believe the Ukraine situation “will have any impact on the Reserve Bank’s thinking about the timing or magnitude of rate increases”. The Commonwealth Bank predicts the Reserve Bank of Australia will lift its official cash rate from the record low 0.1% in June. Financial markets have lately pared back expectations of when the first rise will occur but still predict about one percentage point of increases this year. The release of the ABS’s December quarter wage price index figure on Wednesday will likely underscore the dominance of local factors on the economic outlook, Aird said. “We think we’ll see an acceleration in wages growth,” he said. In the September quarter, wages rose 0.6% and were 2.2% higher over the year. “We’re predicting 0.8% [December quarter WPI], the consensus is 0.7%, and the RBA’s implied profile is around 0.6%,” Aird said. While the differences may appear small, they will be closely watched by financial markets, he said. The reserve bank will also be looking at two consumer price index figures before it decides to move on rates, with the first of these likely to be “a red hot print”, Aird said. Card spending data released on Tuesday for the week ending 18 February showed a rebound in spending after a small fall the previous week, the Commonwealth Bank said. “There are further signs that the economy continues to normalise as new Omicron cases fall. Spending in‑store and spending on services both continued to trend higher over the week,” the bank said.The Age and the Sydney Morning Herald have removed an article that suggested multimillionaire Geoff Bainbridge was the victim of an elaborate six-year extortion racket, admitting they appeared to have been “badly misled” after doubts were raised about aspects of the story. The Age’s chief reporter, Chip Le Grand, wrote on Monday evening that revelations about a video depicting Bainbridge using drugs had thrown into doubt the version of events Bainbridge gave him last week about the footage being at the centre of an extortion attempt. The original Nine story was an apparent effort by Bainbridge to counter a highly damaging story in the Australian newspaper. The Australian reported the chief executive of Lark Distillery had allegedly smoked ice in an explicit video filmed in 2021. Bainbridge, a co-founder of the burger chain Grill’d, resigned as Lark CEO when the story broke. Guardian Australia reported on Friday that the two newspapers had wildly differing versions of Bainbridge’s story but Nine was satisfied Bainbridge was telling the truth because he had provided them with multiple documents to back up his story of extortion. In the Nine story, Bainbridge claimed he was a victim of crime and had been set up by a woman he met in a bar in Asia six years ago. He claimed he was targeted by a criminal gang who extorted thousands of dollars out of him to keep quiet, but when he refused to pay any more they sent the video to journalists at News Corp Australia. Nine’s version was called into question when the Sunday Herald Sun revealed the video appeared to have been shot in Bainbridge’s own Melbourne home, which he bought in 2020, contradicting his claim in the Age and SMH that it was filmed on a wild night out in Singapore in 2015. “The former chief executive of Lark Distilling, who resigned from the publicly listed company hours before the video was broadcast, appears to have misled the Age and Herald about where and when it was taken,” Le Grand wrote in the Nine newspapers on Monday evening. Nine said its original reporting relied on documents supplied by Bainbridge who was working with a Melbourne PR adviser and a lawyer. They provided records of financial transactions made in Philippine pesos to two separate bank accounts, purported extortion demands sent this year by text message from a Malaysian WhatsApp account and “a confidential report by Control Risks, a global risk consultancy, which analysed the purported extortion attempt and advised him how to respond”. “If Mr Bainbridge confected parts of the story to the Age and Herald, it means he could have misrepresented the financial reports and text messages provided to his lawyer, a crisis management expert and the authors of the Control Risks report,” Le Grand wrote on Monday evening. The Age’s editor, Gay Alcorn, told Guardian Australia: “We believe we were badly misled and we question the veracity of the documents we received. We have retracted the story and written a follow-up that makes it clear that we believe we were misled. We will be putting a correction note in the newspaper tomorrow [Wednesday].” The Australian’s investigations writer, Sharri Markson, reported on Monday that the bedroom the videos were filmed in has the same features as the one in the house Bainbridge has lived in for 18 months. “Online real estate photographs show the master bedroom, positioned at the front of the home, features a unique light-fitting, ornate ceiling decor, period shutters, a study nook in the corner of the bedroom, a fireplace and a distinctive bedhead,” she wrote. “All of these details can be seen very clearly in three full, unpublished videos recorded by Mr Bainbridge that were obtained by the Australian.” Markson said the information suggested his story was a “fabrication” as “he obviously recorded the drug-taking video in the inner-Melbourne house he bought in late 2020”. Comment was sought from Bainbridge. Bainbridge told Nine he wasn’t an ice user and didn’t know how he came to have the drug. He also told the Age and SMH in their original story that “although I consider myself a victim of a crime, I accept that I am also responsible for the circumstances I find myself in”. “Ultimately, I put myself in a situation I shouldn’t have been in. I’m a victim of extortion but that wouldn’t have occurred without my poor judgment. I am deeply remorseful for my own actions,” he told the newspapers.With that, I will leave you to enjoy your evenings as I go to inspect the water damage in my bathroom. Stay dry, Sydney-siders. Here were today’s major developments: Australia has closed its embassy in Lviv and ordered all Australians to evacuate Ukraine after Putin ordered troops to descend in the east for ‘peacekeeping operations’. Australia’s foreign affairs minister Marise Payne has condemned Russia’s declaration that separatist regions in eastern Ukrainian are independent states as the crisis continues. Limited train services are back running in Sydney today and the state government has dropped its case against the rail workers’ union after the network was shut down amid an industrial dispute. The RTBU secretary has called on the PM to apologise for comments suggesting the suspension of the services was due to union-led strikes. China says an Australian plane dropped a sonar buoy in water near a Chinese ship following claims its warship pointed a laser at an Australian surveillance aircraft north of Australia. A defence spokesperson quickly responded, and said the Australian surveillance aircraft followed “a standard flight profile” and the plane dropped buoys only after the laser incident. Western Australia has released its Covid-19 modelling projecting 129 Covid deaths, peaking at 10,363 cases per day next month. WA recorded 258 new local cases. And in Victoria, the mask mandate will be lifted from Saturday, along with recommendations to work from home. Victoria recorded 14 Covid deaths and 6,786 new infections, while NSW recorded 14 Covid deaths and 8,752 new cases. Queensland will lift its indoor mask mandates on 4 March. Here’s the latest from AAP on the possible easing of isolation requirements for household contacts in Australia. Household contacts of positive cases are currently required to undergo seven days of quarantine, unless they are an essential worker without any symptoms. However, the health minister, Greg Hunt, said there was capacity for exemptions from isolation to include everyone, following the success of the measures for essential employees. It comes as officials from the Australian Health Protection Principal Committee in NSW and Victoria consider removing the household isolation rules in both states. Hunt said today: NSW and Victoria, with the commonwealth’s support, are leading that work, and I strongly support that direction. The next step is to consider expanding that definition (of household contacts) through the AHPPC … and it has worked well with our nurses. The health minister said officials would follow the medical advice when considering changes to the rules: It’s always a balance of ensuring that we have decreasing case numbers, and that’s a trend which I’m increasingly confident of. As a result of that, that actually allows us to have greater freedoms. Meanwhile, the treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, said despite falling case numbers, it was too soon to implement a UK-style scrapping of restrictions. He said the workplace issues in cities, which had been exacerbated by the Omicron wave at the start of the year, were now beginning to ease: People are getting back to work and some of those workforce shortages are starting to abate. This is the next step in the road, reducing restrictions even further, and we’ll continue to monitor the situation in Australia. As storms ease across NSW, SES volunteers are responding to the aftermath. Western Australia has just released its Covid modelling following transmission of the Omicron variant in the state, and the “transition to living with Covid-19”. It notes high levels of vaccination in WA, and emerging evidence Omicron is “substantially less severe than the Delta strain, albeit far more transmissible” as key factors. The modelling projects three deaths a day at the peak of the virus, expected next month, and 129 deaths cumulative to a 180 day period. It also projects a peak of 10,363 Covid cases and 463,932 cumulative cases to a 180 day period. At the peak of the outbreak, there would be 443 Covid patients requiring hospitalisation, and 56 people requiring intensive care: In a living with Covid approach, further border restrictions will have limited or no efficacy in suppressing cases, as epidemic growth is overwhelmingly driven by community transmission. With reducing positivity rates interstate and around the world and the systematic testing of all arrivals, it is expected that very small numbers of positive cases will leak into the community. Based on current high vaccination rates, high and increasing booster uptake rates and the expected waning in vaccine efficacy, the Western Australian population’s immunity is projected to be at its highest in March 2022, which coincides with the expected uptrend in the epidemic curve. Read it in full. Events in eastern Europe have been moving quickly, so it might be worth taking stock of the Australian reaction. The foreign minister, Marise Payne, this afternoon revealed that Australian officials have been directed to depart Ukraine “due to the increased risk”. The Australian embassy’s operations had already recently been moved from the capital Kyiv to Lviv - but Payne said: Our embassy and operations in Lviv are now temporarily closed. Australian officials have been deployed to eastern Poland and Romania to assist Australians seeking to depart Ukraine. Payne reiterated the government’s earlier calls for “all Australians to leave Ukraine immediately”. Do not delay. The safety of Australians and officials is our priority. It’s well known that the Australian government has been working with allies and partners – including the US, the UK and the EU – on a strong international sanctions package that was intended to deter Vladimir Putin from authorising a further invasion of Ukraine. Payne said the Australian government would join international efforts to “ensure there are severe costs for Russia’s aggression”. Along with our partners, we are prepared to announce swift and severe sanctions that would target key Russian individuals and entities responsible for undermining Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity. Payne’s statement also said the Australian government joined with others in condemning Putin’s declaration that the Donetsk and Luhansk regions of eastern Ukraine are independent states. She said: This flagrantly undermines Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity and has no validity under international law. We also condemn president Putin’s announcement that Russia is deploying so-called “peacekeepers” to eastern Ukraine. These personnel are not peacekeepers. The criticism of Putin’s actions is bipartisan. The Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, and the party’s foreign affairs spokesperson, Penny Wong, also issued a statement condemning the Russian government for “the blatant violation of international law and the territorial integrity of Ukraine, as well as a breach of the Minsk agreements”. Albanese and Wong suggested options could include the withdrawal of Australia’s ambassador to Russia for consultations and targeted sanctions, and added: Labor expects to be consulted on any developments in Australia’s position. In an election year it is critical that bipartisanship be maintained on challenges to national security that affect us all, and which go beyond domestic politics. More from Sydney storms: The Australian government has confirmed an RAAF surveillance plane dropped buoys in the water to collect acoustic data near Chinese warships in the Arafura Sea north of Australia late last week. But it says they were only used after the incident in which a People’s Liberation Army Navy vessel directed a laser at the P-8A surveillance aircraft on Thursday. Essentially, that is hitting back at the suggestion from China’s national defence ministry overnight that the dropping of the “sonobuoys” were an example of the Australian defence force’s “spiteful and provocative actions”. A detailed new statement issued by the Department of Defence this afternoon says the Australian aircraft was “acting within international law at all times”: To surveil the approaches to Australia the P-8A is equipped with an array of sensors to locate, track and understand air, surface and subsurface contacts. Surveillance activities are conducted using all available surveillance tools including photography, sonobuoys and radio calls to identify maritime and air traffic. The use of sonobuoys for maritime surveillance is common practice. Sonobuoys are used to collect passive acoustic data on environmental activity as well as surface and sub-surface contacts. These buoys are a receiving buoy only and do not pose any hazard to shipping. No sonobuoys were used prior to the PLA-N vessel directing its laser at the P-8A aircraft on 17 February. Some sonobuoys were used after the incident but were dropped in the water a significant distance ahead of the PLA-N vessel. China has also accused the Australian side of spreading “false information” and making an “irresponsible claim”. The statement issued this afternoon hits back at that, saying: “Australia does not engage in the spread of misinformation or disinformation.” The Department of Defence says at the time of the laser incident, the Royal Australian Air Force P-8 was about 7.7km from the PLA-N vessel and flying at an altitude of 457m. It says the closest the P-8 flew to the PLA-N vessel was about 4km, which it says “is a standard flight profile for RAAF maritime patrol aircraft for a visual investigation of a surface vessel”. Storm warnings in Sydney have been cancelled with the easing of heavy rain. Any rainbows about? The Rail, Tram and Bus Union national secretary, Mark Diamond, has released a statement in the wake of the NSW government’s withdrawal of its legal action against the union – confirming Sydney train services will slowly return over the coming days. He says it is “now clear” the decision to shut down the Sydney train network had nothing to do with rail workers: It is up to the NSW government to explain how and why that decision was made. For the past two days, Sydney Trains workers have copped abuse from stranded commuters on platforms and on social media because people wrongly believed the cancellation of rail services was due to a union strike. That belief was fuelled by false statements made on 2GB and repeated at a nationally-televised media conference by prime minister Scott Morrison. Scott Morrison lied about a non-existent strike to score cheap political points. That lie compounded the anxiety and stress being felt by millions of people in Sydney. Strikes are a legitimate industrial tool for workers, but we never take strike action lightly. To be accused of taking strike action, when our members were doing no such thing, was utterly bizarre.If Scott Morrison has any decency whatsoever, he will apologise to Sydney Trains workers for his brazen lie. I am happy to take Morrison for a tour of Sydney Trains depots so that he can deliver his apology in person. We have just opened a new live blog with all the developments in Ukraine: In other news, there has been a renewed push for rolling out daylight saving in Queensland. Here’s the latest from AAP. Brisbane mayor, Adrian Schrinner, is calling for a referendum on daylight saving time, but north Queensland politician Robbie Katter has slammed the proposal. The state is the only jurisdiction on Australia’s east coast that doesn’t wind the clock forward by one hour in spring and back by one hour in autumn. First light in Queensland can occur as early as 4.15am during the summer months. Queenslanders in 1992 voted against permanently introducing daylight saving time after a three-year trial. Schrinner says most people under the age of 48 and anyone who moved to the state in the last 30 years hasn’t had a say on adjusting time zones. He told ABC radio: That means that over 3 million out of the 5 million people in Queensland didn’t get a say. So [there’s] a lot of people out there who never got the opportunity to have a say, and I’m actually one of them. Schrinner suggested a new referendum could be held at the same time as the next state election in 2024. But Katter’s Australia party leader, Rob Katter, said Schrinner’s stance is “irresponsible” and doesn’t account for Queenslanders in the state’s north: To do the mature, right and equitable thing by the whole state, he’s got to think a bit more broadly than that. Try encourage people when they’re trying to put their kids to bed at night and it’s 45C when the sun’s still out at 7.30/eight o’clock. Good luck with that. 30 years ago, 54.5% of Queenslanders voted against daylight saving and 45.5% voted in favour. Western Australia’s case numbers are in. There have been 258 new local cases of Covid-19 and five “other” cases detected overnight. It’s a slight jump on yesterday’s numbers, when 213 new local cases were detected, however numbers are still staying relatively stable on what we’ve seen in the past week. There are three people being treated in hospital across the state. Active cases have climbed to 1,315. This is some really good news. The Royal Melbourne Hospital is closing its Pod B ICU unit because of lower presentations of Covid-19. Here’s hoping it won’t have to be reopened. Intense rainfall is continuing in the Sydney area with some easing in the CBD, the Bureau of Meteorology says: As of 3.15pm, severe thunderstorms were detected on the weather radar near Darkes Forest and Helensburgh. These thunderstorms are slow moving. They are forecast to affect Appin and waters off Thirroul by 3.45pm. Intense rainfall that may lead to dangerous and life-threatening flash flooding and damaging winds are likely. Wyong (Olney Forest) recorded 80mm of rainfall in the 45 minutes to 10.30am. 92km/h wind gust was recorded at Molineux Point at 1.19pm. Marrickville Golf Club recorded 61mm in 1hr to 2pm. Back in Sydney, some bus routes have been altered or temporarily suspended due to continued flooding, while flooding at Marrickville station is causing extended train delays. The Australian embassy in Lviv is now closed. All staff and officials have been told to evacuate Ukraine. Australian officials will be sent to Romania and Poland to assist with Australian evacuations. Keep up with the latest developments on our dedicated live blog: Marrickville Golf Club in Sydney’s inner west has had 102mm of rainfall *so far* - equivalent to a month’s worth of rain in two hours. Won’t need to water the green for a while. For reference, this is my house, which is currently leaking from the ceiling. At one point the labrador’s dog bowl was floating in the backyard, which has fortunately ceased. Sydney’s inner west is absolutely soaked right now: Parts of Sydney are experiencing flash flooding: South Australia has recorded three Covid deaths, aged in their 40s, 60s and 80s. There has also been a spike in cases with 1,378 recorded, up 161 on Monday’s number. There are 205 people in hospital, 12 are in intensive care, and three of them are on ventilators. Minister Yvette D’Ath said masks might have to go back on in winter: We are expecting there to be some sort of secondary wave in the coming months, probably in winter. We don’t know what the future will hold but we assume there will be some sort of wave in winter. How large it will be, we don’t know. There is a significant chance we will need to introduce mandatory masks wearing at some point, again for a limited period. When we say mask wearing is mandatory, that means that it’s really necessary. So now that we’re at the end of the wave, now is the time to relax those measures. We have some more information on the five deaths in Queensland. Of the five people, two are aged in their 60s, two aged in their 80 and one aged in their 90s. The state’s chief health officer, John Gerrard, said: One person was not vaccinated, one had received one dose, three had received two doses and none had received a booster. If you were a disadvantaged child today in an Australian school, chances are high that a majority of the other children in your school would also be disadvantaged, write Pasi Sahlberg, a professor of education at UNSW, and Adrian Piccoli, a former NSW education minister. Indoor mask mandates will end in the Northern Territory “sooner rather than later” amid falling Covid-19 case numbers, chief minister Michael Gunner says. Gunner’s comments came as health officials reported the death of a man in his 80s with Civd-19, taking the Territory’s toll since the start of the pandemic to 16. The NT reported another 716 new virus infections on Tuesday. There are currently 123 patients in hospital. Gunner has also signalled the likely scrapping of check-ins at shops and other venues in upcoming reviews of virus restrictions. “We are actively discussing moving on from the indoor mask mandates,” he told ABC radio on Tuesday. “I can’t give you a date yet, but it will be sooner rather than later.” - With AAP Equality Tasmania has put out a statement in response to the PM endorsing senator Claire Chandler’s trans exclusion Bill this morning. Dr Charlie Burton, spokesperson for Equality Tasmania: In the past few weeks the prime minister has shown a complete lack of empathy for trans and gender-diverse Australians and now he is using us as a political football. In Tasmania, transgender women have been playing women’s sport and accessing women’s services for many years without any of the problems predicted by senator Chandler. Tasmanian sporting organisations have been actively seeking guidance on how to be more inclusive, not less, with strong support from the Tasmanian Liberal government. We reject attempts to sow fear and division about policies that have worked well and have made Tasmania a better place for everyone. Here are the latest coronavirus numbers from around Australia today, as the country records at least 34 deaths from Covid 19: NSW Deaths: 14 Cases: 8,752 In hospital: 1,293 (with 71 people in ICU) NT Deaths: one Cases: 716 In hospital: 123 Queensland Deaths: five Cases: 5,583 Victoria Deaths: 14 Cases: 6,786 In hospital: 345 (with 48 people in ICU) Thirty years after Queenslanders rejected daylight saving at the polls, the Brisbane lord mayor, Adrian Schrinner, is calling for a new referendum on the divisive subject. Queensland is the only jurisdiction on Australia’s east coast that doesn’t wind the clock forward by one hour in spring and/or back by one hour in autumn. Elliott is asked if he thinks it is acceptable that we still don’t know the justification for the shutdown: That is a matter for you to take up with Transport for New South Wales. Those questions should be directed to them. Elliott - perhaps making the worse case for the existence of ministers: I am not an operations expert when it comes to running a rail network. The reason why ministers employ senior executives to run departments is they have the expertise in this regard. Elliott is asked why such a huge decision was made without letting him - the minister for transport - know: I don’t expect them to send a car around at two o’clock in the morning and wake me up. We pay these people to do their job, and I accept the fact that at 12:43am it was their judgement call as executives of the organisation that they needed to use their discretion and close the system. Did I like it? Absolutely not. Absolutely not. Am I still asking for information, details to justify a decision? Absolutely. Elliott is seeking to distance himself from the whole thing - saying it was a decision by Transport NSW and he was not consulted. This is an operational matter, and these operational decisions, the executive of any government department would have the right to make a swift call if it is in the interests of the welfare of, [the] safety of commuters in the workforce. Elliott says he and the Premier found out about the shutdown the same time. I can tell you categorically that we knew there was a potential for industrial dispute, but we found out that the decision by Transport for New South Wales that the service would be closed, would not operate, when everybody else did at four o’clock in the morning, when the Premier and I checked our messages. Elliott says “ideally” public transport in Sydney will be back to normal timetable tomorrow. He is asked about his language yesterday (he said it was “terrorist-like” and the PM saying it was a strike (when it wasn’t): I will not dwell on yesterday. It was a day of high emotion because the people of Sydney were certainly disenfranchised, but it was industrial action, there is no doubt about that. Elliott: Going forward, it is on the advice of the senior counsel that the government will withdraw the matter currently before the Fair Work Commission. Senior counsel has given that recommendation, which the government accepts in the interests of not only transparency but goodwill. The NSW transport minister, David Elliott, has been speaking in Sydney. He says he has had a “frank” and constructive meeting with the union. Hello everyone – this is Cait Kelly, taking over from the other Caitlin for the lunch hour. Very glad to be here with you. First up, I’ve got this from AAP for you: The peak body representing NSW doctors has welcomed a move to oppose legislation requiring frontline workers to prove they caught Covid-19 at work to receive compensation. A section was added to the Workers Compensation Act in May 2020, providing a presumption that certain workers in frontline industries who catch Covid-19 were infected at work and should be supported through workers compensation. A bill seeks to have that section removed, and would ask health workers to provide proof of their infection. But a NSW upper house committee on Monday tabled a report recommending those changes be rejected. The president of the Australian Medical Association NSW, Danielle McMullen, has welcomed the recommendations, saying doctors had already faced a “gruelling two years” and the changes would cause further strain. With that, I will pass you briefly into Cait Kelly’s capable hands. Equality Tasmania have vehemently rejected the PM’s endorsement today of senator Claire Chandler’s bill that would allow sporting groups to exclude transgender people from single-sex sports. Spokesperson Dr Charlie Burton says the PM has shown a “complete lack of empathy” for trans and gender-diverse Australians in the past few weeks: Now he is using us as a political football. We completely reject the cynical abuse of trans people as a weapon in the prime minister’s political and electoral game playing. Senator Chandler’s bill would strip transgender people of the right to live as we are, casting us into an unequal, uncertain and unsafe status in the eyes of the law. In Tasmania, transgender women have been playing women’s sport and accessing women’s services for many years without any of the problems predicted by senator Chandler. Women are always stronger standing together rather than divided. Over in NSW, the state government has dropped its case against the rail workers’ union at the Fair Work Commission after late night talks hit a standstill on Sunday. The transport minister, David Elliott, says they will work with the union on a new enterprise agreement. South Australia’s premier ,Steven Marshall, is following suit with NSW, Victoria and the ACT, flagging Covid restrictions could be “gone by Easter”. Prime minister Scott Morrison has backed a push by Tasmanian senator Claire Chandler to allow sporting groups to exclude transgender people from single-sex sports. Campaigning in the marginal seat of Lyons today, the PM said he thought Chandler’s proposed private member’s bill to amend the Sex Discrimination Act was “terrific” and he’d encouraged her to pursue it. Under Chandler’s “save women’s sports” bill, changes would be made to the Sex Discrimination Act to “clarify” that the operation of single-sex sport on the basis of biological sex was not discriminatory. Morrison said: I support it, as Claire knows. I think it’s a terrific bill and I’ve given her great encouragement. Claire is a champion for women’s sport and I think she’s been right to raise these issues in the way that she has. Well done, Claire. Meanwhile, today marks 12 months since the vaccination rollout began in Australia. How time flies. In Victoria, the first person to receive a vaccination was professor Rhonda Stuart - who was also the first person to diagnose a Covid case in Australia. Since then, an average of eleven vaccines a minute have been administered by Victoria’s state-run services. Some 14,105,757 have been administered statewide, accounting for 42% of the vaccination rollout nationally. Peering out my window, I can confirm it’s raining rather heavily. Over in Queensland, the attorney general, Shannon Fentiman, has released a statement in reference to comments made by the leader of the opposition, David Crisafulli, yesterday suggesting whistleblowers wouldn’t take part in the integrity review for fear of reprisals. Fentiman says: It has come to my attention that ... the leader of the opposition made a statement to the effect that he has been made aware of certain allegations and the people making those allegations are requesting protection as whistleblowers. I can confirm that such protections are already afforded under the Public Interest Disclosure Act 2010. Fentiman goes on to urge Crisafulli to refer any allegations to the Crime and Corruption Commission for investigation: It is clear that the leader of the opposition believes that these allegations warrant the further attention of an investigative body. The Public Interest Disclosure Act includes serious consequences if there is reprisal against a person who has made a public interest disclosure, as well as protections against reckless disclosure of confidential information. I urge the leader of the opposition to treat the allegations he claims to know about with the utmost importance and refer them to the Crime and Corruption Commission (CCC). There is no excuse ... he must show some integrity and he must act if he is aware of allegations that require investigation by the CCC. If he manages to avoid Covid-like symptoms, former Socceroo and human rights activist Craig Foster will be up at the National Press Club next month. Meanwhile: Many thanks to Matilda Boseley for guiding us through this morning’s news. I’ll be with you for the rest of the day, sans Clive Palmer. With that, I shall leave you for the day and hand you over to the amazing Caitlin Cassidy. See you tomorrow! China’s national defence ministry has accused the Australian defence force of “spiteful and provocative actions” as it brushed off the accusation that its warship had shone a laser at an Australian surveillance plane. The Australian government had demanded an explanation from Beijing over a “dangerous, unprofessional and reckless” incident last Thursday in which it said a People’s Liberation Army Navy (PLA-N) warship had used a laser to illuminate an Australian P-8A Poseidon surveillance aircraft. The Australian aircraft had been tracking two PLA-N vessels that were sailing east through the Arafura Sea, north of Australia. A new statement issued by the China’s national defence ministry did not address the claim of the laser use in any detail. You can read the full report below: Union officials met with the New South Wales transport minister, David Elliott, at state parliament on Tuesday morning following Monday’s rail network shutdown. Speaking on radio afterwards, the Rail, Tram and Bus Union NSW secretary, Alex Claassens, said the meeting was “a little bit tense” at first and accused the minister and the NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, of being “out there verbalising” the union yesterday. He told 2GB: We had a little bit of a bloodletting but after that we got on with the business of doing what we should have been doing all along and that is having a productive conversation about the way forward and how we can fix some of the things that are broken. Claassens said the union’s industrial action would continue and he expected trains to continue at a similar frequency today and tomorrow. The groups will be back before the Fair Work Commission on Wednesday. Claassens said he wanted to see the Commission to “resolve” the issue so the parties could continue negotiations. He said: We will do everything we can to try and restore normal services as quickly as possible. There’s a deadline on us anyway because [the government wants] to run the normal timetable from the 28th. We’ve all got a goal that we’ve got to try and work to and we’ll try and do what we can, but we do need them to meet us halfway on some of these issues. OK, time for Anthony Albanese to talk about the Sydney trains: Well, the [state] government now seems to have conceded that it was a government decision to shut down the trains*. Workers were there ready to undertake their day’s work in the early hours of the morning. I want unions and the government to come to terms, to have agreements, no one wants this level of disruption ... Bear this in mind, just have a look at the difference in the rhetoric between Scott Morrison talking about the heroes of the pandemic, our nurses – they have had to strike in New South Wales. Our transport workers who have been essentially shut down by the government of New South Wales with the decision to shut the public transport network, and what we need to do is recognise that during the pandemic, the people who kept this country going were our nurses, our cleaners, our public transport workers, truck drivers, our retail workers. They need to be treated with respect and they deserve better than a prime minister who just sledges them without knowing the facts. *Actually the NSW transport minister said this was 100% the decision of Sydney Trains. This is a government organisation, but he said politicians didn’t have a direct decision-making role in this instance. Despite the dig at the prime minister’s ukelele playing, Anthony Albanese seems to be drawing a hard line in the sand by not criticising the government’s approach to international security issues: Look, I don’t seek to raise partisan issues at a time like this. We’ve been briefed, I’m very confident with regard to the advice that was given to Australians to leave Ukraine was entirely appropriate. Our Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade is very good at their job. Our security agencies are very good at their job also and all Australians should stand together against this action and the statements that were made. But also, to say to Russia, that they need to back off. Russia keeps saying that it has no intention of intervening in Ukraine, but every one of the steps that it’s taking points towards the opposite. So we stand with the people of Ukraine, with our allies, as Australians, and that’s important that we stand as one when it comes to national security issues. (Although it should be noted that talking about staying united on the international security front is actually also a subtle dig at the Coalition who have been attempting to state that Labor is somehow in cahoots with the Chinese Communist party, despite there being no evidence to back this up.) Whoops and just like that we are back to domestic politics; Anthony Albanese telling Scott Morrison to lay off the hair washing and the welding and get to work. Albanese: I think this is a government that has failed on key criteria this term. They failed to order enough vaccines. Before that, they failed to respond appropriately to the bushfire crisis. Then they failed when it came to rapid antigen tests. They’re continuing to fail when it comes to looking after aged care and tomorrow I’ll be here in Launceston talking about the aged care crisis which is there. This prime minister seems to be more interested in stunts than he is in doing his day job. I notice on the issue of the rather bizarre welding exercise that occurred in Darwin last Friday, that he said, well, it’s not his day job. I say to the prime minister, do your day job, forget about the photo ops and the shampooing people’s hair, and driving motor cars, and the welding, and indeed, maybe even the ukelele playing, if he can give that a miss too, and do your day job. Australians are facing challenges and they want someone to be on top of issues like aged care. Anthony Albanese: We think this is entirely inappropriate. We also think that China and other countries need to speak out in support of the sovereignty of Ukraine. This unilateral statement by Vladimir Putin has no place in that a world in which we have respect. We know there are consequences behind these sort of statements and the threats and intimidation that has occurred. And we call upon Russia to back off. Anthony Albanese says Labor stands with the Australian and US governments in their condemnation of Russia ordering troops into Ukraine: I want to make some comments about Vladimir Putin’s quite extraordinary statement that he has made. We condemn Russia’s unilateral recognition of breakaway territories in the Ukraine. We respect the sovereignty of Ukraine, Russia should do that too, in accordance with international law. There is no place in 2022 for nation-states to just try to carve off sections of another sovereign nation-state, which is what we’re seeing here. And we agree with the comments made by the secretary of the state Blinken, who has confirmed this action, we stand with all democratic nations in opposing this action, but in particular, we stand with the people of Ukraine. Anthony Albanese has started out with his regular list of Coalition faux pas: Australians have done it tough over the last couple of years, the pandemic has brought real challenges. But Australians have been magnificent in their response. They have made sacrifices, they have looked after each other in the great Australian tradition. But at the same time, the government has let them down. The government let them down by not ordering enough vaccines. The government more recently has let them down by not ordering enough rapid antigen tests, indeed, not ordering any until January of this year. This government also has botched up the jobkeeper program, a good program – Labor supported wage subsidies – but, as the report identifies, there was a lot of waste early on, which meant that whole sections of the workforce, including in universities, in the arts sector, whole sectors missed out on support. And other sectors have continued to struggle, including the hospitality sector. Anthony Albanese is speaking now, also from Tasmania. I’ll bring you updates if he is interesting! Clive Palmer’s office says he has “flu-like symptoms”, in explaining the last-minute cancellation of his National Press Club speech this afternoon. A spokesman for the mining magnate, United Australia party leader and one-time federal MP says he has been “medically advised not to travel” to Canberra for the speech. The Press Club had earlier said Palmer – who said in November that he was not vaccinated against Covid – was exhibiting “Covid-like symptoms”. Palmer’s spokesperson told Guardian Australia that Palmer would get a PCR test today: It is hoped Mr Palmer’s address will be rescheduled for another time prior to the federal election. The terms and conditions of the NPC event stated that guests “are not to attend the event if you are suffering any symptoms of disease caused by COVID-19”. Palmer was due to speak on the topic: The Australian economy: where it is heading and the financial policy of the UAP. Analysis: The New South Wales transport minister, David Elliott, started Monday on a rhetorical cliff and kept walking. On Sydney radio station 2GB, he described industrial action taken by the state’s rail workers as “terrorist-like activity”, then accused the Rail, Tram and Bus Union of acting like “cowards”, spreading “bullshit” and “hijacking the city”. At a hastily arranged media conference a few hours later, he effectively accused union members of seeking to change the government. The industrial action taken by the rail union was designed to “bully the electorate” into voting for Labor, as well as “disrupt the recovery from Covid”, he said. Elliott was not alone. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, weighed in, also on 2GB, to condemn the “strike”, while the NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, described the action as a “coordinated attack by the Labor party and the union movement”. You can read the full story below: Prime minister Scott Morrison says it is “nonsense” to suggest Russia is sending “peacekeepers” into Ukraine, labelling the invasion unwarranted and unprovoked, reports AAP. Speaking from Tasmania today he said he hopes to see diplomatic talks prevail to prevent a conflict in Ukraine, following the move of “peacekeepers”: Some suggestions that they are peacekeeping is nonsense. They have moved in on Ukrainian sovereign territory ... We cannot have threats of violence being used to seek to advantage a nation’s position over others. The prime minister said Australia would be in lockstep with other nations and immediately impose economic sanctions on Russia should there be further military action in Ukraine: Russia should step back, it should unconditionally withdraw, back behind its own borders and stop threatening its neighbours ... It’s unacceptable, it’s unprovoked, it’s unwarranted, and Russia should understand that by seeking to invade another country, that this cannot advantage them, and it would seriously and significantly cost Russia.” This comes after former prime minister Tony Abbott said if Russia was successful, it could create a new iron curtain across Europe, particularly if Vladimir Putin went on to target Poland and the Baltic states. Morrison said he was aware of his predecessor’s comments but was focused on the immediate situation in Ukraine, calling for Russia to withdraw. Couldn’t help but note the subtle “framing” of PM Scott Morrison and environment minister Sussan Ley giving their press conference just then standing in front of what looks to be an empty timber truck in the Tassie town of Triabunna. Of course, that town is famous for once hosting the world’s largest woodchip mill, which according to the spiffy Sandy Bay Mill website is “now managed by a bunch of provocateurs intent on charting a sustainable path”. More sustainable, certainly, than destroying native forests for a pittance. Actually, there are pics circulating of the wild few days when environmentalists took their (presumably borrowed) industrial tools and literally carved up the pulping equipment. Of course, cutting through power plant turbines might take a bit more of an effort, but as we saw with the demolition of the smokestacks at the defunct Wallerawang power plant near Lithgow of the western fringe of the beautiful Blue Mountains, these can be quite spectacular in their own way: As it happens, Wallerawang’s old unit seven boiler is to be detonated tomorrow – just in case tech billionaire and AGL Energy suitor Mike Cannon-Brookes happens to be in the vicinity and is scoping for ideas. Queensland premier Annastacia Palaszczuk has just announced that from 6pm on 4 March the requirement to wear masks in most indoor settings will lift, although they will remain mandatory in healthcare settings and on public transport. She says this can happen as the state are now confident that the peak of the Omicron wave has passed. Now, Clive Plamer’s National Press Club event has just been cancelled, but beforehand the ABC had announced a suite of factchecking and editing measures to ensure no misinformation was spread. Here is Amanda Meade with the details: The ABC had added multiple layers of moderation to the National Press Club speech by Clive Palmer to ensure misinformation was not broadcast. The speech was to be delayed by 90 minutes to give time for factchecking and editing and any changes would have been relayed to viewers, an ABC spokesperson said. In addition, the press club was going to factcheck the speech live and any issues were going to be related to the moderator on stage and addressed on the spot. The spokesperson said: The address will be broadcast on a 90-minute delay and assessed beforehand against the ABC’s editorial standards. Any content inconsistent with the standards may be edited. If edits are made the audience will be informed. The NPC speech will be followed by analysis from ABC journalists including political editor Andrew Probyn. Clive Palmer’s address to the National Press Club has been cancelled, the venue says, claiming the United Australia party leader is showing “Covid-like symptoms”. The mining magnate and one-time federal MP told an anti-vaccine mandate rally in November: “I’m not vaccinated and I don’t intend to be vaccinated.” Palmer was due to give a speech this afternoon on the UAP’s strategy at the coming election. At 10am, the press club said the event wouldn’t go ahead. The venue said: The NPC has just been informed that Clive Palmer has been directed not to travel due [to] him exhibiting Covid-like symptoms ... All ticket holders will be contacted to be refunded. We’ve contacted Palmer’s media spokesperson for comment. Scott Morrison has addressed the rapidly escalating situation on the Russian/Ukrainian border: Russia should step back. It should unconditionally withdraw, back behind its own borders and stop threatening its neighbours. We’ve seen this behaviour before and seeking to take opportunity to threaten a neighbour for their own advantage is just simply not on. It’s unacceptable, it’s unprovoked, it’s unwarranted, and Russia should understand that by seeking to invade another country, that this cannot advantage them and it would seriously and significantly cost Russia and the international reputation and anyone else who support them and stands with them and refuses to denounce it. OK, everyone, thanks very much. Prime minister Scott Morrison is avoiding directly answering questions about if, as China claims, an Australian surveillance aircraft dropped a sonobuoy in the water near a Chinese military vessel – and this what was caused the ship to point a laser at the Australian plane: The facts are very clear. There is a Chinese naval vessel in our exclusive economic zone and it pointed a laser pointer at an Australian surveillance aircraft. That’s what happened. They need to explain that. Not just to Australia, but this needs to be explained to the entire region, as to what they would be doing undertaking such a reckless act for what’s supposed to be a professional navy ship. There is no explanation that Australia has to give here. Our surveillance planes have every right to be in our exclusive economic zone and keeping a close eye on what people are up to in our exclusive economic zone and that is what their job is. And the fact that they were put under that type of a threat I think is extremely disappointing and I think requires an explanation. Not for it to be dismissed or shunted off or some of the usual responses that we get. Now, do I have an expectation that an explanation will be given? Frankly, not a strong one, based on the form but what I do know is that’s what occurred and I will call it out. Reporter: They’ve said that they were forced to take defensive measures because Australia was flying too close to their vessel. Do you know how far our aircraft actually was flying to the vessel and was there any directive from the Australian government? Morrison: Our surveillance aircraft was exactly where it was allowed to be doing everything they were allowed to do and keeping eyes on those who are coming into our exclusive economic zone. They were doing their job as they do every single day and we make no apology for where our surveillance aircraft are looking after and protecting Australia. Morrison has been asked if he is concerned that China is trying to assert dominance or establish territory in the Antarctic and if that has influenced this new funding package. (It 100% has but Morrison is being a bit coy about it.) We are a treaty nation when it comes to Antarctica and we take those responsibilities incredibly seriously. Not everybody respects those obligations and those stewardship responsibilities, so this gives us eyes on Antarctica. We have an important job to do, not just about understanding Antarctica and what the implications of that art for everything from climate science through too many other applications, but it is also about ensuring that we protect Antarctica and that we have good knowledge about what is going on there and we are able to push through now particularly with the airlift capability, the drug capability, the undersea capability, we are able to do things now in this next phase. Reporter: How many new jobs of this created – how many in Tasmania? Scott Morrison: We will see an extra 100 jobs specific to the program itself, and that is largely driven out of Tasmania. This is where we base our thoughts and in Australia and overall there is 685 jobs that this is supporting, but as I said doesn’t include the jobs that are in places like all of the supply chains that sit around that, and it doesn’t include the new apprentices that will come on board to make this incredible equipment, and the skills that they will develop. We are not just building sleds, we are building work with capability here. We are building sovereign manufacturing capability here so there’s the jobs and the capability and what does that do? It drives your economy, gets unemployment down, gets wages moving, ensures that you got money flowing through small communities like this, so the knock-on effects of this I think are very, very positive. This is what a strong economic plan looks like for a strong economy which means a stronger future or Australia and Tasmania. By the way, we are getting an announcement from the Queensland premier in about half an hour. I’ll bring you the updates here. Scott Morrison: This program is going to create 685 direct jobs – 685 jobs. That’s directly in the $800m we’re putting in place and an increase of 100 on what we’re already doing right now. That doesn’t include the jobs here at this company or the supply chain or many other elements that go into supporting this program. So the jobs being created by Australia being one of the large’s leading Antarctic managers, and we’re one of the best in the world with this and we’re working with partners and we’re respected for doing that and that’s creating the sort of jobs and capability – if you can build sleds to go across Antarctica, you can pretty much build anything. Scott Morrison has turned quickly to chatting about the “building domestic manufacturing capacity in Australia” aspect of the Antarctic funding package: Sovereign capability in manufacturing is one of our five key points of the economic plan which is driving our economy forward. That plan is firstly to get taxes down, as we’ve been delivering, and cutting red tape. Secondly to ensure that we are investing in the skills and infrastructure that Australia needs to ensure our economy can grow. And those skills have been on display here. Apprentices coming through with world-leading skills and talents like here in Triabunna. Thirdly, to ensure we have affordable and reliable energy to ensure we can keep electricity prices down and manufacturers can continue to do what they’re doing. Prices have been down 8% over five years and 12% in the last two months. All of this has to come together with Australia being, fourthly, a leading data and digital economy, a top 10 data and digital economy by the year 2030 which enables all of those skills and opportunities. All of that, then, builds into our sovereign manufacturing capability. Scott Morrison: Today we are making an important announcement about Australia’s commitment to looking after Antarctica. This is a very important responsibility that Australia has. We are stewards of some of the most important and most sensitive environments anywhere in the world, whether it is up in far north Queensland on the Great Barrier Reef, where Sussan [Ley] and I were recently, or standing here in Tasmania announcing today $800m of additional investment as part of our science research and capability support program for what we’re doing to implement our Antarctica strategy. Both of these big initiatives are all about Australia’s outstanding reputation of being one of the most advanced scientific managers of these sensitive environments anywhere in the world. Can I just say, it’s so odd to hear Morrison call Australia advanced managers of any environment – especially a frozen one – after the government spent the last five years desperately trying to avoid committing to net zero emissions by 2050. The prime minister is speaking now from Tasmania, talking about this new Antarctica funding. Let’s have a listen in. A brilliant explainer below by Adam Morton and Peter Hannam on why a tech billionaire is trying to buy Australia’s dirtiest energy company AGL. Absolutely recommend you read it. Here are the opposition leader’s comments on the developments in Russia: Supermarket giant Coles has posted a 2% drop in half-year profit to $549m, hit by higher costs due to the Covid-19 disruptions and expenses of its transformation projects, reports AAP’s Prashant Mehra. Sales for the 27-week period to 2 January rose 1% to $20.79bn. Comparable sales also rose 1% during the year. Supermarket sales were up 1.1% to $18.02bn, while liquor sales rose 2.7% to $2bn. Online sales surged 46% to $1.5bn. But sales at its convenience stores Coles Express slid 8.5% to $578m after mobility restrictions due to lockdowns in the eastern states. The group said earnings were hit by $150m of Covid-related costs incurred during the half year, an increase of $45m from a year ago. It also invested $20m in relation to the Witron and Ocado transformation projects, while net costs increased by $13m as a result of lower earnings from property operations, higher insurance costs and an increased net loss from Coles’ 50% share of Flybuys. Meanwhile, trading has been mixed in the current quarter, Coles said. Supermarkets sales were elevated in early January due to the spread of the Omicron variant, before moderating later in the month. There has also been significant variation in sales between states, with Covid and floods in South Australia impacting sales, particularly in Western Australia. The company said it has already incurred Covid costs of $30m in January, although this has moderated in February. Coles has kept its fully franked interim dividend at 33 cents a share, similar to the level a year earlier. Australia has responded quickly to the Chinese government’s claims surrounding the laser incident last Thursday. A defence spokesperson says the Australian surveillance aircraft followed “a standard flight profile”: At the time of the lasing incident the RAAF P-8A Poseidon was approximately 7,700 metres from the People’s Liberation Army – Navy (PLA-N) vessel and was flying at an altitude of 457m. The closest the P-8 flew to the PLA-N vessel was approximately 3,900 metres. This is a standard flight profile for Royal Australian Air Force maritime patrol aircraft for a visual inspection of a surface vessel. The statement doesn’t specifically address Beijing’s claim that Australia dropped a sonobuoy in the water. China’s national defence ministry has given its first detailed response to the claims its warship pointed a laser at an Australian surveillance aircraft north of Australia with two claims of its own. A spokesperson for the ministry said that in the incident on 17 February, the Australian P-8A surveillance aircraft “approached the airspace over the PLA naval fleet with the nearest distance of only 4 kilometres”. He said that was “very close”. He also said the Australian aircraft had cast a sonar buoy into the water around the Chinese vessel. Such a device – also known as a sonobuoy – can be used to gather acoustic information and help detect submarines. An image released by the Chinese national defence ministry shows a triangular orange buoy in the water. In a statement posted on the ministry’s website, its spokesperson, Senior Colonel Tan Kefei, accuses the ADF of “spiteful and provocative actions” that would “undoubtedly result in misunderstanding and threaten the safety of aircraft, vessel and personnel of both sides”. China is firmly opposed to these actions by the Australia. The Australian government had said a PLA-N warship had used a laser to illuminate an Australian P-8A Poseidon surveillance aircraft on Thursday and that this activity was dangerous and was not professional. The Australian aircraft had been tracking two PLA-N vessels that were sailing east through the Arafura Sea, north of Australia. The Chinese national defence ministry statement does not address the claim of a use of a laser in any detail – it just says the PLA naval vessel “maintained safe, normative and professional operations” and accused the Australian side of spreading “false information” and making an “irresponsible claim”. It ends with China calling on Australia to “stop such provocative and risky actions” and “avoid negative effects on the relationship of the two countries and two militaries”. The Australian defence department has been contacted for a response. We’ll let you know here on the blog as soon as we have it. Vladimir Putin has ordered “peacekeeping operations” in Donetsk and Luhansk, the two territories in eastern Ukraine that he recognised as independent today. I’ll bring you some updates in relation to Australian reactions but if you want to follow the situation more closely you can also check out our dedicated Russia/Ukraine blog: But Sunrise host Natalie Barr pushes David Elliott, asking for clarification on who exactly had a problem with the agreement on Sunday night. (The union says it was the government, btw.) Who went back to the commissioner and did not like it? The government or the union? Elliott: That is now a matter before the commission so I will not provide a running commentary ... Barr: Is important because there were people who could not get to school and parents who could not get to work and I think they deserve an answer. Did you go back or did the union? The union says it was you. Elliott: I think what the commuters and people of NSW want is us to have a swift resolution which is why within the hour I will be meeting with [union secretary] Alex in Parliament House to go through the final detail of his concerns and his side of the story, and that is why is it called a dispute. We have the union saying one thing and Sydney Trains saying another and I just want the truth and I want to make sure we can reconcile whatever differences we have and make sure we do not continue with this disruption. Now that we’ve heard from the head of the rail workers’ union about the Sydney train dispute, it’s time to hear what NSW transport minister has to say. David Elliott was speaking on Sunrise earlier and he seems to again be distancing himself from the decision to shut down the train services: There was an agreement and then on Sunday night there was a dispute over the interpretation of that agreement and they could not reconcile the dispute. So there was an operational decision made by the operators of Sydney Trains that dispute meant that the welfare and safety of commuters would be at risk and so, therefore, they decided to suspend services yesterday. Now, am I happy with that? Absolutely not. It was an operational decision by the operators so suggestions that I somehow signed off on it at 1am yesterday is false. These are operational decisions, right ... once politicians get involved in operations, things go wrong. Australia’s foreign affairs minister Marise Payne has condemned Russia’s declaration that separatist regions in eastern Ukrainian are independent states. She labelled the assertion a “violation of international law”. Labor putting a bit of a dampener on the Coalition’s promises of increased Antarctic research equipment this morning: A majority of voters see China and the bilateral relationship as a complex issue to be managed rather than a threat to be confronted, and more voters trust Labor than the Coalition to manage that complexity, the latest Guardian Essential poll suggests. After a bare-knuckle political week in which the prime minister, Scott Morrison, branded Labor’s deputy leader a “Manchurian candidate” and declared the ALP unequal to the task of managing the regional threat environment, the latest poll of 1,089 respondents suggests Australians hold a nuanced view of the Australia-China relationship. While last week’s partisan confrontation played out in stark binary terms, the poll shows 61% of respondents characterise the bilateral relationship with Beijing as complex, and only 26% see it as a threat to be confronted. You can read the full report below: Alex Claassens: We worked until late last night to try to get a resolution and today we are running trains and we will make sure they run safely, and we will work with the government today as well, we will meet with the transport minister today and try and see what we can do. NSW secretary of the Rail, Tram and Bus Union Alex Claassens has disputed the state government’s claim that the rail workers’ planned industrial action (basically refusing to do any duties that weren’t directly assigned to them and not working any overtime) would have made the rail system unsafe: We would never do anything to jeopardise the safety of the network, so let’s start there – so that was a rubbish story that had no basis in any fact. But the reality is, we have been taking industrial action since September. We had a range of different industrial actions and this time was no different. We notified them two weeks in advance, gave them all the industrial actions we were going to take, and there is one difference in this point. We included a new one whereby we have to give 70 days’ notice, and they then alleged at the last minute, despite the fact we gave them two weeks’ notice, they dragged us down to the commission on Saturday night, we hammered out the details and said, we want to go to work on Monday morning as normal, we will run normal services just like … since Christmas, the weekend timetable with some enhanced working, and we were prepared to do that. We signed an agreement with them on the Saturday night, we all thought, ‘You beauty, it’s all good,’ and no. Sunday night we got a phone call saying ‘We want to drag you back into the commission, cancel your action, we don’t think it can work.’ We disputed that, had a conversation in front of the commissioner. We walked away and the commission said, ‘We will hear you on Monday morning, the trains will run.’ We walked away happy. I went to bed on Sunday night and woke up Monday morning like everybody else and went, what the hell? Somebody had made a decision to pull the service. We are as angry and frustrated as everybody else out there today. Jumping back to the Sydney train situation for a moment and the Rail, Tram and Bus Union state secretary, Alex Claassens, is discussing the return of limited train services with ABC News Breakfast: Apparently, where we ended up late last night was we negotiated an outcome where trains will run today. We finally managed to get the management team to see some common sense and today they will be operating a service roughly around the half-hour to 15-minute mark. They will then try and improve on that during the day. We will work together as much as we can to try to get as many trains on the tracks as we can, and you can imagine our disappointment yesterday morning when we got up like everybody else in Sydney to realise some genius had made a decision to cancel all of our train services. Victorians will be able to return to the office and masks will only remain in some settings from 11.59pm Friday. Health minister Martin Foley on Tuesday announced that the recommendation to work or study from home will be scrapped and masks will only required in the following settings: People on public transport, in taxis and rideshare, on planes, and indoors at an airport People working or visiting hospitals, and indoor areas at care facilities Workers in hospitality, retail, the court system, and justice and correctional facilities Students in year 3 or above at primary school, and workers at early childhood centres and primary schools (masks can be removed in secondary school) People working indoors at an event with more than 30,000 people attending In special circumstances, such as if you have Covid-19 or are a close contact and you’re leaving home Masks are recommended for other workers serving or facing members of the public, such as receptionists. The remaining restrictions on elective surgery will also lift on Monday 28 February. Public hospitals will be able to resume all surgery, with capacity to be based on an individual assessment of staff availability and Covid-19 demands. Private hospitals will be able to resume up to 100 per cent of pre-Covid activity. Foley also extended the deadline for some workers required to receive three doses of the Covid-19 vaccine: All education workers have until 25 March to be up to date with their vaccination. Workers who are recent international arrivals will have a new third dose deadline of four weeks from the date of their arrival, provided they have evidence of a future vaccine booking. Workers whose temporary medical exemption (eg, because they had Covid-19) has expired will have a new third dose deadline of two weeks after the expiry of the medical exemption. Fully vaccinated workers who aren’t yet eligible for a third dose will have a third dose deadline of three months and two weeks from when they had their second dose. Penny Wong has skirted around the question of if she thinks it likely that, if Russia were to invade Ukraine, China could use this distraction to launch their own invasion into Taiwan. Well, one of the key drivers around why the opposition should be resolute in respect of Ukraine is because we understand all countries the potential of permitting or being silent while a country engages in these sorts of actions – the potential for risk in our region. It does have implications for the world if a member of the international community simply violates international law and engages in unilateral changes to borders or to the status quo. The invasion or an act of aggression against Ukraine would be a unilateral change to the status quo. One of the reasons we have had since world war two, and one of the most peaceful, prosperous periods in human history is, in general, there has been adherence to international law and a recognition that countries don’t simply invade each other without justification. Host Patricia Karvelas: So you’re saying if this does occur, that you do think that it changes. It sets a precedent or it sets a new standard and you think China may exploit it. Wong: What I was saying is, in the end, the peace is best kept by ensuring countries recognise and respect the status quo. And in respect of Ukraine, that is very clear what needs to occur which is Russia needs to desist from the sorts of aggression we have seen. So you might have heard, but things are really starting to ramp up on the Russian/Ukrainian border, with Vladimir Putin saying he will formally recognise the independence of separatist areas in eastern Ukraine. Australia’s shadow foreign affairs minister, Penny Wong, is speaking with ABC radio now about what this could mean for Australia. She says Labor will stand behind the government in condemning any Russian acts of war in the area: It is a blatant violation of the territorial integrity of Ukraine and it is a violation of the Minsk agreements. And this is why the international community have to be united and have to be clear. There is no justification, no matter what Mr Putin says, for a decision to engage in conflict, and a decision such as that would be, as I think President Biden has pointed out, a decision to enter into and take responsibility for the catastrophic and needless war. So we would join with not only the government, Australian government, but the EU, many European governments and the United States in being very clear in our view about these being a violation of international law, and not providing any justification for conflict in eastern Ukraine. Here is the full statement for those who are interested: Some news from Melbourne. The mask mandate will be lifted from 11.59pm Friday, with the work-from-home recommendation to end as well. Sussan Ley was asked how much “much of today’s announcement is about bolstering Australia’s strategic interests” in Antarctica. She beats around the bush a little bit but basically, it’s all about China: There have been critical times over the years when we have needed to step up and lead. This is one of those times. If you think that to Menzies, the continent could have been carved up after the cold war. Menzies made Australia a founding member of the Antarctic treaty system. If you think of the Madrid protocol 30 years ago, countries wanted to mine Antarctica. This is a moment where we’re stepping up and leading and within the Antarctic treaty system. It’s the science that comes to the fore for environmental protection and management, both in terms of the extraordinary nature of this fragile continent and what we should, as a globe be doing to protect it, but also in the strategic investments that we make. Australia has always been a lead player within the Antarctic treaty system. When I’ve sat down at the table recently with other countries I’ve seen that. I’ve seen the strategic importance of our leadership in science and environmental protection. And the key to the future of the region is the Antarctic treaty system. And yes, there have been pressures on that recently by countries that have sought to overfish, to ignore catch limits, and not to respect the really strong push for a marine protected area that’s been going on now for a decade, that I’m very much keen to see. Speaking of Antarctica, federal environment minister Sussan Ley has just appeared on ABC radio to explain this new research funding for the icy continent. She is explaining what this new equipment will allow our researchers to do that we can’t already do now: [It will give us the] extraordinary new ability to map, to chart, to penetrate the continent. Remember our stations are around the coastline at the moment, but we don’t have the reach into the interior that we should have. Extra funding that supports our state-of-the-art Antarctic icebreaker to focus on more scientific voyages, marine science, the krill, the fishing. The contribution of the Southern Ocean to climate science will be stepped up through this investment, and think to of our fleet of drones that will fly over Antarctica and map looks down below. Think about new medium-range helicopters that will be launched allowing even more reach over the 42% of a continent that we have custodianship over. Good morning everyone, it’s Matilda Boseley here with you this morning, and by golly it’s already a big one. Let’s start our day in Sydney, where limited train services will run this morning after the network was shut down yesterday amid an industrial dispute between the New South Wales government and a transport union. After the rail union ruled that workers would only do tasks as they were set and would refuse to work overtime, Transport for NSW cancelled trains for Monday, saying it was impossible to safely operate services with union bans in place affecting rosters. Then last night NSW transport minister David Elliot said reduced services would return across all lines on the Sydney Trains network from 5am on Tuesday, running at a minimum 30-minute frequency: Sydney Trains encourage commuters who typically rely on the rail network to find alternative travel options, if possible ... These limited services are there to support essential workers and commuters who have no other options to get to where they need to go. Now heading (much) further south, the prime minister, Scott Morrison, will today announce $804m for strategic and scientific programs in Antarctica over the next decade as the government flags its intention to increase Australia’s role in the increasingly contested region. The package will include $136m for charting activities, mobile stations and traverse capability, and $109m for a new drone fleet, autonomous vehicles and medium lift helicopters. Basically, this will let Australia map “inaccessible and fragile areas of east Antarctic”, and set up a new “Antarctic eye” program to parts of the continent. The helicopters, which have a range of 550km, will also allow researchers to travel to parts of the continent that have not previously been accessible. It will come as a surprise to no one that this actually has a lot to do with China – specifically about making it harder for it to make a territorial claim on the southern continent some time in the future. OK! With that, why don’t we jump right into the day!Regional Australia has experienced record levels of growth across housing and rental markets in the last 12 months, according to a new report, as locals say the rising demand has priced them out. NAB’s Regional Migration Impacts on Property Report, released on Tuesday, found “the continued flow of new arrivals into regional areas has placed an unprecedented level of upward pressure on property values, with many locations now experiencing dwelling values at new record levels”. House prices rose most sharply in the southern highlands and Shoalhaven region in New South Wales, with an increase of over 38% in the 12 months to the end of January 2022, according to the report. Julie Rynski, an executive at NAB for regional and agribusiness, said “underlining the unprecedented level of growth across the past 12 months, 24 out of Australia’s 25 largest non-capital city regions have experienced double-digit annual growth for houses”. The report found the median dwelling value across the combined regions jumped over 26% in the year to January 2022, compared to 21.3% across capital cities for the same period. It said strong buyer demand continued to “far outweigh” supply levels. Rynski said it was a similar story in the rental market. The highest surge in housing rental values was seen in the Murray region of NSW around Albury-Wodonga which was up almost 25% on the same time last year. Emily Lightfoot, an accountant and single mother in Albury, said she was lucky her rental accomodation had not gone up since 2019 but she feared that if she was to lose the property she’s in, she’d be left homeless. “I have observed other people in the area who have lived here their whole lives becoming homeless,” she said. Lightfoot said, although the influx of people from Melbourne and Sydney during Covid had exacerbated the situation, the problem was not new. When she left a relationship in 2017 and had to secure her own rental accommodation, she was told the waiting list in the area for public housing was 20 years. Due to health problems, Lightfoot relies on Centrelink for living expenses, while she runs a small accounting business to cover her registration and insurance costs. “If I lose my accommodation, I’ll lose my business as well, as I have nowhere to set up my laptop and photocopier,” Lightfoot said. She said rents had “gone through the roof”, which had seen locals pushed out as people from the capital cities with more buying power were securing properties by offering to pay more rent than advertised. Lightfoot said the issue was drawing more attention as it’s now not just affecting low-income people but also middle Australia. Before Covid she said it was not something that would have come up in casual conversation but now it was a common topic to discuss “the number of people camping down by the river” The NAB report also noted that rental prices on the Gold Coast, where there had been record low vacancy rates of 0.6%, had jumped by nearly 20%, while the southern part of Western Australia’s outback had experienced a 16% increase “heavily linked with the booming mining sector”. Sign up to receive Guardian Australia’s fortnightly Rural Network email newsletter The report also showed that on a local government area basis, the Byron shire on the NSW north coast had the highest median house value of any regional LGA, with an average price of nearly $1,850,000, an increase of 30.2%. Houses in the Kiama LGA, also in NSW, recorded the greatest increase, with a 43.9% uplift in the past 12 months. “High-population coastal centres close to capital cities continue to be the main destinations for capital-city dwellers making a regional move,” the report said. Looking ahead, the NAB report anticipated the pace of migration of capital city residents to regional areas would slow. “While the affordability, lifestyle and strong infrastructure will continue to pull more capital city residents to the regions, the reintroduction of overseas travel, with borders reopening … and the willingness of many to travel domestically also, is expected to see a moderation in regional migration,” the report said.I turned 50 in November and am very much in love with my 59-year-old girlfriend of two years. We have no arguments or stress – outside of one issue. In the past eight months or so, our sex life has come to a complete halt. At least three times a week she suggests we have sex, but I cannot stay aroused for long. I may be overthinking things, lacking confidence or simply experiencing fear or anxiety that I didn’t before. (I am a little overweight, due to spending more time at home because of the pandemic.) At first, our sex was awesome; I could hold out for at least three of her orgasms. But then I began experiencing premature ejaculation and she began to have some problems too. Now that these are resolved, I am struggling maintain an erection. I thought the problem was physical, but I can masturbate for as long and as many times in a day as I want. It could have something to do with routine preparation; I think I need more spontaneity. Announcing, then showering, waiting, getting into bed and learning the rules or limitations, are all adding up. I am struggling and I don’t want her to think I am not attracted to her. Relax. As a couple, you are suffering from a “hot potato syndrome” – so called because one person experiences symptoms, then as they are recovering the other starts having issues. The pattern can repeat endlessly. Have a physical and psychological checkup – premature ejaculation can be the result of a physiological and/or a psychological problem, or a side-effect of medication. It is important to rule out such possibilities or, if necessary, seek treatment. Regarding your aversion to planning – it is OK to express this. Have a proper talk about everything: no blame, no shame, just affirming what is good and what could make it even better. Pamela Stephenson Connolly is a US-based psychotherapist who specialises in treating sexual disorders. If you would like advice from Pamela on sexual matters, send us a brief description of your concerns to private.lives@theguardian.com (please don’t send attachments). Each week, Pamela chooses one problem to answer, which will be published online. She regrets that she cannot enter into personal correspondence. Submissions are subject to our terms and conditions: see gu.com/letters-terms. Comments on this piece are premoderated to ensure discussion remains on topics raised by the writer. Please be aware there may be a short delay in comments appearing on the site.The offensive, we are told, will take many forms. The first sign may well be a cyber-attack knocking out the power grid and internet, jamming mobile phone networks. Well-funded paramilitaries within Ukraine’s borders will be encouraged to create as much disorder as possible. There will be a blitz of propaganda, misinformation and false-flag operations. And then – finally – the blood sacrifice: the trained young men and women prepared to lay down their bodies for greater Russia. Perhaps we all got a taste of how this might play out on a much smaller scale on Thursday night. As a distraught Kamila Valieva left the ice after a disastrous skate that would cost her a medal in the Olympic women’s competition, the first person to greet her was her coach, Eteri Tutberidze. “Why did you let it go?” she screeched at Valieva in disbelief. “Explain it to me. Why? Why did you stop fighting?” For all the deep, voyeuristic discomfort of the exchange, Valieva’s treatment also felt jarringly at odds with the solidarity and belligerence that Russian officials had displayed for much of the past week as their gold medal hope was embroiled in a scandal over a failed doping test. How could Russia fight so vehemently for Valieva only to disown her so publicly after the event? But, of course, that was the difference. Before, Valieva was a potential gold medal for Russia, an asset worthy of state-level protection. Now she was nothing. The motherland thanks you for your sacrifice. But it has no further use for you. Next. And, of course, there will be a next. If history is any guide, then it is probably safe to assume we have seen the last of Valieva in Olympic competition. This is the fourth successive Winter Games in which none of the Russian figure skating team from the previous Olympics made it to the next. Such is the depth and Darwinist savagery of the country’s skating programme, the lust for fresh and unspoilt young talent, the cheapness of human dignity and health, that by the time of Milan 2026 there will already be more Valievas, more Anna Shcherbakovas, more Alexandra Trusovas. For her part Valieva remains perhaps the only blameless party here. It does not feel remotely controversial to point out that a 15-year-old girl taking part in an enormous state-run sporting programme might not necessarily enjoy complete autonomy over the substances going into her body, any more than a soldier gets to choose the city he invades. Indeed, it is probably more helpful to think of her as the sporting equivalent of the Russian men and women currently crouched behind the Ukrainian border in their thousands: young and fit, in the prime of life and yet utterly expendable, live meat waiting to be flung into somebody else’s war. As the world’s diplomats and geopolitical experts peer into the fog trying to divine Russia’s intentions, perhaps sport offers a handy paradigm for how the country has chosen to behave on the global stage. In many ways sport’s governing bodies have been grappling for years with what much of the wider world is only now encountering: the challenge of corralling and constraining a power that shows no inclination of playing by the same basic rules and norms as everyone else. From the Sochi Olympics to the 2018 football World Cup to the massive state-sponsored Olympic doping programme that Russia continues to insist never existed, sport is a useful prototype for the rules of engagement that the Putin regime is now so dramatically bringing to the battlefield. International organisations, whether Fifa or Wada or the International Olympic Committee, are only as strong as their weakest link. Inconvenient narratives and insubordinate individuals can simply be denied, dismissed, discredited: witness how the British journalists who first broke the story of Valieva’s positive test claim they have faced a barrage of abuse and even death threats online. And, ultimately, the ends will always justify the means. There are two ways, I suppose, of looking at all this. Perhaps the impotence and indecision of western powers in the face of Russian aggression is an indication that standing up to Putin’s gangster state is easier said than done. If Nato cannot agree on an effective way of curbing Putin, then is it really fair to expect as much of the IOC president, Thomas Bach, a 68-year-old former fencer? Yet by the same token sport is irredeemably part of the greater enterprise here, the little unpunished broken windows that have persuaded the Kremlin the whole compound is up for grabs. In another saner world it would be appropriate to ask whether any of this is still fit for purpose. Clearly figure skating has some deep-seated ethical issues to deal with here, from its exploitation of young women on the very brink of adolescence to its controversial judging system to its history of eating disorders. “With each gram of weight, a gram of laziness is added,” Tutberidze said in a 2021 interview, and one wonders if a more enlightened sport might have considered restraining her rather than revering her for years as a legend. All the mood music coming out of Beijing suggests the IOC will instead rattle the sabres for a few days and then do very little. By the time Valieva’s doping case is finally heard, the world will have moved on to other matters and so will Russia. After all, there are always new theatres, new frontiers: new wars to fight and new bodies to fight them with.No one expects to see pastoral scenes at Finsbury Park, north London, when they’ve just emerged from the underground. But there it was last Christmas: a huge billboard depicting the English countryside as one big meadow – a grassy landscape devoid of people, buildings or roads, imprinted with the words “Explore the life that could be …” Advertising Rightmove, the UK’s largest property-listings website, this was an invitation to Covid-weary commuters to opt out of stressful city life and run for the hills. The pressures of lockdown life and the realities of working from home have been inducing many to move away from cities to smaller towns and villages. By the end of 2020, the words “detached”, “rural” and “secluded” were Zoopla’s fourth, fifth and sixth most common search terms. Estate agents have been reporting this phenomenon throughout the UK since mid 2020, and the same is true across the EU and in North America too. More recently, however, evidence of rural buyers’ remorse has emerged. Dissatisfied customers complain about the need to drive everywhere. They miss coffee bars and deplore the fact that everyone in the village sends their kids to private school. But what were they expecting? Could it be that they fell for the vision of rural life offered by sites such as Rightmove: fresh air, great views, unlimited access to nature? The English countryside isn’t a blank slate for restless urbanites; nor should it be reduced to an amenity for leisure and recreation. It is a complex and real place, suffused in history, politics, power. Understanding this would be the first step in making it more accessible and less mysterious. In his book about the toxic politics of English nationalism, New Model Island, Alex Niven writes, “the great divide in English life is between the cities and everywhere else”. This is partly a matter of demography and the political choices associated with an older, whiter population. In 2020, the most prominent age group in rural areas was 50 to 59; in urban areas the corresponding figure was 25 to 34. Rural constituencies are much more likely to be represented by Conservative MPs. There is less ethnic diversity outside major towns and cities, and marginally more people voted to leave the EU in rural areas than the national average. Then there’s the question of access to the land. The Rightmove billboard depicts miles of open country, but as the campaign group Right to Roam points out, the public is excluded from more than 90% of the English countryside and almost 100% of rivers. Meanwhile, English farmland has been turned into a lucrative investment opportunity, particularly since the Tories decided to waive UK inheritance tax on agricultural property in 1984. Much of the English countryside has already been sold off as a result. The absence of animals or any sign of cultivation in the billboard is indicative of the crisis in farming too. Regardless of where you live, it is very hard to understand the politics of agriculture today, especially post-Brexit. Little of what we eat or buy from supermarkets is wholly produced in the UK, and farmers are blamed wholesale for wrecking the environment and destroying wildlife. One solution to these problems is to listen to the land itself. Just one single field – even the one in the billboard – can contain clues that help to explain the urban-rural divide that persists today. Leaving aside ancient or prehistoric patterns of human settlement, often visible to the naked eye, the question of ownership is the first key to unlocking the history of a particular patch of ground. I grew up in a small village in north-west Hampshire and returned to investigate a remnant of heathland a mile or two outside. I was intrigued by the idea that it had once been common land. Having discovered that it was part of a larger area enclosed by a wealthy Scottish family from a neighbouring parish in 1818, it took one click to learn that they had made their fortune from owning a sugar plantation in St Kitts in the Caribbean. The colonial countryside evidently means more than prestigious stately homes. War has also shaped local landscapes over centuries in ways that are quickly forgotten. The patch of land was handed over to a local farmer in 1942 after the Ministry of Agriculture ordered the requisition of unproductive land for cultivating food. In 1991, on the farmer’s death, local residents fought a vigorous campaign to restore its status as common land. However, the field was sold to a private buyer after the government, according to press reports at the time, deemed that “the maximum amount of money should be obtained from the sale of land of this type”. However, almost more surprising is the fact that there are still small patches of common land where villagers are entitled to gather firewood. Looking over the hill, I discovered further relics of a feudal era. Many of the large agricultural estates in the area are owned by wealthy investors, some of whom have had very colourful pasts. In the late 1970s a mystery man called Tim Landon acquired the whole village of Faccombe, about a mile farther east as the crow flies. He was known locally as “The Brigadier” in a reference to his shadowy military connections to Oman. He had supported Sultan Qaboos as he ousted his father, Said, in a well-planned coup. Landon then stayed on as adviser to Qaboos, a service for which he was handsomely rewarded. These fragments of history show connections between rural England and elsewhere: that is part of their value. The Rightmove billboard is insidious because it promotes the fantasy that the country’s unbuilt environments are there to be colonised – ripe for property developers, reserved for nature lovers or simply a haven for those who like a quiet life. It’s never been more important to challenge the commodification of the English countryside, and the way to start is to understand exactly how this process has happened. Vron Ware is the author of Return of a Native: Learning from the LandA United Australia party candidate has deleted a tweet about his family link to former prime minister Joseph Lyons after requests for proof from Lyons’ relatives. The UAP candidate for Bendigo, Elijah Suares, tweeted earlier this month that “former UAP prime minister, Joseph Lyons, is my great-grandmother’s uncle”, before drawing a parallel between Lyons’ depression-era policies and the current pandemic response. He has since told Guardian Australia that his connection to Lyons is through a step-relative. Clive Palmer’s UAP has consistently attempted to assert links to Lyons and the original United Australia party of the 1930s and 1940s, a strategy criticised by surviving family members and dismissed by experts as “ridiculous”. When contacted for proof of his claim, Suares said he was not “blood related” and that it was his step relative who had the connection to Lyons. “I am definitely not saying that I am related, but she is. It’s just a very amazing thing that she is in our family and claims to be related.” Lyons’ great-grandson David Austin said his family had searched a database of more than 11,000 known relatives of Lyons and found nothing confirming Suares’ was a relative. “I can say considering our exhaustive family tree, there is no record of this candidate,” Austin said, while emphasising he was not acting as a spokesperson for the whole family. After being alerted to the claim by the Guardian, Austin tweeted Suares asking for proof. “As a grandson of Joseph Lyons, could you please tell me who your great-grandmother is??” Suares said he attempted to contact the family after the concerns were raised on Tuesday. His tweet was subsequently deleted. Suares said he had no reason to doubt what he had been told about him about his family’s relation to Lyons. But he told the Guardian he deleted the tweet because he did not want to put Lyon’s family in a difficult position, similar to that they faced in 2019, when other UAP candidates claimed relation to Lyons. “Knowing what they’ve been through in 2019 is basically what I would not want to happen to them,” He said would happily work with them to understand where this fits into their family tree. He said he understood why the family had questions about his claim. “I’m happy that they questioned it because obviously it’s something I was unknown about until two weeks ago, when I posted it.” The UAP’s website continues to use Lyons’ picture and biography on its website, under a page titled: “Our history – United Australia party prime ministers.” Former prime ministers Robert Menzies and William Hughes are also included on the page. None of the trio have any link to the modern iteration of the UAP, registered in 2018, and the Australian Electoral Commission had told the ABC that there is no continuity of registration between the 1930s UAP and the current party. The UAP did not respond to requests for comment. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning A similar strategy was adopted during the 2019 campaign, frustrating surviving members of the Lyons family. Lyons’ great-granddaughter Wendy Lacey told SBS News in 2019 that the family were “appalled” by the party’s strategy, saying there was no connection between the original UAP, considered the precursor to the modern Liberal party, and the new party. The UAP is embarking on a huge ad spend, estimated to have cost $31m so far across print, digital, radio and social media. Some of those ads have spruiked a connection to Lyons.The UK government has recorded the first monthly budget surplus since the start of the coronavirus pandemic, despite a weaker than expected January performance as rising inflation pushed up debt interest costs. The Office for National Statistics said public sector net borrowing was in surplus of £2.9bn last month – the first month in which income outstripped expenditure since January 2020. January is typically a net positive month for the public finances because of the timing of self-assessed income tax payments. Borrowing last month was £5.4bn less than in January 2021, when the third national lockdown affected the UK economy. Despite the return to the black, the surplus was still smaller than that recorded in January 2020 before the onset of Covid-19. City economists had also forecast a bigger boost for the public finances of £3.5bn. The figures come as rising inflation pushes up the government’s debt servicing costs, fuelled by a surge in the retail prices index to which index-linked gilts are pegged. The ONS said accrued interest payments on central government debt were £6.1bn in January, the highest for that month since records began in April 1997. Alongside rising inflationary pressure, the record rise in government borrowing during the pandemic has pushed up the stock of national debt to levels unseen since the early 1960s. The ONS said the national debt – the total amount owed by the state accumulated over the years – was £2.3tn, or about 94.9% of gross domestic product (GDP). Rishi Sunak said the rise in the national debt and higher rates of inflation were putting additional pressure on the public finances. “Keeping the public finances on a sustainable path is crucial so we can continue helping the British people when needed, without burdening future generations with high debt repayments,” he said. Economists said central government receipts were stronger than anticipated by the Office for Budget Responsibility, the Treasury’s tax and spending watchdog. Borrowing between April and January 2021 was £139bn, below the OBR’s year-to-date forecast of £156bn. Michal Stelmach, a senior economist at KPMG UK, said he expected the OBR would revise down its borrowing projection for the 2021-22 financial year by about £20bn, although much of that would be taken up by the government’s £9bn package of energy support measures. “The underlying picture for borrowing in January is better than today’s data suggest. About 20% of taxpayers have not submitted their self-assessment tax return on time this year, taking advantage of the extended window set by HMRC.”Carlos Corberán leans forward ever so slightly, pinches his thumb and index finger together and begins to make a rather compelling case. He is fielding a question about Huddersfield’s players being weighed before training and whether his meticulous ways were inspired by two years working alongside Marcelo Bielsa at Leeds. For Corberán, a perfectionist and almost obsessive head coach, there is no such thing as a marginal gain. “There aren’t any small details,” he says. “Every action can be the key one. We don’t know which one is going to be the key one. We have to place the same importance on every one.” Corberán rattles off a few examples – “driving one more yard can be the difference between allowing the opponent to counterattack, because you lose the ball, or getting past a defender and passing to a teammate to score” – and cites Danny Ward’s hat-trick – and winning – goal at Reading last month when the striker won an aerial duel five seconds before blasting a shot into the top corner. Ward opened the scoring in victory at Championship leaders Fulham on Saturday and after 45 minutes in Corberán’s company it is easy to understand why Huddersfield are flying. They are fifth in the league and face Nottingham Forest for a place in the quarter-finals of the FA Cup. First, however, they will attempt to extend their unbeaten run to 16 matches at home to Cardiff on Wednesday. It is 4.15pm and there is a moody sky at Huddersfield’s Canalside training base and though the pitches behind Corberán are empty, he is at his desk fine-tuning preparations. Corberán has been known to challenge his players, be it arranging meetings hours after training, not adhering to regular days off, or wanting them to be as lean as humanly possible. His approach appears to be working. “Training has to help us create habits,” he says. “For me, the moment of the game is maybe the moment where they have to think less but play more. But play the right way. And to play the right way, you need to process, you need to work, you need to analyse, and you need to understand the game situations that allow you when you’re on the pitch to just play. “Everything that we want to watch on a pitch at the weekend, we need to see and watch on the pitch on the training ground every single day. For me, football is a question of habit.” Corberán is as he is on the touchline – intense and animated – and training tends to be at full tilt too, especially during “Murderball”, a gruelling drill synonymous with Bielsa where fouls are allowed to run and the ball effectively never goes out of play. Corberán has a doctorate in football, completing a thesis on the philosophy of Juanma Lillo, an assistant to Pep Guardiola at Manchester City, and his hunger to improve often results in long days. “I don’t like to go home with work to do. I like to be at the training ground until I finish … it can be 7pm, 8pm. We think we have a big opportunity and we want to try to use it the best we can.” Home remains in Leeds, where he was appointed Under-23s coach in July 2017 – after spells in Cyprus, Saudi Arabia and in his homeland, Spain, with Villarreal – and later first-team coach under Bielsa, who once said he valued Corberán’s opinion more than his own. “It is one of the few things – or maybe the only thing – that I don’t agree with him on. I cannot accept these types of words. It is not true.” They would agree on the importance of humility, though. “In life our ego can kill us more than help us,” Corberán says. “Football challenges you every single day. Every time you are facing a challenge, you have the opportunity to grow and to add new knowledge. So I hope that today I will be a worse coach than I am tomorrow,” he says, smiling. Huddersfield’s head of football operations and former academy manager, Leigh Bromby, a former Leeds defender, was impressed with Corberán’s side in an Under-23s game between the teams and moved for him in July 2020 after sacking Danny Cowley. Almost five years in England is rubbing off on Corberán. “When I was in Spain I was having dinner around 10pm but now I am more British, around 8pm,” smiles the 38-year-old, who was born in Cheste, near Valencia. “This country is very cosmopolitan. You have Italian, Japanese, Spanish restaurants – everything. I found a place that has paella, which is typical of my city, so I’m not missing anything.” The starting lineup at Fulham was assembled for little more than £1m, with the goalkeeper Lee Nicholls, Matty Pearson, who has been given the nickname “Keighley Cannavaro”, Ollie Turton and Tom Lees, all of whom joined on frees last summer, key to improving a team who finished 20th with the division’s worst defensive record last season. Sorba Thomas, for whom they paid a modest fee, is arguably the star of a team led by the midfielder Lewis O’Brien, who progressed through the academy. Huddersfield are not stacked with household names but shrewd recruits. “They have created one culture,” Corberán says. “I remember in some of my speeches last year before the game I was talking a lot but this year I’m listening to my players before we all go to the pitch. They are ready to compete for their teammates every time.”A police officer involved in the attempt to arrest Kumanjayi Walker before his death has told a court he was “surprised” other officers had not used their guns when the Warlpiri man threatened them with an axe during a seperate incident days earlier. Remote Sgt Adam Eberl was the other officer in the room when Constable Zachary Rolfe shot dead Walker on 9 November 2019 in the remote community of Yuendumu, about 300km from Alice Springs. On Tuesday, Eberl started his evidence in Rolfe’s murder trial in the Northern Territory supreme court. He said that on the day of the shooting, when he, Rolfe, and two other officers were preparing to depart Alice Springs, the group watched footage of a previous incident involving Walker which had occurred on 6 November 2019. During that incident, Walker rushed at two Yuendumu-based officers with a small axe. The court has previously heard this incident was one of several factors that led to the Yuendumu deployment of Rolfe and the other officers from the Immediate Response Team (IRT), which had been trained to arrest dangerous targets. Eberl said that, after watching the footage, he remarked to the other officers he was surprised the two local police who had been threatened with the axe had not used their firearm. Later in his evidence, he clarified that “I said, ‘Wow, I’m surprised they didn’t use the firearm’.” Eberl said he was not angry at what had occurred during the axe incident. He could not recall Rolfe making any comment about it, or mentioning what he would do if threatened with a weapon by Walker. On Tuesday, the court was again shown footage from Eberl’s body-worn camera of the moments immediately before the shooting. It shows Eberl and Rolfe entering a property known as House 511 at about 7.20pm. Eberl agreed he suspected Walker was inside, because of information police had been given by community members only minutes earlier, but said he and Rolfe had not had any discussion about what they would do if Walker confronted them with a weapon. Eberl described the lighting in House 511 as very poor, and said he switched on his torch. Soon after the officers entered they saw Walker walking towards them. Eberl was asked a series of questions by Philip Strickland SC, the crown prosecutor, about his recollections of these moments immediately before the shooting. Eberl told the court he noticed Walker was trying to walk past the officers, but he did not notice him putting his hands in his pockets. He agreed he had been trained to ask suspects to show them their hands, but that he did not do it on this occasion, and that he had been trained that weapons could be hidden in hats. Eberl said that at this time he did not consider Walker to be dangerous, did not consider withdrawing from the house and setting a cordon or the need to put distance between himself or Walker, and did not consider grabbing Walker by an arm or both arms or the need to gain physical control of him. The officers were about 2m from the only door to the property when they came across Walker, Eberl said. Strickland told the court in the prosecution opening earlier this month that soon after the officers confronted Walker, he stabbed Rolfe with a pair of scissors. Eberl has not yet given evidence about the critical moments in which Rolfe shot Walker, and his evidence is expected to continue on Wednesday. Strickland says Rolfe then shot Walker once while he and Eberl were standing about a metre away. This shot is not subject to any charges. Prosecutors say Walker then fell or was wrestled to the ground by Eberl, and the pair struggled on a mattress which was on the floor of House 511. The prosecution alleges Rolfe then walked across the room to the pair, placed his left hand on Eberl’s back, extended his right hand until the barrel of his handgun was within 15cm of Walker’s body, and pulled the trigger twice more. It is the second and third shots which are subject to the murder charge. Rolfe has pleaded not guilty, with one of his barristers, David Edwardson QC, saying the officer acted within his training as he feared for his safety and that of Eberl when he fired the shots. Strickland has previously told the court the prosecution alleges Eberl, a larger man than Walker, was in control of him at the time Rolfe fired the second and third shots, a claim that the defence disputes. Eberl was not questioned on Tuesday about wrestling with Walker, but gave evidence that he had more than a decade of experience in a variety of martial arts disciplines including jujitsu, kung fu and aikido, that he was 184cm tall, and that at the time of the shooting he weighed about 95kg.“I had started on a voyage of discovery, only to find that it was I who was being discovered,” writes Tété-Michel Kpomassie in this memoir of his time as “an African in Greenland”, first published in 1981 and now reissued by Penguin Modern Classics in a translation by James Kirkup. His discovery begins, as many do, in a book. As a teenager in 1950s Togo, one of Africa’s smallest countries, he finds The Eskimos from Greenland to Alaska, stocked by accident in an evangelical bookshop. The world of “the little men of the north” seems exotic to a boy brought up in a country where a python was wound around his naked body to cure a head injury. “In that land of ice, at least, there would be no snakes!” He returns to the bookshop to buy a map of the world. Kpomassie is a young man of resourcefulness and energy. He feels “the call of the cold” in 1958, aged 17, and spends years working his way up the west coast of Africa, country by country, bouncing off obstacles like a pinball. In 1963, he makes it to Marseille; he feels “freer in France than on African soil”, because residents of former colonies are made welcome, but also because he is at last alone in a new world. Two years later, he makes it to the “eternal ice” of his destination, a different planet 4,500 miles from home. He, too, is like an alien to the Greenlanders: “As soon as they saw me, all talking stopped.” But they like this curious stranger and one girl names him “Michel the Giant”: at 5ft 11in, he is 8in taller than most locals. As Kpomassie throws himself into life in Greenland, he finds his height is not the only thing on a different scale. Greenland’s only prison has six cells. He goes fishing in the “international port” of Færingehavn, population 13. And he is maddened by their nonchalance, where a direct question nearly always produces the answer “Immaqa!” (“Perhaps!”) But like many tourists, he has exoticised the country and is disappointed by ordinary life. “I wanted to live with seal hunters, ride in a sledge, sleep in an igloo!” So he travels to the far north, to experience the endless nights of winter and the nightless days of spring. Even difficulties are described with relish: Kpomassie reports only one incident of racial abuse, which he (perhaps vaingloriously) attributes to the man’s envy of his success with local women. Darkness, figurative and literal, becomes more common: we learn of “polar hysteria”, where a man leaves his home to beat up strangers, and of the symbiotic relationship between humans and dogs, not just as companions but as food. A poverty-stricken man slaughters his dogs one by one to feed his family; when permafrost is too hard for burial, huskies break coffins open and “gorge themselves on human flesh”. Once, Kpomassie is attacked by a ravenous dog and is saved from injury, aptly, by his thick dogskin trousers. Dogs and men come together when seal blubber is on the menu: Kpomassie finds it “nauseating” – and seal intestines take “a lot of chewing” – but he soon comes to enjoy the food. It’s a measure of his increasing happiness in Greenland, though he leaves after 18 months to return home and try to explain things such as snow to his family. “Imagine that all the white birds in the sky are shedding their feathers…” Michel the Giant is as much an ebullient snapshot of a vanished age as a travel book. In a new afterword, mostly an inessential account of the book’s success, Kpomassie makes clear that Greenland is his enduring love. He has gone back several times and now, he says, at the age of 81 he will return this year, for the final time, to live out his days in the home where his heart resides. It is never too late – immaqa! • Michel the Giant by Tété-Michel Kpomassie is published by Penguin Modern Classics (£9.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyPerhaps it was the corner-shop setting that first drew Alfred Hitchcock’s attention to Charles Bennett’s Blackmail as the source of his 1929 film. Hitchcock had grown up above his family’s small shop in east London. He would have recognised the world of Bennett’s play, in which claustrophobic living “back stage” is combined with a whirl of local gossip “front of house” on the shop floor. Or perhaps Hitchcock was simply drawn by the huge success of the play. It had opened in the West End in 1928 with Tallulah Bankhead incongruously cast as a young, working-class Londoner. The response in London had been mixed. But once the play went on tour it was a sensation. Its frank portrayal of female sexuality, more than a dash of male homosexuality and a questioning of the probity of the justice system drew audiences across the country. By the end of the year, multiple companies were touring the play. Its first act is a sensational melodrama. But in the second and third, it shifts into a different genre: the thriller. Driven by suspense rather than shock, those final two acts invent the ground rules for much of the work that Bennett and Hitchcock were to make for the rest of their lives. The duo first planned Blackmail as a silent film. But sound equipment arrived at the studio during filming in 1929. Hitchcock – always fascinated by new technology – reshot some scenes to produce the UK’s first full-length “talkie” which became an even bigger hit than the original play. Hitchcock and Bennett carried on working together on the British films The Man Who Knew Too Much and The Thirty-Nine Steps, creating the template for the “wrongly accused man on the run” story. Hitchcock returned to that template at the height of his Hollywood success with North by Northwest, which reutilises the device of a climactic chase at a national monument he first invented with Bennett for Blackmail. When the producer Simon Friend invited me to revisit and revise Bennett’s play for a new production, I decided to cut the first melodramatic act. Bennett wrote a first draft of Blackmail while working as a young actor in 1924. I reasoned that if he himself had returned to the play, it’s a cut he would have considered. Confining the action to a room behind the shop – as his second and third acts do – and revealing earlier events with a series of revelations, creates the boilerhouse of secrets and lies that make an effective thriller. One of the great challenges of the genre is to write the characters into a corner from which there seems no possible escape. The playwright then has to invent a reversal in the last few minutes which suddenly provides an opportunity for escape that neither the characters nor the audience could have anticipated. It’s a tough call. Bennett’s drafts reveal that he had several goes at an ending, none of which he found entirely satisfying. For my new version, I’ve taken one of his possible endings, developing and amplifying it to create – I hope – a satisfying but not-too-neat ending with a moral ambiguity that leaves the audience with some big questions about the events they’ve just witnessed. Bennett was at work on an unproduced screenplay of a new version of Blackmail when he died in 1995. Working from drafts and notes provided by his estate, I’ve come up with a new version which I hope honours his status as the inventor of the modern thriller. Blackmail is at the Mercury theatre, Colchester, 4-19 March.Russia faced western sanctions and bitter condemnation at the United Nations after Vladimir Putin ordered troops over the Ukrainian border into Moscow-controlled territories in the east of the country, which he had recognised hours earlier. With reports of Russian armoured columns advancing into the Donetsk and Luhansk regions under the guise of “peacekeepers” in the Russian-backed enclaves, the US imposed some limited sanctions and warned more would come on Tuesday. The UK is also due to unveil its own package of punitive measures. Both the US and UK believe that the Russian entry into the eastern tip of Ukraine is a precursor for a more sweeping invasion. “This is the moment – the moment to stand up and defend the United Nations and our international order as we know it,” Linda Thomas-Greenfield, the US ambassador to the UN, said. She cast doubt on Putin’s assertion that the Russian troops would take on a “peacekeeping” role in the Donetsk and Lugansk areas. “He calls them peacekeepers. This is nonsense. We know what they really are,” she said. Russian lawmakers will likely approve the Kremlin decision on Tuesday. Observers are concerned over the exact borders of the territories that Russia has recognised as independent. “The open question is what particular borders they’re going to defend,” said Andrei Kortunov, the director general of the Russian International Affairs Council, a Russian thinktank. If Russia did back further territorial claims, he said, that would “definitely mean a war”. The US withdrew its remaining diplomats in Ukraine on Monday, deploying them to Poland, as Putin’s move rattled markets around the world. The UK’s ambassador, Dame Barbara Woodward, told the UN meeting: “Russia has brought us to the brink. We urge Russia to step back”, and warned that an invasion would unleash “the forces of war, death and destruction” on the people of Ukraine. Ukraine’s foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, appealed for strong sanctions as the only way of stalling further Russian encroachment. “World capitals don’t sleep now, regardless of their time zones,” Kuleba said on Twitter. “Ukraine insists: further Russian actions rely on how the world reacts. Russia must be in no doubt that the world talks the talk and walks the walk on sanctions.” Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, made a defiant late night address to his nation, after the first reports of Russian troops were crossing into the country, into enclaves controlled by Moscow since 2014. “We are on our land. We don’t fear anything or anyone. We don’t owe anything to anyone. And we won’t give anything up,” Zelenskiy said. At the UN, Ukraine’s permanent representative, Sergiy Kyslytsya, compared Putin’s decrees recognising separatist regions in Ukraine to one for Georgia in 2008, saying: “The copying machine in the Kremlin works very well. Who is the next among the members of the UN?” It was at the UN that Russia felt its isolation most keenly, as three African council members: Kenya, Gabon and Ghana, spoke out against Moscow’s actions for violating Ukraine’s territorial integrity. A few weeks earlier, Kenya and Gabon had abstained on a Ukraine-related vote. On Monday night, Kenya’s permanent representative, Martin Kimani, delivered a powerful address, suggesting Russia learn to live with ethnic grievances just as African states have done. “Kenya and almost every African country was birthed by the ending of empire. Our borders were not of our own drawing,” Kimani said. “Had we chosen to pursue states on the basis of ethnic, racial or religious homogeneity, we would still be waging bloody wars these many decades later.” “We rejected irredentism and expansionism on any basis, including racial, ethnic, religious or cultural factors. We reject it again today,” he concluded. Russia, which currently chairs the security council, had tried to hold the late night meeting behind closed doors, but was overruled by a majority of council members. Vasily Nebenzya, the Russian permanent representative repeated Moscow’s unfounded claims that Ukraine was about to launch an attack on the eastern Moscow-backed enclaves, presented as a pretext for sending in Russian troops. “Allowing a new bloodbath in the Donbas is something we do not intend to do,” he said. Ukraine has denied any plans for an offensive, and independent reporting has shown no signs that one is imminent. India, the United Arab Emirates and Brazil, avoided mentioning Russia at the council session while urging negotiations. The Chinese permanent representative, Zhang Yun, made a very brief, non-committal statement, which observers said suggested that Beijing has yet to make up its mind. “This reads like a placeholder,” Bonnie Glaser, the director of the Asia programme at the German Marshall Fund, said. “China hasn’t decided what its policy response should be yet.” The US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, spoke to his Chinese counterpart, Wang Yi, on Monday night, and according to the state department, “underscored the need to preserve Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.” On Monday night Ukrainian officials warned that Russian troops may have already entered separatist territory. The officials said local people in the town of Makiivka, 15km west of rebel-held Donetsk, saw what appeared to be Russian armoured vehicles on the move. One source – who declined to be named – said “a huge convoy of Russian armoured personnel carriers and other equipment has been travelling for one-and-a-half hours”. It was spotted heading north towards the city of Yasynuvata, also in the Donetsk region. Video released by Ukraine appeared to show a column of military vehicles moving in convoy along a road. The officials said it was not possible to tell if the troops belonged to the regular Russian army, or were from Russian-controlled separatist units. Putin announced the decision in a televised speech marked by the Russian leader’s visceral anger at a country he has called a “brother nation”. “Those who took the path of violence, bloodshed and lawlessness did not recognise and don’t recognise any other solution to the Donbas problem besides the military,” Putin said. “Therefore I believe it is necessary to take a long-overdue decision to immediately recognise the independence and sovereignty of the Donetsk People’s Republic and Luhansk People’s Republic” – the Russian proxy states in east Ukraine.Last year the issue of home insulation became an urgent national topic. It began when Insulate Britain activists blocked several of England’s major motorways. Protesters were imprisoned (one went on hunger strike), and a passionate national debate ensued about the tactics used by the campaign group. But whether you approve of its methods or not, the problem remains that the UK has some of the oldest, leakiest – and, as such, least energy-efficient – housing in Europe. Meanwhile, pre-pandemic, the building sector as a whole accounted for 38% of all global energy-related CO2 emissions – that includes emissions from operating buildings and from construction, according to the UN’s environment programme. “Because that’s such a large proportion of global emissions, there is a significant opportunity to make a big difference – and decarbonising buildings can be a major part of the solution, but it won’t be as easy as it sounds,” says zero-carbon pioneer Prof Ljubomir Jankovic, director of the Centre for Future Societies Research and founder of the Zero Carbon Lab at the University of Hertfordshire. In the UK, the main focus needs to be houses that have already been built, says Jankovic, because they will make up 80% of the housing stock in 2050 – the year the government has pledged to achieve net zero. “That’s 19.1m homes in total that will still be in use – but most aren’t energy efficient, so retrofitting is an essential step,” says Jankovic. “From my calculations, there are more than 10,000 days between now and 2050, so we need to retrofit approximately 1,870 houses per day to reach that goal. That puts the scale of effort required into perspective.” For some properties, retrofitting, or installing new facilities or systems, might include improved insulation and making properties more airtight; for others, it could require the addition of heat pumps, solar panels and, in the near future, a new type of hydrogen boiler. “Without retrofitting, we won’t reach net zero by 2050,” says Jankovic. New buildings may also be adding to the challenge. “At the moment, building regulations don’t require new builds to be net zero, so we are contributing to the number of houses that will need retrofitting, even though some are new.” One major factor to consider is the embodied carbon emissions within conventional building materials such as brick and concrete – that’s the carbon emissions involved in making the material, transporting it to site and using it in construction. Jankovic and his team at the Zero Carbon Lab, a centre that collaborates with government bodies, local authorities and industry, have calculated that bricks have embodied emissions of about 357kg CO2 per cubic metre, while a cubic metre of concrete is about 10 times higher. “Although these embodied emissions are not always taken into account, they all end up in the atmosphere and add to the challenge of controlling climate change,” says Jankovic. It will take way beyond 2050 to reach net zero if these materials continue to be used without consideration for their embodied emissions, he says, even with the addition of renewable energy systems and energy-efficient retrofitting. But there is another low-carbon option. Jankovic’s research shows that using biosourced materials that can reduce the starting embodied emissions, such as hempcrete or hemp lime instead of brick, could help to reach net zero by 2045 in new builds, in concert with other net zero design strategies. In his view, new research is required in order to update reference information on embodied emissions in other biosourced materials, such as straw bale, timber and others, which “sequester” carbon from the atmosphere during the plant growth period. Currently, this information is not readily available for designers. Working with Welwyn Hatfield borough council in Hertfordshire, Jankovic’s research into zero carbon building design is helping the authority to reduce the cost of powering buildings with renewable energy, improve insulation and opt for greener building materials. He is also assisting Stevenage borough council to evaluate how best to get to net zero by 2030. Using advanced modelling and simulation of dynamic heat transfer, Jankovic and his team can calculate the emissions of a building over a specific time period, based on hourly weather data gathered over a year – that’s 8,760 sets of data, whereas simplified methods based on 12 monthly average sets of data and steady state heat transfer gave far less accurate results. This larger volume of data makes a difference, allowing for more rigorous analysis. “We need to quantify everything, from the starting emissions to ongoing emissions, and ‘pushing and poking’ these computer models in a structured way helps us to determine how we get to zero,” he says. Jankovic is working on making these technical methods accessible to councils and local authorities so they can use preset designs to achieve net zero with more confidence. Ultimately, change happens at the design stage before a new build or a retrofit. “Everyone needs to understand what it means to design net zero emissions buildings – presently, industry doesn’t have enough people who are qualified to do net zero design that’s based on rigorously tested performance data,” he says. “But if we really want to get serious about reaching net zero we need to improve the skills across the industry and to all pull together, from developers to construction workers, to planners, architects and building performance modellers, to create a critical mass of new professionals capable of designing and delivering buildings with a certainty of performance outcomes.” Find out more about the game changing multi-disciplinary research at Herts, how it is deepening understanding of climate change and helping to tackle the environmental emergency.It seems as if it’s never been cheaper to kit ourselves out with a new wardrobe, but our love of fashion comes with a hefty environmental price tag, as according to the World Bank, the industry produces 10% of global greenhouse gas emissions every year. To try to tackle the problem, the UN’s Fashion Industry Charter for Climate Action, which launched in 2018 and was renewed in 2021 at Cop26, set the goal of net zero emissions by 2050. But when Dr Chamu Kuppuswamy, a senior lecturer at the University of Hertfordshire School of Law, read it, she noticed what was missing. “There’s not a single South Asian fashion house that is a signatory of the charter. The sari industry is worth billions of dollars. So if we want to look at reducing emissions, it’s really important to take into account South Asian textiles and fabrics.” Brands that have signed the charter are committed to supporting the implementation of its principles in their organisations. An international lawyer by training, Kuppuswamy’s research for the university’s Centre for Climate Change Research, explores the intersection between the law, climate change, sustainability and the environment. At a country level, South Asian fashion is also ignored, says Kuppuswamy, who has an interest in textile waste. India’s emissions targets for 2030 don’t mention fashion, for instance. “There’s a blind spot,” she says. “If the fashion charter doesn’t shine that light on Indian fashion, that part of the emissions won’t be regulated for.” One area of the clothing industry that particularly piqued her interest related to costumes and performance arts. So she embarked on an eight-month project, funded by Arts Council England, to develop the Fashion Charter for South Asian Arts. Focusing on UK-based artists, performers and retailers who operate within a global network, and drawing on her own experience as a South Asian classical dance performer, she researched consumption and design habits. For example, how often costumes are worn, the materials they are made from and so on. Kuppuswamy points out that fashion is largely unregulated when it comes to textile use and sustainability – existing fashion law, both in the UK and India, is business oriented and focused on areas such as copyright and design. In India, she says, one law has indirectly helped reduce textile waste. “In 2014 legislation came in for the protection of street recycling vendors, which indirectly protected the sale of recycled clothing as well. It provides clothing security for lots of people, but it also encourages longevity of fabrics.” She argues that governments need to strengthen laws around the use of sustainable materials, as well as carbon emissions in the textile industry. “We need policy from government and laws that make fashion commitments more binding,” she says. “If we are to reach the targets, we need accountability frameworks that we can use the courts to enforce. Voluntary commitments are simply not enough.” As part of her work on the Fashion Charter for South Asian Arts, she developed insights that are also applicable to those working in the wider fashion industry. “Costume is a niche area, but the base material is much more widely used,” she says. “More discussion around sustainability in this area will have a trickle-down effect on ordinary fashion.” Here are three of her key findings and recommendations: Design flexible clothes to reduce over-buying Kuppuswamy spoke to several artists and performers who had noticed a trend for a growing number of outfits for each performance. “There used to be two costumes used for every performance; now, it is four or five. One dancer mentioned that five years ago, her peers would switch between two or three costumes – now, partly because of Instagram, they feel the need to have new things every week.” To help reduce this growing overconsumption – something with clear parallels in other parts of the fashion industry – costume designers need to design flexible clothes. “Think about and offer choices that allow for more mixing and matching,” she says. “Make choices that allow for better use over five years, for example through changing body shapes. To do this, designers need to spend time with the customer – talk about their aspirations for the costume.” Increase knowledge sharing There is some “fantastic work” on sustainability being done by elite designers in cities such as New Delhi, but it hasn’t yet percolated down to dance schools and regional designer tailors. “So we now have the expensive cutting edge, and separately, the designer tailors. There should be more interaction between the two,” says Kuppuswamy. She hopes to increase cooperation and knowledge sharing using the Fashion Charter for South Asian Arts. Use a greater diversity of materials Kuppuswamy says costume designers need to be more willing to work with different materials. Many, for instance, refuse to work with ethically made silk because they cannot guarantee the desired effect will be achieved with the finished garment. At the same time, growing numbers of consumers are choosing cheaper, synthetic materials such as polyester to make items. She adds it’s important not to forget ethical labour practices and fair trade, at the moment, saying too few designers consider this. Find out more about the game changing multidisciplinary research at Herts, how it is deepening understanding of climate change and helping to tackle the environmental emergency.Dr Phil Porter is describing the intricate interior of a glacier. “Imagine that the inside of the glacier is like a giant swiss cheese full of tunnels, passageways and caverns,” he says. “Understanding how glaciers work inside is really important in terms of predicting how much melt water will emerge and when.” Last year a study found that the melting of the world’s glaciers has nearly doubled in speed over the past 20 years. Porter, a glacier scientist at the University of Hertfordshire, studies the rate at which glaciers melt, and has worked on projects in the Himalayas – in Pakistan’s Northern Areas and north-east Nepal – looking at the effects of global heating on the amount of meltwater produced. The ice fields in the Hindu Kush and Himalaya range provide a critical water resource for the 210 million people who live in the region, and much of the wider Asian continent relies on this water, particularly outside of monsoon season. “A sizable proportion of the world’s population is directly or indirectly dependent on snow and ice melt for their water resource for consumption, irrigation and power generation,” says Porter. “Being able to predict how those water supplies are going to change in the future is really, really important.” In some areas, the melting glaciers are making the supply of water more erratic, forcing communities to develop new solutions. Porter gives the example of an innovative local project in the Himalayan region of Ladakh, an area of cold desert where villages rely on water from glacial streams. In April and May, when water is needed for crops, there is insufficient supply. So in the winter months, some of the water is diverted and frozen into large ice towers, or artificial glaciers referred to as “ice stupas”. These stupas then melt in springtime, providing much-needed supplementary supplies of water. The picture in the Himalayas is complex. One reason for this is that the Himalayan range is still rising. This helps encourage processes such as rockfall, which can blanket parts of glaciers with thick layers of rocks and insulate the ice from melt. Despite this, ongoing glacial shrinkage will likely lead to a reduction in overall water supply from the middle of the century. Although warming may trigger increased rainfall to partly offset dwindling glacial water supplies, this will likely increase flood risks. The glacial changes will have far-reaching consequences, says Porter, including potentially for the UK. “I don’t think we fully appreciate how reliant we are on imports from countries that rely on snow and ice melt to support agricultural productivity,” he says, citing tea production, as well as cotton, which is grown extensively in the region and exported globally. Delhi’s air pollution Research carried out by Prof Ranjeet Sokhi, professor of atmospheric physics and director of the Centre for Climate Change Research at the University of Hertfordshire, feeds into work to make climate change modelling more precise. It includes examining how air pollution in Delhi – which caused a thick brown smog to envelop the city last November – can be controlled and minimised, and how strategies to adapt to the longer-term impacts of global heating can be improved. Air pollution is the leading environmental risk to health, and the fifth highest global mortality risk in 2017. “The government of India has instigated a clean air programme, with a target of reducing fine particles by 25% compared to 2017,” says Sokhi. “What is lacking is the understanding of the key science drivers behind this air pollution. If we want to have mitigation and adaptation strategies, we have to know what is causing it.” Sokhi is the UK principle investigator for PROMOTE (Process analysis, observations and modelling – integrated solutions for cleaner air for Delhi), whose scientists, from the UK and India, are looking at the processes that drive air pollution, with the aim of more accurate air quality forecasting. Exactly how these processes work is complex. For instance, fine particle emissions are the usual target of air pollution reduction measures. But there are also volatile organic compounds which, combined with nitrogen oxide from vehicle emissions, react with sunlight to produce ozone. “This isn’t new, but quantifying it for Delhi conditions is where we come in,” says Sokhi. Using mathematical models, the scientists can work out the distribution of air pollution in and around Delhi. They are also coupling regional models of air pollution distribution with those that apply at a street scale. “This helps us understand where the hotspots are,” says Sokhi. “As far as we are aware, this has never been done in India before.” Meanwhile Dr Pushp Raj Tiwari, who leads a programme on climate interaction and future changes, addresses the effect of anthropogenic emissions on regional climate extremes (heat waves). His research work with high resolution climate models indicates that minimum winter temperatures across Asia are likely to increase by 2-3 degrees centigrade by 2050, compared with 2000. It shows that in a megacity such as Delhi, with high numbers of vehicles and emissions, air quality will deteriorate along with the health of its inhabitants. This work will feed into the Indian government’s national adaptation plan on air pollution and heat. Ultimately, both Sokhi and Tiwari agree that climate initiatives, green energy, and solar energy need to be better connected with air pollution strategy. Find out more about the game changing multi-disciplinary research at Herts, how it is deepening understanding of climate change and helping to tackle the environmental emergency.Face masks have been an essential part of limiting the spread of Covid-19. But for many people who are deaf or hearing-impaired, the coverings have left them isolated from society. When Dean Ezekiel’s wife Aimee, who is partially deaf, attended a pregnancy scan during the first lockdown, she was distraught to find she had no way to determine what the doctor was saying. “Because he was wearing a mask, she couldn’t read his lips. She felt helpless without the use of basic communication,” says Ezekiel. It was that experience that inspired the entrepreneur to start Design Abled and develop Helloface, a transparent, recyclable face mask, which is compatible with facial recognition technology. The startup was recently recognised for its sustainability credentials, winning the microbusiness category at the Heroes of Net Zero competition at Cop26. Designed in the UK, Ezekiel’s team has worked closely with the Jewish Deaf Association to run focus groups and iterate the design based on user feedback. “The stories about what people are going through are quite heartbreaking,” says Ezekiel, emphasising that in medical care settings, some of the strongest, most confident and successful people in our community can automatically become the most vulnerable. “There are people in hospital beds who can’t tell the nurses that they need to go to the toilet. There are deaf children at school who can’t understand their teachers. And others, like Aimee, who attend medical appointments they can’t participate in,” says Ezekiel. According to government statistics, there are 11 million people in the UK who are deaf or hearing-impaired. Only 87,000 of those know British sign language. Many will instead rely on lip reading and other facial cues to communicate. Research by the charity SignHealth discovered that 74% of deaf people have found it more difficult to access healthcare during the pandemic, and 62% say face masks have been one of the biggest issues related to this. One in three say Covid-19 has had a major negative impact on their mental health. When the pandemic hit, Ezekiel was running the travel company Upgrade, which he’d founded as part of the University of Hertfordshire’s Business Incubator programme. With flights grounded, the university encouraged him to think about other business ideas and pitch them to the group. “I had a few ideas but this was the one that was closest to my heart,” he says. As well as providing office space, marketing and legal advice, and tender writing assistance, the Enterprise Hub Business Incubator and University Enterprise Zone programmes also gave him access to nanotechnology, chemical and material experts from the university, and a specialist pre-compliance certification testing lab. Yanina Aubrey is the head of business growth and entrepreneurship at the University of Hertfordshire. Her team supports between 350 and 400 businesses across a variety of programmes at any one time, from sectors as diverse as manufacturing, the creative industries, hospitality and healthcare. During the pandemic, her team, along with the Hertfordshire Local Enterprise Partnership and the Hertfordshire Growth Hub, launched a volunteer business support scheme, recruiting more than 75 volunteer mentors from the local business community, as well as from within the university’s own business school, to provide advice to SMEs. “It was an incredibly positive experience,” says Aubrey. “Businesses had been desperate for support – they were calling the local growth hub and our own Enterprise Hub and there just weren’t enough hours in the day to answer all of their queries.” The scheme ended up supporting more than 325 local businesses during this difficult period. After more than a year of development, Helloface has released two types of certified masks that will soon be ready for distribution – the transparent medical mask and the P3 half-mask respirator. So far, says Ezekiel, there has been interest from NHS trusts, care homes and social care settings, as well as teachers, childcare providers, and those who work in noisy environments such as factories or building sites. “We’re focusing on healthcare settings first. But ultimately, we want to make sure that anyone who wants them can have them,” he says. Being environmentally friendly has also been a priority. A multidisciplinary group of researchers estimates that if every person in the UK used a single-use mask each day for a year, it would create 66,000 tonnes of contaminated plastic waste. “The materials we use are 100% recyclable, and we partner with local recycling centres so the material is ground down and brought back in pellet form to be reused in production,” says Ezekiel. Encouraging entrepreneurs to think about sustainability is a core focus for the University of Hertfordshire’s Enterprise Hub team, too. “We don’t just want to help businesses grow, we want to help them grow sustainably – and by that we mean sustainability in its broadest sense, including environmental and social factors,” says Aubrey. Sustainability considerations are discussed in the 12-month Incubator Programme, and the university is launching a new 15-week Sustainability Accelerator Programme, funded by the UK government’s Community Renewal Fund, and focused wholly on the development of sustainable products, services or technologies. Aubrey has noticed a shift in how entrepreneurs prioritise sustainability, particularly after Cop26. “Nobody really questions the need to be talking about sustainability today. But businesses still need more training and support. There is a lot of confusion around some of the terminology and it can sometimes feel overwhelming. Sustainability should be part of every entrepreneurial conversation right from the outset, when entrepreneurs are thinking about their concept, their value proposition, their purpose.” For the Helloface team, it was a no-brainer. “We could have done things much easier, much quicker, but we would have created a product that would end up in landfill,” says Ezekiel. “We want to solve a current problem without creating a future problem.” Find out more about the enterprising ecosystem at Herts, and how the university helps businesses to innovate, diversify and grow.Oil prices surged close to $100 (£73) and global stock markets fell in early trading on Tuesday after Vladimir Putin sent troops into Ukraine, rattling investors. Brent crude oil was up nearly 4% on Tuesday morning, hitting just above $99 a barrel, the highest in more than seven years, as fears mounted that supplies would be disrupted. After sharp falls on Monday, the benchmark Moex Russia Index was down more than 5% on Tuesday morning, while a broad sell-off of European shares followed earlier losses in Asia. Germany’s DAX, France’s CAC and Italy’s FTSE MIB fell about 1%. In London, the FTSE 100 index was down by 0.4%, as oil and gas companies Shell and BP were among the top risers in the UK’s index of blue-chip stocks. The Russia-focused gold miner Petropavlovsk was the biggest faller in the FTSE 250 in early trading, with investors wiping almost 13% off its market value. Shares in Ferrexpo, which mines iron ore in Ukraine for the steel industry, fell 3%. By lunchtime most European indices had clawed back earlier losses and were trading roughly flat, although Russia’s Moex was down more than 4%. Analysts expect Brent crude will reach $100 a barrel in the coming days, amid supply fears. The price was last above that level in early September 2014. US light crude jumped 5.2% at $95.81. European gas prices surged as much as 13% over fears energy supplies could be restricted as the conflict deepens. Russia is responsible for a third of Europe’s natural gas and about 10% of global oil production. About a third of Russian gas supplies to Europe usually travel through pipelines crossing Ukraine. “The intensifying crisis between Russia and Ukraine has raised concerns about the supply disruptions that would ensue as sanctions look set to cripple Russia, the world’s second largest oil exporter and the world’s top natural gas producer,” said Victoria Scholar, the head of investment at Interactive Investor. “If Putin continues his aggression and the threat of war becomes a reality, oil prices could easily push beyond $100 towards $120 a barrel to fresh highs not seen since 2014.” A wave of international sanctions are expected after Putin moved troops into two Russian-controlled territories in eastern Ukraine, Donetsk and Luhansk, to perform “peacekeeping duties” after signing a treaty recognising their independence. Sajid Javid, the health secretary, said the move meant that the “invasion of Ukraine has begun”. “We’re waking up to a very dark day in Europe,” he told Sky News on Tuesday morning. “President Putin has decided to attack the sovereignty of Ukraine and its territorial integrity. We can already tell he has sent in tanks and troops, so I think you can conclude that the invasion of Ukraine has begun.” Boris Johnson chaired an emergency meeting of the Cobra committee on Tuesday morning to establish the UK’s response. In Asia, Japan’s Nikkei lost 1.7%, Hong Kong’s Hang Seng tumbled 2.9%, the Shanghai Composite Index fell just over 1% and South Korea’s Kospi dropped 1.35%.A new variety of snowdrop has sold for £1,850 in an eBay auction. The bulb, which is known as Galanthus plicatus or Golden Tears, was created by the plantsman Joe Sharman, the MailOnline reported. Sharman, the owner of Cambridgeshire-based Monksilver Nursery and known as Mr Snowdrop, previously sold a snowdrop bulb called Golden Fleece – which took 18 years to develop – for £1,390. The auction site’s listing, which shows the Golden Tears bulb sold for £1,850 after 55 bids, describes the flower as “exceptionally vigorous”. Sharman wrote: “A narrow-flowered yellow pterugiform with a very large mark and bright yellow ovary. Very beautiful and distinct. Quite different from Golden Fleece. Exceptionally vigorous. 25cm. “The result of a deliberate cross by me using the same parents that created Golden Fleece. Only one for the season.” Sharman, who lectures on various topics including snowdrops but also autumn flowers of the Peloponnese and spring flowers of Turkey, says this is his 15th season of selling rare snowdrops on eBay and he has been growing and breeding snowdrops for 35 years. The buyer is unidentified but is likely to be a galanthophile – a collector and identifier of snowdrop species. Describing his love for snowdrops in an interview with the Guardian in 2015, Sharman said: “They come up early in the year when nothing else is growing, so if you have the kind of brain that needs lots of things to think about, you focus in. “They seem to be almost infinitely variable. You collect the 10 you recognise, then you realise that you can recognise 20 and it just goes from there. I don’t think there is another group of plants quite like it.”Shagged. Married. Annoyed Couples’ podcasts are very much not for everybody. If they lean a little too far one way, they’re overbearing and smug; too far in the other direction and they become unbearably tense psychodramas. The safest place for you to start is probably Shagged. Married. Annoyed, hosted by married comedians Chris and Rosie Ramsey. A weekly unstructured chat, Shagged. Married. Annoyed is relentlessly lighthearted and unchallenging – and as such, actually very pleasant to listen to. One potential criticism is that the Ramseys do sound like they’re aggressively trying to turn their marriage into a brand. So if that’s not your sort of thing, stop reading now. Forced Proximity A favourite podcast subgenre, arguably invented by Scott Aukerman and Harris Wittels’s Analyze Phish, is one host trying to convince another host that something is good. In Forced Proximity, Megan Montgomery attempts to make her sport-loving husband Johnathon Olavarria see the worth in romance novels. What’s amazing about this podcast is that she very quickly succeeds. As such, most episodes consist of two people united in their love for a type of literature that is perennially written off as trashy. It’s a genuinely uplifting listen. Firecrotch &amp; Normcore Succession might be between series at the moment, but that doesn’t mean you shouldn’t go back and explore one of its best offshoots. In Firecrotch &amp; Normcore, married couple DJ Geoff Lloyd and comedian Sara Barron trawl through every episode of Succession’s third series, analysing and bickering about the themes and characters. Better still, they regularly draft in guests to add a third wheel to the dynamic. Nish Kumar, David Baddiel and Lorraine Kelly have all appeared. Trust me when I say that you haven’t lived until you’ve heard Lorraine Kelly call Connor Roy a “noodle”. The Accidental Swingers Myrina and Tristan are a married couple who went on a night out with their friends, realised that their friends were swingers, and as a result ended up falling into a determinedly non-traditional lifestyle. The episodes roughly progress in chronological order, as the couple first become swingers and then start exploring other, more delicate, avenues. They are always open about the pitfalls and boundaries necessary to lead a non-monogamous lifestyle, but seem completely happy with all their choices. If you wanted to use The Accidental Swingers as an instruction guide to swinging, it would probably work well. On the other hand, it’s absolutely perfect for casual rubberneckers. ONE Extraordinary Marriage Then there are the podcasts hosted by couples that are actually about being a couple. Of these, ONE Extraordinary Marriage is perhaps the most noteworthy. Hosted by Tony and Alisa DiLorenzo, who were apparently on the brink of divorce until the husband turned things around with something called a 60-day sex challenge, the podcast dips into all the problems that usually throw marriages into trouble – lack of intimacy, lack of communication, lack of respect – and attempts to course-correct its listeners back to happiness. Consider it free couples’ counselling.The estimable Dave Grohl of the Foo Fighters has bafflingly decided to try everyone’s patience with this insufferable vanity project: a violent gonzo grossout that sadly conforms to the horror-comedy tendency of being neither properly scary nor properly funny. And it’s founded on the assumption that these real-life badass rock musicians are also pretty hilarious and adorable. In this alternative universe, the Foo Fighters are creatively blocked: we see them sitting around the boardroom table in their record company offices, listlessly bickering. So the irascible corporate suit (Jeff Garlin, phoning it in) sends them to a notorious semi-derelict house with all sort of freaky associations with rock legends of the past, there to work on their new album. It was apparently last used by a troubled band called Dreamwidow, who were tipped to be “the next Jane’s Addiction”. Grohl becomes haunted by the place’s devilish spirits, increasingly obsessed with his own freaky otherworldly vision for the record, as more and more violent and demonic things keep happening. Will Forte has a small role as the fast-food delivery guy who keeps trying to get Dave to listen to his demo tape. Bad idea. Grohl himself is at least reasonably relaxed, as the band’s much-loved frontman, finally in dire need of exorcism. But there is an awful lot of terrible wooden acting from everyone else, together with sub-Ghostbusters visual effects, for which the movie expects fanbase forgiveness. It does in fact contain one genuinely funny thing, and that is Lionel Richie’s cameo. But it is really quite disconcerting that the film’s comedy setup is about violent and horrible things that happened back in the 90s …? Some of which concerns a person taking their own life …? As Lionel Richie would say: hello? • Studio 666 is released on 25 February in cinemas.French kings found the ideal refuge for their wealth: a city-state nestled between the snow-capped Alps and the pristine waters of Lake Geneva. Catholic royalty flocked to Geneva in the 18th century in an effort to conceal their dealings with Protestant bankers. By 1713, the authorities in Geneva, who would gain a reputation for discretion, introduced rules banning bankers from revealing details about their clients. That centuries-old code of silence, which was later enshrined in law in Switzerland, came under renewed focus this week after a leak of Credit Suisse data revealed its clients were involved in torture, drug trafficking, money laundering, corruption and other serious crimes, suggesting widespread failures of due diligence by the bank. The disclosures prompted a national debate in Switzerland, even though the much-heralded “end of banking secrecy as we know it” was supposed to have occurred in 2014, when ministers from 50 countries and territories agreed to a global exchange of information about their respective taxpayers’ financial information for the first time. The ministerial meeting in Paris that year was deemed monumental, not least because the enfant terrible of banking had reluctantly agreed to join the club. Switzerland had promised to share information about client bank accounts with participating tax authorities around the world. For a country that had criminalised sharing client information with foreign countries for more than 80 years, adoption of the so-called common reporting standard (CRS) was a significant step. It meant Switzerland and fellow signatories would exchange information about foreigners who held bank accounts in their countries, as part of efforts to crack down on tax evasion and fraud. However, even after Swiss CRS data started changing hands in 2018, critics argued the country’s commitment to the system had created a “zebra strategy”. On the one hand, Switzerland’s banks could take “clean” money from clients in industrialised, developed countries, which were part of automatic exchange of information agreements. But the door had not been shut to accepting funds from potentially dubious clients from developing countries, where authorities investigating tax evasion did not have automatic access to their citizens’ secret Swiss accounts. “Despite many claims to the contrary: banking secrecy is not dead,” said Dominik Gross, a tax and finance analyst at Switzerland’s global development thinktank Alliance Sud. More than 90 countries, among them some of the least developed in the world, have yet to exchange banking information with Switzerland. As far as those countries are concerned, “nothing has changed compared with the past”, said Sébastien Guex, a banking expert and professor at the University of Lausanne. “Swiss bankers are still helping the wealthy in these countries to hide their assets from the tax authorities in their own country.” Credit Suisse said it “strongly rejects the allegations and inferences about the bank’s purported business practices” emanating from the Suisse secrets leak of its data, emphasising that it maintained “a strict zero-tolerance policy towards tax evasion and is fully committed to complying with global tax transparency efforts”, including the CRS. Reputation as a tax haven Despite signing up to the CRS, the landlocked Alpine country’s financial system is the third-most secretive in the world after the Cayman Islands and the US, according to the Tax Justice Network, and accounts for $21bn in lost tax revenue for foreign countries every year. Nearly half of the 7.9tn Swiss francs (£6.3tn) of assets under management in the country belong to foreign clients. It has helped build an industry that accounts for 10% of Swiss GDP and a similar proportion of Swiss jobs. And while Switzerland is home to about 243 banks, Credit Suisse and its larger rival UBS together make up about half of the country’s banking assets. While Switzerland’s tradition of banking secrecy can be traced to the 1700s, its advantages became most apparent at the turn of the 20th century, when Swiss lenders became a magnet for elites wanting to stash their increasingly mobile wealth in a politically neutral state. Its reputation as a tax haven also grew, as wealthy families scrambled to find somewhere to hide their fortunes amid the introduction of inheritance taxes in countries including France in 1901. Lenders pounced at the opportunity, distributing brochures, advertising in local newspapers and deploying bankers across France to drum up new business. But amid growing anger over the loss of tax revenues and the flight of capital, France launched a police raid on Swiss bankers in Paris in 1932. The operation uncovered the names of hundreds of rich French clients with secret Swiss accounts, including bishops, generals and former ministers. Switzerland’s banking community, in turn, was furious and lobbied for retaliation. By 1934, politicians agreed to put banking secrecy – the “duty of absolute silence” – into law, making it a crime for anyone to share clients’ banking information, particularly with foreign authorities. Controversially, the law, combined with Switzerland’s political neutrality, made the country a haven for Nazi officials. Swiss bankers collaborated heavily with Adolf Hitler and his regime, offering financial credit and helping fleeing Nazis hide their loot after the second world war. Scandalous exploits come to light Until this week, opposition to banking secrecy within Switzerland has been relatively muted. When the Socialist party held a referendum in the mid-1980s that would have superseded secrecy laws and forced banks to cooperate with foreign authorities investigating tax dodgers, the government opposed the proposal. It was criticised as an invasion of citizens’ privacy and a threat to the country’s banking system and economy, and was decisively voted down. But elsewhere, global regulators were increasingly frustrated with their inability to penetrate the Swiss banking system in order to investigate global fraud and tax evasion. By the early 2000s, Swiss banks were aggressively marketing their services to wealthy clients who wanted to dodge domestic tax authorities – this time in the US. The details came to light after the UBS banker Bradley Birkenfeld shared information with US authorities in 2007, showing how the bank helped thousands of wealthy Americans avoid paying tax by hiding billions of dollars in secret accounts. Revelations from a subsequent Senate investigation outraged American authorities, who fined UBS and Credit Suisse for their roles in aiding US tax evasion and pushed Switzerland into unilaterally disclosing account information about US taxpayers from 2014. That same year, Switzerland signed on to the CRS alongside 50 other countries and jurisdictions. Impact of banking secrecy on world’s poor Against this backdrop, the Swiss banking industry argues its secrecy laws are a thing of the past. “There is no longer Swiss bank client confidentiality for clients abroad,” the Swiss Bankers Association (SBA) said, adding that automatic exchange of banking information has “become the norm – for both banks and bank clients”. “Swiss banks have done their homework and implemented all international regulations. We are transparent, there is nothing to hide in Switzerland.” But the Suisse secrets revelations suggest skeletons remain in the vaults of Switzerland’s banks. Campaigners remain concerned about the domestic regulator’s “feeble” powers, and the way criminals and tax dodgers from developing countries appear to continue to gain access to Switzerland’s financial system. The Swiss anti-corruption watchdog Public Eye said organisations such as the SBA were playing down “the harmful impact of this hugely successful business model of the Swiss financial industry, particularly for poorer countries”. Those concerns were echoed by the Nobel laureate and economist Joseph Stiglitz, who said the revelations had rightly put the country’s secrecy laws back in the spotlight. “Surely, Switzerland must know the chilling effect of its legislation: almost surely, that was the intent, to preserve its business models as long as possible, of taking a little slice of the ill-gotten gains of others, in return for providing a safe and secret place to hoard and store the geld,” he said.The next time you’re in the city of Denton, Texas, you could do worse than swing by the speakeasy-style Paschall Bar, pull up a stool and order a Pulido Old Fashioned. “It’s my signature cocktail,” grins Midlake’s frontman Eric Pulido from under a well-worn baseball cap. “I think they just started getting tired of me saying: ‘Instead of the sugar can you do Bénédictine [a liqueur], and then can you also put in maple bitters … ’” Pulido isn’t simply a fussy customer, but alongside the rest of Midlake actually owns this dimly lit, book-lined boozer, which, like so many others, found itself on the brink of collapse during the early stages of the pandemic. “We experienced the up and down of ‘We’re good’, ‘We’re not’, ‘Now we’re OK!’” offers Pulido with a sigh. “It was definitely a trying time, but I feel like we’re coming out of the woods now.” The same could be said for Midlake themselves, who have weathered other storms in their 20-odd-year existence. After a speedy rise following the eerie, timeless 2006 single Roscoe, the warmly experimental Texas folk-rockers found themselves riding the crest of a new wave of dreamy classic rock groups, leading to everything from Fleet Foxes’ folksy hymnals to Tame Impala’s swirling psychedelia. They followed their breakthrough second album, The Trials of Van Occupanther, with 2010’s The Courage of Others, switching their lens to the UK and drawing on the likes of Pentangle and Fairport Convention. The band’s seemingly breezy existence, however, hit a wall during sessions for their fourth album, with the acrimonious departure of their frontman and founding member Tim Smith. Rather than break up, the band scrapped everything they had worked on with Smith and started over, writing and recording 2013’s Antiphon with Pulido on lead vocals. “Part of it was just stubbornness after being hurt by your friend leaving and then saying: ‘Well, I’m not going to let his departure dictate what we’re going to do,’” explains Pulido. Although the record was met with giddy reviews that praised the band’s softer, more defined sound, after touring it, they decided to take a little break. That little break then became an extremely long break – so long that people started to ask: “Are Midlake, like, still a thing?” “We were kind of coy about it and said: ‘We’re on hiatus’ – or if a British person asked, we’d say: ‘We’re on holiday!’” confirms Pulido. “But it was definitely possible that we would never reconvene.” There was, of course, plenty of other stuff to be getting on with. After a solid run of festivals and world tours, there was the matter of raising families and getting stuck into solo projects. Pulido pursued his burgeoning interest in interior design, starting with the Paschall Bar, before working on a host of other restaurants in Denton. He also busied himself by forming the indie supergroup BNQT, which he branded “a poor man’s Travelling Wilburys” and featured Travis’s Fran Healy, Franz Ferdinand’s Alex Kapranos, Band of Horses’ Ben Bridwell and Grandaddy’s Jason Lytle. It was only in 2019 that the five members of Midlake tentatively began to reassemble. “There was this gradual and communal realisation that it would be a good idea to try at least,” says Pulido. “But it would have been naive for us to say: ‘We’re just going to pick up, and it’s all going to work and it’s gonna be great.’” After casually sharing early ideas, things properly got going when the first lockdown began in March 2020. “The silver lining was, we weren’t going anywhere, so we thought we might as well give it a go.” The result is the purposely proggy For the Sake of Bethel Woods, named after the site of 1969’s Woodstock festival. It was attended by 400,000 people, including a 16-year-old Dave Chandler, father of Midlake’s keyboard and flute player, Jesse Chandler. After his dad passed away in 2018, Jesse saw him in a dream; he suggested that Midlake start working together again. As a tribute, a painting of Dave at Woodstock – inspired by a shot of the teenage Dave that features in the legendary 1970 documentary about the festival – now graces the album’s cover. “It’s probably the most poetic and beautiful inspiration for us getting back together,” says Pulido. “A big part of it, at least for me, was just missing my friends.” The result is a deeply dynamic record and one that has the broadest scope of influences of any Midlake album to date, a natural result of nine years spent simply listening. “Seventies west coast folk-rock is always going to be a part of our Midlake DNA, but to feel like you can pull from a jazz background and also go to more modern places was really freeing and refreshing,” says Pulido. The band’s time apart also made Pulido keen to be much more open in his songwriting, digging into deeply personal stories including on the gentle Noble, a song named in honour of drummer McKenzie Smith’s son Garrett Noble Smith, who was born in 2019 with the rare brain disorder semi-lobar holoprosencephaly. “We just want to be more honest about who we are and things that might be happening, especially in a time of such shared struggle and loss,” says Pulido. There’s even been something of a reconciliation with Smith, who now lives in North Carolina and makes music under the name Harp. “We still keep in touch – and who knows what could happen in the future?” Is he saying they may one day make music together again? “I definitely would consider that,” he says. “Stranger things have happened. I wouldn’t put it out of the realm of possibility.” So now that Midlake are back in their groove, can we expect album No 6 to come a little quicker than album No 5? “We’ve never been a prolific band and, for better or worse, we’ve never felt the obligation to say: ‘OK, we’ve got to follow this up with a hit single or a song that sounds like this hot thing that’s going on right now,’” confesses Pulido. “But I feel like we’re in a place that’s much more sustainable now.” A cause for Pulido Old Fashioneds all round. For the Sake of Bethel Woods is released on 18 March.The US Senate is not a crowded, rambunctious place like Britain’s House of Commons or other more lively legislative bodies around the world. Members are accustomed to speaking among row after row of empty desks, unheckled by absent colleagues. This has not deterred Senator Sheldon Whitehouse from stepping into the arena to champion urgent causes. For almost nine years the Democrat took to the Senate floor every week the chamber was in session to demand that attention be paid to the climate crisis. He retired the “Time to Wake Up” series last year after 279 speeches only to revive it again this year. But now he has another alarm to sound. “The Scheme” is a series about the plot by rightwing donor interests to capture the supreme court and achieve through the institution’s power what they cannot through other branches of government. For each speech Whitehouse, whose desk is on the back row, rises to his feet beside a mounted sign with the words “The scheme” superimposed on an image of the court’s exterior. He expounds on the decades-long roots of the masterplan, how it was watered by “dark money” and how it bore full fruit when President Donald Trump installed a six-justice rightwing majority on the court. In an interview with the Guardian, Whitehouse, 66, explains why he has no faith in Trump’s three appointees – Neil Gorsuch, Brett Kavanaugh and Amy Coney Barrett – and acknowledges the embarrassment that Democrats were “sleeping sentries” as the threat unfolded. But first, does it bother him that he is not playing to a full house, perhaps shouting into the void? “One gets used to it in the Senate,” he says phlegmatically, sitting in a meeting room at his Capitol Hill office adorned with framed photos of lighthouses and starry skies from Rhode Island, the tiny state that he represents. “Actually the last time I went out, a little troop of people who I didn’t recognise came out of the Republican cloakroom and went and sat on the staff bench on the other side and watched and then, when I was done, they trooped back off. I don’t think I have a fanclub but somebody wanted to get a report.” The thread running through Whitehouse’s spoken essays is that the current 6-3 conservative majority on the court is no accident but the product of special interests and dark money – hundreds of millions of dollars in anonymous hidden spending. The special interests are able to groom young judges, promote them in advertising campaigns and then try to influence them in legal briefs, all lacking in transparency. The outcome is a dire threat to the climate, reproductive rights and myriad issues that touch people’s everyday lives. Whitehouse chose his title carefully. “It implies that this is not random,” he says. “This is not just, ‘Oh, we’re conservatives, and so we’re going to appoint conservative thinking judges,’ which is the veneer. They would like to maintain this is just conservatives being conservatives.” Whitehouse suggests that the model of “agency capture”, when an administrative agency is co-opted to serve the interests of a minor constituency, was applied to the supreme court. “Once you’re over that threshold of indecency, it actually turned out to be a pretty easy target. The other construct to bear in mind is covert operations, because essentially what’s happened is that a bunch of fossil fuel billionaires have run a massive covert operation in and against their own country. And that’s a scheme.” The senator has delivered 12 of the speeches so far. The first, last May, was entitled “The Powell Memo”. It focused on Lewis Powell, a corporate lawyer from Virginia in the 1950s and 1960s, a period of political turbulence that rattled America’s corporate elite. The US Chamber of Commerce commissioned from Powell a strategic plan for reasserting corporate authority over the political domain. One section of Powell’s secret report, called “Neglected Opportunity in the Courts”, described “exploiting judicial action” as an “area of vast opportunity”. He added that “with an activist-minded supreme court, the judiciary may be the most important instrument for social, economic and political change”. The report was dated August 1971; two months later, Republican President Richard Nixon nominated Powell to the supreme court. Whitehouse comments: “Having given the US Chamber of Commerce that warning and laid out that strategy, he then went on to the court and in three very significant decisions created a role for corporations in American politics that had never existed and was clearly not something that the founding fathers thought about or would have approved. Since then it’s gotten worse, but he teed it up in those earlier decisions and set the Republican justices of the court on that pathway.” Another key player in the story is the Federalist Society, founded in 1982 by law students who wanted to challenge what they perceived as the dominant liberal ideology. Its co-chairman and former executive vice-president is Leonard Leo, who also advised Trump on judicial selection. The Federalist Society “first showed its fangs” in 2005, Whitehouse says, when President George W Bush chose Harriet Miers for the supreme court. “The Federalist Society came forward to defeat the nomination of an extremely talented lawyer by a Republican president because she was not, to quote what was said at the time, ‘one of us’. “It was at that point that the grip of this little donor elite and Leo, its Federalist Society operative, really took hold. Justice Samuel Alito was the product of that and he has proven himself on the court as being a faithful workhorse for that dark money corporate rightwing crew.” There was no better example than 2010 and the supreme court’s 5-4 ruling in Citizens United v Federal Election Commission, which allowed wealthy donors, corporations and special interest groups to spend unlimited cash on elections. Since then an estimated $6bn in dark money, often from nonprofits that are not required to disclose their donors, has poured into political campaigns. The Kryptonite to the scheme is transparency because it would enable the public to follow the money. So donors depend on the court to preserve their anonymity. The senator highlights last year’s case of the Americans for Prosperity Foundation, front group of the wealthy Koch brothers that successfully sued to prevent access to donor information. Not surprisingly the court’s reputation for independence has taken hit after hit and Senate nomination hearings have become partisan bunfights. In 2019 chief justice John Roberts felt compelled to push back: “We do not have Obama judges or Trump judges, Bush judges or Clinton judges. What we have is an extraordinary group of dedicated judges doing their level best to do equal right to those appearing before them.” “Piffle,” says Whitehouse. “They’ve got to try to keep the veneer. The instant that Roberts admits OK, this is a captured court, we’re here to do dirty deeds for the big donors that got us on to the court, then they kind of blow themselves up.” “So they’re not going to do that. Keeping a veneer that we’re all actually very serious judges here and this is all on the up and up is important to the success of the scheme.” He adds: “The difference is the evidence of their behaviour. There are things that are inexplicable in a legitimate court.” Anonymous donors gave tens of millions of dollars to the Judicial Crisis Network, a rightwing advocacy organisation, to fund advertising campaigns supporting Gorsuch, Kavanaugh or Barrett for the supreme court. Whitehouse does not believe they are impartial justices. Whitehouse predicts that court will “nibble away” at Roe v Wade, the 1973 decision enshrining a woman’r right to abortion. “There are some things that it’s not worth doing all at once and creating a big political blowback,” he says, comparing it to rulings on Barack Obama’s signature healthcare law. “If my theory is correct, they have an eye to the political winds and don’t want to step out too far if they don’t have to. As long as they are continuing to feed the anti-choice base, step by step is fine.” A similar pragmatism may play out when it comes to filling the vacancy left by Stephen Breyer, a liberal justice who last month announced his retirement. Whitehouse, who does not have a preferred candidate, says: “If you’ve captured the court already and you’ve got 6-3 and it’s doing what your big donors want, you don’t want to create a ruckus, you don’t want lots of controversy. It’s going to be 6-3 before; it’s going to be 6-3 after. “The more Mitch can lower the temperature and have everybody think that the supreme court is just normal – nothing to see here, folks – that’s in his interest. The more that the red meat attack is not against the candidate but against Democrat dark money, the more you have success in the propaganda wars to fool the public about what you actually did.” Democrats have been criticised for being complacent as Republicans unspooled their 50-year campaign to capture the courts. Whitehouse agrees. “It’s way late. It’s really embarrassing how we let this dark money crowd steal a march on us.” He observes: “From a political perspective it never mattered as much to the Democratic base as it did to the Republican base because we did not have the history of Roe versus Wade, Brown versus Board of Education [desegregating public schools] decisions that provoked massive cultural objections on the far right. “So they got highly motivated and we did not but then once we saw this machinery begin to go in operation to capture the court, we never bothered to call it out either. It’s not just that our base didn’t care as much. It’s that we were sleeping sentries.” Whitehouse is planning at least three or four more speeches about The Scheme. Like his climate series, he hopes that the message will get through: it is time to wake up. “I hope there’ll be a more general understanding that what’s going on at the court has a lot less to do with conservatism than it has to do with capture and, with any luck, it might cause a bit of an epiphany with some of the judges that they don’t want to be associated with what they’re actually associated with. And the American public will see it for what it is and give us in politics more opportunities to administer a repair.”It might be best known today for its otters and puffins but 170m years ago the Isle of Skye was home to an enormous flying reptile with a wingspan bigger than a kingsize bed, researchers have revealed. Fossil hunters in Scotland say they have recovered the remains of the world’s largest Jurassic pterosaur, adding the creature – known informally as a pterodactyl – also boasted a mouthful of sharp teeth for spearing and trapping fish. With a wingspan of about 2.5 metres or larger – around the size of the largest flying birds today, such as the wandering albatross – the creature sheds new light on the evolution of pterosaurs, given they were not thought to have reached such a size until about 25m years later. “When this thing was living about 170m years ago, it was the largest animal that had ever flown, at least that we know of,” said Prof Steve Brusatte, a co-author of the research from the University of Edinburgh. “We’ve really dragged back in time the evolution of large pterosaurs,” he said. Brusatte added previous finds suggested pterosaurs did not grow much larger than about 1.6-1.8 metres in wingspan during the Jurassic, only reaching much larger sizes during the Cretaceous period. “There were pterosaurs living at the end of the Cretaceous when the asteroid hit that were the size of fighter jets,” said Brusatte, referring to the mass extinction 66m years ago that wiped out non-avian dinosaurs, pterosaurs and myriad other creatures. The latest discovery calls into question the idea competition with birds may have initially driven the boom in pterosaur size. “Birds evolved from dinosaurs around the time when this [pterosaur] was living,” said Brusatte, although he added birds may have exerted evolutionary pressures for them to grow larger still. It is not the first time pterosaurs have been unearthed in the UK – the fossil hunter Mary Anning unearthed what was dubbed her “flying dragon” in 1828. Brusatte said the new discovery, dubbed Dearc sgiathanach meaning both ‘winged reptile’ and ‘reptile from Skye’ in Scottish Gaelic, is notable for the completeness of the fossil. “It’s probably about 70% complete, which is really just outstanding for a pterosaur, because these things are very difficult to fossilise,” he said, noting the walls of many of the bones are not much thicker than a sheet of paper. Brusatte said an analysis of the bones revealed the animal was at most a teenager and was still growing, adding the adult wingspan could have been more than three metres. The team also carried out scans of the pterosaur’s skull, allowing them to build a digital model of the brain. The results reveal the animal had very large optic lobes, suggesting it had very good eyesight. Writing in the journal Current Biology, Brusatte and colleagues report how the fossils, which have been unveiled at the National Museum of Scotland, were discovered by PhD student Amelia Penny, who spotted the creature’s skull during fieldwork on the Isle of Skye in 2017. “It didn’t look like anything else I’d seen,” she told the Guardian. “I grew up going to the Natural History Museum in London and reading about Mary Anning’s fossil discoveries on the Jurassic Coast – which definitely influenced my decision to become a palaeontologist,” she added. “But to find a new Jurassic reptile, especially a fossil of this significance, is not something I’d ever dared to expect might happen to me.” Dr David Unwin, an expert in pterosaurs at the University of Leicester who was not involved in the research, said it was debatable whether the newly discovered creature was the largest of its era, noting some fragmented bones from other fossils have already hinted at similar sized pterosaurs in the middle Jurassic. Nonetheless he said the find was significant because fossils dating to that time are scarce, while there are very few pterosaur remains that are as complete. “This new find will allow us to go back to those older collections and understand much better what we’ve got in there,” he said. “It’s a big piece of the puzzle in our evolutionary history of pterosaurs.”Nancy Pelosi probably did not expect to set off such a firestorm with her use of three words: free market economy. When the House speaker was asked in December whether she supports proposals to ban members and their spouses from trading individual stocks, she said no. “We’re a free market economy,” Pelosi said. “They should be able to participate in that.” But Pelosi’s comment sparked ire among government ethics experts and editorial boards, who argued that lawmakers’ ability to glean information from classified briefings and stakeholder meetings raised the possibility of insider trading. Some critics also noted that Pelosi’s husband, Paul, recently netted a gain of more than $5m from trading stocks of Alphabet, Google’s parent company. In the face of backlash, Pelosi has changed her tune on the stock-trading issue, but her hesitation highlighted an uncomfortable truth about how Congresshas responded to the proposal. Despite wide public support for banning lawmakers from trading stocks, members of both parties have expressed anxiety about the idea: a rare moment of bipartisanship in a divided America, but one whose subject – stock-trading politicians – is unlikely to please many voters. Government watchdog groups warn that if Congress fails to act on this issue, it will only intensify many Americans’ concern over how money has tainted their country’s political institutions. The debate over banning members’ stock-trading has been reinvigorated in recent months, after a string of high-profile controversies at the start of the coronavirus pandemic. In February 2020, Republican senator Richard Burr sold hundreds of thousands of dollars’ worth of stock before the market suffered a severe setback the next month. While he was overseeing those valuable stock trades, Burr was also publicly downplaying the threat of the virus. The justice department investigated Burr and three of his Senate colleagues – Republicans Kelly Loeffler and James Inhofe and Democrat Dianne Feinstein – for possible insider trading, but ultimately no charges were filed. In response to the outcry over those controversies, both Democrats and Republicans have proposed bills to crack down on members’ stock-trading. One bill, introduced by Democratic senators Jon Ossoff and Mark Kelly, would require members, their spouses and their dependent children to place their stock portfolios in a blind trust controlled by an outside party. Republican senator Josh Hawley has proposed a similar bill, although his legislation does not cover dependent children and would not fine members’ salaries for violations, as the Ossoff-Kelly bill would. Over in the House, Democrat Abigail Spanberger and Republican Chip Roy have introduced a similar bill to the Ossoff-Kelly proposal, and more than 50 members have signed on as co-sponsors to the separate Ban Conflicted Trading Act. That bill, which was first introduced by Democrat Raja Krishnamoorthi, would ban members and senior congressional staffers from trading individual stocks. “It has really gotten to a point where it’s getting a little bit too difficult for the rest of Congress to ignore,” Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, a co-sponsor of Krishnamoorthi’s bill, said at a town hall on Tuesday. “The fact of the matter is, we shouldn’t be able to day-trade the companies whose regulation and whose hearings and whose industries and business is before Congress.” A majority of Americans agree with her. According to a January poll from the progressive firm Data for Progress, 67% of US voters say lawmakers should be banned from trading stocks. Another recent survey, conducted by the conservative advocacy group Convention of States Action, found that 76% of voters believe lawmakers and their spouses have an “unfair advantage” in the stock market. It is illegal for members of Congress, or any American, to engage in insider trading. However, insider trading is very difficult to prove, so in 2012, Congress passed the Stop Trading on Congressional Knowledge (Stock) Act to address concerns about lawmakers’ financial activities. The law prohibits members from using information gained through work for their own personal profit, and it requires them to disclose stock trades within 45 days. Both Democratic and Republican lawmakers have pointed to the existing legislation to argue against banning members from trading stocks. Republican congressman Pete Sessions has described a ban as unnecessary, while one of his Democratic colleagues, Elaine Luria, attacked the proposal as “bullshit”. “Why would you assume that members of Congress are going to be inherently bad or corrupt? We already have the Stock Act that requires people to report stock trades,” Luria told Punchbowl News earlier this month. “So I’m very strongly opposed to any legislation like that.” Advocates for a stock-trading ban were quick to note that Luria and her husband own millions of dollars worth of stocks in Facebook, Netflix and Apple, among other companies. “Honestly, the stock trades by members of Congress just smell bad … Regardless of which party is doing it, it just doesn’t look good,” said RL Miller, the political director of Climate Hawks Vote. Responding to Luria’s comments specifically, Miller added: “Members of Congress expecting that they don’t prioritize companies in which they’re invested is bullshit.” Miller’s group was one of 18 progressive organizations that signed on to a letter urging Congress to hold a hearing on banning stock trades, arguing that the Stock Act and other existing laws “have not served as a sufficient deterrent to this problem”. Enforcement of the Stock Act also appears to have been spotty at best over the past 10 years. No one has ever been prosecuted under the law, and an investigation by Business Insider found that at least 55 members of Congress and 182 senior congressional staffers were late in filing their stock trades in 2020 and 2021. A late filing is supposed to be punished with a $200 fine that increases with subsequent offenses, but Congress does not keep any public record of such fines, and it’s unclear how often they are collected. “The teeth behind the Stock Act are basically non-existent,” said Dylan Hedtler-Gaudette, government affairs manager at the Project on Government Oversight. “We’re seeing that reporting and disclosure do not actually act as any kind of a deterrent to doing things that look, at the very least, pretty sketchy.” Government watchdog groups also argue that the Stock Act is now somewhat outdated. They say the legislation does not properly account for how lawmakers can use the 24-hour news cycle and social media platforms to affect markets and specific companies’ share prices. “We have seen countless examples of how members – not just as a body but individual members – can influence the stock market with a range of tools at their disposal,” said Donald Sherman, chief counsel for Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics in Washington. “Now we’re at a place in history and on the Hill where an individual member of Congress can influence the stock price with a tweet.” Groups like Crew are hopeful that the momentum for passing a stock-trading ban will soon translate into congressional action. Despite her initial reluctance, Pelosi has now adopted a more open-minded tone about the proposals, and the Senate majority leader, Chuck Schumer, has said the upper chamber should address the issue. “I think this is sort of an easy win that will have a very positive impact on policy-making and on public-facing democracy,” Sherman said. The enactment of a stock-trading ban could have the additional benefit of boosting the public’s opinion of Congress, which has suffered in recent years. According to Gallup’s January polling, only 18% of Americans approve of how Congress is handling its job. Advocates for the proposed stock-trading ban say the policy would bolster public confidence in one of America’s most important political institutions. “Anything that can restore Americans’ trust in Congress is a good thing,” Miller said. “This would help rebut that appearance of double-dealing and go a long way toward restoring Americans’ trust in their leadership.” For those members who are hesitant to give up their stocks, Hedtler-Gaudette suggested they should reconsider their chosen career. “To become a member of Congress is an extraordinarily prestigious thing. But it is not compulsory,” Hedtler-Gaudette said. “There are a number of sacrifices that you have to make to run for office … If this is a problem, then you are not required to run for Congress.”Nearly 10 years on from his professional debut, and more than 4,000 miles from home, the man once labelled the “Scottish Messi” and who drew interest as a teen from the likes of Real Madrid, Manchester United and Liverpool has at last, in Major League Soccer’s Vancouver Whitecaps, found a home at which he can deliver on his vast potential. Now 26, Ryan Gauld has come a long way in his career – both in terms of distance covered and experiences logged – as he gets ready for the start of the new MLS season, which starts on Saturday. He was once the 17-year-old star of a vibrant young Dundee United side, before a seven-year stint in Portugal brought mixed fortunes. He left Portugal as a free agent last summer and received no shortage of offers, with big hitters from Scotland and England showing interest after a reputation-rescuing final two years in Portuguese football. “I’ve never been one to make my decisions based on money,” Gauld told the assembled media of his move to Canada. “There is more to a career and more to life than money. The Whitecaps were the first club to reach out to me and make it known how much I was wanted, what they thought I could bring to the club.” Gauld may be overplaying the poverty of a career in MLS a little – his deal last season was worth around $2m. But his decision to eschew proposals from closer to home in favour of North America has been vindicated on the field. With four goals – the last of which came as Vancouver clinched a playoff berth on the final day of the regular season – and five assists to his name last term, he was one of the league’s best performers after his arrival. And it comes as little surprise to those who’ve worked with Gauld that he has once again proven willing to trot the globe. After all he’s been travelling in search of challenges his whole career. Gauld was around 10 when he was first spotted by Dundee United scout Alex Robertson. The midfielder – who has since grown to the not-so-heady height of 5ft 6in – had travelled from his home in Laurencekirk, Aberdeenshire, to play a seven-a-side tournament in Dundee with his grassroots team, Brechin City Boys Club. “Wee Ryan was beating everybody,” Robertson remembers. “He was all left foot, but he was skinning people, taking them on and beating them all. A lot of times when you see people with a lot of ability, they tend to be lazy. They lose the ball, they stop and the don’t do anything about it. If Ryan lost the ball, he would spring up like a yoyo and chase the person to get it back again. You’d have to be blind not to see that he was different. I’ve spent the next 15 years looking and not found anybody as good.” He was swiftly signed by United – along with teammates Harry and John Souttar, now of Stoke City and Hearts, respectively, and whose dad ran the team. So began a three-times-a-week 70-mile round trip to Dundee. The boys enrolled in the Cathro Clinic, former Tottenham coach Ian Cathro’s skills school. Sessions would run from 4.30-6pm on the astroturf pitch at Gussie Park, in the shadow of Tannadice, United’s home stadium. Then, from 6-7.30pm, they’d train with the professional club’s youth set-up. Gauld quickly progressed into the elite group within the Cathro Clinic and made an indelible impression on his coaches. “I looked over and the ball has come in the air,” Steven Leahy, who coached Gauld, remembers of a particularly spectacular moment the young midfielder produced. “You’re thinking, ‘Take a touch, wee man.’ And he doesn’t. He swivelled his body around and did an overhead kick, which was just ridiculous. “I remember Ian stopped the session and made everyone – we had maybe 50 or 60 kids – give him a round of applause.” At 17, Gauld was the focal point of a dynamic Dundee United side that also featured future Liverpool full-back Andrew Robertson and Southampton midfielder Stuart Armstrong. “You could always see that he was a special talent,” says Jackie McNamara, the manager under whom Gauld established himself as a first-team star at Tannadice. “He had a great little football brain. “There were times in training you’d just sit back and laugh. I remember a game against Celtic, a semi-final. He set up the equaliser for Gary Mackay-Steven. Just his decision-making and his weigh of pass, that was the biggest thing about him as a kid. He was a little genius when I worked with him. I loved watching him play.” Interest from some of England’s biggest clubs soon grew, but Gauld had his mind set on a move to the continent. “I think he was always different,” McNamara says. “He saw himself more European [in style] than the hustle and bustle of England.” Of all the European clubs chasing Gauld after his stellar 2013-14 campaign – in which Dundee United finished fourth in the Scottish Premiership and reached the final of the Scottish Cup – Sporting were the most insistent. “They’d done their due diligence on him,” says McNamara. “It was the owner that wanted Ryan. Word came back to me that he loved him, had watched all his clips from his time at Dundee United.” Aged just 18, Gauld signed for Sporting in a £3m deal. As a sign of the youngster’s potential, a €60m release clause was inserted into his contract. He made just five first-team appearances in as many years with the Lisbon giants, though, all of which came in his first season in Portugal. A succession of loans – including a spell back in Scotland with Hibernian in 2018-19 – bore little fruit and his once-promising career began to stagnate. Yet he had embraced life in Portugal. He became fluent in Portuguese and still speaks the language with Cathro, his multilingual mentor. Upon leaving Sporting in 2019, Gauld elected to stay in Portugal, dropping down a tier to join Farense. In his first season with the Algarve club, he scored a career-high nine league goals to fire them back up to the Primeira Division. And last season, despite Farense’s relegation, he scored another nine times and registered seven assists, making him one of only three Primeira Liga players to rank in the top 10 in both categories. Farense initially contested Gauld’s free-agent status last summer. They believed they had a contractual right to extend his deal by a further year, but he countered that the club’s relegation had nullified that clause. Eventually free to join the club of his choosing, Gauld went with the one who’d wanted him most, with Vancouver having chased him since the previous January. The Whitecaps had won just three of their 16 fixtures in the 2021 season before Gauld’s arrival. After his debut they became one of MLS’s form teams. Gauld’s performances proved a catalyst for their playoff hopes, although he couldn’t prevent an eventual first-round exit at the hands of Sporting Kansas City. He has taken the long road to get here – literally and metaphorically – but Gauld is finally thriving. And there’s more to come – whether it’s further MLS stardom, an eventual return to Europe or a belated Scotland debut. “It has taken him a bit longer than I’d have thought to shine,” McNamara says. “But he is still young. He’ll have learned a lot over the last number of years. His football was never in question.”Parts of the UK are bracing for yet more atrocious weather with heavy snow, lightning and gusts of up to 60mph forecast to arrive on Wednesday. The Met Office issued two yellow weather warnings for Scotland, Northern Ireland and northern England. However, the impact is not feared to be on the same level as the triple whammy of havoc wreaked in recent days by Storms Dudley, Eunice and Franklin. The weather alerts came as two severe flood warnings and 84 flood warnings, issued by the Environment Agency, remained in place as river levels continued to rise in the wake of Storm Franklin. Both weather warnings begin on Wednesday. Between about 6am and 3pm the north-east of England and south-east of Scotland can expect strong winds, as high as 60mph, likely to lead to some travel disruption. From 1pm on Wednesday until Thursday afternoon, heavy snow showers, gusty winds and a possibility of lightning are expected in parts of Scotland and Northern Ireland. Up to 10cm of snow could fall even at low levels with up to 30cm building up on higher ground by Thursday morning. There is a small chance of injuries and danger to life from flying debris, the Met Office warned. Power cuts, road and bridge closures and travel disruption are also possible. Met Office spokesperson Stephen Dixon said that this week’s weather was “largely more typical February weather rather than the more impactful weather we saw last week”. The UK has gradually been getting back to normal after the storms. About 1.48m households and businesses lost electricity because of the weather. Power has been restored to the vast majority of people but the Energy Networks Association, which represents providers across the UK, said 11,400 customers were still without power on Tuesday afternoon. Most train services had on Tuesday returned to normal after several days of disruption. Rotherham Central station was still closed because of flooding, with Northern services between Doncaster and Sheffield diverting around it. Network Rail said it recorded about 200 storm-related incidents on its western route between London Paddington and Penzance in recent days. In the past week, rail staff worked in extreme conditions to clear trees, sheds, trampolines and other objects from tracks, and fix overhead electric wires, the company said. Flooding remains the most pressing concern for thousands of people with severe flood warnings in place on the River Severn at Ironbridge, in Shropshire, and Bewdley, in Worcestershire. Residents were urged to evacuate and police declared major emergencies. The Environment Agency warned that temporary flood barriers in Wharfage, Ironbridge, could be overtopped on Tuesday evening with river levels reaching nearly 7 metres high. In Bewdley, officials said they expected temporary structures to “exceed their capacity” on Tuesday, meaning flooding to homes and main roads was expected. River levels in the village were not expected to peak until Wednesday afternoon. More than 80 flood warnings, meaning flooding is expected, were in place across England on Tuesday afternoon , mostly along the Severn near the Welsh border and in Yorkshire. Four flood warnings were in place in Scotland. In York, river levels were thought to have peaked at 4.53 metres on Tuesday morning, at least 3 metres higher than normal, causing flooding to nearby properties. That was only 80cm short of the record level the river reached in 2000, which was the highest measured in the centre of York.Promoting rugby union should be the simplest of games in weeks like this. The Six Nations is in full flow, Wales are due at Twickenham and the passion and intensity is self evident. Who could possibly need persuading to watch on television or, having taken out the required mortgage, to buy a ticket? The answer is millions of people. There is no shortage of non-believers and latterly the big Cs – Covid and concussion – have not helped either. Adult male participation rates have fallen and rugby is not a priority in many inner-city schools. Which makes this a timely moment to ponder how best to woo the unconverted. Are social media clips, celebrities and gaming platforms really the route to a lifelong affiliation? What, ultimately, is rugby’s USP? And what makes it so addictive for those who do love it? The local library is a decent place to start. Some outstanding literary minds, from Arthur Conan Doyle to PG Wodehouse, have long since attempted to project rugby to a wider audience. So did James Joyce in The Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man: “The evening air was pale and chilly and after every charge and thud of the footballers the greasy leather orb flew like a heavy bird through the grey light.” Joyce recognised the light and shade and two-pronged physical and mental challenge rugby offers. And also how the power of the imagination can be the strongest of all. Could it be that rugby’s superpower, over and above its off-field conviviality, is its subtle emotional resonance, not the creation of shiny new (or expanded) competitions that may or may not hit the mark? A modern-day guru is clearly required at this point, someone instantly capable of articulating and untangling such intangibles. Step forward the perceptive Richard Beard, author of the most sharply observed rugby book to be published this century. It is almost 20 years since Muddied Oafs first appeared but it remains a classic of its sparsely populated genre. The late, great Frank Keating described it at the time as “the book rugby has been waiting for”. These days Beard is a widely acclaimed novelist and nonfiction writer. His most recent book, Sad Little Men, is a brilliant study of the emotional carnage a boarding school education can inflict and should probably be on the national curriculum. In his time he has also played club rugby in England, Scotland, France, Switzerland and Japan and remains hugely grateful for the perspective and sense of belonging the game has given him. So what does he think? A few lazy stereotypes, he reckons, need nailing instantly. “There’s a limited imagination about rugby sometimes,” he says, well aware of perceptions that a Twickenham matchday is basically “the professional classes having a jolly” and that rugby fans are there for the drinking, the blazers or possibly both. “A lot of people also have an experience of university rugby clubs, which doesn’t always leave a great impression. But that’s not really what the game is all about any more and hasn’t been for some time.” Instead, beyond the muscular crunch and visceral physicality, Beard believes the game should be trying harder to highlight its myriad possibilities. “Rugby’s boxing but with friends. That’s the great joy of it in a way. But it’s not just about boxing, it’s about finding space. “It’s hard to explain to someone who’s never experienced it. Imagine having a line of large people in front of you, all of whom want to knock you to the floor. Then you somehow find a way through without anyone laying a hand on you and space miraculously opens up. It’s a moment of utter transcendence and joy I’ve never found in another sport. It’s terrifying because everyone is now trying to catch you up but that moment when the whole field opens up is just fantastic.” Which is not to say the “elemental aspect” is not, for many, the biggest draw. As Beard says: “The basic collision of very committed individuals – both in men’s and women’s rugby – is still a great spectacle. You don’t have to understand all the rules to enjoy that.” But in his experience it can also be more emotionally complex than that. “People like sports which somehow map on to their idea of how the world works. Life can be very strategic, quite slow and about getting as close to your objective as possible. A bit like bowls. But if you’re a person who sees life as a struggle and quite combative with some moments of enlightenment then rugby is the game for you.” Even Joyce, who instinctively empathised more with the shivering schoolkid stuck reluctantly out on the wing, clearly sensed a sport with a rare depth to it. As Beard wryly observes: “Apparently Finnegans Wake is full of references to Irish rugby but no one’s ever read it.” Samuel Beckett, a scrum-half in his youth, was another enthusiast. If he was unable to obtain a ticket to watch France v Ireland in Paris he would instead head out on to the street and listen for the roar of the crowd before retreating inside to follow the radio commentary. Just another mundane sport? Hardly. Fast-forward almost a century and the importance of the Six Nations remaining embedded in the national psyche can not be emphasised enough. “The Six Nations is part of the ritual of the British year,” says Beard. “If it ever goes off terrestrial TV that would die off really quickly. It would be a huge shame.” So, whether you are eight or 80, settle down on the sofa at tea-time on Saturday shortly before England and Wales run out. And then, just as Joyce and Beckett did, let your imagination roam free. • This is an extract from our weekly rugby union email, the Breakdown. To subscribe, just visit this page and follow the instructions.Notes on an Execution Danya Kukafka Phoenix, £16.99, pp272 From Thomas Harris’s Hannibal Lecter to Bret Easton Ellis’s Patrick Bateman, serial killers stalk the pages of fiction, their actions and motivations drawing readers back again and again. But how many of us can remember the names of their victims; how many of us have imagined what their lives might have been, if they hadn’t crossed paths with their killers? Just as the true crime genre is starting to upend the narrative of the killer – in Hallie Rubenhold’s award-winning The Five, the women murdered by Jack the Ripper are given their own space on the page – so Danya Kukafka’s Notes on an Execution looks at the women left behind as murderer Ansel Packer awaits his fate on death row. The clock is ticking towards Ansel’s death as he plots his escape, and gloats over the “Theory” he will leave behind for the world to read. His crimes may be horrific, but Kukafka isn’t out to explore the origin story of the murderer. Instead, she tells us about his mother, Lavender, who was 17 when Ansel was born and subject to a world that slowly closed around her in the Adirondack mountains. “Until the time came, Lavender did not understand what it meant to walk away from a thing she’d grown from her own insides.” Lavender’s story is bruising, and brave – but so is Hazel’s. She’s the twin of Jenny, the girl who married Ansel; Hazel watches as her sister is consumed by her relationship with Ansel, helpless as it destroys her. “Why did he do it?” ask the reporters, but Hazel doesn’t care: it doesn’t matter how Ansel felt. “There are millions of men out there who want to hurt women – people seem to think that Ansel Packer is extraordinary, because he did.” And Kukafka tells of Saffron Singh, the detective who has been on Ansel’s trail for years – who knew him as a boy, saw what he was capable of then. As the world moves on from the three girls Ansel murdered, leaving the mystery unsolved, Saffy persists. She can’t stop thinking about who the murdered girls – Izzy, Angela, Lila – might have been. “The possibilities stalked and haunted – the infinite number of lives they had not lived… There were so many things a girl could be,” she thinks. And later, at a vigil for them: “Saffy feels slimy, the truth prickling. There would be no story, for these girls alone. There would be no vigil, no attention at all. They are relevant because of Ansel and the fascination the world has for men like him.” Notes on an Execution is Kukafka’s second novel, after Girl in Snow, which explored the death of a high-school girl in Colorado. It is deeper, wiser, more painful than her debut: devastating in its impact, and impossible to look away from. I can’t remember the last time I finished a thriller in tears, not even sure by that point who my heart was hurting for. Reputation Sarah Vaughan Simon &amp; Schuster, £14.99, pp480 Sarah Vaughan’s fifth novel is uncannily timely. Emma Webster, a Labour backbencher and single mother, is campaigning on the topic of revenge porn when her teenage daughter Flora runs into trouble of her own. As dark and gripping as you’d expect from the author of Anatomy of a Scandal. We Know You Remember Tove Alsterdal, translated by Alice Menzies Faber, £14.99, pp368 The acclaimed Swedish author’s new novel opens 20 years after Olof Hagström left the remote community in the far north of Sweden where he grew up. He was arrested at the age of 14 for the rape and murder of Lina Stavred, and when he returns, he finds himself in the spotlight again. Alsterdal explores themes of culpability and memory as she lays out, sensitively and painfully, how a child suspect is failed by his family and the police. To support the Guardian and Observer order Notes on an Execution, Reputation or We Know You Remember at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyIt’s funny, isn’t it, childbirth? Periodically, someone says something true about whether or not it hurts (I won’t pick a side here), and there’s a flurry of panic that people will be put off doing it and that’ll be the end of the species. In real life, nobody has ever been discouraged from reproducing by its harsh realities, any more than Roy Orbison could deter you from falling in love. Pain is very abstract until it’s almost upon you, and by then it’s too late. But that isn’t the main charge against This Is Going to Hurt, the BBC’s adaptation of former doctor Adam Kay’s ward diary. Rather, it’s that the series, and by inference the diaries themselves, lift the lid on the casual disrespect, bordering on misogyny, with which obstetricians treat mothers. This, again, is a hardy perennial. As a criticism of Kay, it’s way off: the system he describes is of doctors so overstretched as to leave you in awe. Yet anyone brushing against medics in the business of producing young invariably feels, on some level, after some encounters, patronised or undermined or disregarded. It can be the truly insufferable habit of using the word “discomfort” when a better word is “agony” (though, in fairness, the real devils for this are dental hygienists). It can be the feverish overpolicing of behaviours in pregnancy, while at the same time, genuine reported problems are minimised: so everyone’s got time to give you a 10-minute lecture on blue cheese, yet is magically way too busy to hear about your debilitating morning sickness. It certainly isn’t just a cultural problem within the NHS, it transcends all borders; Naomi Wolf, back when she was a feminist icon and 20 years before she was suspended from Twitter for spreading vaccine misinformation, wrote Misconceptions about obstetrics in the US; the C-section scene in marketised healthcare sounded terrifying. What’s really hard to take is the drop in status. You go through your entire life interacting with medicine, if you’re lucky quite infrequently, as a person, and then suddenly – even if you’re still lucky, very frequently – you’re interacting as more of a vessel. You’re an inconvenient interface between medic and baby; it would help everyone considerably if you could perform this role as quietly as possible. The hot indignation of being suddenly a non-person is worse, considerably worse, than the fact that you’re already literally too hot. My hunch is that this has been true since long before medicine. • Zoe Williams is a Guardian columnistGiven the scale of the environmental challenges facing their world, you can forgive teenagers for feeling pretty muddled. They know that action needs to be taken without delay; their parents and teachers preach patience and circumspection and tell them they’re too young to take matters into their own hands. For every steel-eyed Greta Thunberg, you can be sure there are a dozen or more like the title characters of this play, for whom fear for their future and anger at adults’ apathy will only exacerbate the maelstrom of teenage emotion. Sixteen-year-old Zoe, suspended from school by a headteacher who deems her “too excitable”, strains with resolve and frustration. Through sheer force of character (AKA bossiness) she convinces her new neighbour, Rain, to drive her across country on his inherited motorcycle, from their west coast home to a protest against a polluting oil company in Philadelphia, where Zoe may or may not find her long-absent mother. Along the way, the naive pair get lost, fall in love and argue about what constitute legitimate forms of protest, before accidentally turning into the Bonnie and Clyde of glitter-bombing pipelines. Unfortunately, their understandably messy emotional states (Rain frequently finds himself speaking to his dead father, Zoe conjures the moon as her mother) are matched by the untidiness of Crystal Skillman’s story, which is too flimsily constructed to bear the weight of the big themes it’s asked to carry. The plot careers off into a second half of increasingly unbelievable action (how two kids who don’t know how to pitch a tent manage to infiltrate an oil refinery is a mystery). But it is presented with great verve by its likable leads, Jordan Benjamin and Mei Henri, and designed with panache by Zoe Hurwitz; there is inventiveness too, from Richard Holt and Salma Shaw, who play all the other characters and the road scenes in which they become the motorbike are a highpoint of Hersh Ellis’s direction. You leave wondering who exactly the show is for: tonally, it feels like an educational piece for teenagers, and yet it never truly captures their language. At Jermyn Street theatre, London, until 12 MarchThe lifting of Covid restrictions in England will lead to a further rise in home schooling and the “forced exclusion” of immunosuppressed pupils whose families will be too scared to send them to school, an academy trust leader has warned. Steve Chalke, the founder of the Oasis academy trust of 52 schools, said the scrapping of twice-weekly testing in school communities and the legal requirement to self-isolate after a positive test was “a huge gamble”. He said he feared many immunosuppressed pupils – and those living with vulnerable relatives – would be effectively excluded from school because of families’ health fears. “They will not be able to afford to take the gamble,” Chalke said. Boris Johnson told the Commons on Monday it was time to move from “government restrictions to personal responsibility”. The legal requirement to self-isolate will end on Thursday, after which those testing positive, including school staff and pupils, will initially be advised to stay at home. After 1 April it will be down to personal responsibility. Chalke, whose schools work with many of the most disadvantaged children and vulnerable families, said: “I think it will become a forced form of exclusion of those who are vulnerable, those immunosuppressed children and staff who are put at increased risk. Also staff who are living with their own immunosuppressed children. “I think we will see a group of children turning away from education. It will lead to a further rise in home education – it can be a route for those who are worried or scared. All of this will play together in some unhelpful ways. “The gamble in my mind is that attendance among many of the most vulnerable stops or goes down, so it becomes a form of exclusion. Removing the requirement for positive cases to self-isolate puts them all at increased risk.” Councils in England reported in November that there had been a “rapid surge” in the number of parents choosing to take their children out of school to teach them at home, with a 34% jump in pupils being electively home educated on the previous year’s figures. The Department for Education (DfE) is also concerned about attendance, which stood at 86.2% in secondary schools on 3 February, while pre-Covid it would be about 95%. Chalke’s fears were echoed by Ben Davis, the headteacher at St Ambrose Barlow RC high school in Swinton, Manchester. “Without routine testing, isolation and access to free tests it will be much harder to manage the pandemic in schools and this will work against the most disadvantaged who are more likely to be ill, suffer more and have less access to testing,” he said. “There will be plenty of parents, carers, pupils and staff who will genuinely fear being exposed to infected cases now that they no longer need to test and isolate.” Simon Hyde, the general secretary of the Headmasters’ &amp; Headmistresses’ Conference, which represents independent schools, agreed. He said: “These changes could pose additional risks for children and staff that are clinically vulnerable, or have a family member who is vulnerable.” The government is still advising regular testing in special schools, alternative provision and special educational needs units in mainstream schools and colleges. An update to the DfE website said that if parents thought their child had Covid they should not send them to school. “Good ventilation, hygiene and encouraging vaccination uptake, as well as following any additional advice from local directors of public health, are the best measures to prevent the spread of Covid-19 in education settings,” it said. Shadow education secretary Bridget Phillipson said: “Living with Covid cannot mean simply ignoring it. Yet the government are falling woefully short on getting the vaccine out to children and ventilating their classrooms. The Tories are again treating our children as an afterthought.”Almost 15,000 “ghost flights” have departed from the UK, according to newly revealed official figures. The ghost flights, defined as those with no passengers or less than 10% of passenger capacity, operated from all 32 airports listed in the data. Heathrow was top, with 4,910 ghost flights between March 2020 and September 2021. Manchester and Gatwick were the next highest. There were an average of 760 ghost flights a month over the period, although the data covered only international departure and not domestic flights. Flying is one of the most carbon-intensive activities people can undertake and ghost flights have angered those campaigning for action on the climate crisis. The German airline Lufthansa recently warned it would have to fly 18,000 “unnecessary” flights by March in order to keep its landing slots at airports. Under current rules, airlines lose their valuable slots if they are not sufficiently used. However, during the pandemic-hit period covered by the new UK data, the rules that had required 80% of slots to be used were completely suspended. Airlines did not have to operate flights to retain the slots, but nonetheless flew 14,472 ghost flights. “Flights may operate with a low number of passengers for a range of reasons,” said the aviation minister Robert Courts, who produced the data in response to a parliamentary question. “Since the onset of the pandemic, the government has provided alleviation from the normal slot regulations. This means that airlines have not been required to operate empty or almost empty flights solely to retain their historic slots rights.” The Labour MP Alex Sobel, who asked the question and is chair of the net zero all-party parliamentary group, said: “To really tackle the climate emergency we need to ensure that our aviation sector is as efficient as it can be with its carbon output.” Anna Hughes, at Flight Free UK and whose parliamentary petition on the issue now has 11,000 signatories, said: “At a time of climate emergency we need to be drastically reducing our use of fossil fuel, not burning it in empty planes.” Slot rules were partially restored in October 2021, requiring 50% usage, and this will rise to 70% at the end of March. “If more than 14,000 empty flights took off from UK airports when there was no requirement to retain landing slots, how many more will have taken off since?” said Hughes. “Of course, all flights harm the climate, which is why we also campaign for a reduction in demand, a tax on aviation fuel and more affordable trains. But preventing planes from flying empty should be an easy win for policymakers and the climate.” Tim Johnson at the Aviation Environment Federation said: “Information [on ghost flights] is hidden from public view, with airlines avoiding scrutiny by claiming the data is proprietary. No doubt airlines fear reputational damage, but the public and consumers should be informed. It shouldn’t take a parliamentary question to expose the scale of this wasteful practice.” “The number of flights may be small in comparison to the overall total, but the effects on our climate add up when you consider the average short-haul flight emits between 13 and 20 tonnes of CO2,” he said. The Guardian asked the Department for Transport for data on ghost flights in January, but was told the DfT did not hold this data. The Civil Aviation Authority, which provided the new data to the government, refused a freedom of information request from the Guardian, saying it did not have the consent of the airlines to release it. Slot rules are monitored and enforced by a company called Airport Coordination Limited, but it told the Guardian passenger numbers on flights could come only from the airlines themselves. British Airways, Virgin Atlantic and easyJet told the Guardian they did not operate ghost flights to retain slots, but declined to provide data on the occupancy of their flights. A spokesperson for Virgin Atlantic said: “Covid-19 had an unprecedented impact on customer demand, with wide-ranging global restrictions that limited international travel. For three months during 2020, Virgin Atlantic did not operate any passenger flights. Any lower-occupancy flights that operated outside of this window were not ‘ghost flights’ – they supported the global movement of people including returning foreign citizens and repatriated UK citizens.” Both airlines said the increase in the required slot usage to 70%, the highest in the world, would lead to low-occupancy flights. Luis Gallego, the chief executive at IAG, BA’s parent company, said: “This decision would force airlines to operate flights with low load factors, which will generate unnecessary CO2 emissions. This is bad for the environment and detrimental to aviation’s efforts to tackle climate change.” Ryanair did not respond to requests for comment. Tim Johnson said the slot system was unsustainable and outdated and that reform was needed, adding “Slots at congested airports can exchange hands for millions of pounds each so there are very strong incentives for airlines to keep using them, even when passenger demand is very low. The government should rule out airport expansion and instead focus on slot reform and other efficiency improvements.” • This article was amended on 23 February 2022 to include reference to easyJet among the airlines that told the Guardian they did not operate ghost flights to retain landing slots.We would like to hear from customers of the Russian energy company Gazprom. Are you a UK business who has an energy account with Gazprom? How long have you had an account for? What are your views and experiences of the supplier? Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.How do you feel when you encounter a masterpiece? Humble? Overawed? As well as being cultural havens, historically, museums have had a didactic purpose, encouraging us to think, feel and move around them in a particular way. For example, the Sainsbury Wing at the National Gallery in London was built to resemble a 15th-century Florentine chapel. To this effect, it reconstructs the original context of the early Renaissance works it houses, which adds to the sense of awe. This is not the experience you get seeing Eternalising Art History at Unit London. For the first time, using blockchain technology, Unit and the digital art platform Cinello have created digital counterparts of six Italian masterpieces by blockbuster names such as Leonardo, Raphael and Caravaggio. The digital images are presented on screens, encased by identical reproductions of their original wooden frames, handcrafted by artisans in Poggibonsi, Tuscany. And, since this is a commercial gallery, they’re for sale, in editions of nine (a number that mirrors the production of sculptures, where often nine were produced: two as tests, and seven as the finished pieces). Each digital doppelganger hangs against its own dark wall. The first and earliest work, Leonardo da Vinci’s Head of a Woman, is displayed in plexiglass – exactly as it appeared in the Louvre’s blockbuster exhibition in 2019. A highlight is Francesco Hayez’s The Kiss; whose passion charges an exhibition that is not united by a specific time period or theme. As a viewer of Caravaggio’s Basket of Fruit, or Raphael’s Madonna of the Goldfinch, you are not intimidated by the grandeur attached to a masterpiece in a pseudo-sacred space. The exchange feels more like an intimate conversation. The walls are devoid of explanatory text, supporting the idea that no prior art historical knowledge is needed to enjoy art – but you can also access the information on your phone via a QR code , if you feel inclined. So can replicas compete with the real deal? Can the indescribable but tangible “aura” of the original ever be replicated? In short – no. When your eyes scan the surface of a picture to scout out impasto – heavier layers of paint built up on the surface – or areas where a varnish has significantly darkened over time – you get a sense of access to the past that is absent here. Yet the point of these digital replicas is not to re-create or compete with the original, but instead, to get new – and possibly younger – audiences to engage with masterpieces in a world where contemporary art gets all the attention. In 2020 for instance, Tate Modern was the UK’s most visited museum, whereas the National Gallery, with its collection of old masters, was ranked fourth. Part of the reason why old masters may turn gallery-goers off is because art history is steeped in tradition and exclusivity. This unusual exhibition disrupts, challenges and enriches it. What is refreshing – particularly for a commercial art gallery – is the potential for education. Where non-fungible tokens (NFTs) alone are not democratising the art world as once promised, this marriage of digital technology with a physical counterpart creates digital permanence and increases accessibility to historical art. Fifty per cent of revenue generated from sales of these digital versions will go back to the museums who own the original works – much needed in the wake of Covid, which saw, on average, visitor numbers of Italian museums fall by a staggering 70%. At present, institutions worldwide are under huge pressure to embrace new innovations in technology or face difficult choices – such as deaccessioning – to make ends meet. The show offers an alternative, and these masterpieces would otherwise be inaccessible to international audiences – they are all too fragile to travel. For me, the collective ritual of making a pilgrimage to a much-loved museum cannot be beaten. But the harsh reality is that we simply cannot move around in the same way as we did pre-pandemic. In the (very near) future, exhibitions could include both original artworks and digital replicas, allowing for broader curatorial themes at a fraction of the cost and ecological impact. In this way, the exhibition is a nod towards what is to come. Of course, an exhibition of digital artworks is bound to polarise opinion; that Unit has chosen to reproduce some of the most significant works in western art may just be salt in the wound. However, love it or loathe it, the digital art revolution has arrived; and the gap between the physical and virtual has been well and truly bridged. Eternalising Art History: From Da Vinci to Modigliani is at Unit London until 19 March.Good morning. Russia faced western sanctions and bitter condemnation at the UN after Vladimir Putin ordered troops over the Ukrainian border into Moscow-controlled territories in the east of the country, which he had recognised hours earlier. With reports of Russian armoured columns advancing into Donetsk and Luhansk under the guise of “peacekeepers” in the Russian-backed enclaves, the US imposed some limited sanctions and warned more would come today. The US ambassador to the UN, Linda Thomas-Greenfield, has dismissed Vladimir’s Putin’s assertion that the troops heading into the Russian-controlled territories of Ukraine would take on a “peacekeeping” role. At a fiery emergency meeting of the security council in New York she said: “He calls them peacekeepers. This is nonsense. We know what they really are.” A spokesperson for the UN secretary general, António Guterres, said he “considers the decision of the Russian Federation to be a violation of the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Ukraine and inconsistent with the principles of the Charter of the United Nations”. Is this the start of something bigger? The UK minister Sajid Javid said this morning it was clear an invasion had already begun. The US and UK believe that the Russian entry into the eastern tip of Ukraine is a precursor for a more sweeping invasion. What does Russian recognition of breakaway Ukraine territories mean? It could pave the way for Moscow to send military forces into the separatist areas openly, using the argument that it is intervening as an ally to protect them against Ukraine. Switzerland at risk of EU blacklist after Credit Suisse leak The fallout from a huge leak of Credit Suisse banking data threatened to damage Switzerland’s entire financial sector yesterday after the European parliament’s main political grouping raised the prospect of adding the country to a money-laundering blacklist. The European People’s party (EPP), the largest political grouping of the European parliament, called for the EU to review its relationship with Switzerland and consider whether it should be added to its list of countries associated with a high risk of financial crime. Experts said that such a move would be a disaster for Switzerland’s financial sector, which would face the kind of enhanced due diligence applied to transactions linked to rogue nations including Iran, Myanmar, Syria and North Korea. The investigation, called Suisse secrets, identified clients of the Swiss bank who had been involved in torture, drug trafficking, money laundering, corruption and other serious crimes. Credit Suisse leak unmasks criminals, fraudsters and corrupt politicians What is the Suisse secrets leak and why are we publishing it? Indigenous nations sue North Dakota over ‘sickening’ gerrymandering The leaders of the Turtle Mountain Band of Chippewa and Spirit Lake Nation have sued North Dakota, alleging that a new legislative map for the state, which was meant to account for population changes identified in the 2020 census, doesn’t comply with section 2 of the Voting Rights Act. The lawsuit, filed earlier this month, claims the map packs some Indigenous voters into one house subdistrict, while putting other “nearby Native American voters into two other districts dominated by white voters who bloc vote against Native Americans’ preferred candidates”. It adds that complying with the Voting Rights Act would mean placing the two nations in a single district, where they would “comprise an effective, geographically compact majority”. “Our voice is going to be muffled once again,” the Turtle Mountain Band of Chippewa chairman, Jamie Azure, told the Guardian. “It’s getting a little sickening, tell you the truth.” Indigenous people in the US have faced generations of voting restrictions. Although Indigenous people were granted citizenship in 1924, it took more than three decades before they were considered eligible to vote in every state. In other news … Britney Spears has landed a “record-breaking” publishing deal for a tell-all memoir about her rise to fame, her relationship with her family and her experience living under a conservatorship for more than a decade. Simon &amp; Schuster secured the deal for as much as US$15m (£11m, A$20.8m). A huge Moai statue, one of the iconic stone monuments from Easter Island, began its journey back home on Monday, after being removed and taken to Santiago, where it has been housed since 1870. The return of the statue comes after a years-long campaign to have it returned to Rapa Nui. Three white men who chased and killed Ahmaud Arbery on a residential street acted out of “pent-up racial anger” and should be convicted of hate crimes, a federal prosecutor told a jury on Monday. Travis McMichael “was just looking for a reason” to hurt a Black person when he saw the 25-year-old on his street, the prosecutor said. Colombia has decriminalised abortion during the first 24 weeks of pregnancy, adding to a recent string of legal victories for reproductive rights in Latin America. The South American country’s constitutional court ruled five against four to decriminalise the procedure on Monday evening. Don’t miss this: ‘After 35 years of teaching, I became Magic Frank – and I’ve never been happier’ When Frank Farrell’s retirement day came in 2018 – after 35 years of teaching – everyone thought he “would be straight down the pub to celebrate”. Instead, he stayed sober and prepared his materials: the next day he began his new career as a magician. He was 60, and he didn’t yet feel like a magician, but that weekend Mr Farrell the English teacher gave way to Magic Frank. Under this stage name, he performed 10 shows at a Harry Potter convention in Manchester, UK. Climate check: Five ways AI is saving wildlife – from counting chimps to locating whales There’s a strand of thinking, from sci-fi films to Stephen Hawking, that suggests artificial intelligence (AI) could spell doom for humans. But conservationists are increasingly turning to AI as an innovative tech solution to tackle the biodiversity crisis and mitigate climate change. In fact, artificial intelligence has been identified as one of the top three emerging technologies in conservation, helping protect species around the world. Last Thing: Final piece of 17th-century tapestry stolen 42 years ago found by Spanish police Spanish police have recovered the final piece of a 17th-century tapestry that was stolen 42 years ago by a notorious art thief. The tapestry, known as La apoteosis de las artes (The Apotheosis of the Arts), was one of six Flemish tapestries taken from a church in northern Spain on 7 November 1980. The thief, René Alphonse van den Berghe – better known as Erik the Belgian – remained unrepentant until his death. Speaking to El País 10 years ago, he said: “I’m no small-time crook. I’m a high-class thief. I have stolen for the love of art and I have stolen luxury items. Money has no luxury value.” Sign up First Thing is delivered to thousands of inboxes every weekday. If you’re not already signed up, subscribe now. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.comKnit a jumper Use natural materials to knit yourself a jumper – they are better for the planet and keep you warmer than artificial yarns. The beauty and benefits start almost as soon as you cast on, since the growing garment on your knees keeps you warm long before it’s ready to wear. Win-win! Carol Brook, West Yorkshire Don’t let the house get damp A hot drink goes a long way towards keeping you warm during winter, and wearing a wool hat indoors makes an amazing difference, too. It’s also important not to allow the house to get damp, as that always feels much colder, so we run a dehumidifier every now and again to keep everything dry. It has not been too cold a winter this year, so there have been lots of days when we haven’t had the heating on at all. Gill Lee, admin worker, Leicester Spice up your porridge Make yourself a bowl of porridge in the morning, topped with maple syrup and just the slightest splash of Islay whisky. It gives your breakfast a beautiful peaty, sugary smell and a bit of extra warmth on the way down. I learned about this delight while staying at a B&amp;B on Islay some years ago. It takes the porridge, and the start of the day, to a new level. Richard Knight, leadership coach and consultant, East Lothian Do the dishes I can sometimes feel a little chilled but, rather than turn the heating up, I find that doing the dishes warms me right up. Plunging my hands into warm bubbles always does the trick, and it saves on the energy used to run a dishwasher, too. Add a little relaxing music and it can be a useful mindfulness exercise. Also, the dishes get done. Anonymous, Scotland Engage with the winter landscape In the colder months in Norway, when there is also a lot of rain, snow, and ice, I walk a lot: to work, for shopping or other errands, and in the nearby woods. It takes a bit of motivation to bundle up and go outside, but you get warm in no time. Your cheeks glow and your eyes clear in the cold air, and you begin to enjoy the sights, sounds and smells of the outdoors. To me, engaging with the winter landscape using all my senses makes winter much more fun. On snowy days, the woods are silent, enveloping and quite cosy, actually. I also love coming home, kindling a fire in the stove and snuggling in an armchair with a book. Indra Simhan, child psychiatrist, Norway Wear two pairs of socks I recommend double-socking. One (inner) pair of ordinary socks, preferably made from natural fibre, then an outer, woolly pair. My current favourite is alpaca as this means I can buy British from yarn to sock, and they can be darned, too. Keep the inner pair on as you get into bed … I find I’m usually warm enough to take them off before I’ve finished my bedtime hot drink. Anonymous, Worcestershire Make parsnip soup My mum’s parsnip soup recipe is super-easy and cheap to make. I love how thick it is. The trick to its warming (but not spicy) flavour is the garam masala. Simply mix one chopped onion with two teaspoons of garam masala and sauté in oil until soft. Add 1 litre of chicken or vegetable stock, 250ml of milk (almond milk if vegan) and five or six medium-sized parsnips. Simmer for 10-15 minutes until soft, then blend. Season to taste and serve. Simon, London Layer up The energy crisis and rocketing costs mean you can’t just jack up the heating – and anyway, too warm a room feels stuffy. Instead, wear layers. Start with a short-sleeved T-shirt, then add one with long sleeves, then a warm jumper, and top off with a gilet. A warm core helps keep hands and feet warmer than gloves or socks can, although knee-length socks are good for keeping cold draughts out. Soft, warm scarves are good at that, too. Nora Boswell, retired, Bradford Keep a hot-water bottle close I love a hot-water bottle – even before I started working from home, I was known to attend work meetings with one clutched close. They help with cramps and chronic pain, but they’re also great for feeling warm and cosy, and I find them so comforting. For Christmas, I was given a long hot-water bottle that can be tied around you – it’s an absolute gamechanger. Now, I potter around my flat with what feels like a nice warm hug around my waist. Daisy, Hackney Close the curtains and bring out the blankets There’s nothing better than closing the curtains, deploying the blankets, putting the fire on low, opening a bottle of wine and losing myself in a good movie while the cat curls up on my lap. Who needs summer when winter can be so soft, quiet and peaceful? Rob Carrick, local authority worker, LondonOti Mabuse has announced she is leaving Strictly Come Dancing after seven years as a professional dance partner. Sharing the news on Instagram, she said: “Never easy to say goodbye. I have been part of the most amazing TV show, Strictly Come Dancing for the past seven years and it has been an incredible time. “Lifting the glitterball twice and having the best journey with all my celebrities, but also meeting and working with the best team, crew, producers, celebs and incredible professional dancers! You are my family and I adore you all forever.” Born in South Africa, Mabuse, 31, studied civil engineering before moving to Germany to dance. The Latin American and ballroom dancer, who won the South African Latin American championship eight times, was crowned Strictly winner in 2019 with the actor Kelvin Fletcher and in 2020 with the comedian Bill Bailey. Over the past year, she has taken a seat on the judging panels of BBC One’s The Greatest Dancer, ITV’s The Masked Singer and most recently ITV’s Dancing on Ice – leading to speculation that she may not return to the Strictly ballroom. Her new BBC radio show, Oti Mabuse’s Dancing Legends, explores the people who have changed the course of dance, including Fred Astaire and Raven Wilkinson. She has said the show was inspired partly by Bailey, who taught her to “go back in time and find the root of the purpose of what you’re doing”. Mabuse said on Tuesday she was “honestly so grateful to the BBC and will always remember that Strictly and BBC brought me to the UK – which I now call home and I have learned and grown so much. Thank you from the bottom of my heart”. She added: “I can’t put into words how difficult this decision has been, but I have decided not to return for the next series. “Dance will always be my first love and to everyone, my family especially, friends, strictly fans and judges who have been my support throughout my strictly journey. Thank you for being incredible! You are irreplaceable in my heart and have made everyday unforgettable! I love you.” In a statement, BBC Strictly said Mabuse’s “energy, creativity and talent” had contributed to many of the show’s most memorable moments. “She will be hugely missed, not only by viewers, but the entire team.” Earlier this month, the dancer spoke out about the “racially abusive” and “fat-shaming” comments she had received after performing on the show. “I’ve never really spoken about it because I’ve tried for so long to think about it this way: I work on a show that 10 million people love; if 10 or 100 people aren’t nice to me, that is not representative of everyone else’s views,” she said.Over the past few weeks, President Joe Biden has repeatedly emphasized his friendship with Senate minority leader Mitch McConnell. At the National Prayer Breakfast in early February, for instance, he praised McConnell as “a man of your word. And you’re a man of honor. Thank you for being my friend.” Biden’s publicly professed affinity is weirdly at odds with the political situation. Going back to the Obama era, McConnell has led the Republican Party in a strategy of near-total obstruction which he has pursued with ruthless cynicism. It is true that he has, at times, signaled distance to Donald Trump and condemned the January 6 insurrection. But McConnell is also sabotaging any effort to counter the Republican party’s ongoing authoritarian assault on the political system. The distinct asymmetry in the way the two sides treat each other extends well beyond Biden and McConnell. Republicans immediately derided Biden’s pledge to nominate a Black woman to the Supreme Court – while Democratic leaders are hoping for bipartisan support; House Speaker Nancy Pelosi insists the nation needs a strong Republican party – meanwhile radicals like Marjorie Taylor Greene and Paul Gosar, who fantasize about committing acts of violence against Democrats, are embraced by fellow Republicans, proving they are not just a extremist fringe that has “hijacked” the Party, as Pelosi suggested. And when Texas senator Ted Cruz recently intimated that Republicans would impeach Biden if they were to retake the House “whether it’s justified or not,” the White House responded by calling on Cruz to “work with us on getting something done.” Republicans could not be clearer about the fact that they consider Democratic governance fundamentally illegitimate, yet some establishment Democrats act as if politics as usual is still an option and a return to “normalcy” imminent. There is certainly an element of political strategy in all of this. Democrats are eager to present themselves as a force of moderation and unity. But Biden’s longing for understanding across party lines seems sincere. He has been reluctant to make the fight against the Republican party’s assault on democracy the center piece of his agenda; Democratic leadership has proved mostly unwilling to focus the public’s attention on the Republican party’s authoritarian turn. One important explanatory factor is that many Democratic leaders are old. They came up in a very different political environment, when there was indeed a great deal of bipartisan cooperation in Congress. There is no reason to be nostalgic about this – the politics of bipartisan consensus more often than not stifled racial and social progress. But there was certainly an established norm of intra-party cooperation until quite recently. When California senator Dianne Feinstein hugged South Carolina senator Lindsey Graham at the end of the Amy Coney Barrett hearings in 2020, it was a bizarre throwback to those days of amity across party lines in the midst of a naked Republican power grab. Beyond institutional tradition and personal familiarity, this inability to grapple in earnest with the post-Obama reality in which Democratic politicians are almost universally considered members of an “Un-American” faction by most Republicans has deeper ideological roots. The way some establishment Democrats have acted suggests they feel a kinship with their Republican opponents grounded in a worldview of white elite centrism. Their perspective on the prospect of a white reactionary regime is influenced by the fact that, consciously or not, they understand that their elite status wouldn’t necessarily be affected all that much. The Republican dogma – that the world works best if it’s run by prosperous white folks – has a certain appeal to wealthy white elites, regardless of party. From that vantage point, it is rational to believe that the bigger immediate threat is coming from the “Left”: an agenda seeking to transform America from a restricted, white men’s democracy that largely preserved existing hierarchies to a functioning multiracial, pluralistic, social democracy is indeed a losing proposition for people who have traditionally been at the top. When Biden insists that “I’m not Bernie Sanders. I’m not a socialist”, and instead emphasizes his friendship with Mitch McConnell, he offers more than strategic rhetoric. Many establishment Democrats seem to believe that it is high time to push back against the “radical” forces of leftism and “wokeism.” The constant attempts to normalize a radicalizing Republican Party also have a lot to do with two foundational myths that shape the collective imaginary: the myth of American exceptionalism and the myth of white innocence. We may be decades removed from the heyday of the so-called “liberal consensus” of the postwar era, but much of the country’s Democratic elite still subscribes to an exceptionalist understanding that America is fundamentally good and the US inexorably on its way to overcoming whatever vestigial problems there might still be. This often goes hand in hand with a mythical tale of America’s past, describing democracy as being exceptionally stable. Never mind that genuine multiracial democracy has actually existed for less than 60 years in this country. What could possibly threaten America’s supposedly “old, consolidated” democracy? Acknowledging what the Republican party has become goes against the pillars of that worldview. Finally, the American political discourse is still significantly shaped by the paradigm of white innocence. Economic anxiety, anti-elite backlash, or just liberals being mean – whatever animates white people’s extremism, it must not be racism, and they cannot be blamed for their actions. The dogma of white innocence leads to elite opinion instinctively sanitizing the reasons behind the rise of rightwing demagogues, a common tendency in the commentary surrounding the success of George Wallace in the late 1960s, David Duke in early 1990s, or Donald Trump in 2016. The idea of white innocence also clouds Democratic elites’ perspective on Republican elites: Since they cannot possibly be animated by reactionary white nationalism, they must be motivated by more benign forces, fear of the Trumpian base perhaps, or maybe they are being seduced by the dangerous demagogue. “I actually like Mitch McConnell,” Biden said during a press conference a few weeks ago, providing a window into what he sees in Republicans: No matter what they do, underneath they’re good guys, they’ll snap out of it. Promise. It’s the manifestation of a specific worldview that makes it nearly impossible to acknowledge the depths of Republican radicalization – a perspective that severely hampers the fight for the survival of American democracy. Thomas Zimmer is a visiting professor at Georgetown University, focused on the history of democracy and its discontents in the United States, and a Guardian US contributing opinion writerThe “first barrage of UK economic sanctions against Russia” will be announced on Tuesday, Boris Johnson has said, as one of his senior cabinet ministers said the Russian “invasion of Ukraine has begun”. Speaking after a 6.30am Cobra meeting, Johnson said the Kremlin was bent on a “full-scale invasion of Ukraine” and said the UK’s sanctions would hit the “economic interests that have been supporting Russia’s war machine”, a suggestion the UK was prepared to continue ratcheting up measures. “They will hit Russia very hard and there is a lot more that we are going to do in the event of an invasion. Be in no doubt that if Russian companies are prevented from raising capital on the UK financial markets, if we unpeel the facade of Russian ownership of companies, of property, it will start to hurt.” Johnson said his package would go further than those announced so far by the US, which are currently limited to the Ukrainian territories Russia has recognised as breakaway states. He said it was now clear that sanctions implemented after the 2014 invasion of Crimea were “not tough enough” and issued a veiled warning to European states that more had to be done. “We didn’t do enough as Europeans to wean ourselves off Russian hydrocarbons, off Russian oil and gas and to a certain extent now the vagaries of the price in gas, the spikes in gas prices to which European economies are so vulnerable is a consequence of that failure to move away from that dependency,” he said. “That’s what we’ve got to do now, we’ve got to make sure that we cut the umbilicus, we snip the drip feed into our bloodstream from Nord Stream.” Sajid Javid, the health secretary, said he would agree that the threat posed by Russia’s action was on a par with the 1962 Cuban missile crisis. “It’s a violation of international law, and we and Nato will not accept it,” he told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. Johnson convened the 6.30am meeting as Vladimir Putin ordered troops over the Ukrainian border into territories in the east of the country, where Russian troops already have significant presence. A statement to MPs is expected later on Tuesday. Earlier, Putin had recognised what he termed the independence of the Russia-controlled eastern Ukraine areas of Donetsk and Luhansk, in defiance of international agreements and ordered in forces under the guise of “peacekeeping”. The US and UK believe that the Russian entry into eastern Ukraine is a precursor for a more sweeping invasion, though the US has not yet used the term to describe the latest troop movements. The EU’s foreign affairs representative said the bloc did not consider a “fully fledged invasion” had occurred. But Javid took a stronger line on Tuesday morning, telling Sky News: “We have seen that he has recognised these breakaway eastern regions in Ukraine and from the reports we can already tell that he has sent in tanks and troops. From that you can conclude that the invasion of Ukraine has begun.” Overnight, Johnson spoke to the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, telling him he would explore sending further defensive support to Ukraine, at the request of the Ukrainian government. Asked on Tuesday how much further that could go, Johnson said: “I think that they have a right to defend their country and the UK will help them do that. We’re looking at what we can do, what more we can do to help. “As you know, we’ve trained about 22,000 members of the Ukrainian armed forces, and also given them some anti-tank weaponry and some other kit, but we’ll look at what more we can do.” The Cobra meeting follows an emergency session of the UN security council where the UK’s ambassador, Dame Barbara Woodward, said Russia had “brought us to the brink”, warning that its actions “will have severe and far-reaching consequences”. She said an invasion would unleash “the forces of war, death and destruction” on the people of Ukraine. “The humanitarian impact will be terrible on civilians fleeing the fighting. We know that women and children will suffer most.” She said the security council must be united in calling on Russia to “de-escalate immediately”, as well as “condemning aggression against a sovereign nation and defending the territorial integrity of Ukraine”. The EU’s foreign affairs high representative, Josep Borrell, will also convene an extraordinary meeting on Tuesday, in which EU foreign ministers will adopt sanctions against Russia over its recognition of Ukrainian separatist regions. “I’m sure there will be a unanimous decision,” he said. However, there are differences in opinion within the EU as to the strength of the package that will be imposed on Russia at this stage, with Borrell suggesting that Russia had not, as yet, launched a “fully fledged” invasion although its troops were on Ukrainian soil.On Monday the government announced its “living with Covid” strategy, including a phasing-out of free access to rapid lateral flow tests, reduced access to the more accurate PCR tests for most of those with symptoms, an end to legal requirements to self-isolate and an end to financial support for those on low incomes needing to self-isolate. Announcing the changes, which will come into force on Thursday, Boris Johnson said the time to “compel” people was over. Now “people will be asked to exercise personal responsibility” to look after each other, he said. Health and education leaders and scientists are concerned about the wisdom of phasing out both testing and self-isolation measures at this stage of the pandemic – but given that it is happening, what will the shift in policy mean in practice? What will things look like in the UK over the next year, and how will it affect our ability to deal with Covid-19? Supporters of relaxing the measures have often appealed to individual responsibility – whether that’s to voluntarily self-isolate if positive, or to assess our own appetite for risk and behave accordingly. But this misses the point: there is a limit to what the individual can do with a highly infectious disease. Many might choose to isolate if positive, but that relies on knowing you are positive in the first place, on being able to resist pressure from employers to go in to work, and on being able to afford to stay home (both financially and practically). All three aspects will become much more difficult from now on, and will necessarily put others at risk. And measures individuals can take to protect themselves, such as reducing social contact or wearing high-quality filtering masks (such as the FFP2 grade), depend on knowing what the risk of social contact will be. The government indicated some aspects of Covid surveillance will remain, but with less reliable local data on infections and not having the ability to ask others to test before meeting, such personal choices are taken away from individuals. Once infected, lack of testing will ultimately reduce timely access to antivirals to prevent severe illness (which need to be taken as soon as possible after infection) and to long-term care if long Covid develops. The Sage group believes that part of the reason the peaks in July with Delta and this winter with Omicron were not higher is because people voluntarily restricted their behaviour over and above what was required by legislation. However, this “responsible” behaviour on the part of the public as a whole relies on everyone being able to see that there’s a potential problem. As testing, surveillance and reporting of infection rates are scaled back, this will be much more difficult, and it will be much less likely that enough people will change their behaviour at the same time to dampen down future waves. Almost a year ago I wrote about the danger of Covid becoming a disease of poverty. Under the new policies this danger is exacerbated. A vicious cycle will come into play: those in more deprived areas will be less able to afford to test; less able to afford to voluntarily self-isolate; more likely to live in poor, overcrowded housing and more likely to be exposed outside the home thus more likely to infect others; less likely to be vaccinated but more likely to be in existing ill-health, and so more likely to fall seriously ill and die from Covid and develop long Covid. Ill-health then worsens families’ financial situation again and the cycle perpetuates. Despite the constant comparison to the flu, coronavirus is more infectious than flu and has worse health outcomes (both in terms of death and long-term ill-health). Simply adding it to our population without any policy adaptation may return us to what feels like normal life – but it will be a shorter and sicker one. There is also no doubt that Omicron is not the last variant. As the virus continues to mutate, vaccine efficacy against infection wanes and public health measures are abandoned, it is likely that many people will catch it once or twice a year. This is likely to ultimately reduce overall life expectancy, where the steady gains seen over the last 70 years had already stalled between 2011 and 2018. Sudden waves of infection, like those seen last December and January, will put pressure on the NHS as we add a whole new disease to already challenging winter season. A sizeable percentage of the workforce getting sick at once will also – again – cause significant disruption across education, hospitality, transport and other work places. As for any communal problem, lasting remedies must be communal ones. Societies around the world did just this when they tackled passive smoking through anti-smoking legislation, pollution through environmental legislation and car accidents by drink-driving and road safety legislation. For coronavirus, this means research into better vaccines and treatments, understanding and preventing long Covid, infrastructure investment to support cleaner air, tackling inequalities across their whole range to improve population resilience, and a well-oiled national and global public health strategy that can spring into action when needed. The latter three will be effective against any future airborne pandemics. If we don’t want a world with more illness and death, we need to actively do something to prevent it. Christina Pagel is director of UCL’s Clinical Operational Research Unit, which applies advanced analytical methods to problems in healthcareWe would like to hear from Russian people living and working in Russia about their thoughts on the situation with Ukraine. What is the mood like at the moment? What are your thoughts on the developments? We would also like to hear from Russians living in the UK, US or elsewhere. Share your views and experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below, anonymously if you wish, or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. IP addresses will be recorded on a third party webserver, so for true anonymity use our SecureDrop service, however anything submitted on the form below will be encrypted and confidential if you wish to continue. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.A retired military working dog named Hertz has been awarded a medal known as the animals’ Victoria Cross for his service in Afghanistan. The German shorthaired pointer is the first dog in British military history to detect electronic communications equipment such as mobile phones, voice recorders, sim cards and GPS devices. Hertz, who serviced with the Royal Air Force police, has been awarded the PDSA Dickin medal, the 74th recipient of the honour since it was first awarded in 1943. Throughout his time in Afghanistan, Hertz was responsible for finding more than 100 items of contraband, including drugs and personal electronic devices (PEDs), described as a significant threat to the lives of service personnel and civilians. Born in Croatia, Hertz joined the RAF as a one-year-old after showing skills in drug detection. He was then selected as the first-ever military working dog to be trained to detect the presence of electronic devices (PEDs). After weeks of intense specialist training, assisted by the Prison Service, which uses sniffer dogs to detect electronics contraband, Hertz and his handler, WO Jonathan Tanner, were deployed to Afghanistan. Tanner and Hertz worked together daily in military and civilian compounds in the then British military base Camp Bastion. On his first search, Hertz discovered drugs and electronic devices, with the latter successful in supporting intelligence purposes. Hertz was deployed throughout Helmand province and to the Afghan capital of Kabul. During the 13 months of his tour, there was not a single rocket attack on Camp Bastion. The PDSA said: “His work was vital to ensure the safety of all the personnel working there, both locals and military. It is difficult to truly estimate how many lives he saved through his actions.” The first recipient of the Dickin medal was a pigeon, White Vision. She delivered a message that led to the rescue of a ditched aircrew in October 1943, flying nine hours in bad visibility and heavy weather with strong headwinds. Other recipients include Simon the cat in 1949 for “gallantry under fire” and for the disposal of many rats on board HMS Amethyst, and Olga the horse, who received the medal in 1947 for controlling traffic and assisting rescue operations after a flying bomb explosion in Tooting, south London.Sixteen-year-old Izzy (Zelda Adams) lives in a house in the woods with her mother (Toby Poser) where she is being home-schooled because she has an auto-immune disease that makes her vulnerable to infections from other people. That and the fact that both mother and child are witch-like creatures called hellbenders who live for many decades, feed off mostly moss and seed cones, and reproduce asexually like ferns. But they’re happy together, mostly: they have a mini punk band, in which Izzy plays the drums (she’s pretty good), mum plays a mean bass, and they sing songs about the apocalypse and murdering while wearing face paint. It’s not exactly clear how they afford petrol or pay for new picks and drum sticks when needed, but maybe the cash is harvested from the hikers who wander accidentally on to their land and get vaporised by the mother’s supernatural powers, as does one hapless stranger played by John Adams. The power dynamics shift in this Rapunzel-like set-up when Izzy meets another teenage girl, a regular sort named Amber (Lulu Adams) who just happens to be the niece of a hiker mum recently dusted. Through Amber she meets some other teens, and starts to wonder if the isolation she’s been kept in all this time was strictly necessary. Eating a worm on a dare leads Izzy to realise she has supernatural powers that get stronger if she consumes another creature’s life force. Soon, she’s wanting to go into town by herself, giving up their vegetarian diet, and building a meaty tunnel in the basement, sort of like a huge vagina or a gullet, in which to eat her prey. Kids, they grow up so fast! Although made on a tiny budget, this highly original exercise in folk horror punches well above its weight with snappy dialogue, trippy visual effects and impressive camerawork. But the most adorable thing about it is that it’s a family affair: John Adams and Toby Poser are married; Zelda and Lula Adams are their children. All of them took turns working on the crew when they weren’t in a scene, a working method the clan developed in their earlier features, Halfway to Zen and Rumblestrips. The Adams family shot this in lockdown; it’s a pretty impressive family venture given most of us barely managed to get our own kids interested in board games. • Hellbender is available on 24 February on Shudder.Germany has stopped the certification process for the controversial Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline in reaction to Russia’s recognition of the self-proclaimed republics in Luhansk and Donetsk in east Ukraine, the chancellor, Olaf Scholz, has announced. Germany’s energy minister, Robert Habeck, on Tuesday morning instructed the withdrawal of a security-of-supply assessment granted under Angela Merkel’s tenure, which is required to authorise the pipeline between Russia and Germany. “This may sound technical, but it is the necessary administrative step without which the pipeline cannot be certified,” Scholz said at a press conference in Berlin at midday. “Without this certification Nord Stream 2 cannot go into operation”. Scholz said he has commissioned a new assessment into Germany’s energy security in light of geopolitical developments in east Ukraine. The German leader described Putin’s recognition of the Russian-controlled territories as a “grave breach” of international law that broke with decades of agreements between Russia and the west. “The situation today is fundamentally different,” he said. Scholz’s announcement was welcomed in Kyiv, where the foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, said suspending the pipeline’s certification was “a morally, politically and practically correct step in the current circumstances”. “True leadership means tough decisions in difficult times,” Kuleba tweeted. “Germany’s move proves just that.” The decision drew condemnation and threats from Moscow, where the former Russian president and deputy chair of Russia’s security council Dmitry Medvedev tweeted: “Welcome to the brave new world where Europeans are very soon going to pay €2.000 for 1.000 cubic metres of natural gas!” First announced in 2015, the $11bn (£8.3bn) pipeline owned by Russia’s state-backed energy giant Gazprom has been built to carry gas from western Siberia to Lubmin in Germany’s north-east, doubling the existing capacity of the Nord Stream 1 pipeline and keeping 26m German homes warm at an affordable price. The construction of the pipeline was completed last September and its operator says it is already filled with gas and ready to go into use, pending permission from German authorities. Scholz, a Social Democrat who was sworn in as German chancellor last December, skirted around the Nord Stream 2 debate in the first weeks of his tenure, with his spokespeople initially sticking to the line that the pipeline was a purely commercial project. As tensions heightened on Ukraine’s border with Russia, Scholz said that “all options are on the table” when it came to sanctions against a possible incursion, but refrained from naming Nord Stream – until now. Even though German attitudes towards Russia are ambivalent, not just among the wider population but among most of the parties in the Bundestag, Putin’s actions on Monday were widely condemned across the political spectrum. The leader of the conservative Christian Democratic Union (CDU), Friedrich Merz, called the Russian president “a warmonger with no inhibitions” against whom the west had to show a united front. “Our outstretched hand has been batted away,” said Lars Klingbeil, the SPD’s co-leader and a former protege of the former chancellor and Gazprom lobbyist Gerhard Schröder. “Putin has crossed a line.” The leadership of the leftwing party Die Linke also issued a statement condemning Russia’s recognition of the self-proclaimed republics: “This is certainly not a ‘peace mission’, it violates international and Ukraine’s territorial integrity and heightens the risk of a great war in Europe.” Only the far-right Alternative für Deutschland (AfD) struck a different note. While its co-chair Tino Chrupalla said he saw Russian behaviour “absolutely in critical terms”, his party rejected any sanctions against Russia as harmful to Germany’s own interests. The Nord Stream 2 pipeline is an important project for both the Russian and German economies. Gas and oil make up more than 50% of Russia’s exports. In Germany, about a quarter of the country’s energy supply relies on gas, of which half is provided by Russia. While Europe’s largest economy is planning to wean itself off fossil fuels and achieve carbon neutrality in 25 years’ time, gas remains a vital bridging technology on that path. Asked on Tuesday how he sought to end Germany’s reliance on Russian gas in the medium term, Scholz declined to give precise answers. The challenge of diversifying energy supplies was a “major European task”, he said. Original plans for Nord Stream 2 included 90% of gas piped into Germany being distributed on to eastern and southern Europe. Norway and the Netherlands, the two other major suppliers of natural gas to Germany, have already signalled that they won’t be able to significantly increase their supplies. Since Germany does not have its own import terminal for liquified gas, which is transported by ship rather than through pipelines, there are also questions about whether demand can be met through emergency supplies from the US or Qatar. Habeck, of the Green party, said on Tuesday his country’s energy needs were guaranteed to be met, but that he expected the conflict in eastern Ukraine to lead to a further rise in gas prices.As a child, there was a thrilling danger about growing up close to the open prison known as HMP North Sea Camp. My friends and I would ride our bikes up to nearby Freiston, Lincolnshire, which is where the prison stood between the town and the marshland coast. We would dare each other to inch closer to the gates, only talking in whispers. When the danger felt too close we would turn and pedal our little legs as fast as possible, never looking back until we were sure we were long from view. This week, an inmate escaped from the category D prison, which has minimal security and allows eligible prisoners to spend most of their day away from the prison. The sex offender Paul Robson, 56, absconded on Sunday 13 February, spending four days on the run before being arrested on Thursday in Skegness. Robson had been given a life sentence in 2000 for attempted rape and indecent sexual assault. Robson’s escape comes as no surprise to those living in close proximity to the North Sea Camp – who are quite used to prisoners fleeing from the site, given there have been more than 100 reported in the past decade. My best friend recalls numerous occasions when the police have come knocking at the door of her family home to look for escapees. In 2013 the town was aghast after Alan Wilmot, then 49, raped a local woman while on day release. When I was at school in the 1990s, it was common knowledge that prisoners came in during the weekends or holidays to do painting and fixing work. To be fair, the school really needed it, but that about 60% of North Sea Camp’s 400 inmates are sex offenders made their presence in our school feel chilling. A friend who still lives locally tells me that they also worked at her secondary school. “One particular man called Dave had killed his wife with a saucepan after finding her in bed with his best friend,” she says. “We would ask them what they’d done to be inside as inquisitive teens.” I have twin 17-year-old sisters, one of whom attends my old school now, and as we chatted on the phone earlier this week I found myself telling them to do the opposite of what I did when I was younger – to stay at home. “It is really worrying,” one replied, adding they’d been glued to the local police Facebook page for updates. “The prisoners have been painting fences near our house the past couple of weeks, so we could have walked past him before he legged it,” she added. Police warned that Robson should not be approached as he “can cause real harm to anyone he comes across”. It’s more than reasonable, then, to ask why someone like Robson, described by a sentencing judge as a “menace to women and children”, was moved to an open prison in the first place. The answer lies with the Parole Board for England and Wales. The idea of open prisons is to build trust between offenders and the system; inmates are invited to complete their sentences under minimal supervision and aren’t usually locked up in cells. Growing up I was supportive of the idea that inmates could take up employment while on day release, helping them towards successful rehabilitation – which can only help bring to an end the cyclical relationship between prisons, poverty, underemployment, isolation and ultimately re-offending. But for dangerous sex offenders like Robson and Wilmot, was their move to open prison really appropriate? In 2015, Wilmot – who was first convicted of raping four women and committing a string of robberies – was given four additional life sentences and 15 years without a chance of parole for the crimes committed while on day release from North Sea Camp. The judge, who heard that Wilmot had received a warning for his deteriorating behaviour, said he was “very concerned as to how anybody could ever have thought it was safe to release him”. The Ministry of Justice overhauled the process for allowing prisoners out on day release as a result, and commissioned an independent investigation looking at strengthening the system. The MoJ revealed in 2020 that, since 2015, an estimated 631 inmates have absconded from institutions like North Sea Camp across the UK – in England there are 13 open prisons for men and two for women. In 2016 convicted murderer Darren Jackson, 51, sparked a nationwide manhunt after fleeing HMP Sudbury in Derbyshire, after being moved there despite a documented history of attempted breakouts. He was sentenced to life in 1986 for killing 29-year-old mother-of-three Gill Ellis as she walked home in Burnley, Lancashire. Eighteen men who escaped in this time period were convicted rapists, seven were convicted of manslaughter and four caused death by dangerous driving. While absconding rates have fallen over the years, families of victims like Ellis are perplexed by decisions that quite obviously leave the public unsafe. A report promised by summer 2021 from justice minister Lucy Frazer QC, looking to review the parole system in England in the face of calls for reform, has yet to materialise. Labour’s shadow justice secretary Steve Reed wrote to the lord chancellor, Dominic Raab, this week to seek assurances over public safety after this latest blunder by the Parole Board. But more than assurances, we need reform. Usually, overturning decisions deemed dangerous, especially to women, like the subsequently overturned release of John Worboys in 2017 for example, come down to the efforts of public protest. Victims of these offenders are rarely told when their attackers are given day release or, in Worboys’ case, released on licence. My sisters are now the ones living near to that Frieston border that me and my friends used to cross on our bikes, and speak in the same hushed voices about the close danger they too can sense. Robson may have been caught again, but while the system remains inadequate, there are still a whole host of other dangerous offenders putting another generation at risk. As it ever was, that peripheral fear – a chill, just off in the distance – remains. Zoe Beaty is a freelance writerThe former backbench Tory MP Sir Richard Shepherd, who has died aged 79, ploughed a sometimes lonely but always widely respected furrow as one of the party’s libertarians, even when he fell foul of ministers’ wishes and the demands of three-line whips. Holding the executive to account was ultimately more important to him than toeing the party line. Independent-minded and Eurosceptic, he gave fervent, even emotional, support to the concept of open government and freedom of information during a long career in the Commons. He was never promoted to ministerial office – nor would he probably have wanted to be – but he was, rather to his surprise and embarrassment, knighted in 2013. He stood down as an MP at the 2015 general election, after representing the constituency of Aldridge-Brownhills in the West Midlands for 36 years. Shepherd was born in Aberdeen, the son of Davida (nee Wallace) and Alfred Shepherd, but educated in London, first at Isleworth grammar school and then at the London School of Economics, where he studied economics, going on afterwards to Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, Maryland. In 1970 he set up a family grocery business, Shepherd Foods – the first convenience store chain to offer late-night shopping – and as an MP worked in the mornings from a backroom at the firm’s Drury Lane office, assisted by his sister, Davida. He also founded, in 1972, the family’s more upmarket grocery company, Partridges, in the Sloane Street area of Chelsea, run by his brother, John, which received a royal warrant in 1994. Unlike an increasing number of Tory MPs therefore, he could claim first-hand and continuing business experience. A friend and former assistant to the longstanding Conservative backbench Eurosceptic Teddy Taylor, Shepherd contested the Nottingham East constituency in the February 1974 election, but found a more permanent, though not necessarily safer, berth in the suburban Walsall seat of Aldridge-Brownhills, which he won from Labour in 1979 and held through the eight subsequent elections. The conjunction between West Midlanders and their ascetic, intellectual, southerner MP was not necessarily an obvious one, but his home-owning, small-business-orientated constituents clearly appreciated Shepherd and although his majority slipped to just 2,500 in the Blair landslide of 1997, by 2010 it was 15,256 and he was elected with 59% of the vote. In the Commons, Shepherd was one of the Maastricht rebels of the 1990s, but he was never one of the swivel-eyed tendency of Europhobes whom John Major characterised as needing the men with white coats. His was a more fastidious and principled opposition, based on constitutional considerations, concerning the sovereignty of parliament, rather than the ill-concealed xenophobia of some Maastricht rebels. This concern for parliamentary sovereignty led him to his stands against government secrecy, manipulation and dissembling, conveyed by his occasionally almost overwrought interventions as he stood, nearly alone on his side, against ministerial obfuscation. Never was this more pointed than in his defiance of a three-line whip to oppose the government’s handling of the Scott report on the arms to Iraq inquiry in 1996. The lengthy report, three years in the making, exposed ministerial inaccuracies and evasions and outright duplicity in the government’s prosecution of the Matrix Churchill engineering company, which had exported components to Iraq with what it understood to be ministers’ approval. Shepherd was outraged, voting against the government even though the embattled prime minister, Major, had made the issue a vote of confidence. In the event, showing just how brave Shepherd’s stand was, the administration survived with a majority of just one. His concern about individual liberty extended more widely too: he voted against the imposition of control orders on terrorist suspects, against the introduction of identity cards and against giving the authorities the power to detain suspects for lengthy periods without charge. Perhaps his most lasting memorial will be his private members’ bill protecting whistleblowers, which, highly unusually for a non-government measure, was incorporated in statute as part of the Public Interest Disclosure Act 1998. Shepherd exercised his own liberty as a smoker. He was genial and approachable and made friends across the political spectrum – including with Guardian journalists researching and campaigning on similar issues to his own. In 2000 he stood for Speaker of the Commons, coming third – an indication of fellow MPs’ esteem – as the Labour MP Michael Martin was elected thanks to Labour arm-twisting. In his constituency, Shepherd served as president of Walsall Football Club. He is survived by his siblings, John and Davida. • Richard Charles Scrimgeour Shepherd, politician, born 6 December 1942; died 19 February 2022 • This article was amended on 23 February 2022, to correct the date of Sir Richard Shepherd’s death, which an earlier version gave as 21 February.The Fox anchor Neil Cavuto returned to the air on Monday, to say he nearly died from a second bout with the coronavirus and to tell detractors including those who sent death threats over his support for vaccines: “So sorry to disappoint you.” More than 935,000 Americans have died of Covid-19 in the last two years. The seven-day average daily death rate is just under 2,000 – the vast majority unvaccinated. Fox has strict vaccination requirements for staff. But hosts, prominently including Tucker Carlson, have spread misinformation about vaccines and resistance to Covid-19 public health measures including vaccination mandates. Cavuto is immunocompromised, with multiple sclerosis and having survived heart surgery and cancer. After his first positive Covid test, in October, he implored viewers: “My God, stop the politics. Life is too short to be an ass. Life is way too short to be ignorant of the promise of something that is helping people worldwide. Stop the deaths, stop the suffering, please get vaccinated, please.” Some viewers did not stop the politics. Cavuto revealed that he received disturbing messages, including death threats. On Fox Business on Monday, Cavuto said he had been hospitalised for weeks but Fox had not publicised his condition out of respect for his privacy. His second Covid case, he said, was a “far, far more serious strand” because of his immunocompromised status. He had, he said, been in “intensive care for quite a while”. “It was really touch and go,” he said. “Some of you who’ve wanted to put me out of my misery darn near got what you wished for. So sorry to disappoint you.” Cavuto also said: “Let me be clear: doctors say had I not been vaccinated at all, I wouldn’t be here. “This was scary. How scary? I’m talking, ‘Ponderosa suddenly out of the prime rib in the middle of the buffet line scary.’ That’s how scary.” He also dismissed the idea the vaccine caused or contributed to his second Covid bout. “No, the vaccine didn’t cause that,” he said. “That ‘grassy knoll’ theory has come up a lot. Because I’ve had cancer, and right now I have multiple sclerosis, I am among the vulnerable 3% or so of the population that cannot sustain the full benefits of a vaccine.” In October, Cavuto described some of the threats he received for taking and advocating the shot. He also said: “I cannot stress this enough: it’s not about left or right. This is not about who’s conservative or liberal. Last time I checked, everyone regardless of their political persuasion is coming down with this … “Take the political speaking points and toss them for now, I’m begging you. Toss them and think of what’s good not only for yourself but for those around you. “I dare say people who experienced this and see loved ones who have been affected by this or have died from this are not judging the wisdom of mandates. “They’re wishing they got vaccinated, and they didn’t.”A row has erupted in cabinet over plans to scrap a ban on the import and sale of fur and foie gras after No 10 was convinced to kill off policies that would outlaw the trade. Lord Goldsmith, the environment minister and the ban’s main proponent, spoke out after his colleagues, including Jacob Rees-Mogg, persuaded the prime minister to ditch the proposals. In response to those in cabinet who do not agree with the ban, Goldsmith said: “The public are strongly in favour of measures to curb the fur trade and foie gras. “There are some who view the issue as a matter of personal choice, but no one would extend that principle to things like dog-fighting or bear-baiting, so it’s not clear why fur farming or force-feeding geese, which arguably are associated with far greater levels of cruelty, should be any different.” There is hope among ministers who are in favour of the bill that it is not yet completely off the table, though sources say “that is the direction of travel”. The ban was supposed to be part of a raft of measures that would position post-Brexit Britain as a world leader on animal welfare. Sources in the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra) said the ban had been removed from the animals abroad bill in an attempt to scrap the policy altogether. The production of fur and foie gras products are banned in the UK. The Guardian understands that Rees-Mogg made the intervention as he does not believe banning things to be Conservative in nature. This is a further sign of the struggle for Boris Johnson’s ear being played out by the more libertarian side of the Tory party and the more ecologically minded. Some on the rightof the party believe such bans are against free-trade principles, and that the purchase of such goods should be a matter of choice. Others believe the ban could win over swing voters and show the Conservative party is modern and caring. However, there are even splits on the matter within the European Research Group, often thought of as the hub for the party’s libertarian right wing. A leading member said: “I have made no representations to Boris on this matter. I personally stopped eating foie gras when I learned how it was made.” Yesterday, a number of Conservative MPs said they would demand an explanation from the prime minister, who has previously vowed to use Brexit as an opportunity to take a stand on animal welfare. The ban was mentioned in the government’s action plan for animal welfare and aimed to bring swing voters on side. The 2019 manifesto, which referred to the action plan, also committed to not compromising on animal welfare standards in international trade. A Defra spokesperson said the government was still “fully committed to animal welfare”. The shock decision to remove the ban from the animals abroad bill is likely to upset the prime minister’s wife, Carrie Johnson, who has been vocally supportive of such measures. She has previously: “Anyone who wants to buy fur really is sick. Fur belongs on animals only. Nuts to think some of Britain’s department stores still sell fur.” The decision is thought to have been taken while Carrie Johnson was away at the weekend, as she was seen returning to No 10 with her children and some suitcases on Monday morning.What has Vladimir Putin ordered? The Russian president has recognised the independence of two Russian-controlled territories in east Ukraine. They call themselves the Donetsk and Luhansk People’s Republics. The territories have been armed, financed and politically controlled by Russia since 2014. But until this week, Russia still recognised them as part of Ukraine. Putin has also sent his military on a “peacekeeping mission” to Ukraine, meaning that Russia will formally occupy sovereign Ukrainian territory for a second time following the 2014 annexation of Crimea. But in this case, Russia has not annexed the territories. A document signed by Putin on Monday also allows him to establish military bases or place missiles in the territories. Why is he targeting Ukraine? First, Putin has indicated that he questions Ukraine’s right to statehood, calling modern Ukraine an artificial construct of the Soviet Union. He also sees Russians and Ukrainians as “one people”. Second, he thinks that a western-leaning Ukraine is dangerous for Russia. He has called the possibility of Nato membership for Ukraine a “red line” for the Kremlin. Third, he wants to show that popular revolutions such as the one that took place in Kyiv in 2014 do not succeed in the long run. That helps to prop up his own rule in Russia. What might happen next? The decision marks the end of the Minsk peace deal, a troubled road map out of the conflict that would have left the territories in Ukraine. That deal also contained a ceasefire agreement, which is now also void. More than 14,000 people have died in the fighting that has occurred since 2014. Russia’s military is likely to make a formal entrance into the territories soon. Its troops and military vehicles have secretly taken part in the fighting since 2014, but this deployment will probably be much larger. Moscow will now threaten Ukraine with a broader war if it continues to fight against the “separatists”, telling Kyiv that Russia is now obliged by treaty to defend them from attack. Russia could also justify a further invasion of Ukraine by recognising the territorial claims of the two separatist governments. They include the large city of Mariupol, which is on the other side of the frontlines. If Russia recognises their expanded borders, it may order its troops to begin an offensive against the Ukrainian army. That could be a prelude to a broader conflict. Russia has gathered up to 190,000 troops along the Ukrainian border and is positioned to launch an attack that could threaten the capital, Kyiv, and sweep across much of the country. An offensive of that size has not been seen in Europe since the second world war. What will the west do? Western countries have condemned the threat and are likely to impose sanctions on Moscow this week. But the severity of the punishment will be up for debate. And they have made clear that they will not send combat troops to Ukraine. The US had promised the “mother of all sanctions”, probably targeting Russia’s banking and financial sectors, if Russia invaded Ukraine. But that imagined a blitzkrieg-style ground campaign that could take big cities like Kyiv and Kharkiv. The recognition of the territories and occupation by Russian forces is also an act of aggression but it is not the nightmare scenario. As diplomats met in Brussels on Tuesday, it remained unclear whether Putin’s order to send troops into Ukraine would be the trigger for the massive sanctions the EU has been threatening for weeks. How do gas supplies affect the crisis? On Tuesday, the German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, stopped the certification process for the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline in response to Russia’s recognition of the two self-proclaimed republics. First announced in 2015, the $11bn (£8.3bn) pipeline owned by Russia’s state-backed energy giant Gazprom has been built to carry gas from western Siberia to Lubmin in Germany’s north-east, doubling the existing capacity of the Nord Stream 1 pipeline and keeping 26m German homes warm at an affordable price. Europe’s most divisive energy project, Nord Stream 2 bypasses the traditional gas transit nation of Ukraine by running along the bed of the Baltic Sea. It has faced resistance within the European Union, and from the United States as well as Ukraine, on the grounds that it increases Europe’s energy dependence on Russia, denies Ukraine transit fees and makes it more vulnerable to Russian invasion.The director of public prosecutions for England and Wales has been severely criticised by Vera Baird, the victims’ commissioner, for failing to take responsibility for a record-breaking low in rape convictions. Max Hill, the head of the Crown Prosecution Service, was accused by Baird of overseeing a “catastrophic” period in the organisation’s history. She also claimed there were half as many rapists off the streets since he took charge. Her comments followed Hill’s interview on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme, when he claimed he was trying to restore lost public confidence over rape cases by changes that include saving cases from being written off by police. ONS figures last month revealed there were 63,136 rape offences in the year to September 2021, while prosecutions were 1.3%. Appearing on the same programme, Baird was asked which organisation should accept the blame for the poor rape conviction rates. She said: “It is the CPS’s fault, almost completely. And I could hear Justin [Webb, the presenter] interviewing Max Hill expecting him to accept some blame, but he didn’t. “Every year since 2010, the CPS prosecuted 3,900-ish cases. Every year since he’s arrived they’ve prosecuted less than 2,000. Convictions were always over 2,200, they got almost to 3,000 – since he arrived, they’ve never been more than 1,500. “I think Max Hill has presided as DPP over the most catastrophic period in the CPS’s history for prosecuting rape,” she said. Baird also claimed Hill had appeared on the programme because he was pre-empting a report by Her Majesty’s Crown Prosecution Service Inspectorate into rape convictions that is expected to be released on Friday. “They are expecting an inspection report on Friday and it seems to me they are trying to pre-empt it because it is likely to be poor. “Certainly the last one said that there was a lack of awareness in the CPS on trauma. They said they approached cases with a view to focus on the weaknesses rather than the strengths. “An increased conviction rate of 60% is not much use if you are prosecuting very few cases. There are half the number of rapists off the streets than there were before Max Hill became DPP,” she said. Hill, who took over as DPP from Alison Saunders in 2018, said earlier on the same programme that he was “deeply frustrated” that so many women who suffer sexual violence, feel a lack of confidence in the entire criminal justice system. “What they are finding over the last year is that by sitting down with police officers at a much earlier stage they can take an investigation that might look as though it is not capable of prosecution, have a conversation about it and convert it into a case that is in court now,” he said. He said that ‘far too few” rape cases were reaching the CPS because of decisions made by the police. “Far too few of the complaints of rape are ever reaching the attention of the CPS. That is where early advice comes in, case progression clinics come in. When the police decide at the conclusion of an investigation that they can’t take any further, we have set up scrutiny panels where we will say ‘bring us a selection of those cases’. “In some, we are able to say ‘have you thought about another angle on the evidence?’” he said. The CPS has published an update on its handling of rape and serious sexual offences that also highlights plans to recruit more specialist rape prosecutors and improve victim support.Welcome to Pushing Buttons, the Guardian’s gaming newsletter. If you’d like to receive it in your inbox every week, just pop your email in below – and check your inbox (and spam) for the confirmation email. Welcome back to Pushing Buttons! Apologies for the late arrival of today’s newsletter; I was unexpectedly stranded with my family for several days last week because of Storm Eunice. Naturally this was the one time in the past five years that I have travelled without a Nintendo Switch, so I couldn’t even turn this into an opportunity to introduce my five-year-old to Mario Kart, a parenting moment I have been looking forward to since he was born. Sadly the last couple of times I’ve tried to introduce him to games have not gone well. The cute Mario Bros Game and Watch that Nintendo released a while back was thrown across the room in a rage after about 90 seconds (“I HATE JUMPING!!!”), and he disliked Pokémon: Let’s Go Pikachu so much that it will no for ever be known in our house as No No Pikachu. Speaking of Nintendo, it was announced last week that the company is finally shutting the virtual storefronts on its older consoles, 2012’s Wii U and 2011’s 3DS, later this year. Why does this matter? Well – aside from the relatively small number of people who might still want to buy and download games for these consoles, there are plenty of other people who are concerned that many of the 1800-odd games on these digital stores are not available to buy anywhere else. Some of them were made specifically for the consoles in question and never made available on discs or cartridges; others are classic Nintendo games, such as the Zelda: Oracle of Ages/Seasons spin-offs, which are otherwise difficult to get ahold of in their original Game Boy Color forms. There’s still time to download anything you might want from these old digital storefronts before they close for good, sometime after August. But this points towards a problem that is particularly pronounced in this art form: preservation. If you want to legally play, say, a SNES game from 1993, you have to own the original console and an original cartridge, which can be troublesome enough to track down. But games that were only ever released digitally can simply vanish if the company that made or hosted them goes bust, or decides to stop supporting them. This is particularly pronounced on Apple and Google’s smartphone storefronts: games appear and disappear all the time. Most of us have hazy memories of games on old computers or early consoles that seem to have been lost to time. Imagine what that’ll be like for the kids who grew up playing games on an iPad. This matters because large swathes of video game history are in permanent danger of being erased. Organisations like the Video Game History Museum go to huge lengths to track down and preserve copies of games, or in-progress code, or artwork and development materials, but the job is enormous, and few of gaming’s big players seem to care that much about the medium’s history. Companies get acquired and their back catalogues get thrown away. I’m still salty about Bookworm Adventure, a fantastic 2007 adventure-scrabble game that EA inexplicably scrubbed from existence after it bought its developer, PopCap. Inevitably, when there is literally no other way to experience older games, people turn to questionably-legal or straight-up illegal emulation. Copyright laws mean that digitally preserving games in this way is at best extremely complicated – but when companies won’t make the effort to preserve their own history, what are game archivists (or curious retro game fans) supposed to do? At least Nintendo reliably rereleases its classics on its newer consoles every few years. We have to pay for them again every time, though. I’ve lost count of the number of times I must have bought the original Super Mario Bros on all the different Nintendo consoles I’ve owned since 1995 – though I’m comforted by the fact that I’ve definitely spent nowhere near much as the guy who paid $2m for a sealed copy at auction. What to play Full disclosure: I have not played the finished version of Elden Ring, a dark-fantasy collaboration between Dark Souls’ creators at FromSoftware in Japan, and George RR Martin. But I played an in-progress beta version at the tail end of last year, and that was enough to convince me that this game will be a highlight of my year. It’s challenging, unsurprisingly – this studio is well known for its uncompromising approach to game design – but also so intriguing, a crumbling fantasy realm full of brutal creatures to fight and dark secrets to uncover at the ends of overgrown paths. Think Dark Souls meets Zelda: Breath of the Wild and you’re halfway there. It’s out this week, and the reviews will start arriving tomorrow. Available on: PC, Xbox One/Series S/Series X, PlayStation 4/5 Approximate playtime: 40+ hours What to read I have always been rather baffled by Gran Turismo, the rather sterile-looking and fastidiously detailed racing game that has been a PlayStation staple since the 90s. So I was enormously charmed to read Mike Channel’s explanation of how eccentric and appealing it is to its fans. GT is “a surprisingly personal, constantly evolving interrogation of the relationship between humans and the metal boxes they careen around in”, he says, a reflection of the mercurial interests of its intriguing creative director Kazunori Yamauchi – who, I learned from this article, is himself an accomplished racing driver who has participated many times in the Nurburgring 24 Hours endurance race. Some Wordle fans are starting to lose faith, suspecting that its new owner the New York Times has made unwelcome changes. I guess all things must pass, but has Wordle’s time really come already? The BBC has investigated the existence of sex games and chatrooms on mega-popular online children’s game Roblox, built by determined rule-breakers. It is of course a law of the internet that people will attempt to make porn out of anything – fellow millennials might remember what went on in the dark corners of similarly sexless 00s chat game Habbo Hotel. Nonetheless, parents should be advised that this stuff does exist on the platform, and that it is extremely difficult to police. What to click ‘The sprites clearly do not look like actual lemmings’: the inside story of an iconic video game The 15 best games on Apple Arcade Total War: Warhammer III review – swords, sorcery and symphonic metal Question Block To balance out the enormous open-world games I’ve been recommending for the past couple of weeks, I thought I’d answer this question from reader Lawal Muhammad (hello again!): Given the oft interrupted life of a gamer-parent, which games would you recommend for the time-poor and sleep-deprived? My memories of the first six months or so with each of my babies have been mostly erased by sleep deprivation, but I do remember that video games got me through a lot of long nights. At that stage I could not cope with ANY stress whatsoever, though, so I stuck to games that exerted absolutely no pressure on me. I played about 60 hours of pleasant farming game Stardew Valley in the middle of the night, because its soothing, predictable daily rhythms were a salve for my tired brain, and absolutely nothing stressful or tragic could possibly happen. I played Breath of the Wild, because it was easy to achieve and save little milestones during a 20-minute baby nap. I played Forza Horizon, because it was the closest thing I could get to a holiday. I played a lot on my phone, especially games that could be finished quickly and would be different every time I played them: sci-fi story-generator Faster than Light, the beautiful interactive novella 80 Days.Jack Smethurst, who has died aged 89, achieved national fame in Love Thy Neighbour, a television sitcom that ran for a phenomenally successful eight series during the 1970s – but was looked back on as racist and, even for its time, anachronistic. He starred as Eddie Booth, the white, Labour-voting, union-supporting factory worker outraged when Bill Reynolds (played by Rudolph Walker), a Conservative-voting black man, not only gets a job in his workplace but also moves in next door to him. The programme’s creators, Vince Powell and Harry Driver, insisted accusations of bigotry were unwarranted because Bill’s views were presented as ignorance and there was prejudice on both sides. Smethurst also said he took the role on the assurance that Eddie would be seen as the one in the wrong. Meanwhile, the pair’s wives, Joan Booth (Kate Williams) and Barbie Reynolds (Nina Baden-Semper), got along swimmingly and such was the sitcom’s popularity, with viewing figures sometimes exceeding 20 million over a five-year run (1972-76), that it spawned a 1973 film and a 1975 stage tour. The on-screen, off-screen demarcations were seemingly spelled out when Smethurst and Walker played themselves, laughing and joking as they share a drink together at a TV studio, in the 1974 film Man About the House. Despite the criticisms, Love Thy Neighbour was screened around the world and a new version was made for Australian television in 1979, with just Smethurst going with it in a story line that finds Eddie settling in Australia, treated as the “foreigner” and facing conflict. Other television offers went quiet for a while and Smethurst briefly found a job in a flower shop. He later blamed typecasting. “I don’t think it was the racial content,” he said in a 2016 BBC Radio 4 documentary, Still Loving Thy Neighbour? “I think it’s the fact that your face is so familiar. I think people are a lot more adaptable now.” Smethurst was born in the Collyhurst area of Manchester, the third of five children of Kitty (nee Brown), a department store worker, and Bill Smethurst, a packer in a factory. After the family’s home was destroyed by German bombs during the second world war, Jack was evacuated to Blackpool and the family eventually moved to Blackley, Manchester. From an early age, rather than using his given name, John, he was known as Jack, after his maternal uncle, Jackie Brown, a boxing champion. On leaving St Clare’s school, Blackley, at the age of 14 with no qualifications, Jack delivered groceries, then had a job as an apprentice cutter in a raincoat factory and did seasonal agricultural work in Lincolnshire. During national service with the RAF as a corporal in the cookhouse at Cosford, Shropshire, he spent leave time watching plays at Birmingham repertory theatre. It reinforced in him the desire to perform he had felt after seeing the Carl Rosa opera company at Manchester Opera House in his teens. The RAF and Manchester city council then jointly funded him through drama school training, at the London Academy of Dramatic Arts (1954-56). While in Hornchurch for his first repertory theatre work, Smethurst was heard on BBC radio with the Queen’s Players company, under the director Stuart Burge, in a 1956 production of the George Farquhar play The Recruiting Officer, with Smethurst playing the police constable. He was in at the beginning of the revolution giving a voice to the working classes when he played a collier in Serjeant Musgrave’s Dance, John Arden’s drama about army deserters, at the Royal Court theatre (1959). Then came bit parts in the social-realist “kitchen sink” films Saturday Night and Sunday Morning (1960) and A Kind of Loving (1962). Smethurst followed those with character roles in television plays and popular series, including multiple parts in the police dramas No Hiding Place (five, from 1961 to 1965) and Z Cars (seven, 1962 to 1969). Although he appeared as an army recruit in the film Carry on Sergeant (1958), he was in few TV comedies until the end of the 1960s. He was a regular in the sitcom For the Love of Ada (1970-71) as Leslie Pollitt, son-in-law and neighbour of a widow (Irene Handl) enjoying a relationship with the gravedigger (Wilfred Pickles) who buried her husband. Smethurst also appeared in the 1972 spin-off film. Either side of Love Thy Neighbour, Smethurst had four roles in Coronation Street: Fred Clark, a crooked brewery worker delivering short orders (1961); Percy Bridge, accepting money from Elsie Tanner after he falsely claimed to have saved her grandson’s life (1967); Johnny Webb, Eddie Yeats’s fellow refuse collector who briefly lodged at the Ogdens’ (1980 and 1983); and Stan Wagstaff, an allotment holder alongside Jack Duckworth (2001). Returning to sitcom, Smethurst played the boss of a TV chat-show researcher (Marti Caine) in Hilary (1984-86) and had a cameo in Last of the Summer Wine as Davenport, a lost guidebook writer (1997). Powell also wrote the BBC Radio 2 sitcom A Proper Charlie (1984-85) for Smethurst. He starred as Charlie Garside, a trade unionist who works in a factory but spends most of his time in the pub. In 1957, Smethurst married Julie Nicholls, an actor. She and their four children, Perdita, Merry, Jane and Adam, an actor, survive him. • Jack (John) Smethurst, actor, born 9 April 1932; died 16 February 2022Vladimir Putin’s angry and rambling hour-long potted history of Ukraine’s failings on Monday night, culminating in a commitment to recognise the self-proclaimed republics in Donetsk and Luhansk, left western diplomats scratching their heads and wondering whether they had been made redundant. The Russian president not only said he would recognise Russian-controlled territory in Ukraine, rendering eight years of negotiations over their future pointless, but he also signalled that Russia could not tolerate an independent Ukraine on its borders. Nato was hardly mentioned. His target at one point seemed to be the Bolsheviks, for relinquishing land to the nationalists. The lecture was a far cry from a statement from Emmanuel Macron’s office 24 hours earlier saying the French and Russian leaders had “made firm commitments to carry out all useful actions to avoid escalation, reduce risks and preserve peace”. Putin said the self-declared republics needed defending from the threat of “genocide”, and parts of Ukraine must be purged of corruption, cells of extremists, and the threat of nuclear weapons being pointed “only in a matter of time” at Moscow. “Ukraine is an inalienable part of our own history, culture and spiritual space,” Putin said. “These are our comrades, those dearest to us – not only colleagues, friends and people who once served together, but also relatives, people bound by blood, by family ties.” Much of what was said was a rehash of an article he wrote last summer, but it has become clear this ideology is now guiding his actions and he needs to be taken literally and seriously. Following the logic of Putin’s speech, it seems only a matter of time before a full invasion of Ukraine to reunite the two peoples will have to take place. Russia, viewed through this lens, cannot face the risk of assault from Ukrainian territory. The “puppet regime” will have to be removed. Yet even now, at this grimmest point, the west does not want to take the final step of breaking off all diplomatic contact with the Kremlin. Diplomats are looking desperately for chinks of light in the gloom. One uncertainty is quite how far the “Russian peacekeepers” will advance. Will Putin recognise all of Luhansk and Donetsk as independent, or just the territory currently held by the Russia-backed separatists? The former would mean pushing his tanks across the line of contact, drastically increasing the possibility of full-blown conflict. The latter is still a breach of international law, and rips up the Minsk accords, but in a way only formalises the existing Russian presence in the area. This uncertainty accounts for why the west is not yet unleashing the full big bazooka of sanctions. There will be coordinated sanctions in Brussels, London and Washington. They will go after entities and people in the self-proclaimed republics, as well as those close to the Putin regime. But the package is unlikely yet to constitute an imposition of export controls and the drying up of finance for Russia in the London capital markets. The discrepancy constitutes a change of tactics, if not strategy. At a briefing on 25 January, state department officials insisted: “The gradualism of the past is out, and this time we’ll start at the top of the escalation ladder and stay there. We’ve made efforts to signal this intention very clearly”. Boris Johnson said in Kyiv last week that as soon as a Russian toecap crossed into Ukraine, sanctions would be triggered. But Putin has not quite gone over the brink, hence the caution. A US intelligence official a week ago had likened the west’s tactics in handling Putin to dealing with a kidnapper holding hostages in a booby-trapped building. The first aim was to keep the kidnapper talking. The hope was that a professional negotiator, or a sympathetic family member, perhaps a member of the Russian army, could talk the highly strung kidnapper round and make him realise that whatever his grievances, this is not going to work out well for him in the long term. Even now, Putin is toying with the matches but not yet blown the whole building up. If anything, he has now lost some leverage by taking the pressure off Ukraine to offer concessions and leaving his protector, China, uneasy at the UN security council. He also weakened the advocates of diplomacy in Europe. Macron will defend his efforts to keep Putin talking, even if it is seen as a heroic failure. But his proposed summit on the future security architecture of Europe – still not rejected by the Kremlin – looks doomed. Putin simply cannot be trusted. That leaves the west focusing on the consequences of a breakdown – sanctions, shoring up Nato’s eastern flank, preparing for refugees and finding ways to help the Ukrainian army to make Putin’s price of victory so high that his domestic popularity nosedives along with the rouble.Menna Fitzpatrick and Millie Knight are to lead the biggest British Winter Paralympic team in nearly 30 years, as the final places for Beijing were confirmed on Tuesday. Fitzpatrick, who won four medals in Pyeongchang four years ago, including one gold, to become Britain’s most decorated winter para-athlete, will be joined by double-silver medallist Knight in the Alpine ski team. ParalympicsGB finalised their numbers for the Games that begin on 4 March by adding Alpine, Nordic skiing and snowboard athletes to five wheelchair curlers already selected. It brought the total number of athletes to 25, the biggest group since Lillehammer in 1994. Fitzpatrick and Knight will be joined in the visually impaired class of alpine skiing by debutant Neil Simpson, as well as their guides. In the sitting class there will be three athletes competing at their first Games, Shona Brownlee, Alex Slegg and Dan Sheen. James Whitley will compete at his third games in the standing class. “It’s a huge honour to be selected to represent ParalympicsGB again, and I can’t wait to get out there and get started,” Fitzpatrick said. “The last two years have been disrupted due to injury and the pandemic and, with uncertainty about whether the Games would go ahead, let alone the qualification process, to have a seat on that plane is amazing. I’m super excited to travel to China as part of such an incredible team of athletes representing Great Britain.” The Nordic skiing team will be five strong, a sign of increased strength after Scott Meenagh became the first British athlete to compete in the class for 20 years in Pyeongchang. Meenagh returns for Beijing alongside fellow British forces veteran Steve Arnold and Callum Deboys in the biathlon and cross-country events. Steve Thomas will appear in a sixth Paralympic Games, having competed in sailing and ice hockey previously, racing cross-country. Hope Gordon, meanwhile, is set to become Britain’s first ever female Nordic Paralympian, by competing in the cross country. She has already represented Britain in para-canoeing. Finally, James Barnes-Miller and Owen Pick lead the snowboard team along with debutants Ollie Hill and Andy MacLeod. The ParalympicsGB chef de mission, Phil Smith, said: “We are looking forward to using Beijing to build on the success of the past two Paralympic Winter Games and further enhance our reputation as an emerging winter sport nation.”HSBC boosted its banker bonus pool by nearly a third, reaching its highest level since 2014, after a global recovery from the Covid crisis helped profits more than double last year. The London-headquartered bank increased its staff bonus pool to $3.5bn (£2.6bn) in a move it said was justified due to its strong financial performance and the need to compete for workers in an “extraordinarily competitive labour market”. That included tech and IT staff as well as employees across Asia who HSBC said were in high demand. “It is critical for our long-term performance that we continue to attract and retain the talent necessary to deliver our strategic priorities,” HSBC said in its annual report on Tuesday. The increase resulted in the highest group bonus pool in seven years, having last totalled $3.7m in 2014. The boost to bonuses came as the bank said it had paid 451 of its bankers €1m (£832,000) or more last year, marking a 40% increase on the number of staff with such payouts. That list included 15 bankers earning more than €5m, including one unnamed banker who was handed €11-12m – nearly double the £4.9m paid to the HSBC chief executive, Noel Quinn. Quinn’s pay increased by 18% after the cash bonus he waived during the first year of the Covid crisis in 2020 was reinstated. His total bonus came to $1.6m for 2021, up from $816,000 a year earlier. HSBC also reported a surge in its annual pretax profits, which rose from $8.8bn to $19bn. The increase was primarily driven by improving economic conditions, which allowed it to release hundreds of millions of pounds originally set aside for a potential jump in loan defaults during the pandemic. The bank released about $928m in loan loss provisions for the year. It is a significant improvement compared with the $8.8bn it was forced to put aside in fear of soured debts in 2020. Quinn said the bank had ended the year on a high note, recording profits in all of its regional businesses including the UK. The lender will hand more cash back to shareholders as a result, including through a dividend worth 18 cents a share and a further share buyback of up to $1bn, after the conclusion of an existing $2bn buyback programme. Despite expecting weaker performance from its Asian wealth division over the next year – in which it serves rich clients – HSBC said it was optimistic about the income it would make from higher interest rates, as central banks around the world try to combat inflation fuelled in part by Covid support. But Russ Mould, investment director at AJ Bell, warned that “the rising rate situation is not a clearcut golden goose for HSBC. Its strategy is focused on carving out a bigger position in Asia, and China recently bucked the trend by cutting its interest rates. Fears there could be more pain in the Chinese property sector also clouds its outlook.” Quinn added that the bank’s leadership also had to “remain cognisant of the potential impact that further Covid-19-related uncertainty and continued inflation might have on us and our clients”. That is on top of monitoring developments around Russia, including any repercussions of an invasion of Ukraine on financial markets, and any subsequent sanctions on Moscow. Ewen Stevenson, the bank’s chief financial officer, said HSBC’s direct exposure to Russia was fairly small, accounting for just $15m – or 0.03% – of the bank’s $50bn revenues. The bank also only employs 200 of its near-220,000 staff in Moscow. “It’s not a big business for us,” he said, with Quinn adding that the bank had “no plans to change anything at the moment”. “We have really very small exposure directly to Russia and therefore we’re not unduly concerned in that regard,” the chief executive said. “Clearly, any military action that takes place would be a concern with respect to collateral damage on the markets and market confidence. We’ll have to wait to see how that develops,” he said. Investor reaction was muted, though, with shares down 0.14% at 546p each on Tuesday afternoon.The BBC is losing two of its leading broadcasters as the Newsnight presenter Emily Maitlis and the former North America editor Jon Sopel have announced they are leaving to join the media group Global. The pair will front a new podcast for Global Player, host a radio show together on LBC and provide commentary and analysis for the station’s website. Maitlis has served as the lead presenter on Newsnight, and the two host the BBC’s popular Americast podcast, about US politics. Maitlis said: “We are just so delighted to be launching this brand new podcast – which will build on everything we’ve achieved with Americast over the last few years – and it will find new audiences and a new home with Global. I couldn’t be more excited.” Sopel said: “I’m delighted to be joining Global with my great friend and colleague Emily Maitlis. We’ve been blown away by the reception for Americast and are so excited that Global has given us the opportunity to build on this success by creating this innovative news podcast. This is an unmissable opportunity.” The announcement means the two journalists will be free of BBC bureaucracy and can pursue lucrative paid speaking engagements unencumbered by the corporation’s constraints. Insiders said Maitlis’s departure raised questions about the future of Newsnight. “This completely stuffs Newsnight, which is left without an editor and only has one presenter in the form of Kirsty Wark,” said one. The Newsnight editor, Esme Wren, left to join Channel 4 News late last year. Maitlis, who landed the famous Prince Andrew interview, has been castigated repeatedly by the BBC for her tweets and social media output, as part of its impartiality drive. Andrew Marr, on his departure to LBC, said he was “keen to get my own voice back” and was looking forward to having greater freedom to express himself outside the BBC’s strict impartiality rules. Sopel was among the names tipped to succeed Laura Kuenssberg as BBC political editor when she steps down. No announcement has been made about her replacement. First-round interviews for the post are expected to place this week. Sources said there was a sense that the BBC had not grasped how big podcasting was becoming because it was still fixated on servicing its old broadcast channels, and could not compete on money, talent and editorial freedom. BBC on-air presenters are regularly offered big pay rises and job offers by News UK and Global for talk TV and podcast projects. In an email to staff, Jonathan Munro, the BBC’s interim director of news and current affairs, said the pair had “made an enormous contribution to the BBC”. He said: “Most recently as our North America editor, Jon has covered the stories of the region with flair – including three presidents, two elections, the impact of Covid, and the longer-term legacy of 9/11.” Of Maitlis, Munro said: “Her notable interview with Prince Andrew about his relationship with Jeffrey Epstein has led coverage of the story since it aired in 2019. Please join me in thanking both Emily and Jon for their many years of sterling service to the BBC and wishing them all the best for the future.” Announcing the news on Twitter, Maitlis wrote: “It’s an amazing opportunity to do something we all love and we are so thrilled Global is giving us the opportunity to be big and ambitious with this project. “Nevertheless, it will be a wrench to leave the BBC after 20 phenomenal years. I am so grateful for the opportunities I’ve had there. More than anything I’m grateful to have worked with the most incredible people, many of whom are dear friends. I owe my BBC colleagues everything.” Sopel tweeted: “Some work news: @maitlis and I are going to launch a brand, spanking new podcast with @global. We’re excited to be working with them on this innovative project. Opportunities like this just don’t come along very often. But am sad to leave the BBC, which has been home for so long. “Of course, it will be a wrench to leave the BBC after nearly four decades, and have loved my time there – particularly the last seven years as North America editor. I leave with nothing but good feelings towards the corporation and wish all the best to my colleagues and friends there.” The two will be working with Dino Sofos, the founder and CEO of the audio production company Persephonica, a former head of BBC news podcasts and the creator of Brexitcast, Newscast and Americast. He tweeted: “Can’t wait to be reunited with these broadcasting legends as exec producer on this milestone moment for podcasting.”West Midlands police have asked a judge to exclude reporters from a hearing in which they will attempt to force a journalist and former MP who exposed the Birmingham Six’s wrongful conviction to reveal his source material. The force have applied for an order under the Terrorism Act 2000 compelling Chris Mullin to hand over material, including notebooks, from his 1985-86 investigation into the 1974 Birmingham pub bombings, which killed 21 people and injured more than 200. The Birmingham Six were jailed for life in 1975 but their convictions were quashed in 1991, five years after the publication of Mullin’s book Error of Judgement: the Truth About the Birmingham Bombings. In 2018, West Midlands police announced a decision to reinvestigate the case. Officers believe Mullin has interviews that could confirm the identity of a surviving member of the IRA gang now thought to be behind the pub bombings. Relatives of victims of the bombings have criticised the former MP for refusing to disclose the names of living suspects. Journalists are professionally bound to maintain the confidentiality of sources and Mullin is refusing to disclose the requested material on the basis that it would represent a fundamental breach of this principle. The National Union of Journalists is supporting his case. West Midlands police confirmed on Tuesday that they had made submissions asking for Friday’s hearing at the Old Bailey to be held in private. They cited the need to protect the privacy of a suspect whose name may be mentioned in court who has not been charged, in line with the decision in the recent Bloomberg case at the supreme court which protects such suspects. News organisations including the Guardian, Daily Mail and Times plan to challenge the attempt to have the public, including journalists, excluded from the entirety of the hearing. The Guardian understands that Mullin wishes for the hearing to be held in public. Many reporters have risked jail for contempt of court in the past rather than reveal sources. In a significant 1996 case, the European court of human rights backed a journalist from the Engineer magazine, Bill Goodwin, after a court in Britain tried to force him to reveal a source. However, in some decisions since the Goodwin case, judges have ruled that the need for disclosure outweighed the public interest in a journalist being entitled to protect their sources.Uefa is ready to drop St Petersburg as the venue for this year’s Champions League final, but has yet to take a decision, as the military crisis in Ukraine deepens. The final of Europe’s most prestigious club competition is due to be played in Russia’s second-largest city on 28 May but Uefa finds itself under increasing pressure to move the venue after Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin, announced a decision to send troops into Ukraine’s eastern Donbas region. Officials, including Uefa’s president, Alexander Ceferin, were in discussions over the location of the match on Tuesday. The Champions League final has been moved, because of Covid, in both of the past two seasons. “Uefa is constantly and closely monitoring the situation and any decision would be made in due course if necessary,” the governing body said in a statement, updated to include the possibility of a relocation. “Uefa has no further comments to make at present.” Any decision is likely to follow political direction from inside Europe. Ceferin has built close ties within the EU during the recent European Super League affair and a common move towards a ‘European Sport Model’ of governance. On Tuesday the EU and member states began detailing responses to the Russia’s announcements, with the most prominent act a decision by the German government to delay certification of the Nordstream 2 gas pipeline project. The British government has spoken out, expressing opposition to the final going ahead in St Petersburg. Boris Johnson said there should be “no chance of holding football tournaments in a Russia that invades sovereign countries”. A government spokesperson reinforced this view, saying: “We have serious concerns about the hosting of international sporting events in Russia, such as the Champions League final, and will discuss these with the relevant governing bodies. We will not allow president Putin to exploit sporting and cultural events on the world stage to legitimise his renewed illegal invasion of Ukraine.” Although Russian clubs are not a significant player on the pitch, with only Zenit St Petersburg and Spartak Moscow remaining in European competition this season, the country’s financial clout is significant. The Russian gas company Gazprom is at the heart of European football and has longstanding commercial arrangements with Uefa. Last summer it announced an expansion of its sponsorship arrangement with Uefa to include the European Championship as well as the Champions and Europa Leagues. It holds the naming rights for the stadium at which the final is due to be played, the Gazprom Arena, and Nordstream 2 is wholly owned by Gazprom. Meanwhile the Polish football association said it had been in contact with Fifa to “urgently clarify the issues” around the World Cup qualifier they are due to play in Moscow next month. Poland have been drawn against Russia in the semi-finals of the World Cup play-offs, a one-off match which gave Russia home advantage as a seeded team. In a statement, the Polish FA expressed doubts over the safety of playing in Moscow, owing to “potential threats related to the current situation” and their responsibility “to provide Polish footballers with optimal conditions for preparation and performances in international matches”. Poland said their concerns extended to the safety of whoever would face Russia in the play-off final, should Russia win, which would be Sweden or the Czech Republic.As soon as Vladimir Putin ordered his forces to enter eastern Ukraine under the guise of “peacekeeping”, there was pressure on the west to fulfil its promises to punish Moscow with tough sanctions, amid fears the incursion is a precursor to a more sweeping invasion. The US initially responded with limited sanctions targeting investment and trade related to the Russia-controlled territories of Donetsk and Luhansk, while on Tuesday Boris Johnson announced what he called the “first barrage of UK economic sanctions against Russia”. The prime minister told the Commons that the measures, imposed on five Russian banks – Rossiya, IS Bank, General Bank, Promsvyazbank and the Black Sea Bank – and three high net worth individuals including Putin’s friend Gennady Timchenko, were just the “first tranche” and promised more. So who might be next? ‘Moscow-on-Thames’ Of all the countries that could retaliate economically, the UK has an outsized ability to inflict damage. There is thought to be more Russian gold in London than in any other city in the world. Not only in the Chelsea mansions that house the families of oligarchs, which have earned the capital the “Moscow-on-Thames” nickname, but on the London Stock Exchange (LSE). Since the 1990s, companies whose shares are traded in Moscow have turned to London to raise money through what are known as secondary listings. They range from state-backed oil and gas producers Rosneft and Gazprom, to state-run banks VTB and Sberbank, to independent mining companies such as Nornickel that have no state ownership. In total, 31 Russian companies are listed on the LSE, with a combined market value of £468bn, according to the data company S&amp;P Global. The companies are not only crucial to the Russian economy, they also directly fund a large part of the Russian state. London-listed Russian oil, gas and mining companies paid their government £39bn in taxes in 2020, according to a Guardian analysis of payments to government disclosures. That revenue is hugely important to the Putin regime: Russia spent £41.7bn on its military in 2019, 11.4% of government spending, according to the World Bank’s latest figures. How might sanctions be imposed? A statutory instrument laid before parliament earlier this month gave the UK government the power to impose sanctions on those “carrying on business of economic significance to the government of Russia” as well as companies supportive of the Russian government, and sectors of strategic significance, including energy, mining and financial services. While not every Russian-linked company will be a target for sanctions, the reality is most of the London-listed companies potentially fall within the definition of having economic or strategic significance to the Russian government. And in the US a draft sanctions bill explicitly names 12 Russian banks as potential targets for sanctions and would also give powers to hit companies in the oil and gas and mining sectors. No companies or individuals have yet been designated, but the new legislation now allows for the speedy designation of a very broad range of individuals and entities. Who might be targeted? Under the most extreme scenario, companies operating in the UK, US or EU – including most of the world’s major financial institutions – could be forbidden from any transactions with sanctioned entities. That could mean the indefinite suspension of their shares, and an inability to issue new debt or shares in London. The most obvious companies of economic significance to the Russian government, based on tax take, are Rosneft, Gazprom and Lukoil, who together paid 3.2tn roubles (£31bn) in tax and other payments to the Russian government in 2020. All three are primarily listed on the Moscow Exchange, but have secondary listings in London. Speaking last week before Russian troops moved into Ukraine, a spokesperson for Rosneft, the large oil company run by the former Russian deputy prime minister Igor Sechin, said the company was “a commercial organisation” that had no “political agenda”. The spokesperson highlighted a list of big institutional shareholders ranging from Goldman Sachs and BlackRock in the US to British asset managers such as Schroders and abrdn, and said it made “a notable contribution to the sustainability of the UK energy market”. Gazprom, Norsnickel and Sberbank did not comment. Lukoil and VTB did not respond to requests for comment. Some companies with primary London listings also operate in sectors deemed by the UK government as strategically significant to Russia. The FTSE 100 steelmaker Evraz is incorporated in London but has significant operations in Russia. The company is 29% owned by Roman Abramovich, the Russian owner of Chelsea football club. Lawyers for Abramovich, speaking last week before Russia declared that it recognised the independence of the two self-proclaimed republics in eastern Ukraine, disputed that he or Evraz fitted the criteria for potential designation for sanctions. They added: “It would be ludicrous to suggest that our client has any responsibility or influence over the behaviour of the Russian state.” The London-based aluminium miner En+ Group (£1.1bn), which raised $1.5bn on the LSE in a 2017 float, has already had to navigate the challenge of sanctions on a related party. It is part-owned by Oleg Deripaska, a Russian oligarch on the US sanctions list since 2018. En+ managed to escape US sanctions by reducing Deripaska’s ownership to 45% and appointing other directors in a plan devised by Greg Barker, a former UK energy minister and Conservative peer who is the company’s chair. The company is still thought to make monthly reports to US Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control. En+ declined to comment. However, Deripaska has taken legal action to challenge US sanctions. He has denied any wrongdoing and said US allegations against him were based on “false rumour and innuendo”. Where does this leave the City? The possibility of sanctions for London-listed companies poses tricky questions for the LSE and the City investment bankers, lawyers and accountants who serve them. Russian companies are likely to account for only a small portion of the LSE’s fee income, but it has in the past enthusiastically welcomed Russian money – even going so far as mounting a roadshow to Moscow in 2011 to drum up custom. That mood has changed along with the geopolitics since the Crimea annexation, but Russian companies have still raised an average of $1.8bn a year on the LSE between the 2014 Crimea invasion and 2021, or £14bn in total, according to data from Dealogic. Sanctioned companies can, depending on the details, be suspended from trading and removed from the LSE’s stock market indices – although there is little in the rules on what would happen if suspensions were to last years. The London Stock Exchange Group declined to comment.I was once the only passenger on a four-hour “ghost flight” across Europe. I loved it – the exclusivity, the speed, even the meals. But that was 45 years ago, when flying was quite rare and seemed glamorous. The idea that air travel might one day threaten future generations seemed very far-fetched. But the facts change. Travel is now a global commodity, and aviation is the world’s fastest growing major source of climate breakdown emissions. Flying empty or near-empty planes around just to hold on to landing slots at airports now seems close to “ecocide” – an act of deliberate destruction of the environment. A staggering 15,000 ghost flights flew from UK airports between March 2020 and September 2021. These flights are a symptom of an unregulated, highly protected industry encouraged to keep growing without responsibility. Before the pandemic, Britain had the third largest aviation sector in the world after the US and China. It has some of the most travelled people in the world, and its emissions from flying are the third highest per capita. The government subsidises the industry with huge tax breaks and handouts. And while the rest of UK industry has helped to reduce emissions by around 42% in the last 30 years, aviation has been allowed to double its own. In 2019, aviation accounted for 8% of all UK emissions, and it shows no sign of slowing soon. The global industry may be slowly improving its efficiency, by about 2% a year, but passenger growth still surges ahead. Globally, a staggering 38,000 large planes are now expected to be flying regularly within 10 years – and the UK government expects more than 230 million more passengers a year will be using UK airports by 2050. Never mind that the government’s climate adviser, the Climate Change Committee (CCC), say that passenger numbers should not grow more than 25% and that there should be no more net airport growth. Heathrow, Gatwick, Leeds-Bradford, Manston, Bristol, Luton and others are now planning to expand, in the teeth of local opposition. We are to be Runway Britain. But while airlines give the impression of being for everyone, they are largely used by the few. Aside from the air and noise pollution close to airports, which disproportionately affects low-income groups, just 1% of people take 20% of all English international flights and 10% take more than half. There is a limit on how much carbon we can emit without catastrophic climate consequences; the more the aviation industry is allowed to grow, the more all other sectors of the economy will have to cut back. To its credit, Britain also has a legal duty to cut its emissions to reach net zero by 2050, one of the most ambitious decarbonisation plans in the world. This means a 78% cut on 1990 figures by 2035, and 100% by 2050. The government is relying mostly on techno-fixes and imagines a heat pump for every house, electric cars on every drive, better quality housing, mass tree planting and farming reform – but above all, it expects the market to magically deliver the necessary cuts. It is obviously make-believe, and groups including Friends of the Earth and Client Earth are now taking ministers to court, saying the strategy is too theoretical and is not properly backed up with policies, money or commitment. Besides, they say, unlike cars or houses, there is no techno-fix for aviation. The industry knows this, and talks up emission-trading, switching to renewable fuels, carbon capture and storage, and even one day building lighter electric or green hydrogen planes. But few of these nascent technologies are likely to be working at any significant scale in the next 20 crucial years, by which time we must have slashed emissions heavily to avoid more catastrophic storms, flooding, droughts and heatwaves. Meanwhile, the public is fobbed off with talk of airlines paying others to make extra emissions cuts, and being on the brink of breakthroughs. The bitter truth is that UK aviation, as it exists today, and tackling the climate crisis are incompatible, something recognised by the CCC. It warns that, left unchecked, the linked aviation, tourism and airport industries will blow UK climate targets away. We need to reduce emissions from air travel fast – and that can only mean fewer flights. That will require proper interventions, such as a tax on frequent flights, the removal of tax breaks on aviation fuel, and the adoption of the “polluter pays” principle. Any money raised could help provide better public transport, cheaper rail fares and alternatives to flying, The timing for action is good. Two years of travel restrictions and rising awareness of the climate crisis may have convinced many of us that Zoom is here to stay, Britain is beautiful, trains to France and beyond are good, and the days of shopping trips to New York, weekend skiing in Italy and second holidays in Thailand are over. It might also have convinced the industry that the best way to start addressing its impact on climate change is by banning all ghost flights. John Vidal was the Guardian’s environment editorWe’re nearly two hours into our conversation when Morgan Khan starts to cry. I have just mentioned that for decades now, the UK charts have been filled with the children of Street Sounds, the dance music compilation series he began 40 years ago. “It’s true,” he says, when he has composed himself. “I’m balding, with a pot belly and a small dick. That’s me being objective. But what you said is true.” Without ever writing a song, without ever fronting a group, Khan changed the face of British music. He was one of the first cheerleaders for Britfunk, the first to bring electro and hip-hop to the UK, and one of the pioneers of house. Every root of the dance music that has blossomed in mainstream pop grew in the UK thanks to Khan transplanting it from the US. How far ahead of the curve was he? He licensed the first rap smash, Sugarhill Gang’s Rapper’s Delight, to release in the UK. He was the first person to bring Dr Dre over, as part of the World Class Wreckin’ Cru, to play Khan’s 1986 UK Fresh show. When Mory Kanté’s Yeke Yeke became the first African hit to break in Europe in 1987, Khan had released it on Street Sounds New Africa two years earlier. In 1982, Khan – then 23 – launched Street Sounds, a compilation series that democratised the dance music underground. Suddenly, tracks that had been available only on import in specialist shops, bought by DJs and serious clubbers, were available to all. For the price of one import 12-inch, you could get 12 tracks on an album. Street Sounds had its own section in the high street music chain Our Price; I vividly recall the albums being loaned around by kids at my school in Slough. “What was being released in the UK was palatable, watered-down soul,” Khan says of the early 1980s. “It wasn’t street. Everything that was happening in the clubs was on import, and that was the idea that sparked it. Buying imports was costing me half my weekly salary. I thought: these records are never going to see the light of day in Europe. Why don’t I go to the US – to the labels, producers and artists – and let me license them for Europe? “Actually, 90% of them didn’t even know where Europe was. They just wanted to sell in the tristate area [New York, New Jersey, Connecticut] and California. For them, getting an advance for a territory they would never sell to anyway … bonus! No one had approached them before. The majors hadn’t caught on to Black music, street music – they jumped on later. When they saw what we were doing, it became harder for me, because they would hand out million-pound cheques. But before that they didn’t realise the sales potential.” Khan was born in Hong Kong to Anglo-Indian parents. His father was an airline pilot who later lost his job for diamond smuggling, and his family came to the UK when he was nine. He entered the music business – not his parents’ dream for him – in the late 70s, first as a DJ. “They loved my energy,” he tells me. “I’d put on a record, leave the booth and come out and dance with the crowd, then run back in.” Next he was a post boy at the Pye label – at one point, without a home, he spent several months living in their offices – before working in their promotions department on disco releases. “The treatment of dance music was the epitome of racism,” he says. “There was a racist attitude to Black music: it wasn’t ‘serious’ music.” The N-word, he says, was used offhandedly around the industry. “It was just standard vocabulary. It was inbred into the system that you could talk like that, act like that, be like that.” But it was Pye that first sent Khan to New York, where he did the deal with Joe Robinson of Sugar Hill Records to release Rapper’s Delight in the UK. “After the deal was done, Robinson handed me a bundle of notes and said, ‘Khan, buy some fucking clothes. You’re representing me now.’ That night a gift arrived at my hotel room.” He pauses for effect. “She was beautiful.” He pauses again. “All we did was watch TV and eat cheesecake. I was 21.” From Pye, he set up his own imprint, R&amp;B Records, which introduced the pioneering funk band Imagination. He left that because he felt his backers weren’t paying him enough, and with the support of Maurice Oberstein, who ran the UK arm of CBS, he set up Street Sounds for US tracks and Street Wave for his own artists. “He took that music into the suburbs and the small towns, so it was everywhere,” says the DJ Greg Wilson, who adds that Khan was “priming people” for the late 80s rave scene. “A lot of those people had come out of listening to the Street Sounds Electro compilations. Electro was raw – it really swept everything away that went before and began a new world for dance and pop.” It was, Khan and Wilson agree, dance music’s punk moment: nothing would be the same again. Khan’s A&amp;R process for the compilations was simple. First, he would go to clubs: “You’ll see the records that, within a bar, had people not just dancing but getting down.” Second, he would go to New York. “I was flying to New York most Fridays and coming back on Mondays. I was collecting the quarter-inch master tape. There were no mobile phones. There was no digital file. I would go see some labels, fly back again. Cut the record on a Monday, have a test pressing by Wednesday because we were doing such volume. We’d be in production for Friday.” Promotion was from the ground up. “I used the pirates and the club DJs. All these little pirate stations around the UK were starting to play Black music; the legal stations wouldn’t touch it. Each month, 3,000 vinyls went out, maybe more. If the top DJ in a town plays it, other DJs hear it and buy it and play it – you get it to the kingpin in each area, and they are effectively your promotions department.” The first Street Sounds compilation sold around 10,000 copies, Khan says, but they soon started flying off the shelves, aided by the switch to text- and graphic-based designs for the Electro series, designed by John Carver and reminiscent of Neville Brody’s work for The Face, which gave the records a sleek modernity that the first covers – with graffiti-style writing – didn’t have. Suddenly, new names were being talked about in schools around the UK: Newcleus, Rammellzee, Cybotron, Run DMC. By the sixth Electro compilation in 1984 the direction of travel was clear: it featured both sides of the Roxanne wars between the Real Roxanne and Roxanne Shante, as well as Whodini and Doug E Fresh (credited as Dougy Fresh). Hip-hop was the new thing, and Khan was already on top of it. He was soon overreaching, though. His plans to make his organisation the British Motown (“Detroit comes to West Acton!” as one ad campaign enthusiastically put it) foundered on the fact that while the Street Sounds albums were selling – the series racked up 57 chart entries in five years – he was less successful hitting the singles chart with artists he signed directly to Street Wave. The UK Fresh festival at Wembley Arena in 1986 – by a huge distance, the biggest hip-hop show in the UK to that point, and for several years after – was a hit, but his Street Scene magazine, centred on Black music, emptied the coffers. Still he persisted, and in a remarkable comeback he set up a new label, Westside, in 1987, and won the licenses to release the Chicago house labels Trax and DJ International in the UK, only to be gazumped by those with deeper pockets. “We had done the hard work and then the artists started signing major deals. What chance did I have? Pete Tong was flying off to Chicago with a blank chequebook: how do you compete?” Street Sounds still exists – it’s an internet radio station – and Khan wants to get back to releasing compilations of the most exciting underground dance music from around the world again, maybe four a year. He’s angry that others are celebrated for bringing hip-hop and house to the UK mainstream: “People credit Paul Oakenfold and Pete Tong and it fucks me off. People have tried to change the history and it hurts me.” Wilson thinks that’s because the collapse of Street Scene left others out of pocket and resentful of Khan for their losses, and because a new generation came to dance music in the late 1980s and simply assumed Ibiza in 1987 was the year zero, with no appreciation of what had come before. “There’s nothing about him in the books, even though he’s a central figure in the history of British dance culture,” Wilson says. “He was young, he was brave, and he was prepared to put his reputation on the line.” He’s older now, but Morgan Khan remains indefatigable, and convinced talent will surface through the dross – and that he will find it next. “I’m appalled by bedroom DJs who put out these shit beats and everyone thinks they can make music,” he says, before smiling. “But the next Prince is out there.” Morgan Khan on his favourite discoveries Sugarhill Gang – Rapper’s Delight (1979) “Credited for introducing hip-hip to the mainstream, even though it was preceded by the Fatback Band’s King Tim III (Personality Jock) by a few months. Sylvia Robinson, the producer, wanted to capture on vinyl the phenomenon of rappers performing live at block parties in the Bronx – its significance still can not be overestimated.” Imagination – Body Talk (1981) “My first own label release, on R&amp;B Records. Imagination dared to be different with their signature sound and overtly camp stage persona; groups like Imagination proved that Britfunk and soul could take on the Americans, and laid the foundations for the next generation of groups like Soul II Soul.” Hashim ‎– Al-Naafiysh (The Soul) (1983) “A new tour de force would soon empower the music of the street, and Al-Naafiysh (The Soul) epitomised this new music: electro, the driving force behind the emergence of B-boy culture, breakdancing, graffiti and the boom box.” Cheryl Lynn – Encore (1983) “CBS UK had decided not to release this track as a single, despite the pedigree of the artist, and that the song was written and produced by the highly successful Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis. They said they did not see it as a hit, or [an] artist worth promoting – you can deduce why. I persuaded them to license me the track and through our very capable street promotions network, we took Encore into the Top 75. I then received a call: it was suggested by certain powers to halt the chart progress so as not to further embarrass CBS UK to their American bosses.” Rose Royce – Magic Touch (1984) “Rose Royce had substantial hits in the 70s with lead singer Gwen Dickey, including Car Wash and Wishing on a Star. Unfortunately, Gwen leaving the band coincided with a change in the style of music being played in clubs. Magic Touch did nothing in the US, whereas in the UK, Street Wave had a huge record – the track has become a staple anthem at soul weekenders ever since.” Joe Smooth – Promised Land (1987) “House music was born in Chicago, and Promised Land was the quintessence of the genre at its birth. The soulful vocals of Anthony Thomas over the straight four-to-the-floor bass drum became the template for pop music today.” Humanoid – Stakker Humanoid (1988) “The fact we produced, recorded and mixed this track at our studios in Ealing always gives me a sense of pride – we created one of the biggest records of the acid genre, and opened the door to the acid-jazz movement.”In a beige office void somewhere in California, ace but amoral telemarketer Kasey Miller (Lamorne Morris) works the phones, talking people into buying expensive cable TV packages they don’t really need. He’s smooth and considered a superstar salesman around the office – but lately he has mislaid his mojo and one day young rival Barry (Woody McClain) beats him by a single sale on the leaderboard. Determined to take back his crown, Kasey dawdles after quitting time even though he has a date with his ex-girlfriend Christine (Alisha Wainwright) that evening. Using a sneaky, internet-enabled sales technique to try to trick Asa (Jackie Earle Haley) into thinking he’s an old friend who just happens to be a telemarketer, Kasey thinks he’s made a sale – only to find out that Asa was not the hillbilly-accented fool he appeared to be on the phone and was on to him from the start. Then Asa shows up at Kasey’s workplace, armed and angry because of a personal tragedy that he believes was caused by a telemarketer’s phone call. This comedy-drama appears initially to be a cheap bill of goods, but turns out to be more droll and insightful than it looks, and willing to go down some dark paths as it gets closer to the end. A debut feature for writer-director Khaled Ridgeway, it puts most of the pressure on its star to charm the audience while still being a sleazebag practised in the arts of the world’s most annoying profession. Luckily, Morris has the shtick down pat and sparks well with the fine supporting cast that includes not just Jackie Earle Haley but also another thrice-named Haley, former child star Haley Joel Osment (The Sixth Sense), who, judging from this and the TV series What We Do in the Shadows, has turned into a wicked comic character actor. • Death of a Telemarketer is released on 28 February on digital platforms.Why do some recipes specify self-raising flour and others plain flour and baking powder? Can I replace one with the other? Lily, Manchester “I’ve often wondered why people select self-raising flour,” says John Lister, founder of British miller Shipton Mill. His conclusion? A combination of convenience, tradition and classic recipes (hello, sponge cake) that call for it. “It’s a uniquely British thing,” agrees Edd Kimber, author of One Tin Bakes Easy. “We’re not the only country that uses the stuff, but we are the only country that seems to have such a unique relationship with it, which leads to questions such as Lily’s.” Let’s back up, though, and get a quick refresher on what self-raising flour actually is. All-round baking guru Dan Lepard explains: “It’s a mixture of plain flour with bicarbonate of soda [sodium hydrogen carbonate], plus an acid powder [usually monocalcium phosphate in supermarket mixes].” And this is not an ingredient to stock up on, says Sarah Lemanski, founder of Nova Bakehouse in Leeds: “The raising agent in self-raising flour can deactivate over time, so its reliability and consistency can be a bit up and down.” And, as we’ve noted here before, baking is alchemy. “It’s good to know how much baking powder you’re putting into a recipe, and with self-raising flour you just don’t know,” says Guardian columnist Benjamina Ebuehi, whose new book, A Good Day To Bake, is released next month. “Some recipes get you to add baking powder for extra lift, anyway, so in my opinion it just starts getting faffy.” For this reason, Ebuehi doesn’t have much truck with the self-raising stuff at all: “I’m team plain flour with baking powder; it saves space – I don’t like having two flours at home – and you can use plain flour in everything.” Plus, adds Lemanski, who also prefers plain flour plus a raising agent, you then have ample opportunity to play around with different types of flour: “You would never see self-raising rye flour [in the shops], for example.” Of course, Lily could sub in plain flour (and a raising agent) for self-raising in her bakes, but, as Kimber points out, things can get a little tricky, because “no one really agrees on what the ratio of flour to baking powder is”. Lepard suggests either combining 250g plain flour, 10g cream of tartar and 5g bicarbonate of soda, then sifting “two to three times to mix evenly”, or simply 250g plain flour plus 15g baking powder (or about three teaspoons). Lemanski, meanwhile, adds a smidge less (“5% of the weight of flour should be baking powder”); Nigella Lawson on Nigella.com goes for 150g plain flour plus two teaspoons of baking powder; Ebuehi 150g plain flour plus one and a half teaspoons; while Kimber admits he “changes it all the time”, because what you make and what ingredients you use will play a part, too. “Sometimes, a recipe already contains an acidic ingredient, such as buttermilk or soured cream, so it needs only bicarb to rise,” Lepard explains. “Whereas a banana cake, where the fruit makes it very alkaline, often needs extra acidity, so additional baking powder can be helpful.” Essentially, like all of us from time to time, bakes might need an extra lift, so be prepared to experiment. Got a culinary dilemma? Email feast@theguardian.comThe National Portrait Gallery and BP have announced they will not extend their partnership beyond December 2022, when their contract comes to an end. “The gallery is hugely grateful to BP for its long-term support of the BP portrait award,” said Nicholas Cullinan, the director of the National Portrait Gallery. “Its funding for the award has fostered creativity, encouraged portrait painting for over 30 years and given a platform to artists from around the world, as well as providing inspiration and enjoyment for audiences across the UK.” BP has sponsored the award for 30 years, but the partnership has been the subject of numerous protests as part of a protracted and high-profile campaign against big oil’s involvement in the arts. Notably, in 2019, five past winners of the Turner prize – Antony Gormley, Rachel Whiteread, Anish Kapoor, Gillian Wearing and Mark Wallinger – were among a group of almost 80 leading artists, including winners of the BP portrait award, who wrote to Cullinan calling on him to cut ties with BP. They said it was necessary to ensure the gallery remained a “forward-looking institution that’s on the right side of history”. The following year, BP was dropped from the judging panel of the £35,000 portrait award for the first time since 1997. Louise Kingham, a BP senior vice-president, said on Tuesday: “We are immensely proud of our role in championing British arts and culture for over 30 years, but the BP of today is a very different company from when we first started our partnership with the National Portrait Gallery. As we transition to become net zero by 2050 and help the world get there too, we must look at new ways to best use our talent, experience and resources.” The pressure group Culture Unstained said it believed the move was “clearly a vote of no confidence in BP’s business” by the gallery. Jess Worth, a co-director of the group, said: “The company spent 30 years painting a picture of itself as a responsible philanthropist but it is rapidly running out of places to clean up its toxic image. Even now it continues to invest millions in finding new sources of oil and gas, which will only push the world deeper into climate breakdown.” The campaign against fossil fuel corporations’ sponsorship of the arts has continued to escalate in recent years as concerns mount over the scale and severity of the climate crisis. When BP and Tate ended their 26-year sponsorship deal in 2017, the company blamed what it called an “extremely challenging business environment”. In 2019, the National Theatre and the Royal Shakespeare Company ended their sponsorship deals with Shell and BP respectively, after Mark Rylance resigned from the RSC in protest over their continued relationship, which he said allowed the oil company to “obscure the destructive reality of its activities”. A month later, National Galleries Scotland said it would sever its ties to BP over climate concerns. BP continues to sponsor the British Museum, now under the helm of its new chair, George Osborne. Last week, more than 300 archaeologists and historians wrote to the museum’s trustees calling on them to drop the company, while activists staged the latest in a string of protests by presenting fake “Stonehenge drilling plans” to visitors. The relationship between the British Museum and BP has drawn condemnation from the museum’s own staff and led in part to the resignation of one of its trustees, the novelist Ahdaf Soueif. Worth said: “The pressure is now on the British Museum, which is currently deciding whether to renew its own BP sponsorship deal, to get on the right side of history.”Name: Cultural cringe. Age: 72. Appearance: Red of face, downcast of eye. Is it a disease? A sort of syndrome perhaps, first named by the Australian writer AA Phillips in 1950, but diagnosed long before that. What are the symptoms? Crippling feelings of inferiority and provincialism, when comparing the art, drama and literature of one’s own culture to some perceived superior other. Do you have to be Australian to suffer from it? No, you can also be from Birmingham. Birmingham? But it has more miles of canal than Venus! I think you mean Venice. Exactly. And it’s got Peaky Blinders. Yes, and it was Steven Knight, the creator of that BBC show, who recently suggested Birmingham had a problem with cultural cringe. In what context? Although he was proud to set the show in the city, he did so in direct opposition to a sort of general national embarrassment regarding locality. What did he say? “I did think very consciously about what we don’t do in Birmingham,” he told the Radio Times, “and in fact, England as a whole.” What don’t we do? What we don’t do, he said, “is mythologise our own environment and be bold about it.” He’s got me there. I hardly ever do that. “You know,” he went on, “that sort of cultural cringe that often happens with the English not writing songs about Huddersfield or Bolton or Birmingham, whereas in America you get songs about virtually every big city.” Is he saying we need to write more songs about English towns? Perhaps he’s just asking creative people to appreciate the mythological potential of different places. By the Time I Get to Felixstowe, that sort of thing? I’m not sure that’s exactly what he meant. Epsom Prison Blues? Blaby it’s Cold Outside? Do you have a lot of these? Quite a few, yeah. Bacup Little Susie? Viva Lochwinnoch? That last one is in Scotland. Can we return to the idea of cultural cringe? Fine. Frankly, I’m a bit concerned about where all this bold mythologising will lead. You mean that romanticising provincial England is not the same as feeling culturally invested in it? No, I’m just worried tourists visiting Birmingham will be dismayed by the lack of peaked caps and organised crime. Or, maybe pleasantly surprised. Visitors numbers increased by 26% between 2013, when Peaky Blinders first aired, and 2018. Do say: “Be proud of Brum’s glorious gangster past.” Don’t say: “Even though the show is filmed in Dudley, Manchester and Liverpool.”It says a lot about the Ukrainian people’s awful options that the big question is whether Vladimir Putin is crazy or just pretending to be crazy. For some, last night’s entirely improvised, heavily staged speech to his security council was an indication that the Russian president has finally gone mad – a remote diagnosis that suggests we might look back on such things as the annexing of Crimea and the deployment of nerve agent in historic Wiltshire as “his good years”. I should say right off the bat that I have no idea whether Putin has or hasn’t gone mad – however unfashionable not knowing things may be these days. As Russian tanks roll into Ukraine and the western powers debate whether it technically is or isn’t an invasion, you have to say this phoney war really does boast an unbelievable headcount of phoneys. Russia experts now seem to outnumber even Russian army personnel. Column inches and airwaves and social media channels are truly awash with those blessed with the confidence to begin “here’s how Putin thinks…” or “watch what happens next”. Who knew the potential advent of war would feel like being the girl in the nightclub meme, with some PPE bore bellowing his take in your ear as you wonder if 21st-century geopolitics has an Ask for Angela option. That said, it’s great to see Britain boasting such an adaptable and highly reactive workforce, able to retrain at enviable speed. The people who became trade experts in 2016, then became epidemiology experts in 2020, have now become Russian politics experts. My sole area of expertise – and it’s not even that, if we’re honest – is “the type of people who become newspaper columnists”. So take it from one who knows: Boris Johnson looks like he knows enough about the entire Russia-Ukraine subject to write two newspaper columns on it. Three, tops, if you count a rehash of his referendum campaign speech when he blamed the EU for Putin being forced to invade Ukraine last time round. I see Johnson has this morning “unveiled” some sanctions on five Russian banks and a grand total of three high net worth individuals. If Putin makes further incursions, he can expect a fixed penalty notice (overturned on appeal). But back to last night in Moscow and Putin himself – the only megarich Russian who doesn’t get their cosmetic surgery done in London. His face is now so impassive that it must have had an entire Real Housewives franchise worth of work. To watch his Lebensraum speech was to be given the shivers, but also to be struck by the grotesque self-pity of it all. Why are strongmen like this? The age has been awash with such politicians, from Trump to Kim to Bolsonaro, with their endless, aggressively maudlin demands for respect. Putin feels like the world-war version of every guy you’ve ever trodden on eggshells around because “his bark’s worse than his bite” or “that way he’ll calm down quicker”, only to discover one day that it isn’t and he won’t. Further along the human centipede, these sentimental hardmen are assisted by media Haw Haws like Fox News’s Tucker Carlson or GB News’s Nigel Farage – guys with such an overwhelming yen for the respect they feel they themselves were denied at some key point in their lives that their deepest human empathy is reserved for a foreign authoritarian also not getting his due. Is a lack of respect really what’s happening? To this untrained observer, with only her memories to go on, it does feel rather as if Vlad has been ardently pursuing diplomatic resolution with Ukraine somewhat in the way Dubya Bush was ardently pursing diplomatic resolution with Iraq in early 2003. Which is to say, there seems a rather unconvincing theatre to it all. And, indeed, a law of unintended consequences. Four years after the Iraq invasion, one V Putin delivered a conference speech in Munich in which he fumed about US actions in Iraq, lamenting that now “no one can feel that international law is like a stone wall that will protect them”. Which has arguably turned out to be some more rather unconvincing theatre in itself. Spool forward to the present day, and events seem to be developing very fast. Perhaps this is what the early stages of war look like. Sajid Javid felt confident enough to call last night’s tank manoeuvres an “invasion”, which contrasts markedly with the grey area/brainmelt defence secretary Geoff Hoon found himself in back in 2003 after the first night of shock-and-awe bombing of Baghdad. Seconds before he was about to go live on a breakfast TV interview the next morning, Hoon turned frantically to an aide and asked “Are we at war?” “Geoff, we’re in the initial stages,” came the calming response. “Yes, but are we at war?!” Hoon wanted to know. “We’re in the initial stages,” he was firmly told again. I mean … he was secretary of state for defence. Nobody knows anything, do they? For those of us with the incalculable luxury of watching events from afar, meanwhile, the images currently on our screens are striking yet timeworn. The male-female ratio is wild, with giant roomfuls of men in suits from New York to Moscow punctuated by only the odd woman – Liz Truss, say, or Valentina Matviyenko, the sole female at Putin’s security council event. An unwritten law dictates that each of the leading men must be photographed scowling into a telephone diurnally, as though someone has just said “I’m afraid there is a problem with your order – your order to invade/de-escalate/stage a false flag/buy gas from Russia ever again.” Live action shots are more fraught. Politicians wary of going accidentally off-message, In the Loop-style, prefer the deniable safety of metaphors – and some of them tend toward the Freudian. “We’ve got to make sure that we cut the umbilicus,” explained Johnson of European reliance on Russian gas supplies. “We snip the drip-feed into the bloodstream from Nord Stream.” Righto. Will Johnson stick around long enough to cut the umbilical cord? (Hardly the first time that question’s been asked.) Unfortunately, the media appearance in which the prime minister intimated he had liberated Britain from Covid clashed in the schedules with the media appearance in which Putin intimated he was about to liberate Ukraine from itself. Consequently, Johnson’s event lost a bit of its oomph. After all, while some people might regard it as the last word in liberty not to have to isolate if they have Covid, others might feel the time for such first-world crowing has passed. There are freedoms and “freedoms”, aren’t there? And one might be about to put the other firmly into perspective. Marina Hyde is a Guardian columnistThe US coast guard has released dramatic footage of a fisher being lifted to a helicopter after being bitten on the arm by a shark. The coast guard in Miami was contacted on Monday by the crew of “the motor vessel Shear Water”, the agency said in a statement. The crew reported “a man aboard who had been bitten by a shark while fishing and that a tourniquet had been placed on the man’s arm to prevent further blood loss”. The man was bitten onboard. It was not clear what sort of shark was involved. A helicopter responded to the scene, near the Bahamas, and extracted the 51-year-old. Footage released by the coast guard showed the man being winched from the moving boat in choppy seas, one arm heavily bound. “This was the best possible outcome to a truly terrifying situation,” said Sean Connett, command duty officer at US coast guard district seven, in Miami. “This individual was fortunate a fellow crew member was able to render aid prior to the coast guard’s arrival which allowed for a quick extraction from the vessel.” The International Shark Attack File, at the University of Florida, distinguishes between provoked and unprovoked bites. Unprovoked bites, it says, “are defined as incidents in which a bite on a live human occurs in the shark’s natural habitat with no human provocation of the shark. “Provoked bites occur when a human initiates interaction with a shark in some way. These include instances when divers are bitten after harassing or trying to touch sharks, bites on spear-fishers, bites on people attempting to feed sharks, bites occurring while unhooking or removing a shark from a fishing net and so forth.” In 2021, the ISAF recorded 73 unprovoked bites and 39 provoked. The risk that a human will be bitten or killed by shark remains extremely low. . Many more are killed each year by toasters, chairs and other household items. In 2021, the ISAF also recorded four “boat bites”, in which sharks bit boats. Sharks often use biting as an exploratory tool.Like many of her friends, Tatyana, a barista at the fashionable Moscow coffee-shop chain Skuratov, was glued to the screen of her mobile phone as Vladimir Putin addressed the nation. “Usually, I don’t watch television, especially when our president speaks. But I felt like I had to tune in this time. I was witnessing history in the making,” she said, smoking an e-cigarette. “But I am not sure yet if history is going in the right direction.” The day after the Russian leader’s late-night speech, in which he recognised the independence of the self-proclaimed republics in Luhansk and Donetsk, Muscovites were digesting what Putin’s decision could mean for them and their futures. While he ended his address by “congratulating” fellow Russians on the recognition of the two territories, a celebratory mood was absent in the capital, with many fretting about the political and economic consequences his decision might have. “If the recognition brings peace to the region, fine, why not do it,” said Andrei, a regional director at a large logistics firm in Moscow. “But it is already costing me money. I have invested a lot of my savings in shares of Russian companies.” Russia’s financial markets sank to their lowest levels in more than a year on Tuesday, after Putin ordered troops into the two territories the previous day. The country’s markets have been extremely volatile of late, with major state banks like Sberbank having lost more than half their value since the start of the Ukraine crisis. As Putin was delivering his address, the Russian independent TV channel Dozhd posted a live feed of the country’s rouble sliding to a near two-year low. “I think I can wave goodbye to my holiday to Turkey in March,” said Andrei, 41, referring to the decline of the national currency. Some in Moscow, however, found genuine joy in Putin’s move to recognise the self-proclaimed republics, in what they saw as a long-overdue decision by the Russian state. “Bless Putin! He is finally taking the Donbas under our wing,” said Galina Gromova, while waiting for a bus in central Moscow. Gromova, a high school geography teacher, said she was “horrified” by Russian state media reports of the Ukrainians shelling the Donbas and felt “enraged” by Kyiv’s “genocide” of the local population. The west and Kyiv have criticised such reports as “fake news”, saying Moscow was creating a pretext for an invasion. Andrei Kolesnikov, a political analyst and senior fellow at the Carnegie Moscow Centre, said there was no expectation that Russians “would rally around the flag” after Putin’s speech in the same manner as when the country annexed the Crimean peninsula in 2014, after which Putin’s approval ratings reached heights of 89%. “Crimea was an absolutely unique event in which Putin practically had the backing of all parts of society,” he said. “But the country is much more split on the future of the Donbas.” He pointed to recent data collected by the independent Levada Center pollster, indicating that 53% of Russians would want the two regions recognised as independent or as part of Russia, while 26% saw the future of the region with Ukraine. The remainder of those polled, 21%, were undecided on the issue. In Kolesnikov’s view, how the Russian public will ultimately perceive these events will depend on what the Kremlin decides to do next. “Many will welcome the scenario in which the situation calms down after yesterday’s recognition of the region,” he said. “Russians do not have an appetite for a real war with Ukraine, it is currently not a militarised society.” US intelligence continues to stress that Russia is planning a large-scale invasion of Ukraine, while Putin’s latest impassioned speech – with its attempts to rewrite Ukraine’s history – will further fuel fears in Kyiv. But there is also some hope that Putin will not embark on a major military campaign in Ukraine, fearing the unpredictability of what a significant war on the European continent could entail. “The Kremlin gains domestic legitimacy from confrontation with the west, as long as bullets aren’t being fired,” said Prof Samuel Greene, director of the Russia Institute at King’s College London, whose research examines Putin’s sources of popularity. “Actual war brings uncertainty and we do not know how it will play out in public opinion or on the battlefield,” he added. Whatever Russia’s next move is, Britain on Tuesday imposed sanctions on five Russian banks and three high net-worth individuals and, even more worryingly for the Kremlin, Germany’s chancellor, Olaf Scholz, said he would not certify the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline. Parts of Russia’s business elite said they were now preparing for the worst. Its leaders were once among Putin’s biggest supporters but have been sidelined over the years, as Putin has increasingly surrounded himself with the so-called siloviki, security men, many of whom served in the KGB. “I was slightly shell-shocked when I watched the presidential address, my hair stood at the back of my neck,” said a veteran banker at a private firm, speaking by phone on condition of anonymity. “It’s finally sinking in amongst many around me how bad the situation is,” the banker sighed. “This looks like only the start of a very bumpy long road.”People visiting care homes in England will have to pay for Covid tests from April, Downing Street has said, as people were limited to ordering one pack every three days while the tests remained free in an apparent attempt to limit stockpiling. With pharmacy organisations saying there was concern that stocks of lateral flow tests for direct collection could run out amid a rush before charging comes in on 1 April, the official test ordering website was updated so that people can order a pack of seven tests only every three days, rather than every 24 hours. Some limited groups will remain eligible for free testing, expected to include people over 80 or with compromised immune systems, as well as NHS and care staff who show Covid symptoms. But Boris Johnson’s official spokesperson said care home visitors would not be included, bringing criticism from relatives’ groups and charities. “This [free testing] is targeted at the most vulnerable and frontline staff,” the spokesperson said. While NHS and care staff would have free tests if they showed Covid symptoms, it remained to be decided whether they would have access to wider asymptomatic testing, with the health department and NHS England setting this out “in due course”, he added. The guidance for people visiting care homes is that they “should receive a negative lateral flow test result and report it on the day of their visit, either by conducting the test at home or when they arrive at the care home”. The Relatives &amp; Residents Association (R&amp;RA) said that if this guidance was to remain in place it was unfair to ask people to pay for tests to see their loved ones, or to expect financially stressed care homes to pay. “To say, given all you have been through and all the relationships that have been ruined [by visiting restrictions], that you can start rebuilding those relationships but you have to pay for tests seems unfair and extraordinary,” said Helen Wildbore, the director. Ed Davey, the Liberal Democrat leader, said the idea was a “tax on caring”. He said: “It is simply unjust and unfair to force people to pay hundreds of pounds a year to safely visit their loved ones. It will make vulnerable people more alienated, more lonely, and act as a barrier for family and friends getting together. We must stop this tax on caring.” Ruth Driscoll, the head of public affairs for the charity Marie Curie, which assists people with terminal illnesses, said the change would be a concern to many families. “While at least some vulnerable groups will continue to have access to free symptomatic testing, it must be clarified that people with a terminal illness, their loved ones, and all those working with them will be included in this,” she said. Caroline Abrahams, of Age UK, said: “Over the last year or so many older people have felt safe enough to see loved ones only because everyone has taken a lateral flow test beforehand, to provide reassurance. There’s now definitely a risk that some older people and their families will feel much less certain about meeting face to face, if they are unable to access these tests or feel they can’t afford them.” After the announcement on Monday of the end of free tests from 1 April, as part of the end of all domestic Covid restrictions in England, pharmacists reported attempts to hoard lateral flow tests. Leyla Hannbeck, the chief executive of the Association of Independent Multiple Pharmacies, said her members were worried that some vulnerable people were going to miss out amid a rush for tests, with some people seeking to get around the limit of two packs of tests each. “There’s nothing to stop different members of the same family coming in at different times in order to get more. We’ve had reports of that. At the same time, local pharmacists have a relationship with their customers and we really want to make sure that people are not left out and get what they need,” she said. A spokesperson for the UK Health Security Agency: “To ensure an even distribution of lateral flow tests across the country, we continue to work closely with our partners NHSEI [NHS Improvement] and PSNC [Pharmaceutical Services Negotiating Committee], who represent the pharmacies running the rapid test kit collection service. “Lateral flow test kits are delivered to pharmacies regularly but we would encourage people to only collect test kits when they need them, and only after they have used up the kits they already have at home.”The largest number of British manufacturers plan to raise prices in the next three months than at any point since 1976, according to a business survey that underscores the inflationary pressures hitting the UK economy. With energy prices rocketing and wages on an upward path, the CBI said four-fifths of firms expect to increase the cost of manufactured goods in the next three months. Not since the oil shocks of the mid-1970s has such a broad swathe of the manufacturing sector found itself needing to increase prices, pushing a net balance to +77% of firms that say prices will need to rise, up from +66% in January, according to the business lobby group. Order books remained strong in February as the global demand for manufactured goods remained healthy. By some measures the global demand for goods has increased 20% on pre-pandemic levels during the pandemic, putting upward pressure on the cost of raw materials and the price of energy on international markets. The survey showed a net balance of +20% of factories reporting rising orders, down from +24% in January. While this was the weakest reading for four months, the CBI said it was still well above the survey’s long-run average. The CBI deputy chief economist, Anna Leach, said: “Manufacturers will be buoyed up by strong order books and output growth, but amid ongoing cost pressures, almost four in five firms expect to increase prices in the next three months.” She urged Sunak to use his spring budget statement, due next month, to increase investment incentives to help manufacturers. The official annual rate of consumer price inflation rose to 5.5% in January, the highest since March 1992, while the retail prices index, which is used as the benchmark in most pay negotiations, jumped to 7.8%. The Bank of England this month predicted that inflation will peak at about 7.25% in April, when household energy bills are due to rise by more than half. Speaking at the National Farmers’ Union conference on Tuesday, the Bank deputy governor, Sir Dave Ramsden, predicted modest rises in borrowing costs to combat inflationary pressures buffeting the UK economy, but said the longer-term path of interest rates was difficult to predict because of uncertainties including the Russia-Ukraine conflict. The Bank raised interest rates to 0.5% this month from 0.25%, but Ramsden was part of a minority who warned that the Bank needed to act more quickly. Along with three other members of the monetary policy committee he voted for a bigger increase to 0.75%, which would have been the first half-point rise since the Bank was granted independence in 1997. Investors are pricing in another rate hike at the next scheduled meeting of the Bank’s monetary policy committee (MPC) on 17 March. “Some further modest tightening in monetary policy is likely to be appropriate in the coming months,” Ramsden said. “The word ‘modest’ is significant here though – I do not envisage bank rate rising to anything like its pre-2007 level of 5% or above, let alone to the kind of levels we used to see before the MPC was formed in 1997,” he added. However, the Russia-Ukraine conflict has already triggered a raft of sanctions that could increase energy prices further, including a block by the German government on Russia’s Nordstream 2 gas pipeline to Europe’s largest economy Financial markets currently price inrates rising to nearly 2% by the end of this year – well above the levels which the Bank’s forecasts published on 3 February suggested would be needed to get inflation back to its 2% target by early 2024. “New shocks can arise – we did not foresee the recent rise in energy prices, and as we meet today the crisis in Ukraine is intensifying – and so we should remain humble about the possibility that things might turn out differently,” Ramsden said. “[This] makes it particularly difficult to make predictions about where monetary policy might be headed in the medium term,” he added.Not far from Silicon Valley, a technological boom is occurring among beekeepers desperate to find new ways to avoid hives being stolen by criminals amid a dwindling supply of bees across the US. Thefts are becoming so common in the Central Valley area of California that beekeepers are using GPS tracking devices, surveillance cameras and other anti-theft technology to safeguard their honeybee colonies. According to the Associated Press, 1,036 beehives worth hundreds of thousands of dollars have been reported stolen in California, including a heist in which 384 beehives were spirited away in Mendocino county. “We have do what we can to protect ourselves,” Helio Medino, a beekeeper who had 282 hives stolen last year, told the AP. “Nobody can help us.” The Central Valley is responsible for about a quarter of all produce grown in the US but beekeepers from all corners of the country are drawn to the region primarily for the enormous pollination demands of the almond industry, which has doubled in size over the past two decades. There are 1.17m acres of almonds in California that require pollination. At a standard rate of two beehives an acre, that means the industry somehow needs to amass 2.34m beehives for a short window of time each February, when almond trees start to blossom. This demand requires that approximately 90% of all managed US honeybee colonies are strapped to trucks and sent to the Central Valley when the trees are in flower. Thieves, typically people with knowledge of beekeeping, are targeting the hives at night, as they are set down near orchards or in holding areas. Organized gangs are behind some of the thefts, police say, with hives quickly moved on for resale after identifying markers are removed. Thefts are escalating because of the tightening supply of bees and soaring pollination fees: almond farmers who paid about $50 to rent a single beehive a few years ago now often pay more than $200 a hive. Stealing hives has therefore become relatively lucrative. “Normal people can’t just go steal 500 hives with a forklift and a truck,” Charley Nye, a beekeeper researcher at University of California, Davis, told the Guardian in 2020. “So it’s a pretty small pool of people that are able to steal them. But the reward is so big that I think it can be tempting to people to do that.” Honeybees are being assailed by disease, loss of habitat to monocultural farmland and widespread use of pesticides. The drought that has gripped the western US has also weakened colonies, piling further pressure on beekeepers to maintain numbers for the huge logistical exercise of pollinating crops. The effort put in to replenish honeybee populations for agricultural purposes is not replicated for the thousands of wild bee species in the US, however. About a quarter of North America’s 46 bumblebee species are in decline and threatened with extinction, according to the Center for Biological Diversity. Experts have warned that a widespread decline of bee species is risking food security in parts of the world, with the demands for pollinated crops increasing by 300% worldwide in the past 50 years as the pollination supply falters due to habitat destruction, the use of poisonous insecticides and the climate crisis. Oliver Milman is the author of The Insect Crisis: The Fall of the Tiny Empires That Run The World, published in the UK by Atlantic and in the US by WW NortonAn airline has become the first to be fined for failing to ensure that passengers complied with Covid-19 regulations in England. The Romanian carrier Blue Air pleaded guilty to five offences at Uxbridge magistrates court on Tuesday, including not checking that passengers arriving at Heathrow had completed a passenger locator form (PLF). The firm also admitted to not checking whether a passenger arriving at the London airport produced the required evidence of a negative pre-departure coronavirus test. It was fined £40,000 for the breaches. The ruling marked the first prosecution of an airline under the Covid Enforcement Regulations, which gave fresh powers to the Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) to regulate Covid rules for international travel. Blue Air had previously received fixed penalty notices for breaking the rules, but did not seek to resolve them with the CAA – or to pay them. The CAA consumer director, Paul Smith, said: “While we generally observe high levels of compliance from airlines against the regulations, it is important for consumer confidence and public health that failures to follow the requirements are dealt with appropriately. “It is important that airlines including Blue Air continue to engage with us going forward. The UK Civil Aviation Authority will always look to prosecute breaches of compliance where necessary.” The requirement for people entering England to take a pre-departure test before they travelled was scrapped by the Department for Transport in January for fully vaccinated travellers, while the “day 2” test taken after arrival in the country was scrapped for double-jabbed arrivals earlier this month. However, unvaccinated travellers are still expected to comply with the regulations and all arrivals must continue to complete a PLF, which has since been made easier to complete. The legal requirement to self-isolate for those who test positive for Covid will end on Thursday, the UK government announced this week.All three of the largest groups in the European parliament are demanding that the EU assess whether Switzerland should be categorised as a high-risk country for money laundering and financial crime, as reaction to the Credit Suisse leak continues to reverberate about the world. Less than 48 hours after the Guardian and other media published an investigation into the leak as part of the Suisse secrets project, political groups representing the majority of MEPs in the European parliament support the possible blacklisting of Switzerland. The centre-right European People’s party’s (EPP’s) economic and monetary affairs spokesperson had demanded on Monday that the European Commission reconsider whether Switzerland posed a threat to the financial integrity of the bloc. On Tuesday, spokespeople for the Socialists and Democrats (S&amp;D) and Renew Europe, the second- and third-largest groupings representing the left and centre-left in the parliament respectively, expressed support for the move. It could mean Switzerland being added to an EU list of rogue nations considered at high risk for money laundering, such as Iran, Syria and North Korea. “These latest revelations show that too many of the world’s largest banks have still not learned their lesson. Banks are only too willing to accept dirty money, as long as they can pocket the fees,” said Jonás Fernández, an S&amp;D MEP and spokesperson for economic and monetary affairs. “Money laundering thrives on secrecy and banks being able to operate in the shadows without consequence. While we are fighting social inequalities and paying for our recovery from the pandemic, the Suisse secrets remind us of the true injustices that we are up against.” He continued: “The EU has to look again at Switzerland’s anti-money-laundering credentials and ensure the EU’s list of high-risk countries is fit for purpose as an instrument for fighting dirty money.” Renew Europe’s economic affairs spokesperson, Luis Garicano, said: “The Suisse secrets investigation suggests serious shortcomings in the Swiss banking system, which raise grave ethical and regulatory concerns.” “We expect the European Commission to take these findings into consideration when it next reviews its list of high-risk third countries. The fact that the world’s criminals and despots can launder money so easily on the EU’s doorstep is unacceptable.” The three groupings constitute 60% of the European parliament, suggesting a majority of members now favour stringent action to tackle Switzerland’s behaviour as a tax haven. However, the move would also need political support from the European Commission, as well as from individual EU member states. Still, discussion of being added to a blacklist caused alarm in Switzerland. Responding to the debate after the leak, the Swiss Bankers Association said the country’s financial sector “has no interest in money of dubious origin. It attaches the greatest importance to the maintenance of its reputation and integrity”. Credit Suisse said in its statement about the leak that it “strongly rejects the allegations and inferences about the bank’s purported business practices”, adding that alleged failures were largely historical and, in some instances, dated back to “a time where laws, practices and expectations of financial institutions were very different from where they are now”. However, reaction in Washington and Geneva also points to growing anger at Switzerland over the Suisse secrets disclosures, which revealed how Credit Suisse had provided secret bank accounts for an array of high-risk clients over decades. Ron Wyden, the chair of the US Senate committee on finance, expressed “great concern” about what he described as “Credit Suisse’s decades-long facilitation of money laundering and tax evasion”. “These crimes are only possible when bad actors in the financial system look the other way and put profits ahead of following the law,” Wyden said in a statement. The finance committee is currently assessing whether Credit Suisse has complied with a 2014 agreement with the Department of Justice in which it promised to cease enabling tax evasion by US citizens. The Swiss government has yet to respond to the suggestion it may be added to the EU’s money-laundering blacklist, which would require enhanced due diligence on any transaction or commercial relationship with a person or company in the country. However, the publication of the leak, which was initially sent by an anonymous whistleblower to the German newspaper Süddeutsche Zeitung, has prompted a rare debate in Switzerland about the wisdom of the country’s banking secrecy laws. Some have expressed outrage that the laws had prevented Swiss journalists from joining the investigation into the leak, which involved media such as the Guardian, Le Monde, New York Times and the Organized Crime and Corruption Reporting Project (OCCRP). Swiss journalists demanded urgent reform of article 47 of the banking secrecy law, which has in recent years been broadened in a way that potentially criminalises whistleblowing and public interest journalism. Arthur Rutishauser, the editor of Switzerland’s Tamedia, which has previously joined international investigations including the HSBC Files and Panama and Paradise papers, angrily denounced the expanded article 47 in a statement explaining why his news organisation had been prevented from joining the Suisse secrets investigation. Article 47 has existed since the early 20th century. However, it was expanded to include third parties outside of banks in 2015, after several cases of banking insiders handing client data to foreign tax authorities, including a CD of data from HSBC Private Bank Suisse that was subsequently accessed by journalists. On Monday, the general secretary of the European Federation of Journalists, Ricardo Gutiérrez, accused Switzerland of violating “fundamental principles of press freedom”. “Switzerland simply does not respect European legal standards on freedom of expression and freedom of the press,” he said. “It favours the particular interest of bankers over the general interest. The necessary public debate is confiscated. “The case law of the European court of human rights, which authorises the disclosure of confidential information as long as it serves the public interest, is not applied in Switzerland. This practice is worthy of the worst authoritarian states. It must be stopped.”Truth hurts, everyone knows that. Nevertheless, I wasn’t expecting my experience with Truth Social, Donald Trump’s new social media venture, to be quite so painful. After months of fanfare, the former president’s new app, which is essentially a Twitter clone, was opened to the US public on Sunday night. Obviously, I signed up straight away – or at least I tried to. I spent 20 frustrating minutes attempting to create a new account and getting error message after error message. Eventually, I managed to sign up with the username @stormyd, only to be told that I had been put on a waiting list “due to massive demand”. I was number 194,276 in line, apparently. Which, I’m sure, is a very precise number and not something they just pulled out of the air. It is unclear how many people were actually successful at getting on Truth Social – although the Guardian has reported that at least one Catholic priest managed to join. The fact that you, apparently, needed God on your side to secure an account wasn’t the only issue with the launch: the app has also run into potential legal trouble. It turns out Truth Social may not have just taken inspiration from Twitter, the app’s logo looks suspiciously like that of a British solar power startup called Trailar. “Great to see Donald Trump supporting a growing sustainability business!” Trailar tweeted on Monday. “Maybe ask next time?” If Trump’s new app failed to successfully launch on time, it would hardly be the surprise of the century. The last time he made a lot of noise about launching a new media platform, it turned out to be an underwhelming blog, which shuttered after just a few weeks. It’s not as if Trump put a technological genius in charge of Truth Social: Devin Nunes, head honcho at the app’s parent company, Trump Media &amp; Technology Group (TMTG), may be most famous for the fact that he once unsuccessfully sued a cow. In 2019, Nunes, who used to be a Republican congressman, filed a $250m lawsuit against Twitter and two parody Twitter accounts: one was called “Devin Nunes’ Mom” and one was called “Devin Nunes’ Cow”. This is no laughing matter, I’ll have you know. The cow was very mean to him: it called the politician a “treasonous cowpoke” whose “boots are full of manure”. It was all very hard for the poor man, whose lawsuit claimed that the parody accounts subjected him to a “defamation campaign of stunning breadth and scope, one that no human being should ever have to bear and suffer in their whole life”. Nunes doesn’t just have beef with cows, by the way. He’s a big fan of suing anyone who says anything mean to him, and has launched defamation lawsuits against a number of journalists. He managed to juggle all these lawsuits with his political career for a while but, in December, announced he was leaving Congress to join TMTG. “The time has come to reopen the internet and allow for the free flow of ideas and expression without censorship,” he proclaimed. Unless cows are involved, obviously. No free speech or free flow of ideas for cows! Or pesky journalists. Or anyone who says anything unflattering, if we’re being honest. Truth Social’s marketing material talks about welcoming diverse opinions but the app’s terms and conditions are rather more restrictive. Under “prohibited activities”, the rules state that users of the site agree not to “disparage, tarnish, or otherwise harm, in our opinion, us and/or the Site”. A cynic might wonder whether the fact that you are not allowed to say mean things about Trump on his app may factor in why Melania doesn’t appear to be a big fan of her husband’s latest venture. A couple of weeks ago, you see, the former first lady entered into a “special arrangement” to share “exclusive communications” with the conservative social media app Parler. Why would she announce an exclusive relationship with a direct competitor to Truth Social shortly before it launched ? I’m not even going to begin to speculate. The truth is out there, but there’s a very long waiting list to get to it. Arwa Mahdawi is a Guardian columnistNewcastle’s director of rugby, Dean Richards, has been issued with a misconduct charge for criticising referee Christophe Ridley after Sunday’s 15-14 Gallagher Premiership defeat by Exeter. The Falcons back row, Callum Chick, was shown a red card for a high tackle midway through the first half of a game that was decided by Joe Simmonds’ late penalty. Richards believed the sending-off was a hasty call by Ridley, claiming: “We’ve reached a moment in rugby where officials are making quick decisions rather than the correct decision.” The former England No 8 has been charged with conduct prejudicial to the interests of the union and the game and will face an independent disciplinary panel on Wednesday evening. A Rugby Football Union statement said that Richards’ comments “undermined the authority and questioned the integrity of the match official”. Chick was due to face his own hearing over the red card offence on Tuesday evening. The charge laid against Richards comes amid a clampdown on behaviour towards officials by the game’s governing bodies. In November, following World Rugby’s two-month ban for Rassie Erasmus after his rant during the Lions tour last summer, the injured Bath and England wing Anthony Watson was handed a suspended one-match ban for criticising a referee’s decision on social media. During Watson’s hearing, the panel heard from the Rugby Football Referees’ Union which outlined the acute shortage of match officials at grassroots level following the pandemic-enforced layoff exacerbated by “many of our members leaving the game having become disillusioned with, amongst other things, persistent challenging of their decisions.” This week will also see significant discussions over the future of the Championship which underpins the domestic top flight in the Premiership. The RFU council is due to meet on Friday to discuss the future structure of the competition, with proposals being considered that would include Premiership reserve sides in a new-look league. No decisions from the meeting will be binding. Ealing Trailfinders and Doncaster Rovers are also poised to discover if their grounds will be deemed suitable to make them eligible for promotion to the Premiership in the coming weeks.Light lands softly on concrete walls in a series of silver gelatin prints by an unknown photographer. These small, souvenir-like snapshots give glimpses into the houses of Sri Lanka’s first female architect, Minette de Silva. Here, there are no architectural drawings or models – those have been lost to time. What we see are the personal artifacts of De Silva’s mentee Anuradha Mathur – documents that have been newly uncovered as part of the exhibition The Project of Independence: Architectures of Decolonization in South Asia, 1947–1985, at the Museum of Modern Art. De Silva’s work – shown though this unconventional medium from an unconventional source – sheds light on the architect’s regional modernist architecture that has been largely ignored by institutions in the west. It is among many such materials now being brought to light both literally and metaphorically. The Project of Independence is a sharply curated collection of about 200 archival and commissioned works, including contemporary photos by Randhir Singh and models by students at Cooper Union. For the first time, the public can see the architecture of “the idealistic societal visions and emancipatory politics of the post-independence period” of Bangladesh, India, Pakistan and Sri Lanka. “They were transforming their countries according to a specific societal and political progressivism,” MoMA chief curator Martino Stierli said. “We wanted to ask, ‘How was this utopian vision grounded in the lives of everyday people?’” Directly after the end of British colonial rule in 1947, South Asian architects used modern architecture to express the self-determination and emancipation of the post-colonial era. Focusing on a specific set of local modernist architects, the exhibition shows a clear break from the British traditionalist architects whose designs projected imperial power. “Often, expressions of modernism are presented as derivative of the west. However, they have their own unique translations and adaptations that are specific of the places they are coming from,” Stierli and co-curator Anoma Pieris explained. “It is not a mirror of the west. It has relevance and significance on its own.” Perhaps the clearest example the new global technologies marrying local traditions and aesthetics was the recently demolished Hall of Nations in New Delhi, by architect Raj Rewal and engineer Mahendra Raj. Built between 1970 and 1972 for the Asia 72 international trade fair commemorating the 25th anniversary of India’s independence, the multifunctional exhibition space showcased the participating countries under a unique diagrid space from structure made from concrete. Space frames could be considered the pinnacle of modernist innovation in construction techniques. Providing extremely longs spans under lightweight, mass-producible 3D-grid structures, space frames could theoretically cover the globe in flexible, almost uninterrupted space. They represent the innovative engineering and democratic ideals of global modernism. At the Hall of Nations, this globe-spanning technology – usually made of steel – was remarkably built with cast in situ concrete, adapting a universal form to local building techniques and accommodating local materials and labor. The decision to use concrete was twofold: cheap local labor, and high transportation costs of shipping large prefab steel elements on the underdeveloped roads of the newly formed nation. The Hall’s structurally expressive frame is a symbol of a technologically and socially progressive Indian society, while the use of concrete represents self-sufficient independence. It is a clear articulation of the hybridization of European and non-western thought, a recurring theme in the exhibition. This process is captured in an atypical format: an Associated Press film clip of the Hall of Nations under construction is thought to be the only video documentation of the construction of the building, which was sadly demolished in 2017. New architectural languages and solutions paralleled the building of new institutions. This was the first generation of South Asian architects who saw themselves as connected to an international conversation on their own terms. The Hall of Nations brought together international participants under one roof, signaling India as a cosmopolitan, multi-ethnic, multicultural nation-state which had been established under the country’s first post-colonial prime minister, Jawaharlal Nehru, years before. The four countries were part of the 85-country non-aligned movement, which resisted taking sides in the cold war, instead taking aid from both sides in a show of self-determination, as well as sharing technology and resources in third world solidarity. Founded by the Rockefeller Foundation, the Indian International Center was designed by American architect Joseph Allen Stein with environmentally conscious and socially resonant features such as fired clay screens (jali) to create an international hub that would gather visitors and a local elite to build an international conversation. Reinterpreted historic forms connected locally, but materials – concrete, stone and brick – were sourced from around the world. The post-colonial period wasn’t without struggles, however. The end of British colonial rule and subsequent “partitioning”, or violent delineation of newly formed countries, caused the largest refugee crisis in history, resulting in a building boom. Enormous government-sponsored mass housing blocks were built in a relatively straightforward modernist way, but adapting to local climate and cultural conditions. In Pakistan, the newly formed Muslim-majority government sought ways to articulate a cosmopolitanism in an Islamic state. Pakistani architect Yasmeen Lari’s Anguri Bagh housing demonstrates a turn away from “instant Islamic” architecture, which she saw as an appropriated form. Lari opted instead for a more decentralized and organic aggregation of units designed with direct participation of the previously marginalized community. As with de Silva’s houses, archival materials were not available. The curators instead relied on reproductions of plans and photos from the Aga Khan Foundation. The Project of Independence: Architectures of Decolonization in South Asia, 1947–1985 at the Museum of Modern Art was curated by Stierli, Pieris and Sean Anderson, with Evangelos Kotsioris. It is a major contribution to the continuing global project of uncovering the ways in which modernism was deployed in contexts around the world, helping to realize social and political projects through inventive and context-specific formal and material conditions. The Project of Independence: Architectures of Decolonization in South Asia, 1947–1985 is on view at the Museum of Modern Art in New York until 2 JulyAt first glance, it seems to be just another day in Cotonou, Benin’s largest city. Motorbike-taxis are everywhere, filling the streets of the country’s economic capital with dust and noise. But inside the swanky presidential palace, something seismic is talking place: over a century after they were looted by the French army, 26 treasures that once belonged to the nation have gone on display to the public. Art of Benin Yesterday and Today is more than just a stunning show of these ancient works, though. It segues from the looted 19th-century artefacts to work by 34 of the country’s contemporary artists. “This is a form of regained dignity,” says local art historian Didier Houénoudé, “and the culmination of a long fight started by African countries shortly before independence.” Fulfilling a pledge made by French president Emmanuel Macron in 2017, the stolen artefacts were returned to Benin last year, after being displayed one final time at Musée du Quai Branly in Paris. The collection – merely a fraction of the priceless Beninese possessions still held by France and other former colonial nations – includes royal thrones, statues and majestically carved doors. Beside the towering wooden throne of King Ghezo (who ruled what was then called the Dahomey kingdom from 1797 to 1818), the other great repatriated works are three bocios, or protective vodun figures. These lifesize statues, once held in Paris, depict Ghezo and his heirs Glele and Béhanzin. One features a man with the plumage of a bird, the next a lion’s head on human legs, and the third a man with the body of a shark. These reflect the idea that these men were believed to have supernatural powers. Among the regiments of Dahomey fighters who fought the French were female warriors called Amazons. Ishola Akpo, an emerging Benin artist, decided to recreate images of these soldiers and the queens who ruled over them, using women from northern Benin dressed in majestic clothing and holding weapons. “The project explores the memories of forgotten, neglected and erased pre-colonial African queens,” says Akpo. “I noticed their absence during my research, despite their political importance.” How exactly did this historic exhibition come together? Jean-Michel Abimbola, Benin’s minister of culture, says: “We worked every day – for two years I was the minister of restitution. We have taken up this challenge for Benin, the continent and the world.” Benin now has ambitious aims, backed by funding from public and private sources. Several museums are planned to open within years and Cotonou sees itself as a new rival to Lagos, Dakar and Abidjan as a centre of the African art scene. Abimbola had discussions with the curator Jean-Luc Martinez, who set up the Louvre Abu Dhabi. “I told him we had ambitions for a Louvre-Cotonou project.” Right now, seeing the cultural development in the city, such grand aspirations feel attainable. But at a press conference, the minister spoke of obstacles still faced at a legal, political, and security level. The old condescension of Europe has not entirely abated either. For decades, discussions about the return of African art stumbled not only on laws preventing their return – such as Napoleonic-era legislation guaranteeing the inalienability of France’s possessions, even spoils of war – but on the idea that African countries wouldn’t look after these artefacts as well as their European counterparts, an idea Abimbola describes as “ridiculous”. He says: “It reminds me of when people questioned if black people had a soul.” Houénoudé adds: “We do not know exactly how many objects are in French or European museums. This is why we are very interested in inventories.” He mentions one report, by Bénédicte Savoy and Felwine Sarr, that suggests there are more than 3,700 objects from Benin in the Musée du Quai Branly. Jacques Chirac’s gift to France, this museum on the banks of the Seine holds around 70,000 pieces of African cultural heritage. When President Talon opened the Cotonou exhibition on 19 February, it was attended by kings of various tribes giving their seal of approval. The artists, too, feel honoured. Ludovic Faidaro, one of Benin art’s elder statesmen, said that without Dahomey’s past masters, his own work would not exist. Another, Julien Sinzogan, said he felt small in front of these looted works, while Dominique Zinkpè – whose work channels Francis Bacon, Egon Schiele and Jean-Michel Basquiat – considered it a great honour to be exhibited alongside the works. When the palace doors opened to the public the next day, more than 1,000 people attended, eager to see the objects back home for the first time in living memory. Some were overwhelmed. “I’m so proud,” said student Gloria Tokoudabga. “If the means exist to bring the rest back, then bring them back.” Narcisse Ore, a 30-year-old hotel worker, came from central Benin to see the show. “I can identify with these objects,” he said. “They fill me with emotion. This is a revolution – for the good of generations to come.” • Benin: Art of Yesterday and Today, from Restitution to Revelation is at the Palais de la Marina, Cotonou, until 22 May.TUNNEL VISION You probably haven’t heard of Marcel Ries, the Lausanne-based metalsmith who since 2009 has been tasked with engraving the winner’s name on to major Uefa trophies in the moments after the final whistle blows, while someone charges the glitter-cannons and the victors prepare to hoist their freshly personalised pot aloft. Perhaps it was to Ries that Uefa turned on Tuesday, to find out if he is as adept with the Tipp-Ex brush (ask your grandparents) as he is with an engraving pen, and as efficient at taking names off stuff as he is at indelibly adding them. It is curious that Uefa, in contrast to the other major Swiss institution Guardian readers have been reading about this week, are so very keen on publicly putting names on everything. But though it insisted on Tuesday that “at present there are no plans to change the venue”, it might at this point be regretting the decision to emblazon the name of St Petersburg, the city whose Gazprom Arena the Gazprom-sponsored organisation for some reason chose to host the 2022 Big Cup final, on every single ball used in the competition this year. Whatever its statements say, Uefa is universally predicted to eventually conclude that, as tousle-haired party organiser Boris Johnson put it a little earlier, “it is inconceivable that major international football tournaments can take place in Russia”. Such news will be particularly, and in numerous ways, deflating for these suddenly obsolete balls, who will have to take their thermal bonding, rhombus carcasses and high-grade butyl bladders to the nearest discount bin. Meanwhile it might be time to order a few official Road to Saint Petersburg 22 skips in which to dump the enormous quantity of suddenly obsolete stickers, signage and even bespoke tunnel carpets the continent’s leading clubs are about to have on their hands. Perhaps it is even time to accept that the need for bespoke tunnel carpets is not as great as it once appeared. Later on Tuesday, eyes turn to Villarreal and Chelsea, hosts of the evening’s two last-16 games, to see quite how much of this signage has already been quietly cupboarded. Thomas Tuchel’s European champions host Lille, currently 11th in Ligue 1, with Romelu Lukaku the focus of particular attention after his anonymous performance in Saturday’s win over Crystal Palace, in which he touched the ball only seven times, one of those from kick-off. “It’s of course not what we want,” Tuchel said, “but it’s also not the time to laugh about him, make jokes about him.” Have no fear, Thomas – this is The Fiver, there’s absolutely no chance of that. LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE Join Scott Murray at 8pm (GMT) for hot Big Cup MBM coverage of Chelsea 2-0 Lille, while Barry Glendenning will be on hand for Villarreal 1-1 Juventus. QUOTE OF THE DAY “In life our ego can kill us more than help us. Football challenges you every single day. Every time you are facing a challenge, you have the opportunity to grow and to add new knowledge. So I hope that today I will be a worse coach than I am tomorrow” – Carlos Corberán, high-flying Huddersfield’s boss, gets his chat on with Ben Fisher about working with Bielsa, perfectionism and more. FIVER LETTERS “Reading about Jack Wilshere’s move to Aarhus (yesterday’s Fiver) couldn’t help but remind me of my hometown club’s first ever foray into European competition this season (albeit last summer), when Larne defeated said Danish Superliga mid-table powerhouses over two legs to set up a clash with Paços Ferreira. Given the winner of that tie would play Spurs for a place in the group stages of Tin Pot, it’s now gutting to think that the worst performance of six games on our European journey stopped us from witnessing Spurs in all their Spurs-iness at close quarters. By the way, Aarhus were not happy at losing” – Bryce Brennan. “While not letting the fact that it isn’t really that central get in the way, I have long thought that the Aarhus tourist board have missed a trick not bringing Madness in to sell the town. Maybe now Jack Wilshere has pitched up they could give it a whirl” – Alistair Moffat. “Why is it that on the far side of the world, we are rightly showing compassion and sympathy for ‘our’ Meikayla Moore after her own-goal hat-trick (yesterday’s Quote of the Day), yet when I admit to my fellow Kiwis that I am a long-time and tormented Sunderland fan, they all crack up laughing? Chin up Meikayla, things could be a lot worse” – Matt McILraith. “What’s the protocol in that situation? Did Moore have to find another ball from somewhere and present it to the referee?” – Michael Bland. “Re: yesterday’s Fiver letters. Not only does it seem like years since we last heard from Mac Millings, but if one of the wittier Fiver contributors in history (a small field, I admit) is reduced to mere punctuation pedantry then we really are all going to hell in a handcart. It’s not like it was in my day, etc” – Richard O’Hagan. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’ the day is … Matt McILraith. RECOMMENDED LOOKING Here’s David Squires on crypto football nonsense. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS Members of the USWNT have reached a landmark agreement with their governing body to end a six-year legal battle over equal pay, securing a deal promising them $24m plus bonuses that match those of the men. Tadcaster Albion are facing a lengthy break from home action after their ground suffered severe damage in the latest storm to hit the Yorkshire town. Sergio Agüero will be off to the Human Rights World Cup after all, joining the Argentina backroom team in Qatar. “I’ll be there with the team, I get along very well with them,” he cheered. “I want to be close to them and try to have fun.” Jürgen Klopp insists nothing has changed for Liverpool’s title hopes despite Manchester City’s late slip-up against Spurs. “The truth is, I was on the way home when it was 2-1 to Tottenham and then I arrived at home and didn’t follow it anymore because I was sure they would equalise,” he tooted. “Then we went out and the driver was very excited and told me that it was 2-2 and then 3-2, I thought City won but it was Tottenham, so ‘Oh’ was my reaction.” St Mirren have brought in Stephen Robinson from Morecambe as their new boss. And Matt Etherington will take charge of Peterborough at Fulham on Wednesday after manager Little Lord Ferg did one. STILL WANT MORE? Jacob Steinberg on Tommy T’s problems with possession-shy Romelu Lukaku at Chelsea. Ben McAleer previews and predicts what will happen in Big Cup this week. Ryan Baldi charts the journey of Ryan Gauld – once dubbed the Scottish Messi – to success in MLS with Vancouver Whitecaps. Sid Lowe on an emotional and emphatic Basque derby win for Athletic Bilbao. And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! TO THE ABBEY STADIUM!It may not yet feature in a West End musical but scientists say they have found an unexpected response to singin’ in the brain. Researchers say they have found particular groups of neurons that appear to respond selectively to the sound of singing. Writing in the journal Current Biology, a team of scientists in the US report how they made their discovery by recording electrical activity in the brains of 15 participants, each of whom had electrodes inserted inside their skulls to monitor epileptic seizures before undergoing surgery. The team recorded electrical activity in response to 165 different sounds, from pieces of instrumental music to speech and sounds such as dogs barking, and then processed them using an algorithm. They combined the results with data from fMRI brain scans previously collected from 30 different individuals to map the location of the patterns in the brain. Dr Samuel Norman-Haignere, a co-author of the study based at the University of Rochester, said the team decided to combine the data from the different approaches to overcome their respective weaknesses and combine their strengths. “fMRI is one of the workhorses of human cognitive neuroscience, but it is very coarse. Intracranial data is much more precise but has very poor spatial coverage,” he said. The results confirmed previous findings from fMRI scans that some neurons respond only to speech or respond more strongly to music. However, they also revealed populations of neurons that appear to respond selectively to the sound of singing, showing only very weak responses to other types of music or speech alone. “These results suggest that representations of music are fractionated into subpopulations selective for different types of music, one of which is specialised for the analysis of song,” the team write. The work reveals these song-specific neurons appear to sit in the superior temporal gyrus, close to areas previously identified as responding particularly to music or to speech. The authors write that it is likely the song-selective neurons were not spotted in previous work using fMRI scans alone, since the use of electrodes allows for a finer-grained measures of the activity of neurons. The researchers add work is now under way to understand what it is about singing that these areas of the brain are responding to – for example whether it is pitch and timbre, or melodies and rhythms – while they also hope to explore how such selectivity arose during development or evolution. “Our study presents a first step toward answering these longstanding questions,” the authors write. They also raise the possibility of studying the impact of activating areas of the brain related to songs and exploring interactions with other parts of the brain, noting that songs can elicit particular emotions or memories. Sophie Scott, a professor of cognitive neuroscience at University College London who was not involved in the research, welcomed the study. “The singing voice is the only musical instrument that almost everyone is born with, so one might expect us to have a rather different relationship with human song, relative to other kinds of music,” she said. “We know that there are some significant differences between the brain systems that control how we speak and those that control how we sing, so it’s very interesting that some of these distinctions are also seen when we listen to human song.” Dr Ediz Sohoglu, a cognitive neuroscientist at University of Sussex, said the findings were striking. “One of the interesting questions that arises is why the brain has evolved or been shaped by experience to develop such specialised neurons. Why not just use the same neurons in a multi-purpose fashion to process more than one type of sound?” he said. “One possibility is that having specialised neurons helps a listener to focus on certain sounds in noisy environments. For example, if I am listening to my favourite singer in a concert, I might find it easier to ignore the loud conversation behind me – which would be represented in a different part of my brain.”Black carbon pollution from tourism and research activities in Antarctica is likely increasing snowmelt on the continent by an estimated 83 tonnes for each visitor, according to new research. Scientists have estimated that the black carbon produced by vessels, planes and diesel generators results in 23mm of additional snowmelt each summer in the most frequently visited areas of the ice-covered landmass. More than 74,000 tourists visited Antarctica in the 2019–2020 season, nearly double the figures from a decade ago. A team of researchers sampled the snow yearly between 2016 and 2020 at 28 sites spanning 2000km from Antarctica’s northern tip to the Ellsworth Mountains. They focused primarily on the Antarctic peninsula, where about half of the research facilities on the continent are located and where an estimated 95% of Antarctic tourist trips are made. The team estimated that 53,000 tourists visited Antarctica annually between 2016 and 2020. Study co-author Dr Raúl Cordero, of the University of Santiago Chile, said Antarctic snow was the cleanest on Earth, typically with baseline levels of black carbon around one part in a billion. “That is 1000 times less than what you would find in the Himalayas, and 100 times less than what you can find in the Andes or in the Rocky Mountains,” he said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Black carbon levels at sites on the Antarctic peninsula were between two and four times higher than on other parts of the continent. “What black carbon is doing is making the snow darker [so it] is absorbing more solar radiation,” Cordero said. “That extra energy is accelerating the melting of the snow.” He believes a limit on the number of tourists to Antarctica may need to be adopted. The team quantified the likely snowmelt by calculating how black carbon pollution reduced the snow’s albedo – a measure of how well a surface reflects solar energy. They calculated that an Antarctic researcher’s black carbon footprint was about 10 times greater than a tourist’s. “We estimated that … the snow that is melting faster because of the activities carried out by a researcher would be closer to 1000 tonnes,” Cordero said. “Every researcher is using vessels, planes, helicopters, generators – and everybody’s using diesel for powering these.” Cordero said that while the amount of pollution-induced snowmelt is far less than the ice and snow lost to global warming, the study highlighted the need for a transition to renewable energy sources. “There are technical alternatives to diesel that could be used in Antarctica,” he said, citing the Belgian research station, Princess Elisabeth Antarctica, which is primarily powered by wind. Prof Andrew Mackintosh, head of the school of earth atmosphere and environment at Monash University, who was not involved in the research, said the link between black carbon pollution and increased surface melt was well established in other parts of the world. “In the Antarctic peninsula the two major processes [affecting melting] would still be warming oceans melting ice shelves from beneath, or warming surface air temperatures that are melting the ice from above,” Mackintosh said. “If we have even greater surface warming in [the] decades to centuries ahead, as is projected for the Antarctic peninsula, then the additional black carbon on the surface will cause even more melt than would have occurred otherwise,” he said. “Human activity is causing the polar regions to warm, but the burning of … [fossil] fuels has a direct consequence in terms of surface melt as well.” “If you can get rid of the greenhouse gases in the first place, you’ll reduce the temperature increase,” he said. “There’s also the added benefit of less darkening of the snow surfaces.” Cordero said: “Antarctica is the last continent more or less unpolluted. I think we should try to keep it that way.” The study was published in the peer-reviewed journal Nature Communications.A strain of melancholy Slavic clarinet creeps into the soundtrack of this otherwise breathless documentary about Dozhd TV, the hip young gunslingers of Russian independent broadcasting. It’s as if it’s reminding us that this tale – hopeful foray into western-style liberalism is crushed by autocratic forces – has played out many times in Russian history before. Except that Dozhd (“rain”), founded in 2010 and still in business, hasn’t quite been crushed yet. With its live broadcasts of protests Putin would rather the public didn’t see, it shows remarkable persistence in the face of harassment and intimidation in this closely embedded account by one of its former producers, Vera Krichevskaya. Dozhd’s status as thorn in the side of the Kremlin is all the stranger given its founder, Natasha Sindeeva, was a Moscow noughties good-time girl with no interest in politics. But the channel – with its gay-friendly work culture, funky branding and cheeky satire – quickly picked up a following. Dmitry Medvedev, when he was president, appears to have been a fan. But covering the protests that followed Putin’s third-term election in 2012, and its continued links to opposition politics, put the channel on the official shitlist: removal from lucrative national cable packages, harassment of its staff, eviction, legal prosecution and being labelled as “foreign agents” have all been used to keep Dozhd marginal. Thankfully no one here gets a polonium sandwich, but Dozhd’s survival still seems like a decade-long experiment in testing the limits of its slogan: the Optimism Channel. Surviving on YouTube and behind a paywall, its value looks a given to anyone who values free speech. But Sindeeva’s banker husband Sasha starts to waver: “Go to war and die heroically? Or live a long life and die from some common sickness? Both scenarios are possible, for a person and for a TV station.” Sindeeva ends up foiling the sickness – a breast cancer diagnosis – and going down the heroic path. Narrating the film with occasional gonzo outbursts (“We were so fucking stupid”), Krichevskaya is perhaps over-infatuated with her subject, but then Sindeeva seems like quite a character. The kind to go topless and let her radiotherapy sessions be filmed, all the better to make her point and intercut it with another malignancy: Putin amending the constitution so he can stay in power until 2036. • F@ck This Job is released in cinemas on 24 February.The unfolding crisis in Ukraine poses a diplomatic dilemma for China but also offers an opportunity for Beijing as Joe Biden’s administration is likely to continue to be distracted by Russia ahead of the US mid-term elections later this year. China’s position in this round of Russia v the west is under particularly heavy scrutiny following Xi Jinping’s pledge with his Russian counterpart, Vladimir Putin, on 4 February that there would be “no ‘forbidden’ areas of cooperation” in their bilateral relationship. In the last few days, as the crisis in Ukraine dominated international headlines, Chinese analysts have debated the country’s policy choice. While hardliners advocate a pro-Russia foreign policy, others think Beijing should seize on this crisis to protect ties with Washington. “China ultimately wants good relations with the US,” said Wang Huiyao, president of the Centre for China and Globalisation, a Beijing-based thinktank, who also advises the government. “It is true that Beijing and Moscow have pledged closer cooperation, because both countries have similar concerns over external involvement in their own security issues,” Wang said, adding that China sees some parallels in Nato’s eastward expansion with its own concerns relating to the South China Sea. Washington and its allies, however, do not support Beijing’s claims to much of the South China Sea. Dr Yu Jie, a senior research fellow on China at London-based thinktank Chatham House, said the crisis highlights a “sticky point” in Beijing’s relationship with Moscow following Xi’s heavy investment in it. “China much hopes Russia would offer full diplomatic support to Beijing’s various global initiatives under a plethora of UN-led platforms, but Moscow’s current move has made China’s wishes more problematic.” Yu also pointed out that some strategists in Beijing now view this situation favourably because the Biden administration is being distracted, and as a result is likely to have less energy and resources to counter China’s growing influence in the Indo-Pacific – at least prior to US mid-term elections in November this year. So far, China’s position on Russia’s move on Ukraine has been clear: Beijing does not endorse Moscow’s aggression. China’s top diplomat, Wang Yi, attempted to clarify this stance over the weekend. “The sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of any country should be respected and safeguarded,” Wang told the Munich Security Conference. “Ukraine is no exception.” On the surface, Beijing’s response fits the diplomatic doctrines it has long advocated internationally. In a major speech to mark the 60th anniversary of the initiation of the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence on 28 June, 2014, Xi reiterated “mutual non-aggression, non-interference in each other’s internal affairs”. Yet, analysts highlight Wang’s insistence on respecting “the legitimate security concerns of all countries”, as he told Antony Blinken, the US secretary of state, earlier on Tuesday. They say it is a clear indication of Beijing’s sympathy towards Moscow’s view on Nato’s eastward influence. Critics also point to China’s position on Russia in 2014, when Moscow annexed Crimea. A few months before Xi’s June speech that year, China abstained in a UN general assembly vote on a resolution that discouraged Russia’s action. From China’s perspective, the crisis in Ukraine is not as clear-cut. While Xi and Putin exhibit a brotherly relationship, Beijing also enjoys friendly ties with Kyiv, and Ukraine offers a commercial opportunity for Xi’s ambitious belt-and-road economic initiative. Ukraine’s trade with China in 2020 was at $15.42bn (£11.37bn). China is Ukraine’s top trading partner. Late on Monday night, China’s embassy in Kyiv told its citizens and companies to refrain from travelling to “areas where the situation remains unstable”. The embassy also advised Ukraine-based Chinese citizens to stock up on daily necessities such as food and drinking water. The embassy cited “significant changes” in the situation in eastern Ukraine for this urgent advisory. On Tuesday morning, Ukraine’s embassy in Beijing issued a Chinese-language statement on the country’s heavily-monitored social media website, Weibo, condemning Russia’s act and accused Moscow of “seriously violating the basic principles of international law”. The Weibo entry soon became the top “hot topic” on Weibo, followed by the topic of “Ukraine” on the same list. The hashtag: Ukraine issues statement on Weibo has been viewed over 300m times as of Tuesday. Over 20,000 comments followed, too. Ryan Hass, a former senior adviser to Barack Obama and senior White House officials, saw an opportunity for Washington to “[sharpen] Beijing’s choices” through this crisis. “This does not mean concessions or a softening approach to PRC [People’s Republic of China],” he wrote on Twitter. “Rather, it requires Beijing seeing a path remaining open for less hostile relations with the west, and significant risks for being linked to Russia’s recklessness. “The goal would not be to seek to compel Beijing to break from Moscow. That is not happening. It would be to help Beijing reach its own judgment that its interests require it to begin a gradual, steady reorientation in the wake of a Russian invasion of Ukraine.”Some are calling it palindrome day while others are opting for the twos day (or “Twosday”) pun but, it seems, everyone is excited about the unusual calendar event taking place on the 22 February 2022 (22.02.2022), when the day’s date can be read the same way forwards or backwards. This palindrome day is unusual because it’s also an ambigram, meaning that on a calculator it can be read upside down in exactly the same way. In the UK date-writing format (dd-mm-yyyy), there have only been seven palindrome days so far this century, starting with 10 February 2001 (10.02.2001), while the next is on 3 February 2030 (03.02.2030). Commenters on social media have been sharing their excitement about the date and the good luck it is rumoured to bring. One meme doing the rounds captures the mind-blowing confluence of features that make today’s date so distinctive. Stonehenge humbly pointed out that although this palindrome day is a once-in-a-lifetime occurrence for most, it’s not the first time the Wiltshire rock circle has experienced the phenomenon. The University of Oxford pointed out that the last palindrome day of this century will be on a leap day, on 29 February 2092. Several commenters were excited to celebrate their 22nd birthday on the same date as twos day. Another joked about the popularity of palindrome days with wedding venues, given the luck they symbolise, especially in certain cultures. Others shared pictures of pairs, couples and twins, in honour of how many twos make up today’s date. Meanwhile, some retailers are offering customers 22% discounts until midnight in honour of the date.GSK has revealed that its consumer healthcare business, whose brands include Sensodyne toothpaste, Voltaren and Panadol painkillers, will be called Haleon following its planned spinoff and London stock market listing this summer. The drugmaker said Haleon (pronounced “Hay-Lee-On”) was inspired by the merging of the words “Hale”, which is an old English word that means “in good health” and Leon, which is associated with the word “strength”. The business has grown in size over the years after merging with consumer product portfolios from Novartis and Pfizer, and now generates annual sales of £10bn. The new company’s chairman-designate is the former Tesco boss Sir Dave Lewis, whose top priority at present is to assemble its board. GSK trumpeted Haleon’s growth prospects when it revealed in mid-January it had rebuffed three takeover bids for the venture from the consumer giant Unilever just before Christmas. The last offer was worth £50bn, but the drugmaker said it undervalued the business and its potential. GSK predicted organic sales growth (excluding acquisitions) of 4% to 6% in the medium term, higher than analysts’ forecasts. It believes there is strong demand for Haleon’s products, with people focusing more on health and wellness since the Covid-19 pandemic, coupled with rising demand from an ageing population and emerging middle classes in countries such as China and India. Emma Walmsley, GSK’s chief executive, reiterated on Tuesday that Haleon had “strong prospects for growth, and through listing will unlock significant value for GSK shareholders”. She has been under pressure from the activist investor Elliott Management to explore a sale of the business, rather than a spin-off. The New York hedge fund has also questioned whether she is the right person to lead GSK after the split. the GSK board has firmly backed Walmsley. Brian McNamara, chief executive designate of Haleon, said: “Introducing Haleon to the world marks another step in our journey to become a new, standalone company. Our name is grounded in our purpose to deliver better everyday health with humanity and to be a world leader in consumer healthcare. We are on track to launch Haleon in mid-2022 and our business momentum is strong.” GSK will further update analysts and investors at a capital markets day . Haleon will be headquartered in Weybridge in Surrey, with its new campus expected to open at the end of 2024, with a R&amp;D centre and a shopper science lab.A former Post Office worker has told the public inquiry into the Horizon IT scandal he tried to kill himself on three occasions after being wrongly imprisoned for stealing from his employer. Another, also giving evidence on Tuesday, called for his former bosses including Adam Crozier, now chair of BT, to attend the hearings and answer for their role in the scandal. Parmod Kalia, who was jailed for six months in 2001 after the organisation’s flawed IT system incorrectly suggested a £27,000 shortfall at his Orpington post office, told the inquiry how his once tight-knit family had been torn apart in the two decades since. “It came as a bit of a shock when the prison wardens wanted my belt and my tie, that was a bit humiliating,” said the 63-year-old father of four, who was taken to Surrey’s High Down, a prison designated with the UK’s second-highest security level, after being sentenced. “I was numb at the time. Walking through the front door, being asked to strip and given a uniform … I was locked up basically for 23 hours a day.” Kalia, who had his conviction quashed last year but has yet to receive an interim compensation payment from the Post Office, said he had “buried” the events as best he could until a BBC Panorama documentary about the hundreds of wrongfully prosecuted Post Office workers aired in 2015. “Since then I’m now in depression and I have anxiety issues,” he said. “In April last year I went to my GP and for the first time I told him I was suffering from depression and anxiety and had attempted suicide on three occasions in 2015.” Kalia and his wife had struggled until as late as 1am some nights trying to get the Horizon IT system to balance the takings, as his young daughter slept behind the shop counter, and was ultimately forced to ask his mother for most of her savings after a union representative told him to try to pay the loss to “keep out of the courts”. His mother never knew he went to jail as she was taken to India while he was in prison – “if she had found out it would have killed her there and then,” he said – and neither does his older sister. However, he is no longer on speaking terms with his brother, has had to face questions from his children over whether he took the money, and lives separately from his wife. Kalia said since the suicide attempts in 2015 he had been living in charity-linked accommodation. “We haven’t gone down the route of divorce,” he said. “I am a telephone call away. But we don’t have a husband and wife matrimonial relationship. They have classified us as a dysfunctional family, all because of my conviction.” Joan Bailey, who ran a Post Office and several smaller satellite offices in mid-Wales with her husband, said her husband was referred to a mental health team because he “didn’t see any point now … he was talking about suicide” as Post Office investigators pursued the couple for a shortfall of about £13,000. Over a period of six years she estimated the couple paid about £40,000 – drawing on loans and pensions and trying to save by running the heating for just two hours a night in the bitter Welsh winters – to the Post Office to attempt to cover the continuing incorrect shortfalls thrown up. Chris Trousdale, who in 2002 at just 19 took over a Post Office his family had run for 150 years, told the hearing the IT system would not balance even in his first week with the Post Office trainer “watching every transaction”. He produced records showing that he called the Post Office IT helpline, which he dubbed the “hell line”, almost 200 times over a period of 15 months. After a harrowing experience dealing with Post Office investigators – whom he says used bullying, coercion and intimidation tactics, a common theme repeated by witnesses at the inquiry – he saw a doctor and was diagnosed with acute stress reaction and PTSD. “To this day I look back with a bit of terror,” he said. “They were a law unto themselves. They wanted people to believe they were the police, or bigger than the police.” His mother, who went on to run the post office, with a new computer system, was also diagnosed with PTSD. Trousdale, now 39, called for management at Royal Mail and the Post Office to take responsibility. “When I was prosecuted, Adam Crozier was the chief executive,” he said. “I think he should be here answering questions as well as all the other heads of the Post Office. “I don’t think there is anyone who should be allowed to get away with this, it has been happening for 20 years. Bosses were paid bonuses based on performance. Victims’ money [paid to cover the balance shortfalls] in my opinion was going into the pockets of those that had persecuted them.” Crozier, who is chair of Premier Inn-owner Whitbread as well as BT, was chief executive of Royal Mail Group, of which the Post Office was part, from 2003 to 2010. In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org.AGL Energy says a premium of at least 30% on its share price will be needed for an extraordinary takeover bid by the tech billionaire Mike Cannon-Brookes and Canadian investment firm Brookfield to potentially succeed. Markus Brokhof, AGL’s chief operating officer, has also dismissed Cannon-Brookes’ proposal to shut the company’s coal-fired power plants by 2030, saying that was unrealistic. Responding to the consortium’s offer of a 4.7% premium on the Friday share price, Brokhof said any investment banker would advise a full company takeover required the suitors “to offer a premium of 30-40%”. He said AGL would additionally need guarantees about job security for staff and support for communities affected by coal plant closures. The comments suggest AGL could be open to selling to the consortium which on Saturday made an offer that valued the company, including debt, at nearly $8bn. Brookfield’s Asia-Pacific regional head, Stewart Upson, said he believed the initial bid – under which the consortium would also spend up to $20bn on new renewable energy and other infrastructure to replace the coal-fired power plants – was unprecedented. “I don’t think this has happened anywhere in the world ever before, by us or anyone else – buying a business like AGL with this much thermal [coal] generation with a plan over years, a decade-plus, to retire that and turn it into new generation,” he told Guardian Australia. “Australians should be excited by it and proud of it because this is going to make a major change in Australia’s emissions profile in a very responsible and managed way.” Upson said the proposed deal would draw on Brookfield’s $15bn global transition fund, set up to invest in and transform companies with high emissions. He said the consortium was not in a rush and had made no decisions since the offer was formally rejected on Monday. It argues the offer is an effective 18% premium on the average share price over a three-month period. “Obviously we feel like we put a very compelling offer on the table,” Upson said. “We think the value should be compelling to shareholders relative to the alternative they have in front of them, which is the demerger, where we feel value is probably only going to go down. We’re looking forward to hearing feedback from other shareholders and seeing what people think and then we can assess next steps.” The consortium bid was lodged in part to prevent a demerger planned to take effect from 30 June, under which AGL would be split in two, creating a new entity Accel Energy that would include the coal-fired power station assets. The suitors vowed to make AGL a net zero polluter by 2035. In response, AGL defended its own plans to reduced emissions as striking a balance between meeting current and future energy needs while “responsibly” decarbonising. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Brokhof said AGL had yet to receive a response from the bid consortium but a higher bid would be the “natural” next step. “If you would like to get the board’s attention, for sure you need to engage once more, or two times more, or whatever,” he told Guardian Australia. He said AGL did not believe its coal power plants – including Bayswater in New South Wales and Loy Yang in Victoria – could be closed by 2030. The company proposes to shut the plants no later than 2033 and 2045, respectively. Brokhof said the company had already invested $4.8bn in renewable energy in recent years and “money was not the problem”. “We know exactly how to find projects, to develop projects, to get all the permits and approvals and then take your financial investment decision, and then go into the construction,” he said. “And then building also the transmission line will take a lot of time.” The bid is being closely watched in Canberra. While Liberal moderates have welcomed the proposal, the prime minister, Scott Morrison, appeared lukewarm, arguing the government wanted to see coal generators run for the duration of their scheduled operating life. Given the initial pushback by AGL, the government does not expect to be making regulatory decisions this side of the federal election. Laura Hillis, the director of corporate engagement for the Investor Group on Climate Change, said AGL’s slow efforts to decarbonise its business had left it vulnerable to a takeover. “It’s really shocking that we’ve ended up in this position where there’s been such a failure of policy and government leadership on the decarbonisation of our electricity grid, but also corporate leadership from the AGL board and executives,” Hillis said. “AGL have a really straightforward decarbonisation pathway, much more so than many of the companies that we engage with,” such as in steel or chemicals, she said. “But in terms of being really legitimately serious about decarbonising at the pace that’s required for a utility company to meet the goals of the Paris agreement, they are nowhere near that at this point.” Hillis said Brookfield – which counts $US690bn ($A960bn) in assets and is waiting for final approval to acquire Victoria’s main power distribution firm AusNet – had the scale needed to take on a company the size of AGL but Australia’s superannuation funds did not. “I just don’t think that our investors are at that size and scale that they would be able to put something like this together,” she said. The federal Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, revealed on Tuesday that Cannon-Brookes had spoken to him about the proposal over the weekend. Albanese said the government seemed to be often out of the loop when it came to significant developments in the energy market, citing the energy minister, Angus Taylor, not learning about Origin Energy bringing forward the closure of the Eraring coal-fired power plant until the night before the announcement. “This federal government is so out of touch and so isolated that the NSW Perrottet Liberal government had known about this for six months and they didn’t bother to pick up the phone to Angus Taylor or Scott Morrison,” Albanese said. He said Australia needed “reliable, secure power, and we need it to be the cheapest possible” and that there needed to be “appropriate plans that look after people”. Investors in the transition needed certainty about the rules and regulatory structures for the energy market, Albanese said. Emma Herd, a climate change and sustainability partner for EY, said investors globally were hunting for opportunities to profit by accelerating the pace at which fossil fuels exited the market. She said it was consistent with Morrison’s appeal to rely on “can-do capitalism”. “Capitalism will do and is doing,” Herd said. “It’s just a question of whether we get it done fast enough when it comes from a climate perspective.” AGL’s share price eased by 0.8% on Tuesday to $7.85 after rising more than 10% on Monday.On the morning of my daughter’s birthday, I am seeing patients. Today, they happen to be all women and, as the day unfolds, I realise that it is an unplanned window into the mother-daughter relationship. My first patient, at 90, is gleeful that she feels nowhere as bad as her scans dictate. A dancer, she insists on exercise as being the secret of her longevity. That, and her tight relationship with her daughter who is her “walking and talking partner”. When she tells me that this daughter increases her enjoyment of an already contented life, I melt. My elderly Italian patient apologises for her English before relieving all my concerns with one sentence: “My two daughters – one for the medicine, one for the paperwork.” The next patient is a young professional confronting a new cancer diagnosis. My throat catches when she says “I miss my mum” because my eyes have just fallen on the part of the history that says her mother died at the same age of the same diagnosis. To sidestep this potent sentiment would be unacceptable, so I let her reminisce. Another young patient is grateful for her “rock star” mother who cared for the grandchildren. Her mother was a beloved school principal who didn’t think twice about an early retirement if it meant relieving her daughter’s stress. The mother tells me that her daughter’s prolonged good health is the only return she seeks. In a break between patients, I write a letter to Immigration. A young woman is nearing the end of life and would like to see her mother who lives abroad. This is the reassurance she needs that her son will be OK, and I suspect she is hanging on as a result. The mother is similarly desperate, and we all acknowledge that the pandemic has intensified the obstacles to travel. Still, it is worth a try, and I use every synonym for urgent to reunite daughter and mother. Primed with a morning of touching relationships and no doubt subconsciously reflecting on my own, the next encounter shocks me. I suggest to an elderly patient that, as her health deteriorates, I would like to keep her daughter abreast of developments. The usually genial woman stiffens and her eyes spit fire at me. “My daughter doesn’t exist!” My first instinct is to take this literally. “I am sorry, she is still listed as your contact.” “She might as well be dead to me.” I can’t help but wonder what caused a 50-year relationship to break down so irretrievably. As if to rub it in that mother-daughter relationships are not all they are cracked up to be, the next patient, apropos of nothing, releases a string of invective against her mother, accusing her of being a “toxin” and attributing her cancer diagnosis to the stress of their interactions. Our consultation freezes amid this unexpected outburst but, as I relay the good news about her prognosis, she calms down. “I bet your daughter is nice,” she says self-consciously. When my daughter was born, I joked that now there was someone to take me to my appointments in old age. I let her down early when I failed to suspect a serious milk allergy which led to a fussy baby who grew into an irritable toddler. Before I knew it, sandwiched between two carefree brothers, I had a perpetually annoyed little girl of whom few smiling photos exist. As much as I loved her, I appreciated her hours in childcare, which launched me into pools of maternal guilt. But those years passed, thanks in no small part to two supportive grandmothers. And now, before my very eyes, that squally baby is a teenager, and my patient is asking if she is nice. Well, the teenage catastrophes are real. The “massive” pimple that no one else can see. The sheer unfairness of having to make the salad again this week. The wry neck that could be easily avoided with less screen time. All unrivalled by the tragedy of the uncharged phone on the way to school. With a deep breath and a grain of salt, we get by! I think how my own teenage years spent in the pre-internet era were a world apart. They were studious and sheltered. Having attended public schools on different continents, I cannot remember a classmate who had a learning difficulty, physical disability, or mental illness. Of course, those children were among us but were rendered invisible. Now I wonder what happened to the children who failed to thrive and how I might have helped. Today, I watch my daughter employ the full extent of her empathy and humanity in a way I didn’t. When I recently berated her for watching dog videos late at night, she was actually helping a friend in crisis. Sometimes, I worry that she assumes challenges she is not fully equipped to handle but it is a joy to watch her grow in the process. The teacher says she has many bright students, but the real joy comes from the reliably helpful ones. Thankfully, her loud baby lungs have made way for an articulate voice that defends principles. When the school librarian told her to put down a prize-winning fiction book “meant for older readers”, she shrugged and picked up my copy instead. Intuitive love is a wonderful thing. On a long day, she will pluck me a flower from the garden and have a heated meal waiting. Bursting to ask me about a party invitation, she will first inquire about my day. I talk to my mother every day and assume she knows I cherish her. But lately, I realise that of all my daughter’s gestures, the one that makes my heart brim is when, without expectation or invitation, she tells me that I am a good mother. This reward transcends all achievements and all incentives. Watching the steadfast mother-daughter relationships of my patients through health and sickness gives me hope for mine. Meanwhile, my patient expects a reply, so I think of something diplomatic that is not saccharine. “We all have our moments, but yes, my daughter is alright.”When Penelope Spheeris was making the first part of her landmark documentary The Decline of Western Civilization in 1979 and 1980, none of the people she was chronicling were known outside of Los Angeles’s dank punk scene. They played furious music in clubs that looked and smelled like bathrooms, and lived in squats that looked and smelled like squats. (Or, like bathrooms.) But The Decline of Western Civilization is the first and best film of what would become a loosely linked trilogy exploring different LA subcultures over three decades. Featuring rough-ready footage shot at gigs and candid interviews with future punk stars, this film is a slim time capsule of a nascent music scene not yet exploited through commerce or destroyed by day jobs. Spheeris enters a world filled with runaways, drug addicts and squatters, where audience members spit on bands to signal some form of vile, violent appreciation, where Nazi regalia is worn and confused as being a symbol of anarchy. One memorable moment sees a young woman flippantly telling a story about a house painter who died in her backyard; before they called the cops, she and her friends posed for photos with the corpse. We meet Pat Smear, some 15 years before he joined Nirvana as their second guitarist. We visit Black Flag at home, still a few months off meeting Henry Rollins; the band’s singer is sleeping in an overhead closet fit to store spare blankets. A young Exene Cervenka is charming and excitable, on the cusp of ascending with future LA punk legends X, and aware of the importance of what she is trying to achieve. Everyone seems tragic and hopeful. The Germs’ charismatic young frontman, Darby Crash, is the film’s most magnetic force – and the most tragic, too. He’s type of sympathetic character you want to both slap and hug. Crash was the victim of a chaotic family situation that spat him into the caverns of LA: translucent, addicted to drugs and riddled with insecurities about his sexuality, looks and abilities. At gigs he gets so high that he forgets to sing into the microphone. He is scared of the violence that comes with his band’s shows, even though he is the drunken instigator of most of it. In the film, Crash cooks eggs in a rundown kitchen and candidly explains how he needs to be bombed before performing and how he started hurting himself on stage due to boredom. A few months after these interviews, he scribbled a one-line note and killed himself with an intentional heroin overdose. It was too late to change the movie poster: a shot of Crash lying with his eyes closed, almost lifeless, on a stage floor. The second and third films in this series are great too, but for different, lesser reasons. Part II: The Metal Years skews closer to a Spinal Tap experience, capturing what has since become known as “hair metal” or “cock rock”: tight leather, teased mullets, fingerless gloves, Jack Daniels chased with cocaine. Hair metal was rife in the late 1980s on LA’s Sunset Strip, and Spheeris was there to capture it all. This film came in 1988, seven years after the first, and by then Spheeris could attract the already famous – including Ozzy Osbourne, Steven Tyler, Alice Cooper, Kiss and Lemmy – to give lengthy interviews. Thankfully she was savvy enough to balance these with the “almost famous”, like Randy O, frontman of a band whose major exposure would begin and end with this film. While being interviewed, O was convinced he would be a millionaire and his band “bigger than Zeppelin”. This film teeters between musicians who enjoy ridiculous wealth and success, and others who assume they will too, any day now. Each comes off as tragic and hilarious as the other. The third installation came in 1998, with neither a subtitle nor any easy laughs. Spheeris intended to catalogue the same type of LA punk scene she encountered in 1979 but found the kids were no longer all right. She discovered clusters of teenage runaways, dubbed “gutter punks” – partly due to an anti-establishment stance and a shared aesthetic, but mainly because they often lived in the street. The resultant film was so bleak it was passed over for general release in the late 90s. Rewatching it now, it’s not hard to see why this was a hard sell in the popcorn era of American Pie. But you’d be remiss to skip over this final, necessary document; as with Spheeris’s first two films, you’ll find tragedy and hope in even doses.We are only one round into Super Rugby Pacific and already it appears a wildcard and a dark horse may yet upset the status quo in the Australian section of the competition. For the past few years the race for supremacy has played out almost solely between the Brumbies and the Queensland Reds, with the NSW Waratahs, Western Force and Melbourne Rebels merely making up the numbers. The Waratahs, however, have somewhat shaken up the status quo with their 40-10 win against the Fijian Drua in Parramatta last Friday night, raising hopes the men in sky blue have turned the corner under new coach Darren Coleman. What exactly that five-tries-to-one performance means for the rest of the season is near-impossible to predict. It was a good start against underperforming opposition; to read much more into it would be foolish. Fortunately, Coleman has put the win into perspective and there seems little danger of the Waratahs repeating the familiar mistake of getting carried away. Regardless, it was heartening to see a playing group belting out their team song in the dressing room for the first time in 538 days, a rendition which showed just how much it meant. At the very least, there was evidence of genuine cultural change at the Waratahs, which will provide a solid foundation on which to build. Three days later, the Waratahs received another boost when it was officially announced Wallabies star Kurtley Beale was returning to Australia – and to NSW – although he will not be available for the Waratahs until next year. Meanwhile, Queensland coach Brad Thorn was, like Coleman, realistic about the Reds’ 23-5 win against the Rebels in Brisbane on Saturday. Acutely aware of the high standards in New Zealand, Thorn seemed at pains to try to say something positive about his side’s display but was brutally honest in his assessment that it was not satisfactory – a good sign if Queensland wants to continue to improve. There was plenty of room for improvement in the Reds’ game, starting with their lineout, but it was the first game of the season, played in atrocious conditions. Thorn did find something positive to say about gangling Reds fullback Jock Campbell whom he compared to former Brisbane Bronco Darren Lockyer and ex-All Black Ben Smith. High praise indeed, but well-deserving nonetheless. The Rebels would be disappointed not just with the result, which seemed to have an inevitability about it, but also their inability to stay in the contest. Under new coach Kevin Foote, they have appeared to go to great lengths to distance themselves from their more conservative approach of previous seasons. In recent years the Rebels attempted to accumulate points by kicking penalty goals, but on Saturday turned down several first-half opportunities t to go for seven points instead. With heavy rain forecast to bucket down the second half they knew they had to score points in the first. Down 13-5 at half-time it was difficult to play catch-up in wet conditions. In the absence of star winger Marika Koroibete, who is playing in Japan, the Rebels may struggle to make the necessary improvements to take their game forward this year. In their favour, it is early days. While the Reds’ win was fairly predictable, the Brumbies staved off a massive upset against the Western Force in Canberra. With Wallabies second-rower Izack Rodda leading the charge, the Force forwards took it up to the much-vaunted Brumbies tight-five until the ACT men re-grouped. The Force led with two minutes to go but the Brumbies showed their championship qualities at the end with Tom Wright putting Lachie Lonergan over to rescue the match 29-23. One could argue the Force did not know how to win, especially when they kicked the ball back to the Brumbies to give the ACT side one last chance to salvage the match. But it is tough to win in Canberra, particularly for another Australian side. The Brumbies did look somewhat lethargic at times, but for the Force to come so close to causing a boilover will give them confidence they can do something in this competition. Super Rugby in Australia desperately needs the Waratahs, Force and Rebels to step up to challenge the Brumbies and Reds to make the competition more engaging and marketable. While the Crusaders have been the most dominant team in New Zealand historically, the Chiefs, Highlanders and Hurricanes have all won the title in the last decade. Supporters of all five Australian teams must go into each and every season believing this could be their year, at least in the local derbies. Hopefully, the opening-round performances of the Waratahs and the Force were a true sign that Australian Super Rugby will not be a two-team competition for much longer. A clearer picture will emerge when the Waratahs host the Old Foe Queensland at Leichhardt Oval on Friday night, while the Force get another chance to prove they have progressed when they meet the Rebels in Melbourne on Saturday night. The more the Waratahs, Force and Rebels upset the apple cart the better it will be for Super Rugby in Australia.“My life has just been a little bit crazy lately,” Maggie Beer laughs softly as we get on the phone. That feels like something of an understatement. As well as her year-round duties helming a range of gourmet foods plus a shop and restaurant in the Barossa Valley, Australia’s most endearing celebrity cook is in a particularly busy period. Beer is back in the judging seat for another season of reality competition The Great Australian Bake Off. She’s also gearing up for this year’s Tasting Australia festival, which returns to South Australia in April to showcase the state’s best food and drink. Among other duties, Beer will be headlining the festival’s Town Square Kitchen Legends Dinner on 29 April. On a more personal note, Beer and her husband, Colin, have also launched the Saskia Beer Churchill Fellowship, an initiative that will provide a passionate food lover with the opportunity to pursue sustainable, community-focused approaches to food production through travel and study. The fellowship honours the memory of Beer’s daughter, Saskia, who died in early 2020. Last year Beer hung a painting that reminds her of Saskia in the kitchen, the heart of their family home. She tells us why that painting reminds her of the happy times, as well as the story of some other important personal belongings. What I’d save from my house in a fire We have a painting by Davida Allen of a farmer, a young girl and some chooks. It is so important as, to me, it tells such a story of Saskia working with Colin and the birds when she was seven or eight years old. I’m the most sentimental so-and-so and I’m a hoarder of all sorts of emotional things. The painting is full of colour and exuberance and makes it feel like Saskia is there with us. And it’s hanging in my happiest place, the kitchen. Every family celebration we ever had was always there. Everything starts in the kitchen. The memories this painting evokes makes me smile and is a reminder of our family times together – the chaos that always surrounded us, with my girls bossing me around and competing as to who could make the best mayonnaise or who should be doing what. It’s like having our Saskia in the kitchen always. My most useful object Now, this is hard. I have so many “useful” old-fashioned tools in my kitchen I could write about, yet on reflection I’ve decided that the most useful object has to be in the plural – archive boxes! I have a large office at the bottom of the garden full of so many boxes. Inside these boxes are piles of spiral notebooks of every shape and size in which I have recorded all the great food experiences that I’ve had over 40 years, both here in Australia and abroad. They’re records of every great meal that we’ve ever had. This is my gold. One day, if I ever take time to write a memoir, even if it’s just for the family, I’ll need these notebooks. They are my memories of dishes, of people, of restaurants, of different cultures. Just opening them up, either randomly or chronologically, I learn from them again and they continually inspire me to use an ingredient or an idea I’d forgotten about. Sometimes just glancing at the notes of a dish at a certain time and place brings back memories of far more than the food. It’s a history that I really want to take the time to transcribe – and, just perhaps, eventually create a memoir with. The item I most regret losing I’m very haphazard and frenetic. I always have thousands and thousands of emails that I don’t put into folders because I just never have time. But at least in today’s world with computers and the wonderful cloud I can always retrieve things I’ve mislaid. However it wasn’t always so when I used to write columns, menus and stories on typewriters with carbon paper copies and put them away … somewhere. One of my great regrets is losing my file from 1995. That year I was part of an amazing happening with the Barossa music festival, as their “official festival food designer”. I oversaw all the food served at each musical performance all over the Barossa. With the help of a great friend, Clare Bogan, we put so many hours into making each venue the perfect combination of music and local food. Now all that work – all of the excitement, the ideas that we put together and the record of that extraordinary time – is missing. One night the festival was staging a baroque opera in the Octavia Cellar in Yalumba, so it required a menu of 17th-century food for 120 people. I had such fun researching and cooking the banquet, the star of which was my hare pies with lard pastry. But on the night, the pastry collapsed! I was mortified. Even though there was still plenty of great eating I felt I wanted to explain to the assembled throng what had happened. I told the story of the chef who suicided in France at the court of Louis XIV when the fish didn’t arrive, saying I felt pretty bad about it, but not as desperate as that. The files that I’ve lost had the records of all the meals I’d planned over those 16 days. Of them all, I most regret losing the detail and photographs of this night as it was one of the most special nights of my food life. There’s so much about it I remember being amazing, I just need to fill in the gaps with my file, but it’s totally gone.The Anaiwan people of the New England high country in New South Wales have taken matters into their own hands in the fight to reclaim Indigenous land, running a successful crowdfunding campaign to buy a privately owned bush block. After raising more than $330,000, the Nēwara Aboriginal Corporation have made an offer to buy a 240-hectare block 30 minutes north-west of Armidale in the Boorolong region. The block is part of Anaiwan country that its people walked for thousands of years – a mix of rolling hills, stringybark forest, and a creek surrounded by low ferns. Nearly 2,900 donations were made from as far afield as the UK, and include high-profile names like Julie McCrossin, with pledges still being accepted for further works on the land. Dave Widders of the Nēwara Aboriginal Corporation said crowdfunding is the simplest, most direct way to get country back, without conditions, caveats, or strings attached – land that be can used however the Anaiwan see fit. “There are some land councils that got some land back from the Land Rights Act,” Widders says. “But there were strings attached to it. For example, it wasn’t subdivided – you couldn’t build on it. “But buying land outright means self-determination. We can do what we like with it.” Callum Clayton-Dixon, also from the corporation, says: “It’ll be the first time Anaiwan people and the Anaiwan community have owned a block of land as Anaiwan people, not through land councils.” Widders and Clayton-Dixon cite the pain and division the native title process can cause, as well as the time and money it can take to resolve. The group behind the purchase stresses it will be a place not just for the Anaiwan to reconnect with an identity and a culture that was very nearly wiped out in the last 200 years, but also to bring that culture to the wider New England community. The group stresses the importance of moving forward, and engaging “on our own terms” with the wider community. “Where do we start?” Widders says. “Under the white system, we’ll buy this land and call it our own – but I’ve never liked the word ‘ownership’. “Once we get that land, we’ll take on the role of custodians again, of looking after country like we’ve been doing for thousands of years.” Sign up to receive Guardian Australia’s fortnightly Rural Network email newsletter There’s many ideas on what to do with the land. Widders, a teacher at Drummond Memorial public school, talks of cultural tours, especially for the kids in community care that he takes out to reconnect to country. “I’ve had to pay whitefellas $3,000 to hire their venue for a weekend, and I can see that money benefiting our people, our organisation more.” Widders wants to restart traditional land management as well, with things like traditional burning – something he says he’d like to teach local farmers and the RFS. Clayton-Dixon, a linguistics research fellow and PhD candidate at UTS, hopes to use the land to teach the Anaiwan history and language, which was nearly wiped out. “Our language was forced into almost complete dormancy,” he says. “We’ve had a botanist get in contact with us and offer their services free of charge to do a vegetation survey on the block once we get it – the plant species listed will help us develop teaching resources when we’re teaching on country.” Nēwara’s project officer, Larissa Ahoy, hopes it becomes a place of healing and building connections to country, especially for young people. “I could see that’ll give the youth ownership if they go out on it, participate in programs,” she says. “I’ve got a relative that had major drug problems, delving into crime – turning into people that we knew they weren’t. And after watching this person’s journey, they didn’t go to rehab or anything like that – their rehabilitation was walking on country. “This person’s now studying at university – his life has progressed that much and it’s all due to rehabilitation on country.” Steve Widders, the chairman of Nēwara, says: “Some words that are running through me are ‘educate, empower, enable’.”. Uncle Steve sees the land as a chance to better connect with the entire Armidale community, including non-Indigenous people. “It’s going to build better relations. It’s going to break down a lot of barriers and build a lot of bridges – done in our way, on our terms. We put out a hand of friendship and goodwill out there. We’ve done that for thousands of years – we want to share that with everyone. “We don’t want to create walls. We want to do this in a peaceful way.” One of the backers of the crowdfunding campaign is Ros Coggan, a white woman and schoolteacher. Born and bred in Armidale, Coggan sees her backing as reparations – that the Anaiwan can use on their own terms. “My mother and father prospered on Anaiwan land. It’s paying rent – I mean, what I’ve paid wouldn’t cover a minute, but that’s my gesture of goodwill,” she says. Sign up for the Rural Network email newsletter Join the Rural Network group on Facebook to be part of the communityMichael* has called Australia home for nearly a decade. He has a partner and a child here, friends and a community, a career he wants to pursue. But he has consistently faced a perverse choice: tolerate exploitation for job security, or risk losing his protections and right to stay. “My first employer used to bully me, all the time. I was forced to work long hours for no overtime, sometimes more than 60 hours without any more pay,” he tells Guardian Australia. “At first I accepted to work like that, because I cannot do anything: I am relying on the visa.” “I have a son who is three-and-a-half years old. I sacrifice everything to give him a better life in Australia. I never give up hope because of my son’s future. But the government’s policies have taken all my efforts.” The government’s proposed migration amendment (protecting migrant workers) bill has been promoted as addressing migrant worker exploitation by establishing new criminal offences for “coercing … migrant workers to accept exploitative work arrangements”. It would also introduce broader ministerial powers to ban companies that break the law from sponsoring migrant workers. But critics argue the bill is fundamentally flawed because it carries no whistleblower protections for workers who expose their own exploitation. A Senate inquiry will hear evidence on the bill Wednesday morning. Michael arrived in Australia from a south-east Asian country in 2013. Guardian Australia is choosing not to publish his real name nor his home country out of fear it could jeopardise his visa and right to remain in Australia. He arrived in Australia to study cookery and after graduating took up a job as a chef on a 457 visa. But he says because his visa was tied to his employer he was vulnerable to exploitation. His second employer made him work “11-12 hours a day for six days a week, but only paid for 38 hours”. A third employer was bought out and restructured, leaving him again looking for a new job. Michael said each time he moved to a new employer he had to “start again” on his progression towards applying for permanent residency. “We live with uncertainty all the time,” he says. “We work hard, we do everything right, but we keep getting punished.” Michael’s fourth employer was a large hospitality company running several venues. He felt the security of a large firm would militate against the kind of exploitation he’d known in Australia. But he was shocked to learn, shortly after starting, that the company was being investigated for systemic underpayment of migrant workers. Workers were invited to present evidence of their own exploitation, “but nobody did, because we could lose our visa, we might be deported”. When the company later lost its rights to sponsor migrant workers as a result of adverse findings against it, Michael, and all of his colleagues on visas, were once more forced to start again. “To look for an appropriate sponsor is not easy. I am so scared and depressed the same problems will happen again.” Michael says the precariousness of his situation, and that of thousands of others of migrant workers, impacts not only the workers but their partners and families. He said there is a disincentive for migrant workers to report an employer that is exploiting them. As their visa is tied to that employment, they suffer if the employer is found to have acted improperly: their visa is cancelled. This forces them to find another employer, often on a timeframe as short as 60 days, and can imperil their right to stay in the country. Exploitation ‘incredibly common’ Matt Kunkel, the chief executive of the Migrant Workers Centre, told the Guardian the bill would “make a real problem even worse”. He said wage theft and other workplace exploitations were “incredibly common” for those in Australia on temporary visas: more than two-thirds of migrant workers surveyed by the Migrant Workers Centre reported being paid less than the minimum standards, and a quarter reported other forms of workplace exploitation like forced or unpaid overtime. Kunkel said it was essential temporary visas workers could report abuse without any fear of an adverse outcome. “Our current migration system has created opportunities for unscrupulous bosses to take advantage of the precarious residency status of migrants,” Kunkel said. “If they report abuse or lose their job, they may also lose their ability to stay in the country. This means many are forced to make a difficult choice between reporting wage theft or maintaining their employment relationship.” Kunkel said many of the “so-called temporary migrants” have spent several years or even beyond a decade in Australia, “and are important members of our community”. A Senate inquiry into the government’s proposed bill previously heard consistent evidence the legislation lacked protections for migrant workers who were already suffering exploitation. The Australian Council of Trade Unions said the bill “seriously underestimates the scale of the problem” and that wage theft and other exploitations of migrant workers are “endemic and widespread”. It said the proposed law, currently before the House of Representatives, was “fundamentally flawed” and failed to address the systemic factors that led to migrant worker exploitation. “It relies on vulnerable migrant workers coming forward to report exploitation and cooperate in an investigation, without providing them with any incentive or protection to do so. This could expose migrant workers to adverse immigration consequences, including the cancellation of their visa”. The Migrant Justice Institute’s submission cited a 2019 survey of over 5000 international students that found 38% did not seek help for a problem at work because they did not want “problems that might affect my visa”. When introducing the bill to parliament, the immigration minister Alex Hawke said it “will help to level the playing field” for migrant workers. The proposed new offences for companies – against coercing migrant workers to accept exploitative arrangements – were recommendations of the 2019 migrant workers’ taskforce report. Hawke said they were “designed to penalise the misuse of our migration program, and migrant workers, and create a safer environment for temporary migrant workers looking for employment”. Michael said his experience has undermined his faith in Australia, and his chance of a future here. “We always think Australia is a wonderful country, but what is happening to us makes us so disappointed, so depressed, so stressed all the time. “We worry all the time – maybe we made a mistake.” Michael’s name has been changed to protect his identityAustralian voters are more inclined now than a year ago to believe the primary purpose of government is boosting the wellbeing of the population, and less inclined to worry about law and order, according to new research. Polling undertaken for the Centre for Policy Development records a five-point year-on-year rise in support for the idea that the primary purpose of government is to improve overall wellbeing and a seven-point drop in the number of respondents saying government should prioritise public safety and the rule of law. When asked earlier in February what they thought was the primary purpose of government, 32% of respondents said improving wellbeing (up from 27% in 2021) and 11% (down from 18%) said maintaining safety and the rule of law. More survey participants in 2022 also nominated the delivery and funding of social services as a primary purpose of government (31% said this was important, up from 28% last year). The Centre for Policy Development has been researching voter attitudes to the role of government since 2017. The centre’s chief executive, Travers McLeod, said it had been clear for a long time that a majority of Australians supported the maintenance of public sector capability to deliver critical services. But he said the coronavirus pandemic prompted a noticeable community shift. “Since Covid has revealed the critical weaknesses in our service systems people have become even more forthright in their views, not just about the purpose of government, but about the need for government to maintain and deliver the social infrastructure at the heart of our nation,” McLeod said. The research comes ahead of a May federal election. Scott Morrison has declared it is time for governments to step back after a period of interventionism during the pandemic while the Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, is campaigning on the idea that government is transformative for people. The poll of 1,069 respondents undertaken by Essential suggests 58% of respondents believe it’s very important that government delivers social services directly, compared with 53% in 2021 and 57% in 2020. Older voters are more likely to hold that view than younger cohorts, and there has been a significant increase in Victorian voters holding that view (57% this year compared to 48% last year). Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Voters on higher incomes, younger voters and voters in full-time work were less likely to say government delivery of services was very important. The poll shows nine in 10 respondents felt it was either very or somewhat important for governments to maintain capacity to deliver services directly rather than outsourcing provision to third parties. McLeod said responses to this question since 2017 had consistently shown support above 75%, with a “sharp and sustained increase” to about 90% from 2020, which was the first wave of the pandemic. Labor voters were more inclined to agree with this proposition than Coalition voters, although super majorities apply in both cases – 90% of Liberal and National party voters thought maintaining capacity for direct service delivery was important, compared with 95% of Labor voters. Attitudes were more or less consistent between voters in the inner city, outer suburban and regional cohorts. Voters are also conscious of the role of state governments in service provision, consistent with their lived experience during the pandemic, with 43% of respondents saying their state government directly benefits them the most (compared to 47% last October), and 48% say the states are most responsible for delivering services to the community (50% last year). But the polling shows more people acknowledged direct benefits provided by the federal government. Last year, 31% of respondents said the federal government directly benefited them the most. In 2022, this was up to 37%. Travers said the research tracking a growing desire “for all governments to protect and preserve wellbeing, to deliver critical services and to strengthen social infrastructure shows a way forward for proponents of Australian democracy which can help Australia unify and flourish as we recover from the pandemic”. The trends, he said, suggested “Australians want government as an active participant in service delivery, either a direct service provider or a partner that knows what it takes to make services work most effectively at the local level”.The New South Wales police have confirmed they are investigating a complaint of alleged intimidation of Liberal MP Fiona Martin after she was confronted by a pro-Russia anti-vaccine mandate activist. Simeon Boikov, who styles himself as an independent journalist known as the Aussie Cossack, arrived with a camera in tow at the MP’s pop-up campaign stall at Cabarita Park on Monday, later posting several videos of the incident to YouTube. The videos depict Boikov attempting to question Martin as she gets into her car to leave the park, before a staffer for the marginal seat MP calls the NSW police. In the video, Boikov labels Martin a “coward”, a “rat [running] from a sinking ship”, saying she “ran like a criminal” away from him and suggesting it is a “crime” or “unAustralian” behaviour to waste police time. Katja Theodorakis from the Australian Strategic Policy Institute, told Guardian Australia that, while she didn’t suggest Boikov was an extremist, the “divisive” language used to “troll” Martin is consistent with language used by extremists seeking to create division in Australia and other liberal democracies. Boikov featured in a 2021 ABC Four Corners investigation as the leader of the Australian Cossacks, a group that promotes pro-Russian government sentiment. In 2018 Boikov reportedly told a Russian media outlet that “we have a unique opportunity to support Russia from within an enemy state”, in reference to Australia, although he later told the ABC he loves Australia and wants to improve Australian-Russian relations. Boikov was a prominent figure in the recent anti-vaccine mandate convoy to Canberra, part of a contingent of live-streamers and YouTube personalities who broadcast for hours from protests and demonstrations. Boikov was invited into United Australia Party MP Craig Kelly’s office during the recent parliamentary sitting fortnight, to accompany a “delegation” of protesters as a so-called “independent press” representative. Martin claims that on Monday Boikov and his associates twice blocked her car as she attempted to leave Cabarita Park. The video depicts one incident in which Martin waves Boikov away while he stands near her driver-side window and continues to attempt to ask her questions. Martin said the incident prevented her talking to other constituents, as Boikov encouraged protesters to attend the park. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “I’ll talk to anybody if they’re reasonable and calm and not intrusive and offensive,” she said. “But this bloke was quite full-on. “And at a time when we need more bloody women in parliament, and ones with guts. “The [starter’s] gun [for the election] hasn’t even gone off.” In the video, Boikov repeatedly cites Martin’s campaign event invitation to “come and ask me a question” as justification for bringing a camera crew. The video depicts at least three police cars and six officers attending, including one who claims they have responded to a report of property allegedly being damaged. After police arrived, Boikov told them “for your safety it’s better we have the mic rolling”, clarifying that “for public safety” it would be better “to get the right story”. “What’s the damaged property?” Boikov asked the police. “Everything that happened today is on camera... there’s no damage to property, that’s a false allegation.” “This is what you call a politician using police to intimidate political opponents,” he said, prompting the policeman to reply “I don’t think you’re intimidated at all by us”. Boikov and his companions were not detained or charged by police. Asked about the incident number quoted by Boikov in the video description, the NSW police replied: “Police from Burwood Police Area Command have commenced an investigation following a complaint of alleged intimidation towards a 43-year-old woman at Cabarita Park about 9.15am on Monday 21 February 2021.” Although not endorsed by the United Australia Party, Kelly helped launch Boikov’s campaign for the NSW state seat of Strathfield in January. In a video posted by the Aussie Cossack account, Kelly addressed a demonstration three weeks before the byelection claiming the “fightback” would start with Boikov’s candidacy, urging supporters of all parties to back him. “Let’s send a rocket and send a message to [Scott] Morrison and [Anthony] Albanese that these forced mandates must end,” Kelly said. Boikov, who has more than 152,000 subscribers on YouTube, and 24,000 followers on Telegram, has launched a campaign website claiming he will seek election for Martin’s seat of Reid at the federal election. The endorsed UAP candidate for Reid, Jamal Daoud, said he was “against the party supporting or associating” with Boikov, and had received confirmation from party officials that “we are distancing ourselves now from him – totally”. “As [he is] an independent candidate, we are not involved with him.” Theodorakis said that Boikov’s participation in the Canberra convoy and other anti-vaccine mandate protests fits into “a wider trend of anti-government activism that’s quite populist in nature”, and “it’s very easy to jump on this cause and make yourself part of this ‘freedom’ agenda where you can dress yourself up as a defender of democracy”. “The language in that video he posted where he trolled Fiona [Martin] is quite concerning in terms of its divisive, incendiary potential – he employs the kinds of ‘enemy constructs’ that also underpin extremism … [although] I’m not saying he is an extremist. “It deliberately polarises, based on distinctions like ‘our freedom v their tyranny, our truth v their lies’. “It’s ‘the people’ and independent media – who he says he represents – versus the mainstream. [He claims] he has the truth [and] the politicians and the mainstream have lies.” The Australian Federal Police said it does not confirm who may be the subject of an investigation. “The AFP provide security advice to members of parliament on a regular basis based on protection assessments and any identified threats.” Guardian Australia approached Boikov for comment.The United Australia party’s warning it will outspend its 2019 campaign in the looming election has prompted calls for urgent reforms to limit party expenditure. Integrity experts have claimed this would stop money distorting the electoral process. The Centre for Public Integrity released a reform blueprint on Wednesday aimed at removing the influence of money in federal politics and fixing what it described as the “weakest donation laws in the country”. The paper recommended lowering the donation disclosure threshold to $1,000, implementing donations caps, and beefing up the Australian Electoral Commission, giving it a new dedicated enforcement division to better police donation laws. The UAP’s recent suggestion it will outspend its $80m election campaign in 2019 also prompted the Centre for Public Integrity to call for urgent expenditure caps. Even well before the campaign proper begins, the UAP’s social media spending alone is vast. A Guardian analysis of YouTube ads shows the party has spent an average of $472,625 each week for the past six weeks, totalling $2.83m on the platform alone in 2022. Its spend on ads across other mediums – including print, radio and digital – has been estimated at more than $31m since August. Expenditure caps exist at a state level in the Australian Capital Territory, where a spending limit of $42,750 is in place per candidate, and New South Wales, where spending is capped at $132,600 per electorate. Caps also exist in Queensland and South Australia, where spending is limited to $95,964 and $83,635 per seat respectively. The Centre for Public Integrity chair, Anthony Whealy, a former NSW supreme court judge, said the lack of spending caps was, in a sense, the “root of all evil” in electoral financing. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Huge campaign spends forced parties to seek large donations from private hands, he said, giving donors greater influence over politics. “I think there is every reason to believe it does distort the outcome of an election and the sheer bulk of the funds is the main factor in that,” he said. “We would never accept someone buying an election. This doesn’t buy them directly, but it does buy them indirectly, and therefore it is a savage blow.” The UAP has traditionally sourced the majority of its donations directly from Palmer, rather than from external donors. In 2019-20, for example, all of its $5.9m donations came from Palmer’s Mineralogy Pty Ltd. The blueprint says caps should seek to reign in current spending to levels that still allow for parties to campaign and communicate with voters, but ensure equality of participation. The report also warns that “millionaire donors” were becoming the dominant source of funding for parties. It said in the two decades between 1998-99 and 2020-21, 22.48% of Coalition fundraising and 21.83% of Labor fundraising came from donations of more than $1m. “The small number of people who have the financial capacity to make large donations have a disproportionate ability to gain political access and influence,” the report said. The report proposes donations caps of $5,000 per donor per party. The amount is based on state caps, which exist in NSW, Queensland and Victoria. The Centre for Public Integrity executive director, Han Aulby, said that, without reform, the commonwealth’s donations system would remain the weakest in the country. The commonwealth’s donation disclosure threshold is now $14,500, compared with about $1,000 for many of the states, and donations are only reported on publicly once a year, with no requirement for more regular transparency during election periods. “The public will have no idea who is funding our parties before the next federal election,” Aulby said. “We urgently need to lower the disclosure threshold to $1,000, and cap political donations and election spending.” The UAP was approached for comment.Experts have warned the federal government’s pledge to seal the 2,720km Outback Way may not be the best approach for ensuring the project’s success, saying the Coalition is “jumping the gun” ahead of the election, while remote communities have welcomed the promised development. With a federal election expected in May, the infrastructure minister, Barnaby Joyce announced $678m for tarring 1,000km of the roads connecting Laverton in southern Western Australia to Winton in Queensland, known collectively as the Outback Way. It came a day after Anthony Albanese promised a $200m roads package for the Northern Territory if it wins the election. The federal government has previously committed $330m to upgrade the route as well as a more recent $42m federal injection for upgrades along the Eyre highway, the Stuart highway from north of Coober Pedy and the Barrier highway from Burra to Cockburn. Director of the Grattan Institute’s transport and cities program, Marion Terrill, says the government is “jumping the gun” and should not be making promises with public money when they don’t understand the nature of the problem or the solution. “You don’t start with a bucket of money and spray it around,” she said. Terrill said her research had shown that prematurely announced projects are not only more prone to cost overrun but can also continue to be problematic. As a result, she said “the people who will benefit from this, perhaps could have benefited more from something else if careful study had been done or Infrastructure Australia had been allowed to complete its analysis”. Infrastructure Australia, the body established to advise governments of infrastructure priorities to which Joyce appointed Col Murray as chair earlier last year, said it had “not received a business case for the sealing of Outback Way.” The mayor of Boulia shire council along the Outback Way, Rick Britton, welcomed the announcement, which he says allowed the project to go “from a pipe dream to now a reality”. “As far as we’re concerned in a remote rural area you have to have a road corridor first and then you can build things around that. It’s a bit like a chicken and an egg,” he said. “For someone to come and stay in our community, they have to be able to leave in any given time or weather. A sealed road will give that connectivity.” Sign up to receive Guardian Australia’s fortnightly Rural Network email newsletter The prime minister, Scott Morrison, said the upgrades would support 2,197 jobs, and deliver an important economic boost across Australia’s centre. Britton affirmed a road crew from his shire would be employed, and the sealed roads would bring an increase in traffic that would bolster other industries. “If you own a local hotel or roadhouse or have a business in tyre or service providers, it makes your business sustainable and you can invest in it and ramp your business up,” Britton said. He said it would open up greater tourism opportunities for communities all along the Outback Way. Britton also said he believed the announcement came as an acknowledgment of the GDP that rural and remote Australia brings to the nation. Gillian Fennell, who runs beef cattle in remote SA says it’s good to have the government acknowledge the need for investment in regional transport networks. “We need to be building a transport network that is connected with a proper genuine network, not just small amounts of bitumen to cross the outback. That all of our roads are of a certain standard and connected across Australia,” she said. Fennell said inexperienced drivers, especially those with trailers or driving campervans, tip over with alarming regularity on the unsealed roads. She said the discussions have been happening for the past 30 years about sealing the road, especially from Alice Springs through to Queensland but “to get a commitment for whatever it’s worth is exciting”. But Fennell said phone reception remained an issue. “If the government was going to do it really right, they’d put mobile phone towers to match the bitumen,” Fennell said. Sign up for the Rural Network email newsletter Join the Rural Network group on Facebook to be part of the communitySea ice around Antarctica has dropped to its lowest level in more than 40 years, according to preliminary data from satellites. Climate scientists say the record drop can’t yet be linked to global heating but urgent research is needed to work out why the region’s sea ice had broken a record last set only five years ago. Data from the US National Snow and Ice Data Center showed the Southern Ocean sea ice coverage had fallen below 2m sq km for the first time since satellite measurement began more than 40 years ago. Dr Walt Meier, a senior research scientist with the NSIDC, said it coincided with strong winds over part of the Ross Sea that had pulled ice to the north, where it melted in warmer waters or was broken up by waves. This pushed the sea ice extent – the area of the ocean covered by at least 15% floating ice – to below the previous record low set in 2017. But scientists expressed caution about attributing the retreat to the increase in global temperatures linked to greenhouse gas emissions. Since satellites started measuring sea ice from 1979, the two poles have been behaving differently. Sea ice has been disappearing rapidly in the Arctic but satellites have been showing a slight rise in the Antarctic, contradicting expectations from some climate models. The southern cover reached a record high in 2014 before crashing to record lows twice in the past eight years. Meier said the changes in Antarctic sea ice were “still really a muddled signal at this stage”. “Whether this is the start of [a decline] it’s still too early to say, but it’s definitely worth watching”, Meier said. Dr Will Hobbs, who studies Antarctic sea ice with the Australian Antarctic Program Partnership, said the latest record was significant. There had been an expectation that after the record low of 2017 the ice would recover, he said. “But now we have these two events in five years that are off the records,” he said. “You can’t say this is climate change, but we do now have to consider whether or not the system is starting to change.” Researchers first got a hint something unusual was happening last August, when the ice stopped growing and started showing signs of retreat about a month earlier than usual. Antarctic sea ice is challenging to study because of the huge changes that occur. About 15m sq km of sea ice – an area double the size of Australia – grows and substantially melts each year. The ice can be influenced by the strength and direction of winds as well as heat in the atmosphere and ocean. Hobbs, who is based at the University of Tasmania, said the record drop was a “watch and act” for scientists and should prompt a clamour for more research. The sea ice was fundamental to ecosystems and may play a role in protecting the Antarctic ice sheet from the effects of ocean heat, he said. When the ice sheet melts it adds to global sea levels. Prof Julie Arblaster, a climate scientist and Antarctic researcher at Monash University, said a lot of work was being done to pin down what was happening to the continent’s floating ice and how it might change in the future as the planet warms. She said while most climate models suggested sea ice would drop around Antarctica in the future, there was still “low confidence” in the results. “But it’s a critical issue because the ice has a lot of impacts on the global climate and on the marine life down there,” she said. • This article was amended on 23 February 2022 to correct a clamour/clammer homophone.The largest expanse of Roman mosaic found in London for more than half a century has been unearthed at a site believed to have been a venue for high-ranking officials to lounge in while being served food and drink. Dating from the late second century to the early third century, the mosaic’s flowers and geometric patterns were a thrilling, once-in-a-lifetime find, said Antonietta Lerz, of the Museum of London Archaeology (Mola). It was discovered about a month ago at a construction site near London Bridge. The mosaic, which is eight metres long, will be lifted later this year for preservation and conservation work, with the eventual hope of it being publicly displayed. Its main panel features large, colourful flowers surrounded by bands incorporating a twisted-rope design, set within a red tessellated floor. There are also geometric elements and lotus flowers in the main mosaic and a smaller nearby panel. David Neal, an expert in Roman mosaic, has attributed the design of the larger panel to a team of mosaicists known as the Acanthus group, who developed a unique style. The smaller panel is a close parallel to one unearthed in Trier, Germany, suggesting that London artisans travelled abroad. The archaeologists from Mola, who have worked at the site since last June, believe the room housing the mosaic was a triclinium, containing dining couches on which people would recline to eat and drink while admiring the decorative flooring. The walls were also richly decorated. The triclinium may have been part of a Roman mansio, effectively an upmarket motel offering accommodation, dining and stabling to state officials and couriers travelling to and from Londinium across the river. The footprint of the building is still being uncovered, but it appears to have been a large complex around a central courtyard. Another large Roman building was also found at the site, which archaeologists say was likely to have been the private residence of a wealthy individual or family. Traces of lavishly painted walls, terrazzo and mosaic floors, coins and jewellery have been found. Among the items recovered are a decorated bronze brooch, a bone hairpin and a sewing needle. “These finds are associated with high-status women who were following the latest fashions and the latest hairstyles,” said Lerz. It was “the heyday of Roman London”, she added. “The buildings on this site were of very high status. The people living here were living the good life.” The site is being redeveloped as The Liberty of Southwark, a complex of offices, homes and shops that is a joint-venture by U+I and Transport for London (TfL).For the vast majority of travelers, stepping foot on an airplane entails a tremendous act of near-blind faith. We control our own cars, trains operate on set tracks at ground level, but flying requires us to put total trust in the expertise of a complete stranger to operate a machine too complex for us to understand. Every time these gargantuan hunks of metal don’t plummet screaming from the sky towards a certain fiery doom, it feels like a miracle, even if that’s how the majority of flights play out. Rory Kennedy’s damning new documentary Downfall: The Case Against Boeing takes a close look at two incidents included within the small number of flights when things go wrong, and shows us the tragedy that strikes when that sacred compact between passenger and airline is violated. “I fly a good deal, and the truth is I’ve got a bit of a fear of flying,” Kennedy tells the Guardian from behind the wheel of her car, talking transit in transit. “I like to think that when I walk down that jetway, the manufacturer of that plane is invested in keeping it up in the air, that the regulatory agencies focused on safety are doing in their job, and that at least in our country, the government is making sure the regulatory agencies enforce those safety measures. In this case, it seems that all of those agencies failed us.” The case she’s referring to is the horrifying account of two crashes related in their shared cause of a faulty part on the Boeing 737 Max model. On 29 October 2018, Indonesia’s Lion Air Flight 610 dove into the Java Sea and left behind 189 casualties; the following year, on 10 March, Ethiopian Airlines Flight 302 met a similar fate in a similar fashion, with a death toll of 157. After the first catastrophe, one might have expected Boeing to ground their Maxes until they could pinpoint the source of the malfunction. Instead, they shifted culpability to human error on the part of Lion Air, painted by the corporation’s spokespeople as an incompetent third-world operation. Americans certainly had nothing to worry about, they insisted, right up until the Ethiopian Airlines system failure further tarnished their reputation and got people asking whether the Max was really so rock-solid. Boeing was forced to halt the use of the jets, by which point they were already far past too late. “I followed the story of the two Max crashes, the brand-new 737s that crashed within five months of each other,” Kennedy says. “As one of our characters explains, that just doesn’t happen in modern aviation. It drew a lot of attention, including mine. I was surprised, given how similar the flight patterns were, and how the planes were both the exact same model. There was no weather incident, which caught my eye, as did Boeing’s response. I expected them to be deeply apologetic, to ground the planes immediately and commit to figuring out what’s wrong with them. They took 346 lives. But instead, it seemed like Boeing was focused on blaming the pilots for what happened. I felt like there was a lot more to the story, and wanted to know what happened, with the intention to prevent something like this from happening again.” The trenchant film (now streaming on Netflix following a well-received debut through Sundance back in January) details her muckraking, which forms the picture of a business willing to gamble with lives for the sake of profit. We learn that Boeing executives knew full well about the risks inherent to the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System, a small wind gauge that can make the plane’s auto-stabilizers go haywire if damaged. Kennedy delves deep into the mechanical nitty-gritty at play, rendering intricate technical processes palatable for those of us lacking a background in advanced engineering. “I’m not an airplane pilot,” she says. “These terms and concepts were foreign to me, too. I wanted to make them accessible to somebody like me. We worked really hard to fully understand them, and then turn them into information that I hope is digestible to laypeople. At the same time, there’s also an element of determining how much audiences needed to know, because we could’ve gone deeper, but you don’t want to overload your viewer.” She sticks to the major bullet points of Boeing’s malfeasance, chief among them the company’s inkling of how wrong things could go. “The thing that was most shocking to me was the report that came out after the first crash, where the FAA and Boeing were aware that this aircraft had a likelihood of crashing 15 times over the course of its life, a catastrophe on average every two years,” Kennedy says. “They knew that and kept the planes in the air, banking on the hope that they’d create a fix before another plane crashed. Who makes that choice?!” Her rhetorical question has a non-rhetorical answer: Boeing knowingly set themselves up for an expensive, image-destroying scandal because they were already developing a fix for the MCAS, and had banked that nothing would happen before they could implement it. The staggering callousness and hubris behind this decision go hand in hand with greed, an imperative to keep profit margins sky-high at the cost of everything else. Kennedy’s film conveys that Boeing was once the gold standard of American industry, bringing international travel to the world and getting Nasa to the moon by upholding a rigorous degree of excellence on the factory floor. But the ascendance of competitor Airbus (which now holds a dominant market share) put the fear of god in Boeing’s shareholders and CEO, who issued the dual mandate of “cheaper” and “faster”. “It’s the profit-driven running of companies into the ground,” Kennedy says. “You can look at the energy industry, fossil fuels, the destruction of the environment, all for the sake of profit. You can see it in healthcare, media. Part of my interest in making this film was the hope that it could rise to something bigger. We need to be skeptical of all these industries. There were many decades when Boeing did extraordinary things by focusing on excellence and safety and ingenuity. Those three virtues were seen as the key to profit. It could work, and beautifully. And then they were taken over by a group that decided Wall Street was the end-all, be-all. There needs to be a balance in play, so you have to elect representatives that hold the companies responsible for the public interest, rather than just lining their own pocketbooks.” Kennedy and the air-safety activists passing through her film – investigative journalist Andy Pasztor, Congressman Peter DeFazio of the House Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure, grieving father Michael Stumo – request only that the regulators and manufacturers do their jobs. Likewise, the uppermost decision-makers need to recognize that maximizing quarter-to-quarter cashflow might look good on a stock report, but isn’t the key to longevity. Until then, we have no choice but to advocate for ourselves before depositing our helpless bodies in an aluminum canister on a wing and a prayer. “I researched airplane safety, and to get on a commercial airplane in most countries is such a safe form of travel,” she says. “I think it’s been 10 years where there have been no commercial airplane crashes, prior to the two, at least just in the United States. The thing to do is research what sort of plane you’ll be taking. I like JetBlue and Delta these days because they fly the A320. There are aircraft that I prefer to fly now. I’m not getting on a 737 Max based on the research I’ve done and the pilots I’ve spoken to, who have ongoing concerns about the safety of that plane.” • This article was amended on 23 February 2022. An earlier version said that Boeing “halted the use of the [747 Max] jets”. To clarify: Boeing was forced to halt the use of the jets after the Ethiopian Airlines crash, when an emergency order was issued by the US grounding the fleet. Downfall: The Case Against Boeing is available on Netflix nowThe director of the Whitworth Art Gallery is being asked to leave his post by the University of Manchester, after a row when a statement of solidarity with Palestine’s “liberation struggle” was removed from an exhibition of works by a human rights investigations agency. Alistair Hudson, who heads the Whitworth and Manchester Art Gallery, has been asked to leave by the university, the Guardian understands, after a series of complaints by UK Lawyers For Israel (UKLFI). The university explicitly cited his response to the fallout from an exhibition that denounced Israel’s military operations in Gaza and its “ethnic cleansing” of Palestinians, sources say, a move that, in turn, was criticised as “stifling open debate and taming political art”. UKLFI, which advocates for Israeli causes, told the Guardian it had “suggested that the university should take appropriate disciplinary action” against Hudson in the months after the exhibition closed. The controversy dates from August, when a statement of solidarity with Palestine that formed part of an exhibition by Forensic Architecture, a Turner prize-nominated investigative agency, was removed after a complaint by UKLFI. The group suggested the university could have breached its public sector equality duties by not considering the “impact of the inflammatory language and representations” in the Whitworth’s “Cloud Studies” exhibition on Jewish people in Manchester. The exhibition explored how pollution, chemical attacks and the aftermath of explosions affect marginalised people in Syria, Beirut, Louisiana and Indonesia, as well as Palestine. Forensic Architecture, whose digital models of crime scenes have been cited as evidence at the international criminal court, then demanded the immediate closure of its exhibit. Its founder, Eyal Weizman, a British-Israeli professor at Goldsmiths, expressed concerns about academic and artistic freedoms and stated the importance that the equality duty included Palestinians. The university, which runs the gallery, reversed its decision, reopening the exhibition and agreeing to display “different perspectives on the issues raised by the exhibition and help contextualise them”. Commenting on Hudson’s departure, Weizman said: “Alistair turned the Whitworth into an art space where the important questions of our time could be asked. His sacking is the last in series of bullying actions by the University of Manchester, which initially aimed at silencing our solidarity with Palestinians, then at stifling open debate and taming political art more generally. This move will shrink the space for art and artists.” Jonathan Turner, chief executive of UKLFI, said the group had “pointed out to the university that the director of the Whitworth Art Gallery had falsely assured the vice-chancellor that they had established the accuracy and legalities of the work presented in the Forensic Architecture exhibition”. “We suggested that the university should take appropriate disciplinary action,” Turner added. The group said the exhibition included inaccuracies, and claimed a freedom of information request “showed no attempt had been made to check its accuracy”. Forensic Architecture strongly refutes the suggestion of any inaccuracies in the exhibition. The agency has presented evidence in international and national courts and truth commissions. Their Turner-nominated piece investigated the fatal shooting of a Bedouin Palestinian, Yaakub Abu al-Qiyan, by Israeli police officers in 2017, questioning the official narrative of events. The former Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu in 2020 apologised for the killing. At the time of the nomination, UKLFI wrote to the Turner prize judges and the Tate director, arguing that the work lacked objectivity. Hudson, who replaced Maria Balshaw when she was appointed director of Tate in 2017, joined from the Middlesbrough Institute of Modern Art in 2018. He is also co-director of the Asociación de Arte Útil, which promotes the idea of “useful art” alongside the Cuban artist and activist Tania Bruguera. The Whitworth is currently exhibiting a solo show by Suzanne Lacy, a California artist whose previous exhibition at Manchester Art Gallery instigated an increase in cleaners’ wages at the institution. When Hudson was appointed, the university spoke of his “wealth of experience at the forefront of the culture sector”. Prof James Thompson, the vice-president for social responsibility at the time, praised Hudson’s dedication “to the idea of cultural institutions as a force for promoting social change”, which, he said, “fits precisely with the mission of the Whitworth”. A University of Manchester spokesperson said: “We absolutely uphold academic freedom. Staffing matters are strictly internal to the university and we never comment on questions of this nature.”Stephen Colbert On Monday evening, Stephen Colbert caught up on a weekend’s worth of potential third world war developments: Russia continues to amass troops on its border with Ukraine, and US intelligence reports point to a planned invasion of the country. On Saturday, Russian separatists in the eastern region of the country started shelling Ukrainian army positions, which US officials warned “could be the prelude to direct Russian military action”. “Now, call me old-fashioned, but once you’re shelling, that’s pretty much direct military action,” the Late Show host said. “Hey, hey, slow down you two! I’m worried this getting completely naked and bumping junk might lead to direct sexual action.” Outside observers said the shelling came exclusively from the separatists, but the Russian separatists claim there was shelling from both sides. “It’s a real he-shelled, she-shelled by the seashore [situation],” Colbert quipped. Russia has continued to downplay the situation; ambassador to the US Anatoly Antonov appeared on Face the Nation this weekend and said, “there is no invasion and there is no such plans … Russian troops are on sovereign Russian territory. We don’t threaten anyone.” “Yes, Russia’s not threatening anyone! That’s just how they show affection over there,” Colbert joked. “In Russia, if a boy surrounds your house with tanks, that is a prom-posal.” Vladimir Putin has already recognized the separatists as informal republics; in a recent speech, he declared the independence of Moscow-backed regions in eastern Ukraine and referred to them as “ancient Russian lands”. “So they’re independent, but they also belong to Russia,” said Colbert. “Putin’s just living the spirit of the old saying, ‘if you love something, let it go. If it doesn’t come back, surround it with 190,000 troops, then ask it again.’” Seth Meyers On Late Night, Seth Meyers dug into the botched unveiling of Donald Trump’s new alternative to Twitter, an app called “Truth Social”. The app launched over the weekend, with issues: select users who tried to create Truth Social accounts were repeatedly met with a red error warning that said “something went wrong, please try again”. “Though by the time you find yourself signing up for a Donald Trump social media site, something already went wrong,” said Meyers. “But I’m guessing they’ll try again – if you were first in line to sign up for Truth Social, you’ve probably got some free time on your hands,” he added, mocking a Truth Social user: “Well, I’m just sitting here, waiting for JFK Jr to reappear at the Meadowlands with Elvis and the Loch Ness monster to prove the election was stolen – I guess I’ll try logging in again!” “I really enjoy how vague the error message is: ‘something went wrong,’” he continued. “Like, even they don’t know what the problem is? Usually you get an error code or something, but Trump’s site just gives you a shrug emoji that says ‘what were you expecting, this thing is a clusterfuck!’” The snafu makes sense, Meyers continued, because the site is run by former GOP congressman Devin Nunes, who told Fox News last week that the site would be “fully operational” by the end of March. “By the end of March? This is the digital age!” Meyers laughed. “Everything is measured in nano-seconds and you’re moving at the speed of civil car letters home.” Jimmy Fallon And on the Tonight Show, Jimmy Fallon touched on an unfortunate headline from the Winter Olympics in Beijing: the Finnish cross country skier whose competition left him with a frozen penis. “He used it to his advantage though – for two of the turns, he didn’t even use a ski pole,” Fallon joked. “People could tell something was wrong when he was doing a handstand under the hand dryers in the men’s room.” “I feel for the guy, though,” he added. “He’s trained for years and now that’s what comes up when you Google him.” Fallon also discussed the crisis in Ukraine, where it appears all but certain that Russia will invade. “As we speak, Putin is flipping a coin like ‘heads I invade, tails I invade shirtless,’” Fallon said. “Putin’s about as undecided as when a server asks if you want a side salad or fries.”Gary Brooker, the lead singer of the rock band Procol Harum, whose 1967 hit A Whiter Shade of Pale mesmerised baby boomer fans with its psychedelic melancholy, has died at the age of 76. The pianist, composer and lyricist as well as frontman for the band had been treated for cancer. He died peacefully at home at the weekend. A statement on Procol Harum’s website described Brooker as “a brightly shining, irreplaceable light in the music industry”. It added: “Gary exhibited and developed a highly individual talent. His first single with Procol Harum, 1967’s A Whiter Shade of Pale, is widely regarded as defining the ‘summer of love’, yet it could scarcely have been more different from the characteristic records of that era …. “Gary’s voice and piano were the single defining constant of Procol’s 50-year international concert career. Without any stage antics or other gimmicks he was invariably the most watchable musician in the show.” But, the band said, Brooker’s “charisma was by no means confined to the stage. He lit up any room he entered, and his kindness to a multilingual family of fans was legendary. He was notable for his individuality, integrity, and occasionally stubborn eccentricity. His mordant wit, and appetite for the ridiculous, made him a priceless raconteur … “He was above all a devoted and loyal husband to Franky, whom he met in 1965 and married in 1968.” A Whiter Shade of Pale, written with Keith Reid, reached the top of the UK charts two weeks after it was released at the start of the “summer of love”, the hippy nirvana of sex, drugs and rock’n’roll that outraged and alarmed older generations. The single also dominated the European and US charts, selling more than 10m copies. It has been covered by other artists – including Annie Lennox and Billy Joel – more than 1,000 times. Its opening line, “We skipped the light fandango”, and other lyrics sparked debate among critics and fans over their meaning. Some believed it was the story of a doomed sexual encounter, others that it was an account of a hallucinogenic drugs trip. A few even believed it was a retelling of Chaucer’s Canterbury Tales. In 2006, Matthew Fisher, another member of the band, won his claim in the high court that he co-wrote the music to A Whiter Shade of Pale. Brooker appealed the decision, and the case eventually reached the law lords in 2009, who unanimously found in Fisher’s favour and said he was entitled to 40% of the copyright. Brooker said in 2014 that some of the inspiration for his composition came from Johann Sebastian Bach. “If you trace the chordal element, it does a bar or two of Bach’s Air on a G String before it veers off. That spark was all it took. I wasn’t consciously combining rock with classical, it’s just that Bach’s music was in me,” he told Uncut magazine. According to Procol Harum’s statement, Brooker, who grew up in Southend, Essex, later added angling, painting, inventing and owning a pub to his other interests. He was awarded an OBE in 2003 in recognition of charitable services.After all the tough talk of the past month, the sanctions imposed on Russia by the west are unlikely to lose Vladimir Putin much sleep. The response to Boris Johnson’s announcement that five of the less important Russian banks and three individuals would be targeted was: is that it? The most dramatic news was Germany’s decision to halt approval of the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline from Russia to western Europe. That will have an impact, but may end up affecting Germany more than it does Russia. The message from western capitals was that it was the plan all along to start small and then ratchet things up if Putin refuses to back down. Ben Wallace, the UK defence secretary, said there were several options to choose from. The west’s problem is that sanctions against Russia come at a cost, and that cost goes up as the regime is tightened. One suggestion, for example, has been to remove Russia from the Swift network, a messaging system linking banks that facilitates international trade. Such a move would certainly hurt the Russian economy because it would affect its ability to export its oil and gas. William Jackson of the Capital Economics consultancy notes Iran’s economy shrank by 7% when similar measures were imposed on Tehran. While Russia’s financial position is stronger than Iran’s, Jackson says the impact of tough sanctions might be to knock 4%-5% off Russia’s gross domestic product, push inflation above 10% and force the central bank to drive up interest rates to 14%. But cutting Russia out of Swift would hurt the west too. For a start, it would raise the obvious question of how to pay for Russian gas. What’s more, the global cost of energy would be certain to rise – perhaps sharply. So it looks likely that the west will adopt a step-by-step approach, leaving the toughest sanctions as a last resort. The most obvious way to ratchet things up a notch would be to extend the sanctions to a wider group of individuals in the hope that the oligarchs will put pressure on the Kremlin to back down if their assets are frozen. The three names announced by Johnson today were blacklisted by the US some years ago, which limits the impact of a UK designation. Targeting the Russian financial sector would be the next most obvious step. The UK could target the systemically important Russian banks – such as Sberbank and VTB – and could follow through on its threat to prevent Russia from selling its sovereign bonds on the London market. Calibrating the response is not going to be easy, in part because Putin might respond to sanctions by strengthening Russia’s ties with China and in part because the countries imposing the sanctions are already grappling with the highest inflation in decades. As Kristalina Georgieva, the managing director of the International Monetary Fund, pointed out to the Guardian, the crisis in Ukraine is happening at a time when the world economy is only just emerging from the pandemic. “It adds to uncertainty when there is already plenty of it.”This year marks the 25th anniversary of World Book Day, a celebration of books and reading celebrated in 100 countries worldwide. It is usually an opportunity for young bibliophiles to become their favourite book character for the day, but it is also a chance for older book lovers to visit literary destinations associated with favourite authors. So whether it is a hop across the channel to see Montreuil-sur-Mer, where Victor Hugo found inspiration for Les Misérables, or whether you are staying closer to home for a visit to Shakespeare’s birthplace in Stratford-upon-Avon, we would like to hear about your favourite literary destinations across the UK and Europe. If you have a relevant photo, do send it in – but it’s your words that will be judged for the competition. Keep your tip to about 100 words The best tip of the week, chosen by Tom Hall of Lonely Planet, will win a £200 voucher to stay at a Sawday’s property – the company has more than 3,000 in the UK and Europe. The best tips will appear on the Guardian Travel website, and maybe in the paper, too. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here. We’re sorry, but for legal reasons you must be a UK resident to enter this competition. The competition closes on 1 March at 9am Have a look at our past winners and other tips Read the terms and conditions here If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy hereI never expected my home town of Carrickfergus to be mentioned by Marina Hyde (18 February). While growing up, there was a road called Kennedy Drive, named after JFK I believe. During the Troubles it was changed to Prince William Way after perceived offence caused by Senator Edward Kennedy. Perhaps Prince Andrew Way could be renamed Kennedy Drive? David Sinclair Edinburgh • Colin Hartley reminded me of when I taught in Swaziland (Letters, 21 February) . On arrival at school at the start of the week, the children took off their shoes, and at the end of the week, I had to remind them to take them home. While working in the bush, my geologist husband had Swazi helpers who went barefoot until he got wellingtons issued to them. Treading on a black mamba would have been fatal. Veronica Edwards Malvern, Worcestershire • Rosemary Gill won’t get a sensible definition of “woke” from her MP because none exists (Letters, 21 February). Throughout history and literature, there has never been a need to describe in negative terms qualities such as decency, fairness and sensitivity. William Todd Wetherby, West Yorkshire • What is the antonym of woke? Bigoted? Nick Hart St Neot, Cornwall • I’ve used Frank Newhofer’s technique for falling asleep for years (Letters, 20 February), listing countries in alphabetical order. I call it “Azerbaijan to Zambia”, and it never fails. Only once have I got as far as Denmark. The Rev Jenny Welsh London • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.We are sorry to cast doubt on the story of the U-boat captain who spared the Dunera and its cargo of internees from being sunk in July 1940 (Letters, 18 February), but it goes against the known facts. In the first place, the logbook of the U-56 was not “released in 1980”; along with numerous other U-boat logbooks, it has been held in the Naval Historical Branch of the Ministry of Defence since the second world war and was available to researchers such as ourselves during the 1970s. In his log, the U-56’s captain, Oberleutnant Harms, does describe firing two torpedoes at the Dunera, one missing, the other failing to explode. But he wrote nothing about sending out divers to retrieve jettisoned luggage or giving the Dunera safe passage. This fanciful story was related by Benzion Patkin in his book, The Dunera Internees (1979), who named the U-boat captain as one SC Clerque. Searches of the archives failed to find a U-boat captain of this name. We told all this in our own book about the wartime internment of refugees, Collar the Lot! (1980), which contains a full account of the Dunera’s voyage. We interviewed four of the deportees, two of whom had survived the sinking of the Arandora Star. Although internees’ luggage was looted, none said it had been thrown overboard, nor was this recorded in a statement compiled by the internees when they reached Australia. For the record, the log of Günther Prien, the captain of U-47 who sank the Arandora Star, is in the naval archives too. Peter and Leni Gillman London • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.There was excess demand for psychological support before Covid hit, and your article (Millions in England face ‘second pandemic’ of mental health issues, 21 February) highlights the impact the pandemic is having on the nation’s mental health. We need investment now to expand the mental health workforce in the NHS, schools, charities and voluntary services to support the millions who are experiencing mental health problems. It’s not simply a shortage of workers or delays in training them that’s preventing people accessing services, but a lack of political will and funds to bring existing skilled and experienced professionals into the workforce in greater numbers. We represent 45,000 counsellors and psychotherapists who are ready to enter the workforce now to support the country’s mental health. We know that counselling can have a transformative effect, and the public know that too. Our public perceptions survey with YouGov found that 85% of people in the UK think that it’s a good idea to seek counselling or psychotherapy for a problem before it gets out of hand. Ultimately, early help is key and too few people are able to access services quickly. Investing in life-changing mental health services is critical to our recovery from the pandemic, and will deliver extensive cost-saving benefits to government budgets as well as tackling the deep-rooted inequalities that hold so many of our fellow citizens back. We’re committed to increasing access to therapy services. We now need the government and those who fund counselling services to match that commitment to enable the recruitment of more counsellors and psychotherapists. Dr Hadyn Williams Chief executive, British Association for Counselling and Psychotherapy • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Thank you for drawing attention to the ongoing neglect of the “other half” of 16- to 18-year-olds, those not on A-level courses in school sixth forms (Editorial, 20 February). I have been watching with dismay successive examples of this in my local area. Our young people used to be served by a tertiary college that offered both A-level and vocational courses. Then the local authority spent many millions from its reserves to create sixth forms in all the local secondary schools. All chose to be selective. When the authority scrutinised the effect of the changes in 2018, it only reported on how the sixth forms were doing. Nothing was said about the college. This was of course not under the control of the council, but neither were the schools, all academies by then. In 2020, officers prepared a report for committee on “post-16 provision and outcomes”, but the only outcomes mentioned were A-levels. In 2021, financial problems at the college caused it to propose a merger with two others some distance away. Despite the potential significance of this for the “other half” of local 16- to 18-year-olds, officers responded to the required consultation without troubling the relevant committee. The creation of the sixth forms might or might not have been a good use of council money, but the consequences in terms of political attention paid to the “other half” have been profound. Geoffrey Stanton London • Your editorial states that “the mixed-ability principle was never extended to higher education, which continues to be highly stratified”. The answer to any inequality-reducing strategy does not simply rely on creaming off students at 16-plus on the basis of academic achievement. You rightly point to the hugely significant role that could be played by local further education and tertiary colleges in improving access to both higher education and vocational education and training. The case for increased funding and support for colleges is a strong one. I continue to be surprised that little or no attention in this debate has been given to the truly comprehensive model of tertiary colleges. They provided a natural progression for the primary-secondary-tertiary model for comprehensive state education. Graham Phillips Henley-on-Thames, Oxfordshire • The government’s notion of elite sixth forms is indeed a gimmick, but your editorial is mistaken in suggesting that in England there is a straightforward division between a hierarchical system of higher education and an egalitarian system of schooling. Leaving aside that most children of the rich and powerful do not attend state schools, the truth is that the state education system is nowhere near egalitarian. Not only does it continue to maintain a formal system of selective secondary schooling whose malign effects reach further than the number of such schools might suggest, but the doctrine of “parental choice” ensures that all schools exist in a market-driven hierarchy in which the least “desirable” children are concentrated in the least “desirable” schools and vice versa. The Augar review does not address the deeper need for all forms of post-16 education to have equal status. Our inability to shake off our obsession with hierarchy means we are stuck with an educational model designed for the 1930s, which does not augur well for our future. Michael Pyke Lichfield, Staffordshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.My grandmother, Audrey Pratt, who has died aged 100, was a talented illustrator and made a great contribution to the Women’s Auxiliary Air Force during the second world war. As a specially trained tracker of missing aircraft, her skills were called upon throughout the night of 6 June 1944, D-day, to plot the course of Royal Navy boats during the Normandy landings. Audrey was born in Liverpool to James Upton-Prowse, an architect and keen watercolourist, and his wife, Phoebe (nee Mackrell). She was the eldest of three children. By 1927 the family had moved to Leeds, where Audrey attended Chapel Allerton girls’ school. Her love of art developed on holidays to Whitby, where she would join her father sketching on the cliffs. In 1938 she won a scholarship to Leeds Art College, but at the same time was offered a position at the local library, which she decided to take up. She fell in love with a fellow library assistant, Gordon Rogers, but he joined up in 1939 and the following year was killed during the evacuation of Dunkirk, aged 20. In 1942 Audrey received a visit from an army officer, Gordon Pratt, who had served alongside Rogers and had written to her at the time of his death. As it was Audrey’s half-day, they spent a few hours together. Audrey described much laughter on that afternoon, and although they did not meet again for almost four years, they wrote to each other often. By the time they were reunited in 1945, they had been engaged to be married for a year. In August 1942 Audrey began training at RAF Innsworth for the WAAF, and from there went to Leighton Buzzard as a special duties clerk. She developed a flair for “dead reckoning”, where she was able to interpret the whereabouts of aircraft using the controller’s instructions to the pilot together with the Craig computer, which made allowances for wind speed and direction. This plotting was vital for the radar stations if the planes they were monitoring disappeared due to interference. Because of her skills in this area, Audrey was transferred to the radar station at RAF Kingswear, where she worked through the night on D-day. In 1945, Audrey was sent to a base in Patrington, near Hull. There she won a competition to design and decorate the officer’s canteen and was then commissioned to paint other murals, including the bar of the officers’ mess at RAF Church Fenton, near Tadcaster. After the war, in 1946 Audrey and Gordon married and moved to Merseyside. They had three children. In 1966 Audrey began work for the Liverpool regional hospital board, as a research assistant on a patient survey. Her flair for visual art was again put to good use providing graphs and illustrations to analyse the data. Audrey and Gordon both retired in 1979 and began travelling abroad. In 1986 Gordon was diagnosed with Parkinson’s disease; he died in 1991. Audrey constantly sought out new challenges, doing U3A courses, attending WAAF reunions, taking part in quizzes and volunteering at her local amateur dramatic society. She is survived by her three children, Stephen, Paula and Richard, six grandchildren and seven great-grandchildren.Vladimir Putin’s lengthy speech justifying the dismemberment of Ukraine said much about him but also contains chilling warnings for the rest of Europe. And European states must heed those warnings if they do not wish to be the next victims of the Russian president’s imperial ambition. It’s long been known that Putin hankers for a lost age of Russian dominance over its neighbours. Calling the collapse of the USSR the “greatest geopolitical catastrophe of the 20th century” is one of his most-quoted (and most misunderstood) historical judgments. In his speech, Putin reached back far further than the cold war to find his grievances. He stated clearly that the processes that led to Russia losing territory a century ago must be reversed. He pointed out what he said were catastrophic mistakes by the Bolsheviks in recognising Ukraine as a republic, and ceding land to end the war with Germany in 1918. He lamented the loss not of the Soviet Union, but of the “territory of the former Russian empire”. The speech highlighted how unconstrained power, and perhaps the absence of anybody brave enough to disagree with him, has led Putin further into his own version of reality – and he has drawn Russia’s decision-making apparatus with him. The bizarre circus of his security council meeting broadcast earlier the same day, where Russia’s foreign intelligence chief seemed to freeze in fear while Putin openly mocked him, was a terrifying demonstration of how Moscow’s actions are driven by ideas and processes that have nothing in common with the west – and put it on an inevitable collision course with Europe. Putin’s warped description of the way countries achieved their independence from Russian rule is aimed at Ukraine, but there is little in it that could not also be applied to Poland, Finland and the Baltic states. Putin’s interpretation of history may be unrecognisable to the west, but it forms the framework for Russia’s current decisions and so cannot be ignored. This isn’t, of course, the first time Putin has said these things. But he has now removed all doubt that he is also intent on acting on them. There is also little doubt that the west has failed utterly in deterring Russia. Moscow’s newfound confidence has been clearly on display recently in instances such as the open blackmail of Europe over the Nord Stream 2 pipeline, or testing its capability to destroy western satellites. It is barely going through the motions of justifying its latest act of aggression. A less self-assured Russia would make some attempt to make the pretext for military action convincing. This disregard for reputation, credibility and the reactions of the international community is another chilling indication that Russia will not be constrained by the norms and standards of behaviour that the rest of Europe takes for granted. All in all, there are few grounds to assume that Putin will stop at Ukraine. It’s easy to forget that Russia’s “draft treaties” from December demand rolling back western protection not only from the territories of the former Soviet Union, but all the countries of the former Warsaw Pact too. This does not mean Russia cannot be stopped. In countless studies analysing its ambition and how it planned to set about realising it, I and other Russia-watchers have pointed out that real and credible military force – and the demonstrated will to use it – is the western countermeasure that genuinely causes Russia to think twice and step back from aggression. That countermeasure was not offered to Ukraine, and now Russia is moving in. Threats that the west will help Ukrainian resistance in the event of occupation may ring hollow in Moscow, given Russia’s 100% success rate in suppressing resistance movements of this kind. Promising to extend Ukraine’s agony after it has been invaded is no substitute for real and tangible support to prevent it happening in the first place. And promises that Russia will face “another Chechnya” are particularly unhelpful if used unwisely. After all, in Chechnya, Russia won – and won so convincingly that the approach it eventually took was used as a template for operations in Syria. Russia prosecutes counterinsurgency campaigns and suppresses resistance with medieval viciousness because it knows this is effective. There is no reason to think the terrorising of civilian populations seen in Chechnya and Syria would not also be visited on the people of Ukraine. In his speech, Putin said that he had the names of supposed anti-Russian elements in Odessa, who would be found and punished. Which was chillingly close to a recent US disclosure that Russia had drawn up a list of individuals in Ukraine to be rounded up or eliminated. This too is precisely in line with Moscow’s past practice in Poland, the Baltic states and all the other European territories it occupied in the last century. It also means western countries are right to urge their citizens to leave Ukraine, as tragic as it may be for those with deep roots there. By staying, they make themselves targets. It may be too late to save Ukraine. But it is not too late to bolster the next line of defence against Putin’s imperial ambitions. Other frontline states urgently need help from their western allies, partners and friends. This help should come not only in the form of closing specific military vulnerabilities and capability gaps, but also in the simple presence of allied forces – building on the successful example of Nato’s multinational battalions in the Baltic states and Poland. This means the UK too must urgently review its approach to defence. The move to partnering with and enabling other armies must not come at the expense of the long overdue reconstruction of the UK’s own land power. The sad fact is that whatever the UK’s vision of future conflict may be, the enemy also gets a vote – and a force that cannot be deployed, and is built on the assumption it will not suffer losses or attrition, presents no deterrent to Russia. Keir Giles works with the Russia and Eurasia programme of Chatham House. He is the author of Moscow Rules: What Drives Russia to Confront the WestSubversive, liberating, violent, transgressive and revolutionary, surrealism was always more than a parade of melting watches and trains chuffing out of fireplaces. It was also more than a European phenomenon. For a movement that officially began in Paris in 1924, with the publication of the first Manifesto of Surrealism, its ideas travelled around the world remarkably quickly to Osaka and Bogotá, Mexico and Manila, to Cairo and to Greenwich Village. Co-produced by Tate Modern and the Metropolitan Museum in New York, Surrealism Beyond Borders is filled with unlikely conjunctions and unsettling objects, Freudian dreamworlds, nightmares and fantasies. So surreal, so predictable. Where this exhibition – and its enormous catalogue – differs from previous surveys is in showing how expansive, sprawling and diverse a movement surrealism was, and how, emerging in the aftermath of the first world war, its influence continued through the century, in art produced in postwar Japan and Korea, in the black power movement and the protests at the 1968 Chicago Democratic Convention, and in the May 1968 protests and strikes in France. With its substitutions, its impossible juxtapositions, collisions and surprises, surrealism is with us still. What began as an avant garde movement (how quaint the term now sounds) has now become ubiquitous. The compendious, fascinating catalogue takes us from the Bureau of Surrealist Research in Paris to Sufism and surrealism in Turkey, and from surrealism in Brazil to the Philippines. Along the way we meet jazz musicians and poets, Leon Trotsky and a Vodou priest, surrealism’s fellow-travellers and oddball loners, feminists and revolutionaries, visionaries and misogynists. Sean O’Hanlan writes in the catalogue of “a multifarious, polyphonic surrealism … a shifting, transnational assemblage from its very origins”, which is exactly what this exhibition presents. The rooms are filled with individual and group projects, and unlikely meetings and juxtapositions that are almost surreal in themselves. Ted Joans, jazz trumpeter, poet, painter and black power activist said that “jazz is my religion and surrealism my point of view”. Joans knew everyone, and first met André Breton at a bus stop in Paris in 1960. Joans’s Long Distance, an “exquisite corpse” drawing, produced over 30 years and involving 132 participants on three continents in its creation, concertinas its way along a wall for over 30ft. Among its contributors were writers John Ashbery, Michel Leiris and William Burroughs, artists Dorothea Tanning, David Hammons, Bruce Conner and a host of others. Spidery, sexy, automatist, this rambling collective drawing in which each of the file-card sized folds, produced by a different contributor, is a spontaneous compound trace of a kind of group unconscious. For a while, Joans shared an apartment with Charlie Parker, and commemorated him in Bird Lives, a 1958 painted black silhouette, seen from behind, hunched over his alto sax. In a film, we see Jones with sax player Archie Shepp, performing with Tuareg musicians at a Pan-African cultural festival in 1969. Other films here include New Zealand experimental film-maker Len Lye’s 1929 hand-drawn animation using Oceanic abstract motifs (it looks as fresh as the day it was made) and the great Czech animator and film-maker Jan Švankmajer’s 1968 stop-motion and live action Byt, which follows a terrified man racketing around his small Prague flat, which seems to conspire against him in various violent and absurd ways. That year saw the Prague Spring, and its suppression by invading Soviet troops. Filled with objects and drawings, photographs, films and much besides, almost everywhere you look there are terrible and alarming paintings, biomorphs with bristly spiky bits, droopy testicular ovoids, monuments in spooky deserted piazzas, disassembled bodies, Enrico Baj’s monstrous Body Snatcher terrorising a kitsch Swiss landscape, Yves Tanguy’s unctuous, slithery hinterlands. Along the way more familiar works remind us of the wearily familiar surrealist canon – Salvador Dalí’s telephone with a lobster for a hand-piece and Magritte’s locomotive in the fireplace, Picasso’s Three Dancers (to my mind, barely a surrealist painting at all) and a smudgy Arshile Gorky painting, whose presence here feels redundant. Reduced to a black, draped unrecognisable presence, the British-born surrealist Leonora Carrington stands among draped furniture and beside a lit candle in a room in Mexico City in 1962, photographed by Hungarian artist Kati Horna. Horna also partly inspired her friend Remedios Varo’s autobiographical 1961 triptych which recalls Varo’s strict Catholic upbringing in Spain, the weaving of a mantle for the world by a group of female artisans, and a depiction of the artist leaving Spain for Mexico. The paintings (reunited for the first time in many years) have the feel of a feminist, medievalist fairytale. The shadow of a crucifix falls across a city square in which a gigantic woman’s head stares in two directions at once, in a painting by Philippine artist Hernando R Ocampo. Painted in 1939, Ocampo mixes Catholic symbolism with surrealist strangeness, while Haitian Hector Hyppolite, a third-generation Vodou priest and painter (who, for a long time, used chicken feathers for brushes), applies a rather different kind of syncretism, between Catholic and Vodou symbolism, in his paintings. In one, there are knives and axes, a sacred heart, playing cards and a figure wielding a sword. A different kind of violence is implied in Alberto Giacometti’s 1930-31 The Cage, which manages to be both a delicately crafted, lathed and carved wood construction and also an image of dismemberment. Japanese surrealist Koga Harue, whose 1929 The Sea includes a swimsuit-clad Gloria Swanson, a cut-away view of a submarine, an airship, shoals of tropical fish, squid and the odd passing gull. What fun this painting is. Using found printed images as source material, Koga repainted and amalgamated them into a vision of technological advancement and pleasure, painted with almost photorealist finesse. Although criticised in Japan at the time as failing to reflect the realities of modern society, Koga was doing precisely the opposite. If this was surrealism, it was also pop art before the term existed, in the same way that Joseph Cornell’s little boxes of movie star mementoes and highly personal trinkets straddle both surrealist and pop sensibilities. In Okanoue Toshiko’s 1953 photo-collage The Call, an elegant Japanese woman sits in a room, dwarfing her surroundings. She seems as disquieted as a Hitchcock heroine. Outside the room is a raging sea. Amid the waves, a wolf howls. I know how it felt. Full of discoveries, Surrealism Beyond Borders is a tremendous work of scholarship, bringing together so many artists, so many essayists, so many threads and tangents, but indigestible as an exhibition. We travel too far, too quickly, with too many borders to cross. Surrealism Beyond Borders is at Tate Modern, London, from 24 February to 29 August. • This article was amended on 23 February 2022. In an earlier version, Sean O’Hanlan was misnamed as Sean O’Hagan.If the Russian tanks massed just a few dozen miles away begin moving right up to the Ukrainian border, Oleh Synehubov will receive a phone call, and immediately begin to implement a crisis plan. “There is a clear plan of action,” said Synehubov, the governor of Kharkiv region, in an interview on Monday at Kharkiv’s imposing, Stalin-era administration building. He was speaking just an hour before Russian television aired footage of a Russian security council meeting, at which Vladimir Putin set in motion the recognition of separatist republics in east Ukraine and made thinly veiled threats of a major war against the rest of the country. Kharkiv, a largely Russian-speaking city of nearly 1.5 million inhabitants, sits just 20 miles away from the border with Russia, and is seen as one of the main possible targets for Putin. Back in 2014, the initial Kremlin plan after the Maidan protests in Kyiv – quickly abandoned as unrealistic – was to make Kharkiv the capital of an east Ukrainian state. Now, in Belgorod region, just the other side of the border, TikTok videos and satellite imagery show Russian armoured vehicles and troops moving ever closer to Ukraine. At the first sign of “anomalous” activity at the border, said Synehubov, an operation will be launched to warn local people of an impending Russian attack. “There will be television, radio and internet announcements, messages to mobile phones, sirens will sound, patrol cars and fire engines will go through the city with loudspeakers to tell people what to do,” he said. Special measures would be taken at military sites and other strategic locations, and efforts would be made to evacuate places such as care homes and schools. The exact plan, whether the orders to people were to find the nearest bomb shelter, or whether an evacuation would be instigated, would depend on the kind of invasion, he said. “If it’s an artillery attack, then it’s clear everyone has to go to bomb shelters, if it’s a full-scale invasion then we are already in a zone of military action and there would be an evacuation.” Synehubov said he hoped the plan would never be put into action, noting that the regional government is attempting to carry on as normal, with the local parliament sitting on Thursday to determine the budget. But Monday’s security council meeting, followed by Putin’s angry speech, appeared to make the prospect of war come a little more sharply into focus. On Tuesday Putin said that Russia will support the territorial claims of its proxy states in east Ukraine, two-thirds of which is currently controlled by Kyiv. This scenario brings into play towns like Mariupol, Kramatorsk and Slovyansk, where in 2014 local separatists and their Russian backers briefly seized control, but were later won back by Kyiv. Slovyansk and Kramatorsk, two towns north of Donetsk, were among the first places to be captured by groups of angry local people, coordinated by shady Russian operatives, back in the late spring of 2014. Now, they are proudly Ukrainian towns, filled with yellow-blue flags. In Mariupol, where there were pitched battles in the streets during May 2014 between separatist supporters and Ukrainian forces, oligarch Rinat Akhmetov and others have poured money in, to rejuvenate the Soviet feel of the industrial town. In other places, though, life is still tough, and exacerbated by conflict. Many of the young people have left: fleeing for a safer and better life either in Russia or in other parts of Ukraine. Places like Zolote, on the Ukrainian side of the frontline, feel like ghost towns, characterised by empty, decaying apartment blocks, muddy roads and a sense of despair, while the nights are frequently punctuated with the sound of artillery. “Ukraine needs to do a lot more to show people we are serious about providing opportunities for them,” said Iryna Vereschuk, the deputy prime minister in charge of reintegrating the separatist territories. Under the surface, there are still some people, particularly among older generations, who say they would welcome a Russian takeover. “I don’t think many people have changed their minds since 2014, I think it’s just buried deep under the surface. If the Russians came, many people would greet them with flowers,” said one 52-year-old resident of Kramatorsk, who did not want to be named. But the percentages have changed: some of those who backed separatists in 2014 later left for Russia, while others changed their minds after seeing the miserable existence in the separatist republics over recent years. Oleksiy Vukolov, a Ukrainian army commander responsible for the front in Luhansk region, estimated about 30% of the local population on the Ukrainian side of the lines had “separatist feelings in their heads”, he said. The one thing that everyone agrees on is that nobody in the region has a desire for further conflict. Putin, at the same time as he promises to “defend” these people, is promising just that. If Russian forces move against Mariupol, Kramatorsk and other Donbas towns, it could be the pretext for Putin to launch a major war against Kharkiv, Odessa and perhaps even the capital of Ukraine, Kyiv. There, local leaders are adamant that the city, with a large student population, would strongly resist a Russian invasion. Outside Synehubov’s office, a Ukraine flag is mounted on the wall in a glass case: it was saved from the building in 2014 when it was briefly seized by separatists. It later went on a tour of the frontline and now hangs proudly on display. Even though many people in Kharkiv would like to see Ukraine and Russia have good relations, Synehubov said opinions have changed drastically since 2014. “Back then, in Kharkiv people didn’t understand what was happening in Kyiv, what was happening in Donbas, and the Russians were waging a very big information war. Now, there is a unified opinion that Kharkiv is a Ukrainian city and it’s part of Ukraine. The things that happened in Crimea, in Donbas, it just can’t happen here.”Hundreds of customers of First Direct have been victims of fraudsters who have used their card details to place orders at Nando’s. Cardholders received notifications of the payments last week, with some reporting that more than £100 had been spent on their account apparently at the fast food chain’s website. One customer said she received a text from the bank querying a £41.98 payment to the chain, while on online forums others said they had spotted multiple transactions on their account. In an email seen by the Guardian, the bank told a cardholder who had been defrauded: “Unfortunately, many customers including customers from other banking institutions, were victims of fraudulent transactions to Nando’s.” It added that it was “experiencing a high volume of fraudulent transactions to this retailer at the moment”. On the Moneysavingexpert website one First Direct customer said that after being alerted to a suspicious transaction from Nando’s for £26, they called the bank. “They had already paid out £114 in 6 transactions over 4 days, all to Nando’s, so the fraudster got away with £114 before FD thought to inform me,” the person said. A First Direct spokesperson said: “We are aware of some low-value unauthorised retail transactions appearing on a small number of our customers’ cards. “We want to reassure impacted customers that they will not be left out of pocket and apologise for any inconvenience caused. We take our customers’ security very seriously and will be reaching out to affected customers in the coming days.” The spokesperson advised customers to check their statements regularly and get in touch if they notice any suspicious activity. A Nando’s spokesperson: “We are aware of an increase in payment fraud related to a small number of bank cards being made at Nando’s. We are working closely with the card issuing bank to support affected customers. “We have robust security controls in place around customer accounts and payments. As with most online retailers, we apply further controls on a risk-assessed basis. Due to the nature of the incident, out of an abundance of caution, we are subjecting all payments to these further controls while the cause of this issue is being addressed.”Kyle Rittenhouse, the teen who shot dead two men and injured another during anti-racism protests in Kenosha, Wisconsin, in 2020, has announced the formation of a group to fund lawsuits against reporters – and also Whoopi Goldberg. In November, after a controversial trial, Rittenhouse was found not guilty on all charges related to the shootings, which he carried out with an assault rifle while purportedly providing security in the protest-racked city. He has since emerged as a rightwing celebrity. He spoke to Tucker Carlson on Fox News on Monday night. “Me and my team have decided to launch the Media Accountability Project,” Rittenhouse said, “as a tool to help fundraise and hold the media accountable for the lies they say and deal with them in court”. Carlson asked if “like the Covington Catholic kids” – high-schoolers from Kentucky who became embroiled in controversial events on the National Mall in Washington in 2019 – “you will be suing news organisations that maliciously lie about people who are in the news?” “Yes, sir,” Rittenhouse said. “We’re going to be holding them accountable, Tucker.” Rittenhouse, 19, repeatedly drank from a water bottle and added: “I don’t want to see anybody else have to deal with what I went through. So I want to hold them accountable for what they did to me, because I don’t want to see anybody have to go through what I went through.” Carlson asked if Rittenhouse had any particular targets. “Well,” he said, “right now we’re looking at quite a few politicians, celebrities, athletes. Whoopi Goldberg is on the list. She called me a murderer, after I was acquitted by a jury of my peers.” Goldberg, a co-host of The View on ABC, said of Rittenhouse: “Even all the excuses in the world does not change the fact that three people got shot. Two people were murdered. To me it’s murder. I’m sorry.” Rittenhouse said: “Don’t forget about Cenk [Uygur] from the Young Turks, he called me a murderer before I was acquitted and continues to call me a murderer.” Most observers agree such speech is protected under the first amendment to the US constitution. David Shuster, a former MSNBC anchor now with Young Turks, tweeted: “The courts have long established that calling somebody a ‘murderer’ is an opinion and a legal right, even after the person is found ‘not guilty’.” “At that point, one can still call them a murderer, just not a ‘convicted murderer’. Nobody has called Rittenhouse that. He has no case.” Rittenhouse shot the three men at a protest over the shooting by a white police officer of a Black man, Jacob Blake. The case was racially charged but the men Rittenhouse shot were white. He told Carlson he would also target people who called him a white supremacist. “We are going to hold everybody who’s lied about me accountable, such as everybody who’s lied, called me a white supremacist. They’re all going to be held accountable, and we’re going to handle them in a courtroom.” Rittenhouse’s announcement comes amid heightened rightwing rhetoric over perceived mistreatment by the mainstream press. Earlier this month, the former Alaska governor and vice-presidential pick Sarah Palin lost a defamation case against the New York Times, over an op ed about gun violence. Many on the right think US defamation and libel law should be changed. Some think the supreme court, dominated 6-3 by conservatives, may soon be open to such a shift. Some on the left have hinted at counter-measures. Last week, both Hillary Clinton and Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez suggested that attacks by Fox News anchors might be actionable in court. On Monday night, Rittenhouse also gave a web address for donations. Carlson promoted his coverage of Rittenhouse on the streaming service Fox Nation.The French far-right presidential candidate Marine Le Pen has postponed several campaign events because she is yet to secure the 500 endorsements from elected officials needed to qualify for the first round of the vote. Le Pen, the leader of the nationalist-populist National Rally, is lying second in the polls and is widely considered to be Emmanuel Macron’s most likely opponent in a second-round runoff on 24 April. But Le Pen’s team said on Tuesday she was postponing two events – a press conference on her education policy scheduled for Wednesday and a trip to the northern Somme region on Saturday – to try to drum up more signatures before the deadline in 10 days’ time. All candidates in France’s presidential race must secure the endorsement of at least 500 of more than 40,000 MPs, MEPs, senators, regional councillors and mayors, from at least 30 different départements and overseas territories, before 6pm on 4 March. The requirement, introduced by Charles de Gaulle in 1962 with a threshold of 100, was meant to limit the number of candidates but has been widely criticised over concerns it may exclude popular candidates from outside the political mainstream. Le Pen released a video on Monday appealing to mayors to endorse her run and saying she was still 50 names short. According to the Constitutional Council, which receives and verifies the signatures, she has 393 – more than 100 fewer than necessary. The far-right leader told French radio her position was “democratically terrifying”, calling on mayors to endorse her if they “find it really extremely serious that someone who can win this election cannot, for administrative reasons, take part”. Le Pen’s far-right rival, the TV polemicist Éric Zemmour, has cancelled a planned trip to the Indian Ocean island of Réunion, insisting he was “not suspending my campaign but shrinking it, because we still do not have these endorsements”. Zemmour, who is only marginally behind Le Pen in the polls, has 350 signatures, while Jean-Luc Mélenchon, the leader of the radical-left France Unbowed, polling at 11%, is short of about 60 endorsements, according to the council’s latest list. The prime minister, Jean Castex, appealed to elected officials on Monday to endorse candidates, saying only 10,000 out of the 42,000 who were eligible had done so. “The act of endorsing a candidate is not automatically synonymous with political backing. It is also a democratic act,” Castex told MPs. He said he would meet local mayors’ associations to underline the importance of popular candidates being able to stand. Macron, who polls predict will win a second term regardless of whom he faces in the runoff, has yet to formally declare himself a candidate, having devoted the past days and weeks to frantic last-ditch diplomatic efforts to avert a war in Ukraine. He is expected to announce his candidacy next week. Analysts said on Tuesday that even if his hopes of preventing Russian tanks from rolling towards Kyiv were dashed, voters were likely to give him credit for having tried. “Even if he fails with the Russians, he will have emerged as leading the European effort,” Philippe Moreau Chevrolet, of the public relations firm MCBG, told Agence-France Presse, adding that the crisis had placed Macron at the centre of media attention and public debate and “completely removed the opposition from view”.Labour has called for a ban on the Russian state-backed broadcaster RT, accusing the channel of pumping out pro-Vladimir Putin “propaganda”. Keir Starmer, the Labour leader, told MPs that the Russian president’s “campaign of misinformation should be tackled”, starting with moves to prevent RT from “broadcasting its propaganda around the world”. The English-language channel is regulated by Ofcom, which said on Monday it would prioritise any complaints about any broadcast coverage of Ukraine “given the seriousness of the crisis”. “All licensees must observe Ofcom’s rules, including due accuracy and due impartiality,” an Ofcom spokesperson said. “If broadcasters break those rules, we will not hesitate to step in.” RT’s coverage of the situation in Ukraine has been overwhelmingly from a pro-Russian perspective, since Putin ordered his military to enter the Russian-controlled areas of Luhansk and Donetsk after a decision to recognise the self-proclaimed republics as independent territories. News segments also discussed the US, UK and EU responses to the crisis and showed footage of Johnson warning of the possibility of war and bringing in sanctions. But on-the-ground reports were largely from the perspective of celebrations in the territories, with a strapline and headline news of “fireworks, Russian flags, Donbass cheers Russian recognition”, interviews with jubilant residents, and Russian citizens who have “selflessly opened their doors” to refugees. The broadcaster also showcased a series of pro-Moscow and anti-Nato commentators on Tuesday, alongside a segment on the west’s “lies” about having previously promised not to expand Nato in the 1990s. Ofcom looked at complaints against RT as recently as earlier this month and decided not to investigate. It also decided not to take any action over RT’s broadcast licence in the wake of the Salisbury poisoning. At the time, it said state broadcasters “vary greatly in the extent to which they accept and conduct themselves according to UK and generally accepted international values” and which will “sometimes commit, or will have committed, acts which are contrary to these values”. It added: “In our judgment, it would be inappropriate for Ofcom always to place decisive weight on such matters in determining whether state-funded broadcasters were fit and proper to hold broadcast licences, independently of their broadcasting record. “If we did, many state-funded broadcasters [mostly those from states which may not share UK values] would be potentially not fit and proper. This would be a poorer outcome for UK audiences in light of our duties on plurality, diversity and freedom of expression.” In a section on RT, a commentator, Afshin Rattansi, responded to Starmer’s call for RT to be banned by saying Britain “has a long history of free speech” and suggesting anyone who thought it was propaganda could switch off. “We are still broadcasting here at the moment in Britain … We should be hoping that NGOs for free speech – from [Reporters Without Borders] and Amnesty International – will be there to defend this channel against Sir Keir Starmer and the British Labour party who want to ban free speech.” The presenter added that the channel’s mantra was to “question more” the mainstream narratives and asked whether western viewers would be getting only a one-sided perspective if RT was not broadcasting in their countries.Boris Johnson has announced a series of sanctions against Russia, imposing asset freezes on five major Russian banks and three high net worth individuals. But, as he took questions on his proposals from MPs for an hour and a half, many Tory and opposition MPs complained that his measures did not go far enough. (See 2.37pm.) Liz Truss, the foreign secretary, later said that subsequent sanctions might go “much further” (see 4.20pm) and in a separate debate James Cleverly, the Foreign Office minister, said the government would tighten sanctions even if President Putin did not step up the attack against Ukraine. (See 5.15pm.) Scotland’s system of mandatory vaccine passports for nightclubs and sports venues is to end next week, as Nicola Sturgeon moved to lift rules requiring face masks on buses and in shops. That is all from me for today. But our coverage of the Ukraine crisis continues in our global blog. It’s here. David Lammy, the shadow foreign secretary, was responding to James Cleverly in the sanctions debate on behalf of Labour. Keir Starmer told MPs earlier that the sanctions announced today did not go far enough (see 2.37pm), but Lammy was more explicit about this. He said that the government sanctions package was “too limited and too partial” and he said Labour would be pushing for a more comprehensive package. He said the EU was imposing sanctions on 27 Russian individuals, while the UK was targeting just three people. Boris Johnson has spoken to the French president, Emmanuel Macron, this afternoon, Downing Street said. In a statement, a No 10 spokesperson said that Johnson updated Macron on the UK sanctions announced today and that “the leaders agreed they needed to continue to work in lockstep to target Russian individuals and entities bankrolling President Putin’s aggressive approach”. In the Commons Sir Iain Duncan Smith, the former Tory leader, asked James Cleverly if he could include Vladislav Surkov in the sanctions legislation. He said Surkov was President Putin’s right-hand man, or his Rasputin, and that he had organised Russian activity in Donbas. Duncan Smith said it would be good to know that “at least one person responsible for what is going on there” was being sanctioned. Cleverly said that it was usual practice not to discuss in public who might be subject to sanctions, but he said Duncan Smith’s point had been noted. In response to a question from Robert Jenrick (Con), who asked whether further sanctions would only be imposed if President Putin intensified the aggression in Ukraine, or whether they would happen anyway, James Cleverly, the Foreign Office minister, told MPs that he was glad to have the chance to clarify the government’s position. He said the government was planning to tighten sanctions even if Putin did take no further action. He said: We intend to escalate these sanctions, to ratchet up these sanctions, in response to what has already happened in order to deter further aggression and in order to stimulate Putin to withdraw the troops from Ukraine, to take them away from the border and send them back home to their families. In the Commons MPs have just started debating the Russia (Sanctions) (EU Exit) (Amendment) Regulations 2022 (SI, 2022, No. 123) – the secondary legislation, announced two weeks ago, that will give ministers the power to impose a wider range of sanctions on Russia than allowed previously. The regulations are here. These are enabling regulations. The actual measures announced today are set out elsewhere. James Cleverly, the Foreign Office minister, is opening the debate. He says the aim of the measures announced today is to stop President Putin going any further, to get him to withdraw his troops and to encourage him to de-escalate. Sir Iain Duncan Smith, the former Tory leader, intervenes to say he is not clear whether today’s measures are intended to stop Putin going any further, or get him to withdraw his troops. Cleverly says the aim is to remove the threat facing Ukraine. Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland’s first minister, has said Russia should face “the most severe sanctions” following the invasion of Ukraine. In a statement she said: The Scottish government unreservedly condemns Russia’s actions, which are in flagrant violation of international law and which further destabilise an already volatile situation ... We offer our unqualified support for Ukrainian independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity and to the people of Ukraine. We stand with members of the international community in opposing Russian aggression, in demanding the most severe sanctions on Russia and in seeking to deter a further and wider invasion of Ukraine. At the afternoon Downing Street lobby briefing the PM’s spokesperson said Boris Johnson “mis-spoke” when he told MPs earlier that Roman Abramovich had been subject to sanctions. (See 4.11pm.) No 10 is expected to correct the record. The National Cyber Security Centre has urged organisations in the UK to tighten their online security in the light of the Russian aggression in Ukraine. Liz Truss, the foreign secretary, has said the government is willing to go “much further” in tightening sanctions on Russsia if President Putin does not “pull back”. In a statement accompanying the Foreign Office news release giving details of the sanctions announced today, she said: This first wave of sanctions will hit oligarchs and banks close to the Kremlin. It sends a clear message that the UK will use our economic heft to inflict pain on Russia and degrade their strategic interests. And we are prepared to go much further if Russia does not pull back from the brink. We will curtail the ability of the Russian state and Russian companies to raise funds in our markets, prohibit a range of hi-tech exports, and further isolate Russian banks from the global economy. These will be surgically targeted sanctions that will hit Russia hard. No 10 is expected to correct the record on Roman Abramovich, PA Media reports, after Boris Johnson told MPs he had been subject to sanctions. (See 2.09pm.) Johnson is thought to have been referring to a visa issue. As PA says, Abramovich had issues around his entrepreneurial visa in 2018. In October 2021, the businessman’s spokesperson confirmed he travelled to London as an Israeli citizen - therefore entering the United Kingdom without the need for a visa. And here is some more media comment on the sanctions package. From ITV’s political editor, Robert Peston From the Spectator’s James Forsyth According to Bloomberg’s Kitty Donaldson’s, shares in Russia’s two biggest banks have gone up follow the publication of the UK’s sanctions list, which left them out. Scotland’s system of mandatory vaccine passports for nightclubs and sports venues is to end next week, as Nicola Sturgeon moved to lift rules requiring face masks on buses and in shops. My colleague Severin Carrell has the story here. Tom Tugendhat, the Conservative chair of the Commons foreign affairs committee, told the World at One that the UK should be going “much further, much faster” in terms of imposing sanctions on Russia. He said: I’d like to see this go much further, much faster. As my former boss, the chief of the defence staff, Gen Lord Richards, put it: clout, don’t dribble. You allow people to think that you’re not serious if you don’t respond seriously quickly, and it can lead to worse confusion in the future. What you need to do is you need to be extremely clear, extremely quickly, and make it perfectly obvious that Russian dirty money and Russian influence peddling in the United Kingdom is not OK, and that we’re going to defend the British people against the corruption that they bring. So I would like to see the identification of President Putin’s wealth - I’d like to see it splashed all over every newspaper in the world. As the FT’s Peter Foster reports, No 10 has shot down a proposal from Jacob Rees-Mogg, the new Brexit opportunities minister, for the government to just accept other countries’ safety standards, instead of imposing its own post-Brexit. Foster explains the story in a thread starting here. Government sources are saying the sanctions announced by the government today against Russia are “just the start”, the BBC’s Nick Eardley reports. Ben Wallace, the defence secretary, has described the false flag operations being launched by Russian troops in Ukraine as “almost comical”. He said: President Putin wants a legacy, it’s our duty to make sure he gets a legacy, but not the one he is planning. A man who doesn’t follow international law, a man who is now has a very large army on the doorstep of a sovereign state and seems to not even worry that the false flags and the fake news we are watching is so obvious, it is sadly almost comical. The actions we’ve seen today and last night are absolutely according to his playbook. It’s according to what he wrote in July last year, and if you want to know what his next intentions are, I recommend you listen to his latest speech, that he made last night, full of huge inaccuracies, one of which was that Ukraine is not a proper state. I should remind people, Ukraine has been separate to Russia as a nation longer than it has been part of Russia, that is a simple fact of history. He should look at his history books, and not selectively pick dates that suit his narrative. Wallace gave his own account of the history of Ukraine in a long article for the Times last month that was widely praised. A row has erupted in cabinet over plans to scrap a ban on the import and sale of fur and foie gras after No 10 was convinced to kill off policies that would outlaw the trade. As my colleague Helena Horton reports, Zac Goldsmith, the environment minister and the ban’s main proponent, spoke out after his colleagues, including Jacob Rees-Mogg, persuaded the prime minister to ditch the proposals. Helena’s full story is here. Boris Johnson came to the Commons with an announcement about sanctions against Russia, but he faced a blizzard of criticism from MPs who complained that he was not going far enough. Some Conservative MPs sounded just as angry as their opposition counterparts and (apart from on the issue of Russian donors to the Conservative party) the debate did not divide along party lines at all. It was more hawks versus doves, with Johnson (who at one pointed cautioned against “casual Russophobia” - see 1.17pm) very much in the dove contingent. Here are quotes from some of the MPs saying sanctions should go further. Conservative MPs From Sir Iain Duncan Smith, the former Tory leader Should it not be that we need to hit them if we are going to hit them with sanctions hard and hit them now? They need to feel the pain of the first part of this decision. The second thing is, what is the ultimatum to them now? If they move further, are we going to take further action? Mark Harper, the former Tory chief whip, called for “further and stronger measures even if President Putin does no more”. From John Baron I hope [the PM] takes away from this exchange today the strong cross-party support for tougher sanctions now, because that is what is needed. Peter Bone said both sides of the house were expecting “stronger sanctions” to be announced. Opposition MPs From Keir Starmer I welcome the sanctions introduced today. And the international community’s efforts to unite with a collective response. However, we must be prepared to go further. I understand the tactic of holding back further sanctions on Putin and his cronies. To try and deter an invasion of the rest of Ukraine. But a threshold has already been breached. A sovereign nation has been invaded in a war of aggression based on lies and fabrications. If we do not respond with a full set of sanctions now, Putin will once again take away the message that the benefits of aggression outweigh the costs. From Chris Bryant, a Labour former minister From Liam Byrne, a Labour former minister From Margaret Hodge, a Labour former minister From Hilary Benn, the Labour former cabinet minister The prime minister said … ‘there is a lot more that we are going to do in the event of an invasion’. The prime minister has just told the house that he regards what happened overnight as a ‘renewed invasion of Ukraine’. If that is the government’s view then why is he waiting before imposing full sanctions on Russia now? From Ian Blackford, the SNP leader at Westminster I welcome the sanctions that are now being brought forward by the UK government – but it is deeply regrettable that the delay has allowed many Russian individuals to shift dirty assets and money in the last number of weeks. The UK government must go further, including suspending Russia from the Swift payments system. From Ed Davey, the Lib Dem leader Freeze and begin seizing the assets of every single one of Putin’s cronies in the UK and then expel these oligarchs from our country as part of a much stronger sanctions regime. Second, recognise the existential threat posed by Putin to our Nato allies by immediately cancelling [the prime minister’s] own decision, his misguided decision, to cut our armed forces by 10,000 troops and, third, no longer tolerate international sporting or cultural events hosted in Russia. From Layla Moran, the Lib Dem foreign affairs spokesperson Boris Johnson left the Commons as soon as his statement was over, and he did not wait to hear Chris Bryant (Lab) use a point of order to say that Johnson was wrong when he told MPs earlier that Roman Abramovich was one of the Russian oligarchs already subject to UK sanctions. Sir Lindsay Hoyle, the Commons Speaker, said that if Johnson was wrong, he would expect the record to be corrected. Back in the Commons Nickie Aiken (Con) asked Boris Johnson if he would support calls for the children of Russian oligarchs to be removed from British schools as part of an escalation of sanction measures. In response, Johnson said he would not go that far. He said he felt the sins of the fathers should not be visited on their children. When it comes to children, maybe I am not quite there. The sins of the fathers—or indeed the mothers—should not be visited on their children, in my view. The Commons statement has now finished. Ben Wallace, the defence secretary, has stressed that the sanctions against Russia announced by the government today are only likely to be a start. Speaking after chairing a meeting of defence ministers from the Joint Expeditionary Force countries (Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Iceland, Latvia, Lithuania, the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, and the UK), Wallace said: We have a range of sanctions, we’ve made them public – we put them before parliament a few weeks ago. We have chosen to use some of those sanctions – that doesn’t mean to say we won’t use more. We are prepared with a whole raft of sanctions. We also know that the most important message to send to President Putin is that we are completely unified across Nato, the EU and the US and the UK. We must do all of these things in lockstep – that’s what we’re doing. Here is the full text of Boris Johnson’s opening statement to MPs. In response to a question from George Howarth (Lab), Johnson told MPs that Vladimir Putin was turning Russia into a pariah state. He said: We need to make it absolutely clear to Russia that as a result of this venture, this ill-conceived and disastrous venture in Ukraine, his country will end up, as I have said, poorer, more encircled by Nato, and engaged in a disastrous conflict with fellow Slavs - and a pariah state. That is what President Putin is willing on his people, a pariah state. The Times’s Steven Swinford has a useful list of the MPs who have been complaining during this statement that the sanctions announced by the PM do not go far enough. Liam Byrne (Lab) says “pulling our punches” does not work with President Putin. He says the UK should be hitting Russian bankers harder. Johnson says Russian bankers are being hit hard. Back in the Commons Layla Moran, the Lib Dem foreign affairs spokesperson, says two of the indivividuals sanctoined by the UK have already been sanctioned by the US. This is not the UK acting with its allies, but catching up with them, she says. She asks what the trigger will be for further sanctions. Johnson says he thinks it is inevitable that further sanctions will be imposed. Nadine Dorries, the culture secretary, has said she will be speak to the football governing bodies about trying to stop the Champions League final being held in St Petersburg. Earlier Boris Johnson said it would be “inconceivable” for that fixture to go ahead in Russia. (See 1.04pm.) As PA Media reports, St Petersburg is due to host this season’s Uefa Champions League final in May. English clubs Chelsea, Manchester City, Manchester United and Liverpool remain in the competition. Ben Bradshaw (Lab) says the three individuals sanctioned by the UK have been sanctioned by the US for the last four years. He says the government should use unexplained wealth orders more widely. Not one has been imposed since Johnson became PM, he says. Johnson says many investigations relating to unexplained wealth orders are under way. Back in the Commons Caroline Lucas, the Green MP, says the sanctions announced today do not go far enough. She made the same point earlier on Twitter. And Bill Browder, the American financier who has campaigned in the US and elsewhere for laws imposing Magnitsky sanctions against Russia (so-called after Browder’s tax adviser, Sergei Magnitsky, who died in a Russian prison after speaking out about state corruption), also claims the UK sanctions announced today are “pretty tepid”. This is from Max Seddon, the FT’s Moscow bureau chief, on the sanctions announced by Boris Johnson this afternoon. This is from David Lammy, the shadow foreign secretary, on the sanctions package announced by Boris Johnson. Tan Dehsi (Lab) asks when Johnson will stop playing tennis with Russian oligarchs, in return for donations to the Conservative party. Johnson claims the government is ahead of other countries in imposing sanctions on Russia. He says nobody should donate money to a political party in the UK unless they are a UK national. But he says opposition to what is happening in Ukraine should not spill over into “casual Russophobia”. He implies that that is what he has heard from some MPs during this session. He says he does not want to discriminate against the Russians as people. Sir Iain Duncan Smith, the former Tory leader, said the government should go further with its sanctions. And he was followed by the Labour MP Chris Bryant, who also said sanctions needed to go further. Bryant told Johnson that MPs would support a tougher package, but that they needed to be imposed now. Johnson claimed the measures announced today would have an effect. Here is the government note with details of the sanctions being imposed on Russian banks and individuals today. This is from the Scotsman’s Martyn McLaughlin. Julian Lewis, the Conservative chair of the intelligence and security committee, asks the government to set 3% of GDP as the benchmark for defence spending. Julian Lewis, the Conservative chairman of the Intelligence and Security Committee, called on the Prime Minister to “accept 3% of GDP on defence as a suitable future benchmark”. He asked: “Does (he) accept that too many Nato governments and political parties have accepted energy dependence on Putin and financial dependence on dodgy donations from Russian oligarchs? “Given that we spent between 4.5 and 5% of GDP on defence throughout the 1980s until the end of the Cold War, will he now accept 3% of GDP on defence as a suitable future benchmark?” Boris Johnson replied: “Completely right to say that we have failed to wean ourselves off dependence on Russian hydrocarbons since 2014, I think that’s been a tragic mistake by European countries. “In the UK we’re in the fortunate position of only having 3% of our gas coming from Russia, but other European countries have learned that they have much more to do. “By the way, I salute the decision of the German Chancellor Olaf Scholz to cancel Nord Stream 2. I think it’s a brave step by Olaf and the right thing to do. “On his point about defence spending, actually we’re up at 2.4% now of GDP, I think one of the very highest in Nato, and we are the second biggest contributor, second biggest military power, in Nato already.” Johnson says the governmnt is at 2.4% of GDP, which is one of the highest figures in Nato. UPDATE: Lewis said: Does [the PM] accept that too many Nato governments and political parties have accepted energy dependence on Putin and financial dependence on dodgy donations from Russian oligarchs? Given that we spent between 4.5 and 5% of GDP on defence throughout the 1980s until the end of the Cold War, will he now accept 3% of GDP on defence as a suitable future benchmark? Johnson replied: Completely right to say that we have failed to wean ourselves off dependence on Russian hydrocarbons since 2014, I think that’s been a tragic mistake by European countries. In the UK we’re in the fortunate position of only having 3% of our gas coming from Russia, but other European countries have learned that they have much more to do. By the way, I salute the decision of the German Chancellor Olaf Scholz to cancel Nord Stream 2. I think it’s a brave step by Olaf and the right thing to do. On his point about defence spending, actually we’re up at 2.4% now of GDP, I think one of the very highest in Nato, and we are the second biggest contributor, second biggest military power, in Nato already. Ed Davey, the Lib Dem leader, says the government should seize the assets of all Russian oligarchs in the UK, and expel these people. And he says international cultural events should not take place in Russia. Will the government back calls to prevent the Champions League final being held in St Petersburg? Johnson says there is more action to come from the government against President Putin’s “cronies”. And he says it is “inconceivable” that major international sporting events could now be held in Russia. Tobias Ellwood, the Conservative chair of the Commons defence committee, says sanctions alone will not be enough. He says that hard power should be considered and that Nato “should not be benched”. He urges the PM to consider backing a no-fly zone over Ukraine. Johnson says Nato countries are offering support to Ukraine, including military support. Tom Tugendhat, the Conservative chair of the Commons foreign affairs committee, says the government should introduce a law for the registration of foreign agents to distract Russian activities in the UK. Johnson says the government is looking at this. This is what Boris Johnson said in his opening statement about the sanctions being imposed today. Today, the UK is sanctioning the following four five Russian banks: Rossiya, IS Bank, General Bank, promsvyazbank and the Black Sea Bank. And we are sanctioning three very high net worth individuals: Gennady Timchenko, Boris Rotenberg, and Igor Rotenberg. Any assets they hold in the UK will be frozen, the individuals concerned will be banned from travelling here, and we will prohibit all UK individuals and entities from having any dealings with them. This is the first tranche, the first barrage, of what we are prepared to do: we will hold further sanctions at readiness, to be deployed alongside the United States and the European Union if the situation escalates still further. Ian Blackford, the SNP leader at Westminster, says Russia has effectively annexed another two Ukrainian regions, in defiance of international law. This is not about peacekeeping, he says. “This is war-mongering, plain and simple.” He says the SNP welcomes the sanctions being brought forward, but he says the delay has allowed Russians to shift money out of the UK in recent weeks. Theresa May, the former Conservative PM, welcomes Johnson’s statement. But she asks if the PM shares her concern about the “wider worldwide trend of authoritiarian states trying to impose their way of thinking on others”. While the focus today is rightly on protecting Ukrainian independence and territorial integrity, what lies behind this is a wider worldwide trend of authoritarian states trying to impose their way of thinking on others. And that the battle in which we must now engage is nothing more or less than the defence of democracy itself. Johnson agrees. He says what is happening will be followed in countries like Taiwan and around the world. That is what’s at stake and what happens in Ukraine now is being watched around the world, and the echoes will be heard in Taiwan, in east Asia and throughout the world. Johnson is replying to Starmer. He says the change in Labour’s stance on Russia over the last couple of years (ie, since Jeremy Corbyn was leader) is massively to be welcomed. He says the measures announced today are tough. But the further sanctions being prepared are much tougher, he says. Starmer says the government has failed to stop Russian money coming into Britain. And the government needs to do more to keep foreign money out of politics, he says. He says Russian aggression has torn up the Minsk protcol. But even now the government must pursue diplomatic routes, he says. Putin seeks division, Starmer says. He says the west must stay united. Putin thinks the west is too corrupted to do the right thing, he says. “We must prove him wrong.” Keir Starmer says yesterday was a “dark day” for Europe. “Putin appears determined to plunge Ukraine into a wider war”, he says. He says Putin fears democracy. People do not want live under an “erratic and violent authoritarian”, he says. He says it is important for MPs to show they will not be divided. He welcomes the sanctions. But the government should go further, he says. He says he understands the case for holding back some measures. But if the government does not impose a full set of sanctions now, Putin will conclude that he will not be punished, he says. He calls for RT (formerly known as Russia Today) to be banned. Johnson says “we should steel ourselves for a protracted crisis”. Because the stakes are so high, “Putin’s venture in Ukraine must fail”, he says. And it must be seen to fail. Johnson says sanctions are being imposed on five Russian banks, and three high net-worth individuals. Any assets they hold in the UK will be frozen, and the individuals will be banned from coming to the UK. This is the first tranche, he says. He says further sanctions will follow if Putin goes further. UPDATE: See 12.56pm for more details. Johnson says 44 million people in Ukraine now risk being involved in war. He says the government has tried to find a peaceful way through this crisis. He says the defence secretary and chief of defence staff held a joint visit to Moscow - the first of its kind since a visit by Churchill in the second world war. He says the government will not give up trying to avert war. He says the UK will now guarantee up to $500m of development finance to Ukraine. He spoke to President Zelenskiy of Ukraine last night, and assured him of the UK’s support. Now the UK will impose sanctons, he says. Boris Johnson is delivering his statement to MPs now. He says MPs should be in no doubt that what has happened amounts to a “renewed invasion” of Ukraine. And President Putin is establishing a pretext for a full-scale invasion, he says. He says it is hard to imagine Russia plotting the destruction of a neighbour. But that is what seems to be happening, he says. This is from Liz Truss, the foreign secretary, about the reprimand delivered to the Russian ambassador this morning. The Downing Street lobby briefing has just finished. Here are the main points. The Russian ambassador to the UK, Andrei Kelin, has been summoned to the Foreign Office this morning to hear the government’s protests about the decision to send troops into eastern Ukraine, the prime minister’s spokesman said. But there is no suggestion that the ambassador is going to be expelled. The spokesman said the government considered that the dispatch of troops to eastern Ukraine did amount to an “invasion” of the country. But he made a distinction between this and a “full-scale invasion”, which he said was not happening. As Alex Wickham explains in his London Playbook briefing, some countries have been reluctant to use the word invasion because so far President Putin has only dispatched Russian soldiers to areas already under Russian control, held by separatists who have been covertly aided by the Russian military. The PM’s spokesman said: There is no doubt that the deployment of these forces that we’ve seen reported in sovereign Ukrainian territory amounts to renewed invasion of the country. President Putin has sent his troops in, he’s broken international law, he’s repudiated the Minsk agreement. We believe that Russia’s actions overnight could well be a precursor to a full-scale invasion. But clearly, we want to continue to pursue any diplomatic avenues that exist and we’ll be speaking to other world leaders, as I say, and urging Russia to step back from this action. The spokesman said that the UK sanctions being announced by Boris Johnson in the Commons shortly were being coordinated with other nations. “We are acting in a coordinated way,” the spokesman said. “We are discussing this with European partners, with the US and ... you can expect a united approach to sanctions,” he went on. The spokesman welcomed the German government’s decision to shelve the Nord Stream 2 pipeline project in the light of Putin’s decision to send troops into eastern Ukraine. He pointed out that in his TV interview this morning (see 10.22am) Johnson spoke of the need to “snip the drip feed into our bloodstream from Nord Stream”. The spokesman said the Foreign Office is sending “rapid deployment teams” to countries neighbouring Ukraine to assist British nationals who cross over the border. Teams are being deployed to Poland, Moldova, Lithuania and Slovakia to provide consular support, the spokesman said. Ukrainians in Britain have urged the UK government to act without delay as Russian troops are ordered into the country, PA Media reports. In a letter sent to the foreign secretary, Liz Truss, and copied to Boris Johnson and Keir Starmer, the national chairman of the Association of Ukrainians in Great Britain (AUGB), Petro Rewko, said it is clear the “window for diplomacy” has closed. He said: As you will be well aware, the scope for prolonged military threats and potential further aggression is very real and the consequent humanitarian disaster would be unimaginable. History shows us that Russia’s invading forces will have no regard to the safety and human rights of the civilian population, that the death toll will be significant, and that war crimes will be committed. We believe that it is time for the UK government and its Nato partners to act without further delay, as Russia is intensifying its war against Ukraine now. Liz Truss, the foreign secretary, has renewed calls for Britons who are still in Ukraine to leave. According to a report by Lucy Fisher in the Telegraph, Russian oligarchs have been lobbying the Foreign Office in the hope of ensuring they avoid being hit by UK sanctions. Fisher says: The flurry of correspondence from individuals and companies to the UK government undermines claims that the Kremlin is unfazed by the prospect of economic measures. Earlier this month, Viktor Tatarintsev, Russia’s ambassador to Sweden, claimed that Vladimir Putin “doesn’t give a s---” about sanctions as he attempted to pour scorn on the West’s key strategy. It is understood the Foreign Office has been contacted by panicked Russian oligarchs and firms collectively worth hundreds of millions of pounds. Britain – which has been liaising with the US and EU over a severe economic response to the crisis – has a blacklist of targets ready if Russia invades Ukraine. The details remain confidential in order to avoid allowing those listed to act pre-emptively to protect assets. A reader has been asking if there is an English transcript of President Putin’s long speech about Ukraine last night. The Kremlin has published a version on its website, but it is not complete (the transcript ends “to be continued”). And Reuters has a report with highlights. In an interview with LBC this morning Sajid Javid, the health secretary, also said that if NHS staff needed a Covid test for work, they would continue to be able to get one for free, even after free tests stop being routinely available in England from 1 April. “What I can guarantee is that NHS staff if they need a test, they will receive that test for free and as part of their employment,” Javid said. But he said it would be for local managers to decide when tests were needed, not central government. In his Today programme interview this morning Sajid Javid, the health secretary, did not challenge claims that there was an internal government row between his department and the Treasury about the funding of ongoing Covid testing and surveillance schemes ahead of the announcement yesterday about the end of Covid regulations in England. Asked about the reports, Javid said: If you are asking me did we debate in government what should be our final response in our Living with Covid document, of course we did because that’s normal in government, that’s what you do. Did we come to an agreement on the best way forward - myself, the prime minister and others, the entire cabinet? Of course we did. That’s why I think what we set out yesterday is a historic moment that we can all be proud of. The UK government has recorded the first monthly budget surplus since the start of the coronavirus pandemic, despite a weaker than expected January performance as rising inflation pushed up debt interest costs, my colleague Richard Partington reports. The Institute for Fiscal Studies has posted a Twitter thread on the figures starting here. In an interview this morning on the Today programme Sajid Javid, the health secretary, said that the dispute between Russia and Ukraine was as serious as the Cuban missile crisis in 1962, which is widely seen as the closest the world has come to nuclear war since 1945. Asked about the comparison, Javid said: I do think it’s as serious a situation as that. There is still an opportunity here for President [Vladimir] Putin to step back, despite him having now chosen confrontation over dialogue. It is not to late for him to step back and bring his troops back into Russia and open dialogue. Javid was responding to a question about whether he agreed with an earlier contributor to the programme, General Sir Richard Shirreff, the former deputy supreme commander of Nato, who said this was the most dangerous moment in Europe at least since the Cuban missile crisis. Shirreff told the programme: This is the most dangerous moment in Europe probably at least since 1962 and the Cuban missile crisis, and it could be much worse than that, because this is the invasion of a sovereign country which could turn into a catastrophic war, with warfare on a scale not seen in Europe since 1945. So I think it is difficult to overstate the seriousness of the situation. When it was put to him that the Cuban missile crisis involved a potential nuclear conflict, Shirreff said the analogy was apt because “the Russians integrate nuclear thinking into every aspect of their military doctrine, and they practice it”. Javid was interviewed immediately afterwards and he was asked if he also thought it was as serious as the Cuban missile crisis. He replied: “Yes, I would agree with that analysis.” Here are the key points from Boris Johnson’s pooled TV interview this morning after the Cobra meeting. Johnson said the UK government would “immediately” impose sanctions on Russia in response to President Putin’s decision to send troops into eastern Ukraine. He said the sanctions would be targeted “not just at entities in Donbas and Luhansk and Donetsk, but in Russia itself, targeting Russian economic interests as hard as we can”. He said full details would be set out in the Commons later. But he went on: The intention is not just to hit the entities within Luhansk and Donetsk, but those Russian economic interests that have been supporting Russia’s war machine ... They will hit Russia very hard. He said a full-scale invasion was expected, and that this would would be followed by further sanctions. He said: I’m afraid all the evidence is that President Putin is indeed bent on a full-scale invasion of the Ukraine, the overrunning, the subjugation of an independent, sovereign European country and I think, let’s be absolutely clear, that will be absolutely catastrophic. Talking about what further sanctions might do, he said: Be in no doubt, if Russian companies are prevented from raising capital on financial markets, if we unpeel the facade of Russian ownership of companies, of property, it will start to hurt. He said all his predictions about Russia had been vindicated in this crisis. He said: This is I should stress just the first barrage of UK economic sanctions against Russia because we expect I’m afraid that there is more Russian irrational behaviour to come. The sad thing is that at every turn in this crisis the UK’s pessimistic predictions have been vindicated. We said that there would be false flag operations and there have been false flag operations. We said that there would be provocations in the Donbas, and that’s exactly what we are now seeing. He said Putin had “completely torn up international law”, including the Minsk agreements, with his actions last night. He said Europe had to cut its reliance on Russian oil and gas. The west’s response to the annexation of Crimea in 2014 had not been tough enough, he said. He went on: In the end, we did not do enough as Europeans to wean ourselves off Russian hydrocarbons, Russian oil and gas. And to a certain extent now ... the spikes in gas prices to which European economies are so vulnerable is a consequence of that failure to move away from that dependency. That’s what we’ve got to do now; it’s vital that we cut the umbilicus, we snip the drip feed into our bloodstream from Nord Stream. But he played down the impact of the crisis on UK consumers, saying they UK only got 3% of its gas from Russia. He said that Putin’s speech last night was not a surprise in the light of what the Russian president said in his long essay about Ukraine he wrote last year. Ben Wallace, the defence secretary, has described the situation in Ukraine as “incredibly serious”. Speaking at a meeting of defence ministers from the Joint Expeditionary Force countries (Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Iceland, Latvia, Lithuania, the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, and the UK), Wallace said: It’s incredibly serious what’s happening in Ukraine. Many of us were forewarning that President Putin already had an agenda - you heard that agenda in his speech last night. This is a sovereign state which has now had some of its land effectively annexed from it. This is a sovereign state, a democratic state in Europe. All of us in Europe should worry and not hesitate to take whatever action we need to to deter President Putin from undermining both Nato, but also Europe and, more importantly, our values. Good morning. Boris Johnson was chairing a meeting of the government’s Cobra emergency committee this morning to discuss the Ukraine crisis and, speaking afterwards, he confirmed that the “first barrage of UK economic sanctions against Russia” in response will be announced today. He also said a further tranche of sanctions would follow if Vladimir Putin were to extend his invasion beyond the enclaves in Donetsk and Luhansk, already under Russian control, into the rest of the country. Johnson said: [The sanctions] will hit Russia very hard and there is a lot more that we are going to do in the event of an invasion. Be in no doubt that if Russian companies are prevented from raising capital on the UK financial markets, if we unpeel the facade of Russian ownership of companies, of property, it will start to hurt. Johnson said that Putin had “completely torn up international law” by his actions in Ukraine and that, if he launched a full-scale invasion, it had to fail. The prime minister said: I just want everybody to be in no doubt that if Vladimir Putin continues down this track of violence, of aggression, of a full-scale invasion, of encircling Kyiv itself, which is what he seems to be proposing to do, capturing the Ukrainian capital, it is absolutely vital that that effort, that conquest of another European country, should not succeed and that Putin should fail. There is full coverage of the crisis from a global perspective on our Ukraine live blog, which is here. But the crisis is also dominating UK politics, and I will be covering the British reaction here. Here is the agenda for the day. After 12.30pm: Boris Johnson makes a statement to MPs on Russia and Ukraine. 2pm: George Eustice, the environment secretary, gives a speech at the National Farmers’ Union conference. 2.20pm: Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland’s first minster, makes a statement to MSPs on Covid. Also today Ben Wallace, the defence secretary, is hosting a meeting of the defence ministers of the Joint Expeditionary Force nations in Leicestershire. I try to monitor the comments below the line (BTL) but it is impossible to read them all. If you have a direct question, do include “Andrew” in it somewhere and I’m more likely to find it. I do try to answer questions, and if they are of general interest, I will post the question and reply above the line (ATL), although I can’t promise to do this for everyone. If you want to attract my attention quickly, it is probably better to use Twitter. I’m on @AndrewSparrow. Alternatively, you can email me at andrew.sparrow@theguardian.com.After a student’s failed attempt at creating rocket fuel in a dorm room displaced 22 people, police at Brigham Young University (BYU) in Utah reminded students to “keep your experiments in the lab”. The unnamed student attempted to concoct homemade rocket fuel on a stove in their dorm on Sunday afternoon. The “volatile mixture suddenly exploded into a fireball”, the BYU police department said in a Facebook announcement. “The flames from the explosion engulfed the walls and ceiling around the stove and the intense heat tripped the fire sprinkler system,” police added. Firefighters secured the scene quickly and were able to put out the fire. Photos released by the police department revealed black explosion marks across kitchen cabinets, walls and ceilings. A living room – apparently complete with a toilet, lid open, next to a sofa – appeared to be flooded with several inches of water, as a result of the sprinkler system. Nobody was injured, police said. However, 22 dorm residents were displaced due to flooding “caused by this kitchen chemist experiment”, which resulted in “extensive damage to the building”. In an update on Monday, police said the “Rocket Man” case was an active investigation. “We urge students to be aware of circumstances around them and consider how their actions have the potential to [a]ffect not just themselves but others as well,” police said.One of Wall Street’s most fearsome activist investors has launched a campaign to force McDonald’s to change the way it buys pork for its Bacon McDouble Cheeseburgers, Sausage McMuffins and McRib sandwiches. Carl Icahn, whose long history as an asset stripper precedes him, plans to challenge the practice used by some of McDonald’s pork suppliers of confining pregnant pigs in small crates and not in group housing. Ichan is best known as an aggressive investor whose history spans hostile efforts to take over companies ranging from TWA, Marvel Comics, RJR Nabisco and US Steel, sometimes ruthlessly “downsizing” companies he takes over. He owns just 200 shares in McDonalds, valued at approximately $50,000 – far less than the multimillion stakes he typically acquires in companies he targets. But he is using his holding – and his reputation – to push for Leslie Samuelrich, a sustainability-focused investor and president of Green Century Capital Management, and Maisie Ganzler, an executive at Bon Appétit, a restaurant management company, to be put on McDonald’s board. The fast-food giant promised 10 years ago to end its suppliers’ crate practice and said Sunday that it expects to source 85% to 90% of its US pork from pigs not housed in “gestation stalls” during pregnancy, up from 60% currently, by the end of this year. But Icahn, who became involved in the issue at the behest of his daughter, Michelle Icahn Nevin, says he had expected the use of the crates to be banned altogether, not merely have sows moved from crates only after they are confirmed pregnant four to six weeks into their 16-week term. McDonald’s said it would be “impossible” to meet Icahn’s request to end the practice immediately as it would go against “veterinary science” and “harm the company’s shared pursuit of providing customers with quality product at accessible prices.” And McDonald’s did not welcome Icahn’s intrusion, saying in a statement in response to Icahn’s notification that it would “evaluate the nominees as it would any other candidates proposed to it” at its annual shareholder meeting in April. “Mr Icahn’s stated focus in making this nomination relates to a narrow issue regarding the Company’s pork commitment, which The Humane Society US has already introduced through a shareholder proposal,” the company said. The investor’s efforts to pressure McDonald’s comes a year after several members of Exxon’s board of directors were pushed out in a shake-up by activist shareholders looking for the oil giant to act decisively on climate change. Icahn told Bloomberg TV last week that he was committed to taking action, despite McDonald’s explanation that outbreaks of swine disease and the Covid-19 pandemic delayed producers’ ability to meet its original timeline by two years. “We’re not going to fool around with them any more,” he said. But the company shot back, critiquing Icahn for his majority holdings in Viskase, a firm that produces packaging, such as sausage casings, for pork and poultry. “It’s noteworthy that Icahn has not publicly called on Viskase to adopt commitments.” The conflict also highlights the limited and often slow progress that food producers have made in altering their supply chains. McDonald’s says it sources only approximately 1% of US pork production and does not own any sows, or produce or package pork in the US. “More than ever, our customers want to know how their food is produced and where it comes from,” the company posted on its Animal Health &amp; Welfare page, adding that it is using its size and global reach “to improve animal health and welfare” and “source chicken, eggs, beef and pork from producers who share our commitments”. A 2005 study commissioned by the American Society of Swine Veterinarians asserted that “pigs are explorative by nature, and exploratory behavior is considered an important component of pig welfare”. The study noted “the difficulty experienced by sows in advanced gestation when the space is restricted”, adding that “it appears that increasing available space in gestation stalls would improve sow welfare”.An MP rejected an approach from a lobbyist group who told her it planned to set up an all party parliamentary group for the night-time economy, which was to be sponsored by alcohol firms. Alison Thewliss said it was “unusual” to be propositioned by lobbyists rather than an MP, even if there may have been merit in such a cross-party group. The MP was speaking after it was revealed last week that more than £13m has been poured into a growing network of MPs’ interest groups by private firms – fuelling concerns over the potential for backdoor influence. In emails to Thewliss in 2019, a lobby group called Connect Communications said sponsorship was needed “to make the group viable”. One of the emails, which were first published by openDemocracy, read: “We’re very keen to get it off the ground and hope to have you involved … We’ll keep you updated as we gage [sic] interest from other MPs, and once we begin talking to external organisations about sponsorship.” Connect Communications, which is co-owned and run by the former Labour MP Andy Sawford, currently runs 15 APPG secretariats. The secretariats of APPGs, of which there are now 755, arrange meetings and trips for members and sometimes cultivate potential funders. A spokesperson for the company said: “In 2019, there was an initiative from parliamentarians and outside organisations to form an APPG on the night-time economy and Connect were involved in these discussions. “Connect offered to provide secretariat services, to support good practice and compliance with the rules on APPGs, although this was not taken forward and we are not involved.” A night-time economy APPG was subsequently established with the help of a different lobbying firm, Tendo Consulting. The APPG received more than £7,500 worth of “benefits in kind” from the Night Time Industries Association (NTIA), which acts as the group’s secretariat, last year. The NTIA says on its website that it “lobbies nationally” on behalf of the pubs and clubs it represents across the UK. The APPG last year published a 46-page report on the impact of Covid on the industry, calling on the government to extend tax breaks for the sector. Although described as ‘an APPG inquiry’ the report was researched by Tendo Consulting and funded by the NTIA. Thewliss, SNP MP for Glasgow Central, who chairs three APPGs, said she believed there is a pressing need for greater transparency more broadly about the funding of APPGS and the role of commercial interests. She said: “Some of them clearly do attract quite a lot of money. It is difficult for MPs to run these things – in offices it takes up our own time and can be quite burdensome but if you have another organisation funding it you need to have that transparency and ask questions about the outcome of it.” Jeff Smith, the Labour MP who chairs the APPG, told openDemocracy the report was “a good piece of work which gives an accurate reflection of the plight of the industry at the time”. On its involvement in the report, Tendo said it had “a wealth of experience in research techniques and knowledge across numerous sectors of the UK economy”. The NTIA said Smith had “provided his input and ultimately signed it off.” Tendo, the NTIA and Smith have been approached for comment. A former Liberal Democrat MP who now chairs a pressure group campaigning for democratic reform said that the investigation last week had reported on what he described as an “unsavoury aspect of APPGs: the influence lobbyists funded by industry can buy”. Tom Brake, who was deputy leader of the House of Commons during the coalition government, also suggested MPs should be banned from membership of the groups seeking to influence policy in areas where the MPs had a personal financial interest. The veteran Labour MP and former shadow chancellor John McDonnell said that the investigation “exposes deep concerns about the role of APPGs.” He added: “There now needs to be a full and independent inquiry into their role. We need to ensure that there are not just proper standards and procedures but proper policing of these groups.”The doors to the Russian embassy in Kyiv were shut on Tuesday. Seemingly nobody was at home. Outside on the street a small, noisy crowd of demonstrators waved blue and yellow Ukrainian flags. “We are not afraid of Vladimir Putin. Or his army,” said one activist, Roman Tyschenko. Behind him protesters banged kettle drums and broke into a rhythmic chant of “Putin huiylo”, to blaring music from a loudspeaker. “It means Putin is a motherfucker,” Tyschenko explained. “It’s our anthem. Football fans in Kharkiv invented the song in 2014, when Russia stole Crimea.” After a meeting with his security council on Monday in Moscow, Putin recognised the so-called breakaway republics of Donetsk and Luhansk as independent. In a long, and menacing speech he also asserted that Ukraine was not a state, but a historical mistake made by Lenin. “Putin is insane, crazy,” Tyschenko said. “Ukraine is both a country and a state. We have ancient traditions. Kyiv was founded before Moscow. We have a much longer record of nationhood.” The threat of war hangs over Kyiv, a city of 3 million people plus another million who commute daily from its suburbs. The US and UK governments believe Putin’s ambitions go beyond the Donbas region, whose separatist administrations Moscow has long armed and propped up. They believe that Russia’s president is poised to attack and encircle the Ukrainian capital, sending in tanks and troops currently parked two hours’ drive away, just across the border in Belarus. The talk among intelligence professionals is of Baghdad-style shock and awe. His goal: to subjugate Ukraine. And yet so far Kyiv residents have reacted to the situation with an collective weapon: carrying on as normal. Cafes and restaurants were open on Tuesday, mothers pushed their toddlers through parks bathed in spring sunshine, and cyclists bumped over cobbled streets. A few more flags were visible than usual, attached to cars and adorned with the slogan: “Believe in Ukraine.” Otherwise there was no hint that the country might soon be at war, or that Kyiv could find itself occupied by a foreign army. “We will defend our country,” one activist, Serhiy Ikonnikov, said, standing outside the Russian embassy, a grey neo-classical building topped with razor wire. He added: “In the history of war there is the question of motivation. The Russian army doesn’t have it. We do. We will defend our country, our homes and our families. If Putin invades, lots of Russian blood will be spilled.” Was he afraid? “A bit. Not for myself but for my relatives,” he said. Next to him, protesters held signs saying: “Donbas is Ukrainian”; “We will never retreat”; and “Evil empire”. Ikonnikov, 23, added: “There’s also some kind of excitement. If Putin invades us it will be the end of Russia. It will be the start of a wonderful new Europe, and of Ukraine as a member of that Europe.” In another part of Kyiv, with a picturesque glass bridge spanning the turquoise Dnipro river, friends and couples posed for photos. Sitting on a bench, Denis Astapenko said Russia was trying to spook Ukrainians with a disinformation campaign. “There are a lot of rumours,” he said. “For myself I’m calm.” Astapenko, a wedding photographer, said he had done portraits of a couple who got married in Kyiv on Tuesday morning. His order book was full, he said, with further shoots lined up for later this week. A favourite wedding shot location was the bridge, with its panoramic views, he added. In the nearby Volodymyrska Girka park a statue of Vladimir the Great looked out over the embattled capital. It was Vladimir who converted Kyivan Rus’ (alternative spelling: Kievan Rus’) – a princely state founded in Kyiv in the 10th century – to Christianity. At the time Moscow didn’t exist, Astapenko noted. Olga Machevska, a retired librarian, said Putin’s view of Ukraine’s history was entirely wrong and stupid. “He needs to go back to the archive,” she said. “We had Kyivan Rus’. In the 11th century we built St Sophia’s cathedral. In Moscow there was nothing: just woods.” Over at the city hall, a grandiose building on Kyiv’s main Khreshchatyk boulevard, done in postwar Stalinist style, the head of civil defence, Roman Tkachuk, said there was no reason to panic. “We are ready for any emergency situation,” he said. “We are highly prepared.” Tkachuk said Kyiv now had a network of 5,000 bomb shelters including 47 Soviet-era metro stations, dug deep underground. There was enough space for the city’s residents, he said, with purpose-built basements in hospitals, bread factories and other critical facilities. Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has so far taken no obvious steps to fortify Kyiv from Russian military attack. He has previously berated the US and UK for moving their embassies out of the capital, and relocating them to Lviv, close to the Polish border, in the west of the country. Was Zelenskiy’s optimism that nothing would befall Kyiv a mistake? “If I give an order to put sandbags outside government buildings or to tape up windows that will cause concern,” Tkachuk said, adding there were plans in place if evacuation became necessary, with the city authorities ready to help the old and infirm. One fear is that Russian combat planes may seek to knock out mobile phone and internet services, as well as electricity and power, leaving a terrified population in the cold and dark. Tkachuk said there were plans to send police cars with megaphones round the streets, in order to deliver public order messages, if TV stations went down. “I will be the last person to leave the city,” he said. “My family lives here, my mother lives here. I’m not going anywhere.”While enthusiasm for lockdown pursuits such as baking and Peleton riding may be waning, a rise in bookings for Easter getaways confirms the country’s newfound passion for caravanning remains undimmed. The easing of travel restrictions means many Britons are planning foreign trips, but new figures from the Camping and Caravanning Club show holidays in the UK are in rude health, with bookings for its 100 sites up 33% on Easter 2019. The four-day weekend usually heralds the start of the camping season but Covid rules either closed or limited Easter access to campsites in 2020 and 2021. This means it will be the first time in three years people are free to spend the break sleeping in their caravan or motorhome or under canvas. Simon McGrath, the Camping and Caravanning Club’s head of communications and external relations, said that with the exception of Wales, where campsites were open for Welsh residents last year, the curbs meant the club had “missed out on the previous two Easters”. “Easter is a really popular time for camping that signals the start of the season,” he said. “This year looks certain to make up for lost time with strong bookings and a significant increase in the number of campers heading to our sites.” Popular destinations for its more than 700,000 members include – in what is the Queen’s platinum jubilee year – its Sandringham site in the grounds of the royal estate, as well as remote spots in Pembrokeshire in south-west Wales, and in the Scottish Highlands. The majority of its members are caravan or motorhome owners. The pandemic has made many Britons see domestic breaks, and caravanning in particular, in a new light. Last year dealerships struggled to get their hands on enough vans as a growing number of under-40s, including new pet owners, bought homes on wheels. Demand for other holiday vehicles, including motorhomes and converted vans, was also high. McGrath said the organisation enjoyed record membership levels in 2021 as new people took up the pastime or returned to it after a break. A big focus for its site teams this year would, he said, be “ensuring that all newcomers have a fantastic experience”. But after the hiatus caused by Covid the domestic holiday industry will once again be facing stiff competition from abroad this year with the leading tour operators reporting an increase in bookings for this summer, including a rise in long-haul trips to places such as the Caribbean. Tui says that its UK summer bookings are up nearly 20% on summer 2019 with demand for the period expected to be close to pre-pandemic levels. However, the worsening cost of living crisis is also a factor for Britons planning holidays this year. Inflation is at close to a 30-year high with economists predicting it will reach almost 8% in April when household energy bills are to soar by hundreds of pounds.An inquiry into allegations that Israel’s police force systematically hacked into the mobile phones of Israeli citizens has found that while the police did use NSO Group’s controversial Pegasus malware, there is no evidence suggesting illegality. In a series of explosive reports over the last two months, the local financial daily newspaper Calcalist accused the police of spying on at least 26 individuals who were not criminal suspects. Those named included politicians, protesters, and members of the former prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu’s inner circle – claims Netanyahu used to delay proceedings in his corruption trial. Israel’s attorney general’s office ordered an investigation into the alleged police behaviour last month. On Monday, the Israeli justice ministry contradicted the most serious of the newspaper’s claims, saying an interim inquiry discovered “no indication” that the police had bypassed judicial authorisation in using the spyware. In two instances, unsuccessful attempts were made to hack the phones of people subject to court orders authorising the tracking of their electronic communications, and in a third case the police succeeded, the probe found. It also said investigators looked into the use of a second type of spyware available to police and again found no signs of wrongdoing. The announcement still represents the first time the Israeli government has confirmed that Pegasus has been deployed against a citizen. A consortium of 17 media outlets, including the Guardian, revealed last year that the Israeli-made surveillance product had been sold to repressive governments worldwide and used to surveil activists, journalists and lawyers, as well as government officials and heads of state. NSO has previously said that all its sales are government-authorised and that it does not itself run Pegasus. Israel has since tightened rules on the export of cyberweapons, and NSO was blacklisted by the US in November. While the Israeli state and private firms have developed sophisticated surveillance systems to monitor the activities of people in the occupied Palestinian territories, where Israel implements military law, senior NSO officials had previously said that its software was not authorised for use against Israeli and US telephone numbers. Those reassurances subsequently caused public outrage when the Calcalist allegations were published earlier this year. The claims were strongly denied by the police service. An editorial carried by Calcalist on Tuesday acknowledged that the deputy attorney general Amit Merari’s initial findings necessitated “a review of the paper’s allegations”. NSO, which has been fighting a mounting tide of criticism, welcomed the justice ministry’s announcement, saying in a statement that the company hoped the conclusions “will result in reporting that no longer relies upon misinformation and political organisations issuing biased and prejudiced reports”. Questions remain over whether current Israeli privacy law, which came into force in 1981, is fit to handle the technical intricacies of modern spyware. Cybersecurity experts have previously suggested that Israeli court orders are not sufficient for authorising the use of invasive malware such as Pegasus. Merari’s investigation utilising the technological expertise of the Shin Bet and the Mossad, Israel’s domestic and foreign intelligence agencies, continues. Her team will examine whether spying software was used without court orders on individuals other than those mentioned in the Calcalist reports, and whether the police exceeded their authority in using spyware on citizens, the justice ministry said.On this note, we are wrapping up for the day. Thank you for reading -- we’ll be back tomorrow. Good night! - JK Reuters has unearthed an error made by Boris Johnson’s government when it slapped sanctions on five private Russian banks, including Rossiya Bank, which the government said was “privately owned by elite Russian billionaires with direct links to Putin” (the two largest state banks were spared from sanctions, for now). The sanctions document mistakenly listed Rossiya Bank’s address as “Neglinnaya, 12 Moscow, 107016, Russia”. It is, in fact, is the address of Russia’s central bank –– known in Russian as “Bank Rossiya,” which was founded in 1860. Rossiya Bank, the private bank created in 1990, is based in St Petersburg. This is thought to be an error - there is no suggestion that the central bank has been sanctioned, Reuters said. Our economics editor Larry Elliott has written this analysis: Ukraine crisis: sanctions against Russia come at a cost to the west. After all the tough talk of the past month, the sanctions imposed on Russia by the west are unlikely to lose Vladimir Putin much sleep. The response to Boris Johnson’s announcement that five of the less important Russian banks and three individuals would be targeted was: is that it? The most dramatic news was Germany’s decision to halt approval of the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline from Russia to western Europe. That will have an impact, but may end up affecting Germany more than it does Russia. The message from western capitals was that it was the plan all along to start small and then ratchet things up if Putin refuses to back down. Ben Wallace, the UK defence secretary, said there were several options to choose from. Even though things are a bit calmer, tensions remain high. Peter Cardillo, chief market economist at the financial services firm Spartan Capital Securities in New York, told Reuters: The bottom line is that fear factor remains elevated and until we get some sort of a clearer picture of what Putin may or may not do, the market is just going to stay in a state of confusion. Crude oil prices have given up some of their gains, after Brent crude, the global benchmark, pushed over $99 a barrel this morning. The last time it was at this level was in early September 2014. Brent crude is now trading at $96.95 a barrel, up 1.6% while US light crude is up 2.2% at $93.1 a barrel. Russ Mould, investment director at the investment firm AJ Bell, said: Oil and gas shed some of their gains from earlier in the day when it became clear that sanctions would not reach key Russian exports of raw materials (or at least not yet). Some calm has returned to financial markets, after Russia said it would only recognise the Donetsk and Luhansk territories’ independence within the boundaries that the Moscow-backed separatists currently control, and as Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy played down the prospect of a large-scale conflict with Russia. Asian shares recorded some chunky losses, with Japan’s Nikkei losing 1.7% and Hong Kong’s Hang Seng tumbling 2.7%. The main European stock markets in Germany, France, Spain and Italy all slid more than 2% in early trading but later clawed back most of their losses. The FTSE 100 index in London closed 11 points lower at 7,495.97, a 0.16%% drop. Germany’s Dax lost 0.4% while France’s CAC slipped 0.16%, and Italy’s FTSE MiB and Spain’s Ibex were flat. The rouble has recovered from a near two-year low after suffering its biggest one-day drop, of 3.3%, since the outbreak oof the coronavirus pandemic on Monday. The Russian currency fell to 81 against the dollar and is now trading at 79.18. Russian stock markets also staged a small comeback after earlier losses, with the dollar-denominated RTS index and the rouble-denominated Moex index on the Moscow exchange both rising 1.6% this afternoon. Shares in Russia’s largest lender Sberbank rose 1.3% (after an earlier gain of 5%) while the second-biggest bank VTB was up 1.7%, after they escaped British sanctions. They were not on the list of five banks that are to be sanctioned by the UK. However, the two state-backed banks are among a number of Russian companies that have secondary listings in London, and their London-listed shares are still down, albeit not nearly as much as earlier. Sberbank fell 1.4% in London after plunging 13% this morning while VTB has lost 1.6%. State-backed oil and gas producer Gazprom fell 3.4% after an earlier loss of 8%, while Rosneft ended the day nearly 8% lower and Lukoil closed down 5.3%. Shares in PAO Novatek, the largest gas producer in Russia not directly controlled by the Russian state, dropped 7.3% in London. Gennady Timchenko, a close ally and friend of Vladimir Putin, is one of three Russian oligarchs who appeared on today’s UK sanctions list, and owns a stake in Novatek. In total, 31 Russian companies are listed on the London Stock Exchange, to raise money and give international investors easier access. Two FTSE 100 companies whose assets are based in Russia, the steelmaker Evraz reversed earlier losses and gained 5.4%, while the gold miner Polymetal rose 2.8%. Today’s CBI survey revealed that the largest number of British manufacturers plan to raise prices in the next three months than at any point since 1976, underscoring the inflationary pressures hitting the UK economy. With energy prices rocketing and wages on an upward path, the CBI said four-fifths of firms expect to increase the cost of manufactured goods in the next three months. Not since the oil shocks of the mid-1970s has such a broad swathe of the manufacturing sector found itself needing to increase prices, pushing a net balance to +77% of firms that say prices will need to rise, up from +66% in January, according to the business lobby group. The Centre for Economics and Business Research, a UK think tank, is warning on the impact on western living standards, already under pressure, from rising inflation and potentially slower growth as a result of the Ukraine crisis. Any international action will likely not only add to the current inflationary binge, possibly bringing inflation close to 10% in the main Western economies, but also should slow down growth quite rapidly. World GDP growth in 2022 had been forecast to be about 4% at the turn of the year. Rising inflation has been edging this down and it might fall as low as 2% with the inflationary spur from the conflict with Russia if severe sanctions cause a much more serious spike in energy prices, pushing oil towards $130 and gas to 300p a therm with corresponding moves in metal prices. This would mean no growth at all for the rest of the year and possibly with some quarters of contraction so getting close to a recession (on the technical definition of two consecutive quarters with negative growth). Perhaps the biggest issue that will determine how severely the West is affected by the issues with Russia is whether there is the cohesion and willpower to put up with sanctions on the scale that might eventually affect Russia. The analysis above suggests that action could be costly, particularly for living standards that are already under pressure. Similar to the UK and eurozone, the US economy has bounced back from the Omicron wave this month, according to a monthly survey from IHS Markit. However, inflation has also picked up: prices charged for goods and services in the US rose at a record pace as companies continued to pass on higher cost burdens to their clients. Flash US Composite Output Index at 56.0 (51.1 in January). 2-month high Flash US Services Business Activity Index at 56.7 (51.2 in January). 2-month high Flash US Manufacturing PMI at 57.5 (55.5 in January). 2-month high Flash US Manufacturing Output Index at 52.5 (50.5 in January). 2-month high Chris Williamson, chief business economist at IHS Markit, said: The pace of economic growth accelerated sharply in February as virus containment measures, tightened to fight the Omicron wave, were scaled back. Demand was reported to have revived and supply constraints, both in terms of component availability and staff shortages, moderated. With demand rebounding and firms seeing a relatively modest impact on order books from the Omicron wave, future output expectations improved to the highest for 15 months, and jobs growth accelerated to the highest since last May, adding to the upbeat picture. The service sector rebounded especially impressively, accompanied by a more muted upturn in manufacturing. Goods producers remain hamstrung by supply shortages which, although easing to the lowest since last May, continued to severely limit production growth, resulting in a further large rise in backlogs of work. Wall Street (which was closed for Presidents Day yesterday) has opened lower. S&amp;P 500 down 23 points, or 0.5%, at 4,325 Dow Jones down 192 points, or 0.56%, at 33,886 Nasdaq down 132 points, or nearly 1%, at 13,415 Russian sanctions: who has been hit and who might be next? My colleague Jasper Jolly writes: The UK sanctions list cited Timchenko’s shareholding in Bank Rossiya. However, he is also a board member and shareholder of PAO Novatek, the largest gas producer in Russia not directly controlled by the Russian state. Novatek is among 31 Russian companies whose shares are listed on the London Stock Exchange, giving international investors easier access. The price of its London-listed shares dropped by 8% on Tuesday, a much steeper drop than shares in Novatek’s main listing in Moscow, which fell by only 1.2%, suggesting concerns about the London listing. Timchenko was the founder of Gunvor Resources, a major commodities trading company based in Geneva. However, Timchenko sold his shares in Gunvor in 2014 when he was sanctioned by the US following Russia’s annexation of the Crimea region of Ukraine. Bill Browder, a former investor in Russia who campaigns for global anti-corruption laws, described the UK’s sanctions as “pretty tepid if you ask me” and highlighted the absence of Russia’s two biggest state-controlled banks, Sberbank and VTB, in a post on Twitter. GSK has revealed that its consumer healthcare business will be called Haleon after its planned spinoff and London stock market listing this summer. Its brands include Sensodyne toothpaste and Voltaren and Panadol painkillers. The drugmaker said: Haleon (pronounced “Hay-Lee-On”) is inspired by the merging of the words ‘Hale’, which is an old English word that means ‘in good health’ and Leon, which is associated with the word ‘strength’. The business has grown in size after merging with consumer product portfolios from Novartis and Pfizer, and now generates annual sales of £10bn. Brian McNamara, chief executive designate of Haleon, said: Introducing Haleon to the world marks another step in our journey to become a new, standalone company. Our name is grounded in our purpose to deliver better everyday health with humanity and to be a world leader in consumer healthcare. We are on track to launch Haleon in mid-2022 and our business momentum is strong. We look forward to updating investors and analysts more on this at our capital markets event at the end of February. Emma Walmsley, GSK’s chief executive, reiterated that Haleon had “strong prospects forgrowth, and through listing will unlock significant value for GSK shareholders”. She has been under pressure from the activist investor Elliott Management, a New York hedge fund, to explore a sale of the business, rather than a spin-off. Our economics editor Larry Elliott has spoken to Kristalina Georgieva, the managing director of the International Monetary Fund. He asked her about Russia and she expressed concerns about the possible impact on the global economy. She said: It is very concerning. It adds to uncertainty at a time when there is plenty of it, because we are not yet done with the pandemic and because the path to recovery for many countries is a difficult one. Georgieva said the tension had already had an impact on Ukraine through investors becoming more “hesitant” and said sanctions would have an impact on Russia and neighbouring countries. I anticipate an impact on Russia and through it an impact on Central Asia and the Caucasus - countries more dependent on economic ties with Russia. On the impact on the global economy, Georgieva said it would depend on how the crisis unfolded. I still hope there is a path to avoid a more dramatic impact. A more profound development could put pressure on energy prices to go higher. It is happening at a time when there are more risks for the world economy. Aggravating those risks is in nobody’s interests. The FTSE 100 index is holding on to its meagre gains, trading 17 points, or 0.2%, higher at 7,501, while Europe’s other main indices are flat to slightly lower. In London, the Russian miner Evraz fell more than 4% this morning but is now the top riser, up 4.8% at 280p. Jess Ralston, analyst at the energy and climate intelligence unit, a non-profit organisation, warned about the impact on UK (and European) households: Gas prices are already surging and with Germany putting a halt to Nord Stream 2, the gas crisis now looks almost certain to last for years, not months. Given the global nature of gas markets, the UK’s dependence on gas for heating and power will leave UK bill payers on the hook for Putin’s incursion into Ukraine. The government will increasingly feel the pressure to shield households in the long-term by insulating more homes, speeding the switch over to electric heat pumps and getting on with delivering the net zero policies that will wean us off volatile gas and protect us from future crises. Here is our full story on Germany stopping the certification process for the controversial Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline in reaction to Russia’s recognition of the self-proclaimed republics in Luhansk and Donetsk in east Ukraine, by our man in Berlin, Philip Oltermann. Germany’s chancellor Olaf Scholz described Putin’s recognition of the Russian-controlled territories as a “grave breach” of international law that broke with decades of agreements between Russia and the west. “The situation today is fundamentally different,” he said. European natural gas contracts rose 9.5% to €78 a megawatt hour after the announcement from Scholz. The UK has imposed sanctions on five Russian banks and three high-net worth individuals, including Vladimir Putin’s close ally Gennady Timchenko, a Russian oligarch and billionaire businessman. The move comes after the Russian president ordered troops into eastern Ukraine last night, and formally recognised the territories of Donetsk and Luhansk as independent states. The banks are: Rossiya, IS Bank, General Bank, Promsvyazbank and the Black Sea Bank. The other individuals are Igor Rotenberg and Boris Rotenberg, who together own the SGM Group, which is Russia’s biggest construction firm in the oil and gas industry. Boris Johnson told parliament: This is the first tranche, the first barrage of what we are prepared to do. Any assets they hold in the UK will be frozen and the individuals concerned will be banned from travelling here. We must now brace ourselves for the next possible stages of Putin’s plan. Putin is establishing the pretx for a full-scale offensive. Britain has also previously threatened to block Russian companies from raising capital in London and to expose what Johnson calls the “Matryoshka dolls of Russian-owned companies”. More on Dave Ramsden’s comments from Joanna Partridge, who is at the National Farmers’ Union’s annual conference: Inflation, rising energy prices and the intensification of the crisis in Ukraine are among the string of challenges facing farmers and businesses in the current “age of uncertainty”, according to Bank of England policymaker Sir David Ramsden. Speaking to English and Welsh food producers at the annual conference of the National Farmers’ Union, the Bank’s deputy governor said “on inflation I haven’t seen such a challenging set of circumstances as this”. He added: The shock of the decision to leave EU, then the pandemic two years ago, now the energy price shock and intensification of the crisis in Ukraine, are creating uncertainty about where we go next. This does feel like the age of uncertainty. Fruit grower Ali Capper, chair of English Apples and Pears, told Ramsden that farmers in her sector are facing significantly higher costs this year, and will potentially have to pay workers 40% higher wages in 2022 than a year earlier. He said: The shocks that are coming in terms of fertiliser prices and other input prices are very, very significant. You are facing much higher inflation rates than I am seeing as a monetary policymaker in the economy as a whole. He said the best thing which could be done by the Bank - which expects inflation to peak at around 7.25% in April when the impending rise in the energy price cap takes effect - was to stick to its plans to maintain financial stability. Ramsden, whose mother was raised on a Welsh hill farm, also revealed he had watched TV presenter Jeremy Clarkson’s attempts to become a farmer on series Clarkson’s Farm, where Clarkson was surprised that he was judged to be a key worker during Covid. European shares have see-sawed: they are now back in the red with the exception of the UK’s FTSE 100 index, which is 21 points ahead at 7,505, a 0.28% gain. Meanwhile, Bank of England deputy governor Dave Ramsden said that there will be further interest rate rises in the months to come as the central bank responds to soaring inflation. But he said the longer-term path was hard to predict because of heightened uncertainty, including the Russia-Ukraine conflict. Ramsden said in a keynote speech at the National Farmers’ Union’s annual conference: Some further modest tightening in monetary policy is likely to be appropriate in the coming months. The word ‘modest’ is significant here though – I do not envisage Bank Rate rising to anything like its pre-2007 level of 5% or above, let alone to the kind of levels we used to see before the monetary policy committee was formed in 1997. New shocks can arise – we did not foresee the recent rise in energy prices, and as we meet today the crisis in Ukraine is intensifying – and so we should remain humble about the possibility that things might turn out differently. [This] makes it particularly difficult to make predictions about where monetary policy might be headed in the medium term. Investors are expecting a further rate hike after the Bank’s next scheduled meeting on 17 March, following two increases in February and December, to 0.5% now. Financial markets have priced in rates rising to nearly 2% by the end of the year. UK inflation jumped to 5.5% in January, its highest level in nearly three decades, and the Bank expects it to peak at 7.25% in April when a 54% hike in household energy bills comes into effect. Germany has taken steps to halt the process of certifying the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline from Russia, chancellor Olaf Scholz said today, as the West started taking punitive measures against Moscow over the Ukraine crisis, AP reports. Scholz told reporters in Berlin that his government was taking the measure in response to Moscow’s actions in Ukraine. The decision is a significant move for the German government, which had long resisted pulling the plug on the project despite pressure from the United States and some European countries to do so. Washington has for years argued that building another pipeline bringing natural gas from Russia to Germany increases Europe’s reliance on Russian energy supplies. Scholz said that the government had decided to “reassess” the certification of the pipeline, which hasn’t begun operating yet, in light of the latest developments. “That will certainly take time, if I may say so,” he said. Germany meets about a quarter of its energy needs with natural gas, a share that will increase in the coming years as the country switches off its last three nuclear power plants and phases out the use of coal. About half of the natural gas used in Germany comes from Russia. As a reminder, you can follow the latest developments in our Ukraine crisis live blog: BREAKING: Germany has pulled the plug on the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline, according to the chancellor Olaf Scholz. The UK and Europe’s main stock markets have turned positive after suffering heavy losses (of more than 2% on the German, Italian and Spanish stock indices) in early trading. The UK’s FTSE 100 is up 29 points, or 0.4%, at 7,513 while the other exchanges are broadly flat. Brent crude, the global benchmark for Russia’s main export (oil), ventured above $99 a barrel earlier but is now trading at $98.15, up 2.9%. Russia’s two main stock indices are still trading lower. The dollar-denominated RTS index has fallen 3.5% after yesterday’s 13.2% plunge, while the rouble-denominated Moex index is down 3.86% following last night’s 10.5% drop. The Russian rouble fell to a near two-year low of 81 to the dollar, but has now recovered to 78.88. Ukraine’s hryvnia currency has fallen to a seven-year low, trading at 28.9 to the dollar. Here is our full story on what’s going on in financial markets. And a round-up of our other main stories: HSBC boosted its banker bonus pool by nearly a third after a global recovery from the Covid crisis helped profits more than double last year. The London-headquartered bank increased its staff bonus pool to $3.5bn (£2.6bn), a move it said was justified due to its strong financial performance and the need to compete for bankers in an “extraordinarily competitive labour market”. The UK government has recorded the first monthly budget surplus since the start of the coronavirus pandemic, despite a weaker than expected January performance as rising inflation pushed up debt interest costs. The Office for National Statistics said public sector net borrowing was in surplus of £2.9bn last month – the first month in which income outstripped expenditure since January 2020. Hundreds of thousands of tonnes of surplus food that could be going to hungry families is going to waste as supermarkets restrict who their suppliers can give it to, according to food distribution charities. Several independent charities, which are grouped together under the Xcess network, say they struggle to source unwanted edible food from manufacturers and processors because of supermarkets’ rules about the handling of their own-label products. The number of women in FTSE 100 boardroom roles has jumped to 39.1% from 12.5% 10 years ago, data has revealed, even as equality charities said progress for women in senior leadership roles was severely lagging. And in our Suisse secrets series, our banking correspondent Kalyeena Makortoff has looked at how Swiss banking secrecy enabled an unequal global financial system. There are fresh calls on the UK government to clamp down on Russian influence in UK finance and politics. The UK capital is also known as “Londongrad”. Last month ministers were criticised by MPs from all parties for failing to tackle London’s reputation as a money-laundering hub used by Russian oligarchs, criminals and kleptocrats. Caroline Lucas, Green MP for Brighton Pavilion, and a former party leader, has tweeted: Russia’s move against Ukraine has massively increased the uncertainty around the economic outlook for the eurozone, according to the European Economic Commissioner Paolo Gentiloni. He said at an economic conference today that “uncertainty remains around us,” adding: The violation of international law through Russian recognition of two separate territories in Ukraine will strongly increase this uncertainty. The European Commission already cut its growth forecast for the 19-nation currency bloc to 4% this year from 4.3% earlier this month, citing a new wave of Covid-19 infections, soaring energy prices and ongoing supply chain problems. German business morale improved in February across all sectors, according to a closely-watched monthly survey from the Munich-based Ifo institute. Its business climate index rose to 98.9 from an upwardly revised 96.0 in January, marking the highest level since August. This was better than economists had expected. Commerzbank’s chief economist Jörg Krämer said: The results of the February Ifo survey are a clear sign that the German economy will benefit massively from the easing of the coronavirus crisis in the coming months. However, the Ukraine crisis hangs over Europe’s largest economy “like the sword of Damocles,” experts said. Ifo economist Klaus Wohlrabe told Reuters that “the uncertainty will increase massively” and the biggest risk for German companies comes from soaring energy prices. “That would be poison for the [economic] recovery.” ING economist Carsten Brzeski said: We don’t want to speculate about the next steps in the Russia-Ukraine crisis, but it is clear that the new uncertainty will weigh on business sentiment, dent purchasing power if energy prices continue to increase, and could eventually also, temporarily, subdue business investment. Natural gas prices jumped 7%, despite assurances from the Russian president that Russia will continue to deliver uninterrupted natural gas supplies to world markets. He made the pledge in a letter to an energy conference in Doha. British wholesale gas for next-day delivery rose 7% to 183p per therm this morning. The United States and its European allies are set to announce fresh sanctions on Russia today, after Vladimir Putin ordered Russian troops to march into eastern Ukraine. Fears of supply disruption have sent London-traded metal prices surging. Aluminium hit a more than 13-year high of $3,350 a tonne while benchmark nickel prices reached the highest level since August 2011. Oil prices are trading at seven-year highs and Brent crude is fast approaching $100 a barrel. The global benchmark has jumped 3.8% to $99.04 a barrel, the highest since September 2014, while US light crude is 5.2% higher at $95.81 a barrel. Experts are saying that oil could easily go through $100 and push towards $120 a barrel. The last time Brent was at (and above) $100 a barrel was in early September 2014. Victoria Scholar, head of investment at interactive investor, said: The intensifying crisis between Russia and Ukraine has raised concerns about the supply disruptions that would ensue as sanctions look set to cripple Russia, the world’s second largest oil exporter and the world’s top natural gas producer. If Putin continues his aggression and the threat of war becomes a reality, oil prices could easily push beyond $100 towards $120 a barrel to fresh highs not seen since 2014. Not only are geopolitical tensions supporting the uptrend but the fundamentals of supercharged demand post COVID coupled by constrained supply from OPEC+ continue to support more bullish price action ahead. London-listed Russian companies have suffered heavy share losses in recent hours. The FTSE 100 steelmaker Evraz, which is incorporated in London but has significant operations in Russia, is among the top fallers on the blue-chip index, trading nearly 4% lower. It is 29% owned by Roman Abramovich, the Russian owner of Chelsea football club. Some 31 Russian companies are listed on the London Stock Exchange. Some which have their primary listing in Moscow have secondary listings in London, to raise money here. They range from state-backed oil and gas producers Rosneft and Gazprom, to state-run banks VTB and Sberbank, to independent mining companies like Norilsk Nickel that have no state ownership. In London, Rosneft shares lost more than 7% this morning and later traded 3.7% lower, while Lukoil lost 6.2%, and Gazprom tumbled 8.1%. VTB Bank lost 9.2% and Sberbank plunged 13%. The mining group Norilsk Nickel fell 3.5%. Neil Shearing, group chief economist at Capital Economics, said: The economic and market consequences of a war between Russia and Ukraine will depend on the severity of the conflict, and the response of the West. But in most cases the economic impact on countries beyond Russia and Ukraine is likely to be limited. The most significant consequence is likely to be that it will add to inflation pressures this year. At the risk of stating the obvious, the biggest economic impact will be on Ukraine. The country’s balance sheet is extremely fragile, and some form of external financial assistance and/or debt restructuring is likely to be needed over the coming months. Depending on the evolution of the conflict, this could be challenging to co-ordinate. The impact on Russia’s economy will depend in large part on the response of Western governments. It’s balance sheet is stronger than at the time of the 2014 Crimea crisis - external debt is lower, and financial linkages with other major advanced economies are smaller. The imposition of sanctions will still have an impact on the economy, but all other things being equal this is likely to be smaller than in 2014-15 (when GDP fell by ~2.5% and the country experienced a financial crisis). Shearing said the biggest impact on other countries is likely to come through commodity prices. In a worst case scenario, we estimate that oil prices could rise to $120-140pb. European natural gas prices are also likely to rise further. Were this to happen, it would add around 2%-pts to headline inflation (relative to our current baseline) in advanced economies this year, with Europe hit particularly hard. In normal times, central banks would tend to look through an energy-led rise in inflation, but given the current high rates of inflation, and corresponding concerns about it feeding higher inflation expectations, it’s possible that this adds to the list of reasons for policymakers to raise interest rates. Finally, while a lot of bad news is now priced into Russian financial markets, this doesn’t appear to be the case elsewhere. Most of the sell-off in global equities this year can be attributed to the hawkish shift by the world’s major central banks. This suggests that there is still significant downside for global stock markets (and upside for safe havens, including US Treasuries) if the conflict escalates. It could also reverse this year’s pattern of European equities outperforming those in the US. Russian stocks have notched up further losses. The dollar-denominated RTS index on the Moscow stock exchange fell as much as 6.4% to its lowest level since November 2020. It is now down 5.2% after yesterday’s 13.2% drop, while the rouble-based MOEX index has lost 4%, following yesterday’s 10.5% decline. Gold, a traditional safe-haven investment, has climbed in recent days and reached $1,910 an ounce, a gain of 0.2%. Silver prices are also up, by more than 1%. However Bitcoin, the world’s best-known digital currency, has fallen 0.4% to $36,913. At the opening bell, the FTSE 100 index in London lost 110 points and is now 1.4% lower at 7,380, a 105 point fall. France’s CAC fell 2.3%, while Germany’s Dax, Spain’s Ibex and Italy’s FTSE MiB all tumbled by 2.5%. The rouble has fallen sharply to 80.8 against the dollar, from levels around 70 four months ago. This is likely to fuel inflation, one of Russians’ main worries, and further drag down living standards. After yesterday’s 3.3% fall, the rouble is down a further 1.2% against the dollar this morning, and went as low as 80.97, a level last seen in March 2020. Against the euro, it has also lost 1.2% to 91.2. Ukraine’s hryvinia currency weakened more than 1% this morning, slipping to 28.9 against the dollar. It has lost about 6.5% since the start of the year as investors have pulled money out of the country. Russian bonds have also sold off, sending their yields soaring. Yields (the return to an investor from the bond’s coupon, or interest, payments) on Russia’s 10-year benchmark OFZ bonds hit 10.79% this morning. The cost of insuring Russian sovereign debt against default has soared to its highest level since early 2016. Five-year credit default swaps, which are used by investors to hedge against risk, jumped to 327 basis points, according to Reuters and data from IHS Markit –- the first time the 300 basis point threshold has been breached since April 2016. The UK government has recorded the first monthly budget surplus since the start of the coronavirus pandemic, despite a weaker than expected January performance as rising inflation pushed up debt interest costs, reports our economics correspondent Richard Partington. The Office for National Statistics said public sector net borrowing, excluding the nationalised banks, was in surplus of £2.9bn last month – the first net positive month for the public finances since January 2020. Although this was £5.4bn less than borrowed in January 2021, it was still a £7bn smaller surplus than in the same month in 2020 before the onset of Covid-19. City economists had forecast a surplus of £3.5bn. January is typically a net positive month for the public finances due to the timing of self-assessed income tax payments. Hinting at tough measures in the forthcoming budget next month, Rishi Sunak, the chancellor, said: We provided unprecedented support throughout the pandemic to protect families and businesses and it has worked, with the UK seeing the fastest economic growth in the G7 last year. But our debt has increased substantially and there are further pressures on the public finances, including from rising inflation. Keeping the public finances on a sustainable path is crucial so we can continue helping the British people when needed, without burdening future generations with high debt repayments. National insurance is set to go up in April. British health secretary Sajid Javid said Russia’s invasion of Ukraine has already begun so Britain will impose sanctions on Russia. Reuters reported that tanks and other military vehicles have moved through the separatist-controlled city of Donetsk after Putin formally recognised two breakaway regions as independent states, and ordered the deployment of Russian forces to “keep the peace”. Speaking on Sky News, Javid said: You can conclude that the invasion of Ukraine has begun. The Russians, President Putin, has decided to attack the sovereignty of Ukraine and its territorial integrity. Boris Johnson is due to address parliament on Ukraine later today. Javid said sanctions would be announced in the statement to parliament. I’m sure that we’ll make those sanctions as targeted as possible to the people that are responsible for this flagrant violation of international law. Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. The deepening Ukraine crisis has sent global stocks tumbling and crude oil surging. Last night, Russian president Vladimir Putin ordered his military to enter the Russian-controlled areas of southeast Ukraine. In a lengthy televised address, he had recognised the territories of Donetsk and Luhansk as independent states. Washington, European and other countries have condemned the move and threatened to impose tough sanctions. Boris Johnson is chairing a meeting of the UK’s emergency Cobra committee this morning to sign off a package of sanctions against Russia. The initial signs were that the package would target “those complicit in the violation of Ukraine’s territorial integrity”. You can read more on our Ukraine crisis live blog. Financial markets are in for a torrid day. In Asia, Japan’s Nikkei lost 1.7%, Hong Kong’s Hang Seng tumbled 2.9%, the Shanghai Composite Index fell just over 1% and South Korea’s Kospi dropped 1.35%. European and US markets are also braced for heavy losses at the opening bell. On oil markets, Brent crude is marching towards $100 a barrel amid supply fears. It has gained more than $2, or 2.2%, to $97.51 a barrel while US light crude has jumped $3.60 to $94.67 a barrel, a gain of nearly 4%. Viktor Szabo, an emerging market portfolio manager at abrdn in London, told Reuters last night: It is probably an understatement to say that it will be an ugly day [on the markets]. I was hoping we weren’t going to get here, but this is a significant step. Russian markets were still trading when Putin announced his decision live on television following phone calls to the leaders of Germany and France. The rouble dropped 3.3%, falling past 80 against the dollar, while Moscow’s stock markets plummeted to their lowest level in over a year. The dollar-denominated RTS index ended the day 13.2% lower while the rouble-based MOEX Russian index lost 10.5%. The Agenda 9am GMT: Germany Ifo business climate survey (forecast: 96.5) 9am GMT: Italy inflation final for January (forecast: 4.8%) 10.45am GMT: Bank of England deputy governor Dave Ramsden gives speech 11am GMT: CBI Industrial trends survey for February 2pm GMT: US House prices for December 2.45pm GMT: US Markit PMIs for February (manufacturing, services and composite) 3pm GMT: US Consumer Confidence for February (forecast: 110)The US supreme court has rejected a case by the Dakota Access oil pipeline operator to avoid a legally mandated environmental review, in a major victory for tribes and environmentalists campaigning to permanently shut down the polluting energy project. Energy Transfer, the pipeline operator, had sought to overturn a legal victory won by the Standing Rock Sioux Tribe in 2020 that struck down a key federal permit that violated the National Environmental Policy Act (Nepa). On Tuesday the US supreme court rejected the company’s bid to challenge the 2020 ruling, which required the US army corps of engineers to conduct a comprehensive environmental impact statement (EIS). As a result, the lower court’s decision remains intact and the army corps must complete a review of the pipeline’s route underneath Lake Oahe, which straddles the border of North Dakota and South Dakota, that complies with Nepa. Indigenous communities rely on the lake, which they consider sacred, for drinking water and food. The ruling is a huge victory for North Dakota tribes including the Standing Rock Sioux Tribe which rallied support from across the world and sued the US government in a campaign to stop the environmentally risky pipeline being built on tribal lands. It signals the end of the litigation road for the Texan energy company, but the pipeline, known as DAPL and open since 2017, will continue to operate as the review is carried out. “The litigation concerning the pipeline is over, but the fight continues,” said attorney Jan Hasselman from EarthJustice, the legal non-profit that represents the Standing Rock Sioux Tribe in the case. “We call on the administration to close the pipeline until a full safety and environmental review is complete. DAPL never should have been authorized in the first place, and this administration is failing to address the persistent illegality of this pipeline,” Hasselman added. The eventual future of the fossil fuel project was not part of the supreme court appeal, but Energy Transfer said in court papers that the pipeline was “vulnerable to a shutdown” with the new environmental review pending. The Standing Rock tribe, along with the Yankton Sioux, the Oglala Sioux and the Cheyenne River Sioux tribes, have long opposed the biggest pipeline out of the Bakken shale basin, which runs about 1,170 miles from North Dakota to Illinois. The disputed section under Lake Oahe, an artificial reservoir on the Missouri River, is 1.7 miles long. The tribes fear an oil spill which could be catastrophic. The legal battle dates back to 2016 when the Obama administration denied permits for the pipeline to cross the Missouri river and ordered a full EIS to analyze alternative routes and the impact on the tribe’s treaty rights. In his first week in office, Donald Trump signed an executive order to expedite construction. Construction of the 1,200-mile pipeline was completed in June 2017. The tribe challenged the permits – and won. As a result, the corps was ordered to redo its environmental analysis, which it did without taking into consideration tribal concerns or expert analysis. The pipeline continued to transport oil from North Dakota to Illinois. The tribes and EarthJustice, an environmental law not-for-profit group, sued again. In March 2020, federal judge James Boasberg, an Obama appointee, said the environmental analysis by both the companies behind the pipeline and the corps was severely lacking. In his ruling, Boasberg said that the company’s abysmal safety record of the pipeline parent company “does not inspire confidence”. The Biden administration urged the supreme court not to hear the subsequent appeal by Energy Transfer, saying the pipeline operator concerns about a shutdown were overstated. The company declined to comment.Boots is to offer individual lateral flow tests for as much as £5.99, including delivery, from Wednesday as retailers gear up for the end of widely available free tests. The UK’s biggest pharmacy business said customers would be able to order one test online from Wednesday or pay £17 for a pack of four, including delivery within two days. These tests will include the option to send results to the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) but they cannot be used for travel requiring a negative antigen test certificate. From early March, Boots said it would be possible to pick up lateral flow tests in more than 400 of its stores for £2.50 for one or £12 for a pack of five. These cheaper tests will also be available online with four tests priced at £9.50. These tests don’t have the UKHSA reporting function. Dan Shears, national health and safety director at the GMB union, said: “This is rampant profiteering at the expense of working people. Almost £6 per test is a huge sacrifice for the lowest paid workers, and, if they wish to test family members as well, then the cost will soon become prohibitive. “The government should provide tests for free – they are a clear public health benefit that far outweighs cost. But if we have to pay, test provision should be subsidised to make tests affordable. “The reality is that those who are most at risk are least able to afford testing, meaning it will not happen and low-paid workers – many of whom are key workers – will continue to take the brunt of Covid.” Frances O’Grady, general secretary of the TUC union body, agreed that free tests must remain in place. She said: “Introducing charges for Covid tests in the middle of a cost-of-living crisis is both heartless and reckless. This decision will hit low-income and frontline workers the hardest – at a time when many are struggling to make ends meet. Do ministers really want low-paid staff – with public-facing jobs – to go into work untested?” Asif Aziz, director of healthcare services at Boots UK, said: “We are pleased to be expanding our Covid-19 testing services even further, with affordable lateral flow testing options for those who still want peace of mind from asymptomatic testing. “While it is great that we are returning to normal and finding a way to live with Covid-19, we encourage our customers and patients to stay safe and continue to take measures to limit the spread of the virus, especially to those in vulnerable groups.” Free testing for the general public will end in England from 1 April, with most people having to pay for lateral flow and PCR tests including those visiting people in care homes. There will be some exceptions. Free symptomatic tests will continue to be available for NHS patients and those in care homes, and some asymptomatic testing for both. More broadly, the UKHSA has yet to set out which other groups will remain eligible for free tests, although availability is expected to be limited to people aged 80 and above or those with compromised immune systems only. There will also be tests kept for the Panoramic study, which is assessing the efficacy of antiviral drugs, the Vivaldi scheme, examining Covid in care homes, and Siren, which looks at the NHS. Announcing the change of plan on Monday, the prime minister, Boris Johnson, emphasised “personal responsibility” as the best way to control Covid-19 from now on. Johnson said the primary line of defence would be “pharmaceutical interventions”, such as antivirals and vaccines. However, concerns have been raised about testing for NHS staff and other workers dealing regularly with the general public. The British Independent Retailers Association, which represents thousands of small local shops, said it was concerned about the end of free testing. “Employers have a duty of care and need to know if they are required to provide testing facilities to employees – if yes then the kits should be free to employers,” said Andrew Goodacre, the chief executive of the trade body.Well, blow me down with a feather duster. That’s basically what the government has announced today: we are going to blow Vladimir Putin down with a feather duster. These aren’t meaningful sanctions. They are the bare minimum of what we should have done weeks ago, when Putin first announced that he did not respect the territorial integrity of Ukraine. They are not a proper response to Putin’s declaration of independence for Donetsk and Luhansk and his sending in of troops. I don’t doubt that Putin is laughing his way to his dacha. His mocking sidekick Dmitry Medvedev said as much yesterday. The Russian banks that Boris Johnson put on the sanctions list today aren’t the major players: they’re the spare change in the Russian economy. The three individuals he named have already been sanctioned in the US since 2018. So, we’re picking off the minnows but allowing the basking sharks to swim freely. Johnson didn’t even know whom we had already sanctioned, claiming that Roman Abramovich was on the list and refusing to correct the record when I asked him about it. Later in the day, his office had to own up that he was wrong. Is it too much to expect that a prime minister at a moment of international crisis would actually know some of the details? Johnson keeps on saying that we are going to have a public register of beneficial ownership of UK property, so that shell companies owning swaths of UK property can’t hide their oligarch owners. Yet the government has been promising this for years – and Companies House still doesn’t have the power or the resources to verify information registered with it, so it’s easy to lie with impunity. Johnson says they are closing the gold-plated tier 1 visa scheme for wealthy “investors”, but he still won’t tell us how many oligarchs were granted rights here without a proper examination of where their wealth came from. It’s difficult not to worry that the Russians who have given money to the Tories can have done so only because they were given UK nationality by the Tories. In any other country we would call that corruption. What angers me is that this is exactly what we did when Russia annexed Crimea in 2014. Some useful idiots then repeated the claims that Crimeans wanted to be part of Russia. Others said it was as much part of Russia as the Isle of Wight is British. Yes, the west huffed and puffed. We introduced a few minor sanctions. But soon we lost interest. Putin is a liar and a ruthless dictator. Human rights groups have long documented his regime’s record of repression and terror. He is a kleptocrat; consider the plunder by him and his allies of Russia’s wealth. Some estimates say he has become the richest man on the planet. He has ruthless imperial ambitions, with his hankering to construct a “greater Russia”, with echoes of the old Soviet Union. He regularly resorts to excessive use of force. Witness the 334 hostages killed at Beslan school in 2004, including 176 children, or the 130 killed in the Moscow theatre siege. He understands only force, and a feather duster isn’t going to stop him. When he resigned as foreign secretary, Johnson said that his biggest mistake was how he dealt with Russia. Today was another lost opportunity. We appear weak, spineless and vacillating. We still don’t seem able to wean ourselves off Russian money, and government communications are so chaotic that it’s unclear whether we think Russia has invaded Ukraine yet or not. We need much tougher, wider sanctions. We need reform of Companies House so we know the truth behind shell companies. We need a new Foreign Lobbying Act, reform to the Official Secrets Act and the immediate publication of the review into tier 1 visas. In my book, Putin has crossed the line. MPs of all hues agree. We are keen for the UK and her allies to put on a united front – and show some real mettle. Chris Bryant is the Labour MP for Rhondda and a member of the Commons foreign affairs select committeeTrapped in her home on the banks of the River Severn in Shrewsbury, Siobhan Connor said this was the 17th time she had been flooded in 14 years – and it was only becoming more frequent. “If you look at all the forecasts, this is going to become an annual or biannual occurrence,” Connor said from her first-floor window, as flood water filled the ground floor up to waist height. “We’ve had four major floods here in two years, and they’re now at record level.” Residents of Shrewsbury said they were hit by the worst flooding in 20 years this week as they criticised authorities for decades of inaction. After being flooded for three consecutive years, many in the town said they feared the climate crisis was making major flood events more frequent while the government was doing little to help. “River levels today are close to the 2000 record, and 22 years later what have they done?” said Connor. Forecasters had anticipated that the river level at Welsh Bridge in Shrewsbury could surpass the record 5.25 metres measured in 2000, but at its peak on Tuesday morning it was just under at 5.15 metres. Despite having installed state-of-the-art flood defences and elevated her home, Connor feared the damage this time round would be extensive. “We’ll have to get in massive industrial dehumidifiers which will probably drain about 10 litres of water a day for at least a month. And we all know energy bills are going up in a couple of months. There’s so little government support, it’s expensive,” she said. She said it was a combination of housebuilding on floodplains and climate change that were pushing water levels ever higher, and felt action by the Environment Agency was ineffective. “There’s ways of mitigating flooding that could have been done with the right planning years ago. There’s nothing now we didn’t already know 20 years ago,” she said. Down the road, Louise Turner was helping to pump water out of the basement of her family’s business, the Abbots Mead hotel, which they have run since 1994. “I haven’t seen it this bad in years, since 2000 probably. This is horrendous this time. Surely it shouldn’t be happening in this day and age,” she said. “Usually it comes in a little bit, and our pumps kick in. This time the basement has flooded, including one of our family rooms, and the restaurant. It’s impossible to see the scale of the damage until it goes down, but it will be a lot.” She added: “It will be in the news for a couple of days and then people will forget about it until the next time round. It happens continuously. Something needs to change.” On Tuesday Shrewsbury’s Conservative MP, Daniel Kawczynski, wrote to the prime minister asking him to visit the area to witness the “extent of the devastation … to homes and businesses”. Lezley Picton, the Conservative leader of Shropshire council, said local authorities were working extensively with the EA on solutions to stem the flow upstream, but admitted a quicker fix was needed. “We need short-term as well as long-term solutions, because businesses and people’s homes can’t go on like this. It’s heartbreaking, for some of the businesses this is the third time in three years they’ve flooded,” she said. “I’d like to see the government and the EA have some resolution to get this sorted sooner rather than later, because it’s not just us who are affected.” Downstream in Ironbridge, where the EA evacuated people from their homes and issued a severe threat to life flood warning, residents were preparing for the river to potentially overcome flood barriers on Tuesday evening. Peter Andrews, an ice-cream vendor, had decided to stay put in his cottage on the banks of the river and was relying on a water pump and thick metal boards to keep the waters at bay. “This is the third year running we’ve been flooded, so I’m getting used to it now. But prior to that it was around 2000 we had floods. It’s got to be down to global warming and all these freaky storms,” he said. “But what can you do? I would like to see more action to improve the situation, but I don’t know what the answer is.”Food producers have said the challenges they face are “the toughest in a generation” as members of the National Farmers’ Union met for their annual conference after the first full year of Brexit. Farmers from England and Wales gathered in Birmingham on Tuesday, against the backdrop of huge upheaval in agriculture, with labour shortages caused by Brexit and Covid, an ongoing pig cull and the transition to life beyond the EU’s subsidy scheme. The day opened with a blistering attack on ministers from the National Farmers’ Union (NFU) president, Minette Batters, who accused the government of having no post-Brexit plan and of showing a “total lack of understanding of how food production works.” Her views were echoed by farmers speaking from the floor of the conference. Sam Godfrey, a pig farmer from Lincolnshire, said it was the “toughest time” he had known in 14 years on the family farm, while his father said he had not seen such challenging conditions since the 1970s. Godfrey, who has a herd of 6,500 sows, said pigs were still backing up on their farm, as abattoirs continued to take fewer animals to slaughter each week than planned. This is despite the family having invested £50,000 in converting buildings into extra space to house their pigs. “We have some spare capacity,” Godfrey said. “But we have never had a situation where it was this prolonged.” The NFU estimates that 200,000 pigs are backed up on farms in England, and are unable to be taken to slaughter as a result of labour shortages at abattoirs. Meanwhile, 40,000 healthy animals are thought to have been culled, and have not entered the food chain. Batters told the conference she had received a “heart-breaking” email from a family, who did not want to share their name, who had been producing pigs for more than 50 years. “They have taken the decision to cull 4,700 sows,” she said. Their son had hoped to enter the family business after completing an agriculture degree but had been forced to find another job. The government recently announced an immediate review of fairness in the pig industry supply chain and extended measures to support pig producers, including permitting foreign butchers to travel to the UK on temporary visas, longer working hours at processing plants and a scheme allowing producers to store carcasses for several months before processing. However, ministers have stopped short of providing financial support to affected pig farmers, in contrast with Scotland, Northern Ireland and some EU countries. One agricultural company, Thanet Earth, which grows tomatoes, cucumbers and peppers in glasshouses in Kent, said it had lost £320,000-worth of produce in 2021, when crops could not be picked at the right time to sell to its primary customers. “Some of it went to charity, but it hits us as a loss because it is a low-margin industry,” said Robert James, technical director of Thanet Earth. “The impact of not having access to labour.” Others warn that some smaller growers may leave the industry if they are unable to get enough workers to pick their crops. “We don’t know until we get into the summer whether we will get the workers we need,” said Philip Pearson, group development director at APS Produce, the UK’s largest tomato grower. The company requires 1,000 seasonal workers each year. “What this is going to mean is more imported food.” Producers say post-Brexit visa quotas are holding them back. The government has kept the number of seasonal worker permits at the 30,000 people allowed in 2021, resisting calls for a significant increase.The veteran Kremlin spokesperson Dmitry Peskov certainly had not been authorised to declare war on Ukraine in his daily press briefing on Tuesday, but he was coming perilously close to doing so anyway. He could not explain if Russia had recognised the self-proclaimed republics of Donetsk and Luhansk up to their current borders, or with claims on further Ukrainian land. The answer could be the difference between a stalemate and a Russian war of conquest. And, not knowing that Vladimir Putin would weigh that evening to settle the question in favour of the expanded borders, Peskov was making a hash of it. “Do these borders include Mariupol,” a journalist asked. “I have nothing to add,” replied Peskov, who had already delivered his one-line talking point: “Within the borders in which they exist and have been proclaimed.” “Meaning within the current borders?” another journalist ventured, hoping that the sixth question on the topic might lead to a breakthrough. “I have nothing to add to this,” Peskov replied. And on it went. Putin signed a presidential order to recognise the territories’ independence on Monday but it only became clear on Tuesday evening that Putin would back the territories’ claims to nearly three times the area currently under their control, making an offensive in east Ukraine a distinct possibility in the near future. For nearly a day, officials were treading water. A deputy prime minister said Russia had recognised the current borders where the states “operate and have jurisdiction.” An MP contradicted him, saying it should be the expanded borders, then contradicted himself, saying he was just expressing his personal opinion. It is possible that Putin only made up his mind later on Tuesday, after he gauged the reactions from the west to what some called his “re-invasion” of east Ukraine. Analysts who spent Tuesday waiting for Putin’s decision on the issue said that backing the territorial claims could “definitely mean a war”. “In Moscow, the open question is what particular borders they’re going to defend,” said Andrei Kortunov, the director general of the Russian International Affairs Council, a thinktank, noting the territorial claims could be a justification for war. But while Putin could remain sphinx-like on the question for much of Tuesday, other officials were forced to run the gauntlet in public, stumbling over themselves to avoid making policy for the Kremlin. Denis Pushilin, the leader of the self-proclaimed Donetsk People’s Republic, went on state television late in the afternoon to discuss an official treaty he had just signed with Putin on friendship, cooperation and mutual assistance. “I want to get to the bottom of this question,” the anchor asked in an unusually insistent interview for Russian state TV. “When the agreement was signed between Russia and the [Donetsk People’s Republic], Russia took on an obligation to defend the borders of the republic in the whole Donetsk region, is that correct?” Pushilin sighed. He’d already dodged the question twice. “I’ll tell you that the question was not discussed,” he admitted a bit sheepishly. While normally you would expect a state signing a similar treaty to recognise the others’ territorial claims, he added: “We shouldn’t get ahead of ourselves.” When Putin finally chimed in later on, he made it sound as though the answer had always been obvious. “We have recognised the independence of these republics,” he said, noting that included their constitutions, which had the borders “within the Donetsk and Luhansk regions at the time when they were part of Ukraine”. The simple statement could have explosive consequences.Sarina Wiegman has urged England to be more “ruthless” in the final game of the Arnold Clark Cup against Germany on Wednesday. The Lionesses are second in the four-team friendly tournament, level on two points with Spain. Canada top the standings having beaten Germany after a 1-1 draw with England. Wiegman brushed aside concerns about the team’s lack of goals from the front, with the centre-back Millie Bright’s volley England’s only goal of the competition, but she conceded they do need to be more clinical. “It doesn’t really matter who scored the goals as long as we score a goal,” the manager said. “We want to do better in the final third and that’s about decision-making, about connection, about scanning the situation and then being ruthless. “So yes, of course, we want to do a little better because we created lots of chances. We played really well, created those chances and now we want to score them, too, and that’s just the final touch, the hardest thing.” Germany are the highest-ranked team in the competition, at third in the world, but are missing key players, including Wolfsburg’s Almuth Schult, Svenja Huth, Alex Popp and Tabea Waßmuth and Olympique Lyonnais’s Dzsenifer Marozsán. “They still have a very strong squad,” Wiegman said. “They are always a very good team and, even though they are missing very good players ,they still have very good players. We expect a good Germany, a very competitive game with a lot of speed and power, so we’ll be prepared like we were for Canada and Spain.” Wiegman rotated heavily between England’s 1-1 draw with Canada and 0-0 against Spain, making nine changes, and she confirmed she would continue to experiment. “We want to continue what we were doing but make that even better against another good opponent again. We want to see some slight changes in positions.” Wiegman has been impressed with how the squad has held up against the toughest challenges faced during her tenure. “I’ve seen a lot from us and the team. When I came in I knew the England squad was very good but it’s even better than I thought. “The players already have so much experience and there are lots of personalities within the team. How we want to add some things, to get clarity about our style of play and development, is going really well.”Athletes at the Commonwealth Games this year will be allowed to raise a fist on the podium to protest in favour of racial equality, and wave Pride flags in support of LGBT+ rights during victory laps, the Guardian has learned. The 4,500 athletes expected in Birmingham this summer will also be permitted to wear clothing, armbands and badges on the podium to support social justice causes under radical new “guiding principles” for athlete advocacy due to be announced on Tuesday. But while the move will delight many athletes and human rights campaigners, insiders are also expecting a backlash from some commentators, who may try to rebrand the event as the “Common-woke Games”. The decision to allow athletes to raise a fist on the podium in support of Black Lives Matter is particularly evocative, as it will bring back memories of Mexico 1968, when Tommie Smith and John Carlos used a black power salute on the Olympic podium to protest against racial injustice in America. Within 48 hours of their protest both men were kicked out of those Games at the urging of the International Olympic Committee president, Avery Brundage – and, even now, the IOC forbids athletes from any kind of protest or demonstration on the podium, field of play, or during ceremonies. However senior figures at the Commonwealth Games Federation believe that a more enlightened policy is now needed. The hope is that by allowing more freedom of expression in Birmingham it will allow athletes to better become – in the words of one source – “agents for change in improving the world for the better”. It is also expected that the CGF will argue that strengthening athlete advocacy and activism humanises, rather than politicises, sport – a view very different to that taken by the IOC. Another notable change for Birmingham 2022 is that Aboriginal flags will be allowed on victory laps – a decision that stirs images of the 1994 Commonwealth Games in Victoria when the Australian Cathy Freeman proudly held the flags of both her country and her people over her head, after winning the 400m. At the time such a celebration was not permitted and Freeman was publicly reprimanded by Australia’s chef de mission for the Games, Arthur Tunstall, who said: “She should have carried the Australian flag first up, and [we should have] not seen the Aboriginal flag at all.” Allowing Pride flags may also prove to be controversial in some nations given homosexuality is still illegal in 36 of the 72 countries that will compete in Birmingham. However the move is likely to be warmly endorsed by Tom Daley, who has regularly used his platform to suggest that the Commonwealth should be doing more to support LGBT rights. Speaking after winning gold at the 2018 Commonwealth Games on Australia’s Gold Coast – when homosexuality was illegal in 37 of the countries taking part – the British diver said: “You want to feel comfortable in who you are when you are standing on that diving board and for 37 Commonwealth countries that are here participating that is not the case. “I feel with the Commonwealth, we can really help push some of the other nations to relax their laws on anti-gay stuff.” Under the new guidelines athletes will be reminded that protests will be subject to the CGF ‘Charter of Good Conduct’ and must be done in “a tolerant and positive way”. Athletes will also be told that protests against a person, country or organisation – as well as actions such as defacing a national flag on the podium, hate speech, and making hand gestures affiliated with hate groups – are still forbidden.UK petrol prices are poised to hit a record 150p a litre later this week after the worsening tension in Ukraine added fresh pressure to the cost of living crisis facing households. Crude oil prices reached more than $99 a barrel at one point on Tuesday in response to Vladimir Putin’s decision to recognise the independence of two breakaway regions in eastern Ukraine. Prices later slipped back after markets viewed the west’s initial sanctions response as weak. But with Brent crude ending the day 1.6% higher at just under $97 a barrel, the RAC said motorists would quickly be paying 150p a litre for unleaded petrol and 154p a litre for diesel. Analysts said the cost of crude – already at its highest level in seven years – was soon likely to push through the $100-a-barrel level. Jeremy Nicholson, corporate affairs officer at Alfa Energy Group, said: “The deterioration of the situation in Ukraine and threat of military action by Russia is adding to the risk of disruption to European gas supplies, putting further pressure on UK/European wholesale gas and power prices. Oil prices are also being affected, with growing expectation oil could shortly reach or exceed $100 a barrel.” Germany’s decision to withhold approval of the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline drew a swift response from Dmitry Medvedev, Russia’s former president and now deputy chairman of its Security Council. “Welcome to the new world where Europeans will soon have to pay €2,000 () per thousand cubic metres!” he tweeted – suggesting prices were set to double. On a rollercoaster day, stock markets in Europe took their initial cue from Asia, which suffered big falls overnight after Russia sent troops into Donetsk and Luhansk. Share prices later recouped most of their losses in London, Frankfurt and Paris after the UK imposed sanctions on five of the smaller Russian banks and on three individuals already targeted by the US. But the risks of further turbulence on the global markets increased when the Nato secretary-general, Jens Stoltenberg, said the alliance believed Russia was planning a bigger assault on Ukraine. Western leaders in London, Washington and Brussels warned they would scale up their response if there was an intensification of Russia’s military action. Responding to all-party criticism, Britain said it would be scaling up its response while the EU and the US also pledged to put strong economic pressure on Moscow. The UK’s Centre for Economic and Business Research thinktank warned the crisis in Ukraine threatened to deliver a double blow of higher inflation and weaker growth. “Any international action will likely not only add to the current inflationary binge, possibly bringing inflation close to 10% in the main western economies, but also should slow down growth quite rapidly,” it said. The UK annual inflation rate – as measured by the consumer prices index – currently stands at 5.5% but is forecast by the Bank of England to rise above 7% by the spring. In London, the FTSE 100 index in London closed marginally higher at 7,495.97. Germany’s Dax lost 0.4% while France’s CAC slipped 0.16%, and Italy’s FTSE MiB and Spain’s Ibex were flat. Russian stock markets also staged a small comeback after earlier losses, with the dollar-denominated RTS index and the rouble-denominated Moex index on the Moscow exchange both rising 1.6% this afternoon. Shares in Russia’s largest lender Sberbank rose 1.3% (after an earlier gain of 5%) while the second-biggest bank VTB was up 1.7%, after they escaped British sanctions. Russ Mould, investment director at the investment firm AJ Bell, said: “Moscow’s RTS index was down 3% before Olaf Scholz and Mr Johnson made their statements – and it ended the day 1.6% higher. Major gainers included Gazprom, Norilsk Nickel, Tatneft and Rusal.”There can be few people who don’t want to return to the happy-go-lucky days before Covid-19. It’s only human to hanker for a time when one could hug a friend or sit next to a stranger without fear of spreading a deadly disease. But the measured judgments of the government’s top scientists on Monday evening confirmed that going back to the norms of the pre-pandemic world remains some way off. Sir Chris Whitty and Sir Patrick Vallance warned that infection rates remain high; that there are still significant numbers of people in hospital with Covid; and that a viral resurgence could “lead to [more] hospitalisations than Omicron”. This makes Boris Johnson’s decision to end all remaining Covid restrictions in England, including the legal requirement to self-isolate, baffling. Also gone by Thursday will be the self-isolation support payments of £500 for those on low incomes, and routine contact tracing. Next week Covid tests will no longer be free for most people including, bizarrely, NHS staff – which will inevitably leave vulnerable patients worried about a risk to their health. While restrictions are being relaxed in other parts of Britain, they have not been as dramatically swept away as in England. Mr Johnson’s decision is reckless. Ending self-isolation and testing will increase infections. Perhaps his gamble is that the effect will be so small that no one will notice. The government is not following the science, but its political instincts. Mr Johnson wants the support of a handful of Tory MPs amid the ongoing partygate scandal. In return for their votes, he is prepared to throw caution – and reason – to the wind. The moves are at odds with the public mood. For all the talk of restoring “freedoms”, polls indicate only 17% think people shouldn’t legally have to isolate. Mr Johnson’s claim that he is letting people exercise “personal responsibility” hides a policy where options are limited to those who have the means. Without proper support for isolation, many will go to work ill and spread Covid. The prime minister’s exhortation that British workers should imitate their German counterparts by staying at home when feeling unwell is undermined by the fact the UK has far lower levels of statutory sick pay. His claim that “anyone who wants to can buy a test” exposes an indifference towards people who cannot afford them. Mr Johnson’s message is that the pandemic is over and life can get back to normal. This is dangerous as it undercuts a public health message, when nearly a third of adults are unvaccinated. Covid is being checked but not eliminated. To help to keep the virus under control, it would be better to ease self-isolation at a slower pace and retain free tests. Mr Johnson frames this as being too expensive, a thinly veiled attempt to panic voters about the state of the public finances. For all the suffering, Covid also revealed new possibilities. The ability of the government to spend vast sums of money demonstrated the economic power it has to address a threat deemed serious enough. The pandemic functioned as an object lesson in what is possible. Maybe it was that hope Mr Johnson feared spreading – even more than the virus.After months of growing tensions, and massing troops at Ukraine’s borders, there is no doubting the gravity of this moment. The tremors are felt across Europe, which the repercussions of Russian aggression could shape for decades to come – in its east, especially, where other former Soviet republics watch anxiously, but most of all, of course, in Ukraine itself, where this is not about geopolitical struggle but the threat of a massive human disaster. Its neighbours are preparing for millions of refugees in the worst case; some Ukrainians are already fleeing, abroad or to the country’s west, though others have vowed to fight. Vladimir Putin’s recognition of Donetsk and Luhansk in eastern Ukraine as independent states, and order to send in “peacekeepers”, is the culmination of events which began in 2014 when Russia fomented the separatist insurgency that created the two self-proclaimed republics. Since Russian personnel have long been believed to be involved, this could be seen as to some degree a formalisation of the status quo. But in recognising the separatists’ claims to parts of the Donbas region that they do not currently control, the Russian president has increased the prospects of his armed forces encroaching on other parts of Ukraine. On Tuesday he requested the Duma to authorise the use of troops abroad; his angry railing the previous day, and the size and location of the military buildup, already suggested actions on a much larger scale. Besides making absurd claims of “genocide” by Ukraine, Mr Putin portrayed the country as a Russian invention with no historical right to exist and, chillingly, warned that if Kyiv did not stop the violence of which Moscow accuses it, “all responsibility for the possible continuation of the bloodshed will be entirely on the conscience of the regime ruling on the territory of Ukraine”. The best way to solve the current crisis, he has argued, is for Kyiv to abandon its goal of joining Nato and declare its neutrality. The unspoken words: or else. He has laid out his deep frustration at the Soviet Union’s collapse and desire to reestablish Russian supremacy in the region. His anger at Nato expansion comes alongside contempt for a weakened west; Brexit, domestic political divisions, the rise of China and the hope of a second Trump presidency have all, surely, factored in. Yet as Ukraine’s foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, said, there is “no other way” than focusing on de-escalation efforts: restating the costs for Russia, and keeping the door open for diplomacy, however uninterested Mr Putin appears, and however unlikely it seems to succeed. His security council looked uncomfortable as members declared their backing for recognition – but they all took what was effectively a public oath of fealty. Western unity will be essential. Russia has foreign currency reserves, and is benefiting from high energy prices, while the west must decide how far it will go amid a cost of living crisis. Germany’s suspension of certification for the Nord Stream 2 pipeline was both striking and welcome. But the first Nord Stream pipeline already provides two-thirds of Germany’s imported energy, and the Italian prime minister, Mario Draghi, has declared that EU sanctions should not hit energy. Meanwhile, Britain’s sanctions are decidedly anaemic, despite Boris Johnson’s bluster, singling out five banks and three oligarchs whom the US targeted years ago: hardly the promised crackdown on kleptocracy, and weaker than the EU’s measures. Leaving further leverage is sensible, but a lacklustre response has even less chance of deterring Mr Putin if he is truly set upon a course that, as the jailed opposition leader Alexei Navalny warned, is likely to lead to the deaths of Russians as well as Ukrainians and cost his country dearly too.The New South Wales transport minister, David Elliott, has denied he was told about a potential shutdown of the state’s rail network before going to bed on Sunday night, despite Labor brandishing a text message in parliament that appeared to contradict his claims. In a stunning backdown, one day after Elliott accused the Rail, Tram and Bus Union (RTBU) of “terrorist-like activity”, the minister said on Tuesday that the government had withdrawn its application seeking an end to their industrial action in the Fair Work Commission and would negotiate with them instead. After being completely shut down on Monday, Sydney’s trains remained on a reduced timetable on Tuesday afternoon. The RTBU said they were working on a plan to resume full services next Monday, but Elliott said he hoped a compromise could be reached sooner. In an extraordinary press conference on Tuesday afternoon, the minister insisted he was not aware in advance of the decision to shut down the network on Monday, because he went to bed while the department was still grappling with the call on Sunday night. He also said he had not informed the premier, Dominic Perrottet, of the potential for a looming shutdown because he had gone to sleep between 11pm and midnight, before the decision was made at 12.43am on Monday morning. Despite telling reporters that he had an “inkling” of what was to come, Elliott said he had not informed Perrottet “because I had no confirmation and I didn’t know exactly what action Transport for NSW would be taking”. While stating that he was “OK” that officials hadn’t called him at 12.43am when the call was made to shut down the system – “because I may not have answered the phone” – Elliott said he was “asking for information” about the decision. “We pay these people to do their job and I accept the fact that at 12.43am it was their judgment call; as executives they needed to use their discretion and close the system,” he said. “Did I like it? Absolutely not. Am I still asking for information and details to justify the decision? Absolutely.” But during question time on Tuesday the NSW Labor leader, Chris Minns, cast doubt on the minister’s version of events, reading from a text message he said was sent by Elliott’s chief of staff to a senior transport official just before 11pm on Sunday night stating the minister had been “briefed” on the situation. Speaking under parliamentary privilege, Minns said that Elliott’s chief of staff told transport officials the minister had been “briefed on the major disruption from the looming shutdown” and was “comfortable” with the decision to close the system. Responding in parliament, Elliott repeatedly said the decision to close down the network had been taken by the Sydney Trains chief executive, Matthew Longland. Elliot said there was “no way in the world” he could have been told about the closure of the network before he went to bed on Sunday because “a decision hadn’t been made until after midnight”. “Certainly this decision was made independently of me as would’ve been appropriate because I’m not an operational expert.” He challenged Labor to produce “evidence” that he had been informed of the decision to close the network. “I knew when I got up very early on Monday morning that this decision had been made and of course that the community would be inconvenienced but these decisions, as important as they are, are always made with a significant amount of communication,” he said. During his earlier press conference, Elliott said that he had yet to see a copy of a risk assessment reportedly carried out by Transport for NSW before the department made the call to shut down the network, saying he had “requested” to see it. But he also said he would have been obliged to follow the department’s advice – if he had been awake to receive it – because they were the experts on the matter. The minister’s handling of the shutdown has come under increasing scrutiny since he launched an extraordinary tirade against the rail union on Monday, accusing them of “terrorist-like activity” and “hijacking the city” over what he incorrectly labelled a “strike” action. Elliott had also claimed incorrectly that the union had failed to appear at a hearing before the commission on Sunday night. He himself had not been at the meeting, and had only arrived back in Sydney on Sunday after spending the weekend in Darwin to take part in the Veterans Ministers’ Council where he was photographed drinking a beer with prime minister Scott Morrison. In markedly more conciliatory language on Tuesday, Elliott said that the government had withdrawn its Fair Work Commission application and that he had met with the union on Tuesday and thanked Claassens after the meeting. He said his earlier comments on Monday had come “on a day of high emotion”. RTBU NSW secretary Alex Claassens said the union still wanted to see the risk assessment on which the decision allegedly hinged. He said the union’s legal team has requested it three times from the department when they were before the commission but it was never made available. “They were asked three times to produce it. They never did produce it once,” Claassens said. “This morning at 10am, our legal team sent a subpoena notice across to the other side, demanding the production of that documentation and by 11am they had a notice withdrawing the application in the commission.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Minns also called for the risk assessment used by Transport for NSW to make the decision to be made public.Harriet Harman has called for a full investigation into how a housing association failed to realise that a tenant had apparently been left dead in her south London flat for more than two years despite repeated calls from neighbours. The body of a woman, named locally as Sheila Seleoane, 61, was found in the Peabody housing association flat in Peckham on Friday after neighbours complained about the noise of a balcony door banging during Storm Eunice. The same neighbours said they had told staff at the housing association in the late summer or early autumn of 2019 that they were worried by the appearance of flies, maggots and a disturbing smell. They said an employee from the housing association opened corridor windows but otherwise their complaints were brushed off. “We were told that the housing association didn’t deal with flies and maggots – they said it was an issue for pest control,” said a woman who lives in the flat beneath where the woman died. Other neighbours said they tried to stop the smell coming into their flats by putting old clothes on the floor by the front door to seal the gap. “We called them many times. It’s shocking that our complaints were handled so badly,” said a neighbour whose flat stands opposite that of the dead woman. “No one listened to us.” Both residents asked not to be named. The victim has not been named formally but local media reported that she was Sheila Seleoane. Police said her death was being treated as unexplained but not suspicious. Harman, the Labour MP for Camberwell and Peckham in south London, said: “You would like to think that this kind of thing wouldn’t happen in a block of flats in a busy part of London. It is shocking – awful for the neighbours and for the woman’s relatives. It raises a lot of questions for Peabody and for the police and for the council. “Peabody say they were contacted in 2020, but the neighbours say they contacted them much earlier. There is a clear discrepancy between what the housing association are saying and what the neighbours have said. We need a prompt report from Peabody and the police. What is already clear is that tenants weren’t listened to. We will establish what needs to be done to prevent this from happening again.” In a letter to local councillors, Wells Chomutare, Peabody’s assistant director of resident services for the south region, wrote: “We are fully investigating what happened. From our initial search our neighbourhood manager visited when concerns were first raised by neighbours. This was in October 2020. “When we couldn’t contact the resident we contacted the police, who reported that everything was fine. The case was then closed. We made several other attempts to call, visit and contact the resident throughout the two years.” A Peabody spokesperson said: “This is a desperately sad situation and we understand that people want answers. Our early inquiries show that we treated residents’ concerns extremely seriously when they were reported to us. We made repeated attempts to contact Ms Seleoane and called the police to raise concerns for her welfare in 2020. “Our records indicate that the police then visited the property and reported to us that our resident was safe and well. We are now working with the police and other partners to establish how this happened as part of a full investigation into all of the circumstances. We need to understand what went wrong so this can never happen again.”Weren’t stock markets meant to plunge when Russian troops were ordered over the border into Ukraine? Well, the FTSE 100 index opened 100 points lower, which fitted the script, but it quickly rebounded and spent most of the day in positive territory. It closed up 10 points: basically flat. It was a reminder, for the umpteenth time, that stock markets are a reliably unreliable guide to geopolitics. As the fund manager Terry Smith points out often, trying to time macro events is virtually impossible since you need to know what the market was expecting and how it will react, and neither task is straightforward. Brexit and the election of President Trump were meant to shatter stock markets if they happened: share prices soared when they did. That said, Tuesday’s mild market reaction to President Putin’s action looks little more than a holding position. The relative calm surely won’t last if Russian troops drive further into Ukraine, presumably triggering more than the “pretty tepid” sanctions, as Bill Browder, former investor in Russia and campaigner for global anti-corruption laws, described the UK response. One suspects stock markets will take their cue from energy markets in coming days and weeks. Oil briefly touched $100 a barrel on Tuesday, the highest for seven years and a price that will eat into global growth if sustained for long. Natural gas rose as Germany halted certification of the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline and conceded, in effect, that it needs to rethink a new energy policy. The fund manager Amundi’s analysts noted semi-optimistically that the former Soviet Union and Europe maintained commercial relations on energy supply even at the height of the cold war and that it is therefore “premature” to talk about an energy crisis in the EU. Yes, that assumption, which is still the market’s base case, is currently reasonable. That doesn’t mean it is guaranteed to be correct. Insurance industry reform is welcome, notwithstanding the spin It was polite, or canny, on the part of the big insurers to play along with the government’s spin that reform of the EU-focused Solvency II regulatory regime represents a “Brexit dividend” or a “bonfire of red-tape”. The reality is that the EU is also in reforming mode to unlock capital on insurers’ balance sheets and can be put to more useful work than sitting on piles of government IOUs. Indeed, Brussels was quicker to signal its own bonfire: its review of the rules was announced last September. Never mind the political point-scoring, though. Reform is welcome. In this technical field of “matching adjustments” and “solvency capital requirements”, a good illustration of the perverse incentives created by Solvency II was offered by the insurers’ trade body, the ABI. It calculated that this is currently much easier for a pension fund managed by an insurer “to invest in a highly rated mining company that it is to invest for 30 years in a windfarm”. It is hard to fathom how such an outcome is supposed to protect policyholders. Solvency II, which has good points, got lost in a few thickets. We have yet to see how much of the theoretical £95bn of extra investment in UK infrastructure materialises. At least part of the answer will depend on the input of the Bank of England, which presumably will be anxious to preserve a few safety-first features. But, yes, reform is a dry but important development that should boost long-term investment in the UK. Hello to the short and inoffensive Haleon Beecham – one of the names made redundant in the turn-of-the-century merger that created GlaxoSmithKline – seemed a decent ancient brand to revive for the demerger of the group’s Sensodyne-to-Panadol consumer products division. Sadly, it’s not to be. The new £50bn-ish FTSE 100 company, arriving in the summer, will be called Haleon. It sounds vaguely like an inert gas, but, according to the official explanation, the name is a marriage of hale (as in hearty) and leon (associated with strength). If you insist. At least GSK has opted for something short and inoffensive and hasn’t tried to be whizzy and digitally enabled (chief culprit: abrdn, as Standard Life Aberdeen, bizarrely, is now known). The test is how soon the outside world will stop adding an explanatory “GSK’s former consumer division” on every mention. As with the spirits group Diageo, one suspects we’ll get used to this one reasonably quickly. It’ll do.The first glimpse of a Partygate questionnaire confirms that Downing Street insiders are being questioned under police caution – and asked if they have a “reasonable excuse” for attending lockdown-busting gatherings. Boris Johnson has already returned his replies to the Metropolitan police’s questions, and is believed to have argued that he attended social events in No 10 in a work capacity. A copy of one of the official questionnaires, obtained by ITV, shows it includes the police caution: “You do not have to say anything but it may harm your defence if you do not mention when questioned something which you subsequently rely on in court. Anything you do say may be given in evidence.” Angela Rayner, Labour’s deputy leader, said: “This is an embarrassment that for the first time in UK history we have a PM interviewed under police caution.” As well as asking the recipient to confirm their attendance at a specific event, the leaked questionnaire shows they were also asked: “What was the purpose of your participation in that gathering?” and “did you interact with, or undertake any activity with, other persons present at the gathering. If yes, please provide details.” Recipients were offered the opportunity to give a “lawful exception” or “reasonable excuse” for attending. Johnson is understood to have hired a lawyer to help him draw up his responses, which Downing Street has confirmed were submitted before the deadline of last Friday. Questionnaires are still being sent to some officials. The Met will then have to decide whether to impose fixed penalty notices for breaking lockdown rules. The Met investigation into 12 social events, several of which the prime minister is known to have attended, was triggered by evidence uncovered by the senior civil servant Sue Gray, whose full report on her inquiry will not be published until the police have completed their work. Johnson’s allies are convinced he has a justification for attending events that took place at No 10, which is his home as well as his workplace. He initially denied reports that parties had been held in Downing Street, telling MPs: “All guidance was followed completely.” Receiving a fixed penalty notice for breaching rules that he himself drew up is regarded as unacceptable to many backbenchers, and would be likely to prompt more letters calling for a vote of no confidence. If 54 such letters are submitted to the chair of the 1922 Committee, Graham Brady, a vote of no confidence in Johnson would be triggered, and if he lost such a vote, his premiership would be over.Russia’s ability to fund its invasion of Ukraine through Europe’s financial markets is to be hit with a package of EU sanctions closely coordinated with the White House. As agreement was announced by the 27 European member states on a range of punitive measures against Moscow, Josep Borrell, the EU’s foreign affairs chief, said the first strike from Brussels would “hurt Russia, and it will hurt a lot”. EU officials said that further punitive measures could be agreed by western allies at a meeting of the G7 later this week depending on Russia’s behaviour. “We still have quite a huge package in reserve if need be,” a senior EU official said. “And that would be a political discussion with leaders across the Atlantic and with our UK friends. We have a G7 on Thursday. So that will be also discussed if we need to scale up intensity depending on the development on the grounds.” Ursula von der Leyen, the European Commission president, commended a separate decision on Tuesday by the German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, to suspend certification of the Russian gas pipe Nord Stream 2 after much speculation about its future. She said: “We will make it as difficult as possible for the Kremlin to pursue its aggressive policies. I think the German government is absolutely right. Nord Stream 2 has to be assessed in light of the security of energy supply for the whole of Europe. Because this crisis shows that Europe is still too dependent on Russian gas. “Our action today is a response to Russia’s aggressive behaviour. If Russia continues to escalate this crisis that it has created, we are ready to take further action in response. The EU is united and acting fast.” After a tense 24 hours of intensive discussions, EU foreign ministers had agreed at an emergency meeting in Paris to target banks financing the military operations along with the ability of Russia to access capital by banning Russian bond trades in the European market. The EU will also block all trade from the two breakaway regions to and from the EU. It is understood that banks to be hit include Promsvyazbank and VEB.RF. Travel bans and asset seizures will also be imposed on 27 individuals and entities who played a role in “undermining Ukrainian sovereignty”, the 351 members of the Duma that voted in favour of Russia’s recognition of the self-proclaimed republics in Luhansk and Donetsk and the 11 that proposed it along with the commanders of the Russian military “peacekeeping” mission. The package mirrored that planned by the US but was tougher than that presented by Boris Johnson in the House of Commons earlier in the day, with the UK threatening only to legislate to prevent Russia from issuing sovereign debt on UK markets. Officials in Brussels admitted to have been surprised that the UK had not gone harder after hawkish performances by Johnson during behind-the-scene talks in recent weeks but they insisted that there had been close coordination and that the west was united. There had been some concern voiced among some member states, particularly in the Baltic region, at the insistence of Italy, Austria and Germany on an incremental approach to sanctioning Russia. But Borrell said the EU needed to maintain leverage over Russia’s behaviour. “We are afraid that this story has not finished,” he said. An official added: “We can calibrate because you have the The Full Monty and you can calibrate depending on developments.” It is understood that cutting Russia out of the Swift financial system, which moves money from bank to bank around the world, is within the scope of a second tranche of sanctions that could be imposed. Such a move could cut Russia off from most international financial transactions, including international profits from oil and gas production, which in all account for more than 40% of the country’s revenue. “We are not contrary in principle [to further sanctions] but we believe in an incremental approach, if the escalation is growing, if the threat is growing,” said one EU diplomat from one of the more cautious member states. Hungary had been the only member state not to immediately offer full support for the list of individuals that would be hit by travel bans and asset seizures during a meeting of EU ambassadors on Tuesday morning. But Charles Michel, the European Council president, had secured the support in private of the country’s prime minster, Viktor Orbán, and unanimity was achieved over the entire package.Widening sanctions against Moscow could result in higher energy bills for a swathe of UK businesses if a key Russian-owned supplier is blacklisted, the UK’s energy trade body has confirmed. Gazprom Energy, a subsidiary of Russia’s state owned gas and oil giant, has been one of the largest suppliers of gas for UK businesses since 2010, according to energy consultancy Cornwall Insight, which said the firm accounts for about 20.8% of the market. While Downing Street has so far only imposed asset freezes on five Russian banks and three high net worth individuals as part of its retaliation over Moscow’s threat to Ukraine, the UK has given itself powers to extend those sanctions to target other key industries including the energy sector. A larger package of UK sanctions against Moscow, which is being coordinated with the US and EU, will be implemented if a full-scale invasion of Ukraine takes place. That could impact companies such as Russia’s state-owned gas giant Gazprom and subsidiaries such as Gazprom Energy, which provides gas and electricity to factories, businesses and public sector customers across the UK. According to its latest annual report, it supplied gas to 178,000 sites across the country in 2020. A subsidiary of Gazprom’s marketing and trading arm, the gas it supplies to UK customers comes from a “variety of sources and countries” including Norway and Qatar. The firm declined to confirm the proportion secured from Russia. The UK’s energy trade body has warned that any further disruption to the supply during an existing crunch could spell trouble for customers. “With both domestic and business customers already facing steep bill increases as a result of record gas prices on the wholesale market, further disruption to the market and supplies would be a big concern if it increases prices further,” a spokesperson for Energy UK said. Unlike domestic energy users, there is no price cap for business customers across the UK. Companies have suffered rising bills following a global gas supply crunch that emerged as economies began to rebound after the Covid-19 slump. Gazprom Energy first entered the UK market when it bought supplier Penine, which had just 600 customers at the time, in 2006. It did not confirm the number of UK business customers it currently serves, and declined to comment on the potential impact of UK sanctions. The gas supplier employs about 290 people at its head office in Manchester, according to its website. Its parent company is responsible for about 13% of global gas production. Although a further escalation of tensions between Russia and the west would have a far more significant impact in mainland Europe – including Germany where Russian gas imports account for 40% of the supply – it could also indirectly push up prices on the wholesale market. Economists warn this is likely to have a knock-on impact for British firms and households. Britain consumes about 74bn cubic metres of gas each year, or about 1,100 cubic metres per person, making it one of Europe’s heaviest consumers per capita. About half is imported, mostly from Norway which supplies a third of UK gas. Russia was the fourth largest market for UK gas imports in 2021 according to official figures from the Office for National Statistics. Ranked after Norway, Qatar and the US, Britain bought almost £1bn of Russian gas, or about 4.9% of total UK imports. Speaking last month as tensions mounted, Will Webster, energy policy manager for the industry lobby group Oil and Gas UK, said: “If the Russians reduce deliveries of gas to Europe, then it has to come from somewhere else, most likely as shipments of liquefied natural gas. That will increase competition for supplies, driving up prices and consumer bills even more. Conversely, any additional gas we produce ourselves will help alleviate this process.” Jamie Maddock, an equity research analyst at investment management firm Quilter Cheviot said the impact of potential sanctions on the wider gas market would depend on the “severity and breadth of any sanctions beyond what’s already been announced, and then if it instils a response in Russia.” “So far, the government’s sanctions are focused on certain oligarchs within Putin’s inner circle and various Russian banks,” he said. “There is little impact on energy companies, Gazprom included, though this could well change.”Vladimir Putin has said that Russia will support the territorial claims of its proxy states in east Ukraine, dramatically increasing the likelihood of a larger war in the near future in what Joe Biden denounced as an attempt to carve out “a big chunk” of the country. “Who in the Lord’s name does Putin think gives him the right to declare new so-called countries?” Biden said, announcing new sanctions on two Russian banks and sweeping measures to stop Russia raising capital in western markets. In a dramatic move Germany halted the approval process for the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline from Russia, while the EU and the UK announced sanctions on Russia in a show of concerted western resolve, with EU foreign ministers banning Russian bond trades in the European market. Boris Johnson revealed a package of asset freezes on five Russian banks and three high net worth individuals but faced criticism from his MPs for not going further. The UK, US and EU made it clear they were prepared to escalate sanctions in line with Russian actions.k On Tuesday evening US secretary of state Antony Blinken said a meeting with his Russian counterpart, Sergei Lavrov, that had been scheduled for Thursday would not go ahead. “Now that we see the invasion is beginning and Russia has made clear its wholesale rejection of diplomacy, it does not make sense to go forward with that meeting at this time,” he said. Shrugging off threats of economic isolation, Putin enlarged the scope of Russia’s military intervention in Ukraine. Speaking at a press conference, he said that Russia recognised the borders claimed by the self-proclaimed “people’s republics” which are well beyond the current frontline and include substantial territories, including towns and cities still under Ukrainian government control. “We have recognised the independence of these republics, which means we have recognised all their fundamental documents, including the constitution. And the constitution prescribes the borders within the Donetsk and Luhansk regions at the time when they were part of Ukraine,” Putin said. Russian troops have already crossed into Ukraine in the Moscow-controlled territories up to the frontline. Putin’s legalistic remarks implied they could go further in the name of defending their proxy states. Any Ukrainian response could then be used to justify a full-scale, multi-pronged invasion of the kind the US and its allies have been predicting. “We still believe that Russia is poised to go much further in launching a massive military attack against Ukraine. I hope I am wrong about that,” Biden said, noting that Russia has moved supplies of blood towards the border. “You don’t need blood unless you plan on starting a war,” he said. The president said he would send US reinforcements to the Baltic nations on Nato’s eastern flank, but stressed they were “totally defensive moves on our part”. “We have no intention of fighting Russia,” he said. Russia said on Tuesday it was evacuating its diplomats from Ukraine, citing concerns about their safety. Putin also received approval from his Federation Council on Tuesday to use the armed forces abroad. The decision indicated that they would be used in a “peacekeeping” force in south-east Ukraine but has raised concerns that Russian legislators have just green-lighted an all-out assault on Ukraine. Putin suggested further military action would be unnecessary if Kyiv negotiated with Moscow over “difficult questions”. He laid out three demands of the Ukrainian government: recognition of Russian sovereignty over Crimea, seized in 2014; renunciation of Ukraine’s aspirations to join Nato; and partial demilitarisation. The government in Kyiv is unlikely to accept any of Putin’s ultimatums, which would involve surrendering a large swath of territory. Before Putin spoke, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, the Ukrainian president, addressed the country saying: “We will give nothing away, we fear nothing and nobody.” Later he said he was introducing the conscription of reservists for a special period but ruled out a general mobilisation. “We need to promptly replenish the Ukrainian army and other military formations,” he said. “We must increase the readiness of the Ukrainian army for all possible changes in the operational situation.” On a visit to the Pentagon during a trip to Washington, the Ukrainian foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, said Putin’s aim was not about Luhansk and Donetsk but “the destruction of the Ukrainian statehood”. “We will not fall into provocations arranged by Russia,” Kuleba said. “But if the war is imposed on us by President Putin, we will be defending ourselves.” The Nato secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, said the crisis was “the most dangerous moment for European security in a generation”. The western sanctions are intended to deter Putin from an all-out offensive. Biden imposed bans on two Russian banks, VEB and Promsvyazbank, which are closed to the Kremlin and the military respectively Blinken said the two banks together hold more than $80bn in assets, adding that their assets in the US would be frozen, they would be shut out of the global financial system, without access to US dollars. The US also extended existing prohibitions on Russian sovereign debt to the secondary market, which Biden said “means we’ve cut off Russia’s government from western financing”. The US imposed targeted sanctions on members of the Moscow elite and their families. Those targeted were: FSB chief, Aleksandr Bortnikov, and his son Denis, deputy president of a state-owned bank, VTB; Sergei Kiriyenko, the first deputy chief of staff in the presidential office, and his son, Vladimir, the CEO of VK Group, the parent company of Russia’s top social media platform, and Petr Fradkov, who is the CEO of Promsvyazbank. “Other Russian elites and their family members are on notice that additional actions could be taken against them,” Blinken said. A senior US administration official said that Russia could be cut out of the international electronic payments system, Swift, in a future raft of sanctions. “We are not taking Swift off the table. It will remain an option that we can deploy, depending on how Russia makes its next move,” the official said. EU foreign ministers agreed to sanction 27 Russians and entities, all members of the Russian Duma, the lower house of parliament, as well as banks and the defence sector, while limiting Russian access to European capital markets. The UK imposed asset freezes on five Russian banks and three wealthy Russians, but left unscathed the major UK-based oligarchs, an issue that has been a point of friction between Washington and London. Johnson said it was only “the first barrage of what we are prepared to do”. In Kyiv, there was a growing sense that Russia had decided to escalate military conflict, and the only remaining question was scale. “Unfortunately, there are more and more confirmations that such a decision by Russia is a reality. As Russia abandons diplomacy as a tool for resolving the conflict, Ukraine has no choice but to prepare to defend its territory,” said Bohdan Yaremenko, an MP and member of parliament’s foreign policy committee. After announcing new sanctions, Biden said Washington’s door remained open to diplomacy, saying: “There’s still time to avert the worst case scenario that will bring untold suffering to millions of people.”A mother accused of murdering her five-year-old son while he was isolating with Covid screamed for help when she reported him missing, a jury has heard. Angharad Williamson, 30, her partner John Cole, 40, and a 14-year-old boy, who cannot be named for legal reasons, deny murdering Logan Mwangi between 28 July and 1 August. At their trial at Cardiff crown court, the jury was played a recording of a 999 call made by Williamson on 31 July to report her son missing from their home in the village of Sarn, near Bridgend. She is heard to scream “help me please” before saying she had woken up and found her son was not there. During the 13-minute-long call, Williamson repeatedly suggests that another woman may have taken him. She said: “He can’t be on his own, there’s no parent with him, he must be scared.” She tells the call handler: “My back gate is open, my back gate is open” before stating that her partner is out looking for Logan. She says: “Logan has had Covid for the past week so he has been in lockdown for the past week. He has never had symptoms. Please help me. He’s my baby. I can’t just stand here and do nothing. Please, I’m begging you. He’s my baby.” Williamson, Cole and the 14-year-old are also accused of conducting a cover-up after his death which included dumping his body in the river like “fly-tipped rubbish”. Williamson cried as the court was told of the moment Logan’s dead body was found in the River Ogmore by two South Wales police officers at 5.55am on 31 July. He had suffered 56 injuries to his head, face, torso, arms and legs, the jury heard. Caroline Rees QC, prosecuting, said that when taken to see her son’s body in hospital, Williamson told a nurse “that she wished she’d taught him to swim”. She later asked another nurse why Logan was wet. Williamson claimed it was the first time she had been made aware of this, the court heard, which Rees said was considered an odd comment given her earlier statement about not teaching Logan to swim. Rees told the hearing that medical experts had found Logan suffered catastrophic injuries to his abdomen, including lacerations to his liver and a tear to his bowel, as well as traumatic brain injuries. Rees said the evidence was “capable of proving that Logan was subjected to a serious and sustained assault within the home over a period of time and possibly on more than one occasion”. “It is incredible to consider that any person within that house – so that would include all of the defendants in this case – could have been unaware that the assault was going on or that Logan had been seriously injured and was at high risk of death.” The court heard the three defendants made comments about the case after their arrests. Cole is said to have told a prison guard that he had a “moral dilemma”, while Williamson wrote a letter claiming that Cole had killed Logan, it was claimed. The youth is alleged to have been observed singing: “I love kids, I fucking love kids, I love to punch kids in the head, it’s orgasmic.” He is later claimed to have said: “I might plead guilty next week”. Concluding her opening remarks Rees said: “We say that each defendant played their part in the death of a little five-year-old, Logan, and it is clear from the terrible injuries that he sustained that that must have been with the intention to kill or at the very least cause really serious injury.” The trial continues.Call me old fashioned, but I’d rather Boris Johnson wasn’t prime minister when Russia invaded Ukraine. Serious times call for serious leaders and Johnson is a profoundly unserious person. This isn’t about the lies and the parties: it’s about being led by someone who doesn’t aspire to be more than a music hall act. Albeit one with a limpet-like narcissism that keeps him clinging to the top job. That said, Johnson has had a goodish war so far. Partly because he has been so distracted by filling in police questionnaires that it’s only recently he seems to have noticed there was a situation developing in eastern Europe. But also because he has got some of the basics right. OK, so he looked a total wreck at the Munich security conference, arriving with the toddler haircut all over the place, his eyes stuck half shut, his tie askew and his shirt crumpled. But the content of his speech more or less hit the right mark. At least, he didn’t lose his place or ad lib about Peppa Pig World. Small victories and all that. And when he came to update the Commons on Monday night’s invasion of Ukraine by Russian tanks, the Suspect at first looked as if he would again pull off the required trick of sounding like a grownup. He was heard in near silence as he ran through Vladimir Putin’s crimes and the failed attempts of western allies to talk him down from invading Ukraine. But now a line had been breached with Russian troops entering the self-proclaimed republics in Donetsk and Luhansk. It was time to make Putin really sweat with sanctions that would hurt him, said Johnson. Only the sanctions he came up with – five relatively small Russian banks and three oligarchs – didn’t sound as if they would cause the Russian leader to lose a moment’s sleep. If that was the best the UK could come up with in response to the invasion so far, then Putin might as well make a bee-line for Kyiv. Compared with Germany’s decision to cancel the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline, the UK’s response looked like pissing in the wind. Don’t panic, the Suspect, continued. Because this was just a graduated response. It was best to start with little sanctions. Sanctionettes in response to what was still only a minor invasion. That way we could build up to proper sanctions later. It didn’t seem to have occurred to Johnson that even as he spoke, Russian oligarchs were already moving their money out of UK assets that could be the subject of sanctions in the coming days and weeks. No matter. It was only friendly to give Russia ample warning. And he could be tough if he wanted to. If he could persuade Liz Truss to give up the tank she has on permanent call for a photoshoot, he would send it to the Ukrainian defence force. It could make all the difference. Still, this was a day for parliament to put on a united front and it did so. Though not quite in the way Johnson might have expected. There were no MPs on the Labour left to suggest that Nato might have been a bit provocative and it was time to give Russia the benefit of the doubt. It’s possible that Jeremy Corbyn had just that argument in mind but he arrived in the chamber too late to be called to speak and sat morosely on his own for about 15 minutes before leaving. So we’ll never know. Maybe he would have surprised us all by launching a blistering attack on Russian aggression. Instead that was left to Keir Starmer, who along with many other Labour, Conservative and Liberal Democrat MPs, not only deplored Putin’s brutal authoritarianism but demanded stronger action. It was clear that Russia had invaded Ukraine so what was stopping the UK government from imposing tougher sanctions now? Sequencing sanctions was all very well but surely the baseline response should have been to exclude Russia from financial mechanisms like Swift and to ban trading in Russian sovereign debt? Labour’s Ben Bradshaw observed that the three individuals who had been sanctioned had all been put on a US sanctions list four years ago. So they were all old lags at this kind of thing and the new penalties imposed on them wouldn’t make the slightest difference. Surely there must be some others among the dozens of oligarchs close to Putin who were worthy of some kind of sanction? Johnson hummed and hawed. He was fairly sure Roman Abramovich had been sanctioned. If only. As it turns out – Abramovich has never been sanctioned. Pity, as the thought of Chelsea being stripped of its assets and relegated to League Two could unite the entire country. All but 45,000 of it. And they don’t count. Besides, you had to remember that if you used up your sanctions all at once then you might not have any left for later. Then again, if you didn’t – as countless other MPs pointed out – you merely encouraged Putin to go for broke. Caroline Lucas and Labour’s Tanmanjeet Singh Dhesi cut to the chase. Was the prime minister sure that weak sanctions had nothing to do with Russian Tory party donors, oligarchs playing tennis with Tory ministers, appointing Russians to the House of Lords or Russian interference in UK elections? Absolutely not, the Suspect insisted. Perish the thought. One mustn’t get carried away by Russophobia. He only played tennis with the very nicest and very richest Russians. As you do. With that Johnson scarpered for the exit, wondering how he had managed to let himself be outflanked by the entire Commons. • An evening with Marina Hyde and John Crace: Join online Join Marina Hyde and John Crace looking back at the latest events in Westminster. On Monday 7 March, 8pm GMT | 9pm CET | noon PST | 3pm EST. Book tickets hereThe opening goal came from a corner after four minutes, the game exactly where they wanted it already. There was a lead to defend and so they did, an hour passing before the second arrived. Breaking from their own area after a corner, wide spaces suddenly appeared before them and an open goal did too, the shot curling in from 40 yards with the goalkeeper off his line. Two touches was all it took, the ultimate in efficiency. Then, in the last minute, another break and it was over. Five shots, three goals, a clean sheet: how very Atlético. Er, no. Not really, not any more. On Saturday Atlético Madrid prepared for their meeting with Manchester United by defeating Osasuna 3-0 at El Sadar. Luis Suárez scored, and from miles out. Jan Oblak made four times as many saves as his opposite number. Sime Vrsaljko got away with a hand in an opponent’s face. And Atlético, lined up in a 4-4-2, had 37% of possession but neither wanted nor needed more. “The little details went against us,” the Osasuna coach, Jagoba Arrasate, said. This was “Classic Atlético”, one newspaper said but those two words were not the point; the truly key words were the other three they used: the, return and of. That was what made it so significant, why the central defender Stefan Savic insisted: “It was important for us to win again and do it with our DNA, which is to be strong at the back and effective up front.” But: is it? Still? And might Saturday’s win, their self-awakening, have been a one-off, another false dawn? The question that hangs over Atlético is not just how they are but who they are. On Tuesday Ralf Rangnick talked about Atlético as an “emotional side” that “reflects the character of their manager”. Diego Simeone, he said, “has won trophies with a clear identity, with a recognisable playing style. I don’t think that has changed in the last years.” But that was already not entirely true and now it is even less the case. At times this can feel like a team suffering an identity crisis. Atlético are a side that has periodically evolved one way and then back again, as if wanting to return to what they know, to revert to type. There have been shifts, glimpses of doubts about what they want to be, hints that players and manager do not always reach the same conclusion or believe in the same things. Last season they certainly did not play as they had in previous campaigns, Suárez the catalyst for them occupying different positions. They did not even play the same way at the start of the season as they did at the end, the season’s close almost absurdly epic. This season, though, has been a step again, deeper into uncertainty. All those things you think you know about them, the lines that are endlessly repeated: forget them. Certainly don’t trust them. Savic might will them to be real, Simeone too, but the truth is different. Osasuna was their first clean sheet away all season. Three days later they were beaten at home by Levante, who are bottom. It was their 10th defeat but at least it was 1-0. In the previous four matches the team whose results once read like binary code ran: 4-3, 4-2, 3-2 and 2-2. That 4-2 is a loss at Barcelona when Atlético took an early lead. The 4-3 and 3-2 are consecutive last-minute comebacks at home, against Valencia and Getafe respectively, exhilarating evenings that also revealed flaws, the promise of revival proving fleeting. Both were followed by defeats and it is not just that they are losing, it is the way it is happening. For so long defined by their defence – a team that are tough, organised, ultra-competitive – Atlético are not good at the things Atlético are supposed to be good at. They have had twice as many 2-2 draws as 1-0 wins. They have already conceded more than in any of the 10 seasons under Simeone, seemingly always on edge even when they win. In Europe, they were beaten 3-2 by Liverpool, having come back from 2-0 down, and progressed on the final day with just their second win, goals in the 90th and 92nd minutes finally seeing them through in Porto. In Milan they had needed a 97th-minute penalty. No longer occupying a Champions League place, last season’s champions are fifth, 15 points off the top. “You start to think: ‘Why is this happening to us?’” Ángel Correa admitted. “So why is it?” he was asked, to which he replied: “I don’t know. I couldn’t explain it but it’s a reality.” Marcos Llorente, their outstanding player last season from midfield, has been injured and, when he has played, has often done so at full-back. Savic and José Mariá Giménez have been able to play together less than a third of the campaign, the former insisting: “We have been affected by injuries, which have made it harder for the manager to choose a system.” Oblak looks human, his save percentage plummeting. Antoine Griezmann has been injured. Suárez is a year older, the revenge that fuelled him running lower now. Koke has not reached the level he was at last season. Kieran Trippier has gone. “His exit has changed us for sure,” Savic admitted. But part of the problem may be exactly that: that they are champions. They then signed Rodrigo De Paul, Griezmann and Matheus Cunha, many saying this was the best squad they had had, declaring them favourites. That was probably an exaggeration anyway but it changes things, even if only at some subconscious level. When it comes to group management too, and perhaps at mechanical level. From playing against the power they had to administer abundance: the team has changed 32 times in 34 games. “For a team like Atlético it’s not easy to be champions,” Simeone said. “We created expectations and when the results didn’t arrive that hit us hard,” Correa told Marca. The margins are sometimes fine and fortune plays a part – last season, it is worth recalling, they were on edge all the way to the line, suffering and surviving Simeone talking about them entering the Suárez Zone. The underlying statistics are also not as bad as the results but there is something not right, something missing –an edge, a sense of cause, a decisiveness. “We’ve conceded the fewest shots but it felt like every shot went in,” Savic said. Simeone referred to a “lack of attention”. The results were not right, the route to them no longer clear, until Saturday offered a way back to how they were. “We’re united. But it’s not words; it’s bodies that show that unity best, and in Pamplona we saw it. I have no doubt we’re on the right path,” Savic insisted. “I cling to the search for the team spirit we saw the other day,” Simeone said. “I hope we have that spirit tomorrow because, when we have that, we compete well.”Good morning. Vladimir Putin has ordered his forces to enter eastern Ukraine to perform “peacekeeping duties” and confirmed that Russia has recognised the expanded borders of the two Russian-controlled territories there, dramatically increasing the likelihood of a larger war in the near future. Britain and the US say Putin’s order amounts to the “beginning of an invasion”. The UK and EU will impose sanctions against Russians and entities and Germany has halted the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline approval in reaction to Russia’s “grave breach” of international law. The situation is moving fast – here’s what could happen next. AGL Energy says a premium of at least 30% on its share price will be needed for an extraordinary takeover bid by the tech billionaire Mike Cannon-Brookes and the Canadian investment firm Brookfield to succeed. Markus Brokhof, AGL’s chief operating officer, dismissed Cannon-Brookes’ proposal to shut the company’s coal-fired power plants by 2030 as unrealistic. Responding to the consortium’s offer of a 4.7% premium on the Friday share price, Brokhof said any investment banker would advise a full company takeover required the suitors “to offer a premium of 30-40%”. NSW police are investigating a complaint after the Liberal MP Fiona Martin was allegedly confronted by a pro-Russia anti-vaccine mandate activist. Martin was labelled a “coward” and a “rat from a sinking ship” by self-styled “independent journalist” Simeon Boikov, who arrived with a camera in tow at the MP’s pop-up campaign stall at Cabarita Park on Monday. Martin claims that on Monday Boikov and his associates twice blocked her car as she attempted to leave Cabarita Park. The federal immigration minister Alex Hawke, failed to appear or send legal representation, to a NSW supreme court despite being named as the first defendant in a case that will determine whether the NSW Liberal party branch can continue to operate beyond 28 February. “It’s an extraordinary state of affairs that a federal minister would not appear in court,” one senior party member said. Australia The United Australia party’s warning it will outspend its 2019 campaign in the looming election has prompted calls for urgent reforms to limit party expenditure. More Australian voters say the government should prioritise the population’s wellbeing over law and order, according to research, which also found nine in 10 respondents think governments should deliver services directly instead of outsourcing them to third parties. The government’s proposed bill to protect migrant workers from exploitation by establishing new criminal offences for “coercing … migrant workers to accept exploitative work arrangements” has been criticised for its lack of whistleblower protections for workers who expose their own exploitation. Sea ice around Antarctica has dropped to its lowest level in more than 40 years, according to preliminary data from satellites, but scientists say it too soon to link the the record drop to global heating. The Anaiwan people in NSW have crowdfunded $330,000 in a bid to buy a 240-hectare block of land to reclaim their country. They say they hope to use the land to reconnect with their culture and language and bring that culture to the wider New England community. The world The supreme court has formally rejected Donald Trump’s request to block the House select committee investigating the Capitol attack from accessing his White House records related to the events of 6 January 2021. All three of the largest groups in the European parliament are demanding that the EU assess whether Switzerland should be categorised as a high-risk country for money laundering and financial crime, as reaction to the Credit Suisse leak continues to reverberate about the world. The three men convicted of murdering Ahmaud Arbery have been found guilty of federal US hate crimes and attempted kidnapping for violating Arbery’s civil rights and targeting him because he was Black. The Queen cancelled planned virtual engagements as she continues to experience Covid symptoms. Recommended reads “My life has just been a little bit crazy lately,” Maggie Beer says. That feels like something of an understatement. As well as her year-round duties helming a range of gourmet foods plus a shop and restaurant in the Barossa Valley, Australia’s most endearing celebrity cook is in a particularly busy period. She is back in the judging seat for The Great Australian Bake Off and is also gearing up for this year’s Tasting Australia festival. But she took some time out to share with us the stories of three important belongings. “Watching the steadfast mother-daughter relationships of my patients through health and sickness gives me hope for mine,” Ranjana Srivastava writes. “I talk to my mother every day and assume she knows I cherish her. But lately, I realise that of all my daughter’s gestures, the one that makes my heart brim is when, without expectation or invitation, she tells me that I am a good mother. This reward transcends all achievements and all incentives.” Penelope Spheeris’s trilogy about LA’s punk and hair metal scenes, The Decline of Western Civilization, is both hopeful and bleak, with revealing interviews with future icons, Nathan Jolly writes. “Featuring rough-ready footage shot at gigs and candid interviews with future punk icons, this film is a slim time capsule of a nascent music scene not yet exploited through commerce or destroyed by day jobs. Spheeris enters a world filled with runaways, drug addicts and squatters, where audience members spit on bands to signal some form of vile, violent appreciation.” Listen As debate over the religious discrimination bill – and the right for religious schools to expel transgender kids – reached fever pitch this month, the Rev Josephine Inkpin carried on with the business of providing solace to those in need. In today’s Full Story, Laura Murphy-Oates speaks to the first transgender minister appointed in a mainstream church about breaking ground, hope and why the battle for inclusion isn’t over. Full Story is Guardian Australia’s daily news podcast. Subscribe for free on Apple Podcasts, Spotify or any other podcasting app. Sport We are only one round into Super Rugby Pacific and already it appears that a wildcard and a dark horse may threaten to upset the status quo in the Australian section of the competition. For the past few years the race for supremacy has played out almost solely between the Brumbies and the Queensland Reds but it appears the Waratahs have shaken up things up with their 40-10 win against the Fijian Drua in Parramatta last Friday. Media roundup Wild weather hit Sydney with flooding reported in homes and shops, says the Sydney Morning Herald, and Queensland received 250mm of rain on Tuesday, with the Courier-Mail reporting that more intense rainfall is expected in the state’s south-east in the coming days. Victoria’s premier, Daniel Andrews, is set to face questions in an anti-corruption investigation into Labor’s dealings with fire union, according to the Herald Sun. Coming up Disability royal commission hearings continue and Rio Tinto will share its full-year results at an investor briefing. Sign up If you would like to receive the Guardian Australia morning mail to your email inbox every weekday, sign up here. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com. Discover Australian Weekend Every Saturday from 6am, enjoy early access to the best journalism planned for the weekend in one elegant app, plus a curated selection of the week’s news and analysis from Australia and the world.Manchester City’s Oleksandr Zinchenko has stated “no one will ever appropriate” Ukraine, as fears grow of war between his homeland and Russia. The utility player, who captained Ukraine at Euro 2020, spoke out after Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin, stated he recognised the Russian-controlled territories in east Ukraine – Donetsk and Luhansk – as independent states. This has increased fears of a wider invasion of Ukraine by Russia. Zinchenko, who played for Russian club Ufa before joining City in July 2016, has responded with a defiant message on his Instagram page. “My country belongs to Ukrainians and no one will ever be able to appropriate it,” the 25-year-old said. “We will not give it away. I can’t stand back and [not] put my point across. The whole civilised world is concerned about the situation in my country. The country in which I was born and raised and of which the colours of I defend [represent] in the international sports arena. The country we are trying to glorify and develop. A country whose borders must remain intact.” Zinchenko made his debut for Ukraine in 2015 and has 48 caps.The supreme court has formally rejected Donald Trump’s request to block the House select committee investigating the Capitol attack from accessing White House records related to the events of 6 January 2021. The court announced on Tuesday in its latest list of orders that it would not take up Trump’s appeal to a lower-court ruling allowing the select committee access to the documents. The news comes a month after the supreme court rejected Trump’s emergency motion to block the release of the documents as his case regarding executive privilege claims made its way through the courts. That January ruling cleared the way for the select committee to start receiving Trump White House documents. They have already started combing through the records. Seven people died as a result of the attack on the US Capitol by supporters Trump told to “fight like hell” in service of his lie that his defeat by Joe Biden was the result of electoral fraud. The attack did not prevent certification of electoral college results, though 147 Republicans in the House and Senate did lodge objections. More than 100 police officers were injured. More than 700 people have been charged. Eleven people, members of the far-right Oath Keepers militia, face charges of seditious conspiracy. Trump was impeached for inciting an insurrection, but acquitted when enough Republican senators stayed loyal. Only two Republicans, Trump critics Liz Cheney and Adam Kinzinger, sit on the House select committee investigating January 6 and Trump’s attempts to overturn the election. The committee is working quickly, given Republicans’ expected takeover of the House after midterm elections in November. Public hearings are believed to be on the way and key aides to Trump have been served with subpoenas or asked to co-operate. Few have. Steve Bannon, a former White House strategist and key figure on the pro-Trump far right, has pleaded not guilty to contempt of Congress – a criminal charge carrying jail time. Others including the former chief of staff Mark Meadows have refused to co-operate. Members of the panel have said they expect Rudy Giuliani, Trump’s personal lawyer and a key figure in attempts to overturn the election, to testify. The supreme court’s formal rejection of Trump’s attempt to keep White House records away from the committee was not a surprise. Laurence Tribe, a Harvard law professor, said on Twitter: “Trump’s baseless and brazen attempt to keep the January 6 select committee from obtaining his White House records has now been turned down by the supreme court of the United States. No surprise there, but with this court one never knows until one knows …” The court is currently imbalanced 6-3 in favor of conservatives, after Trump appointed three justices in his single four-year term in office. Clarence Thomas, who was appointed by George HW Bush, was the only justice who said he would have granted Trump’s attempt to stop the January 6 committee gaining access to his records. Thomas and his wife were the subject of an extensive New York Times profile published on Tuesday. Ginni Thomas is a conservative activist with close connections to pro-Trump groups. Dustin Stockton, a conservative organizer with ties to Bannon, told the paper that Ginni Thomas was tasked with coordinating rightwing groups around Trump’s rally near the White House before the Capitol attack, so “there wouldn’t be any division”. “The way it was presented to me was that Ginni was uniting these different factions around a singular mission on 6 January” Stockton told the paper. “That Ginni was involved made sense – she’s pretty neutral and she doesn’t have a lot of enemies in the movement.” Questions about Clarence Thomas’s role on the court given his wife’s work have mounted since the New Yorker published a lengthy piece of its own last month. Neither the justice nor Ginni Thomas has commented.Ministers are subjecting the families of Commonwealth military veterans to “deeply unjust” visa fees after pleas to waive the costly sums for spouses and children were rejected, two MPs have argued. Labour’s Dan Jarvis and the former Conservative minister Johnny Mercer criticised the government for removing the £2,389 immigration bill only for long-serving veterans. The Ministry of Defence and the Home Office had planned to announce the fee waiver, which would have applied to Nepali, Fijian and other Commonwealth veterans who had served six years or more on Wednesday. But by excluding partners and dependents, the MPs said on Tuesday night it would still leave veterans facing thousands of pounds of Home Office bills to resolve their family’s immigration status when they are discharged from service. “We remain concerned that families continue to be sidelined – this amounts to a 25% discount on a £10,000 visa fee bill for a family of four,” the two MPs said. “It is deeply unjust for the government to profit from them exercising their right to remain in the country for which they risked their lives.” The two MPs, both veterans, went public the night before the announcement, arguing that people who had a “long and proud history” of serving in the British armed forces would still be poorly treated. Britain has long used foreign-born soldiers in its armed forces. Nearly 7% of troops come from outside the UK, most notably Nepali Gurkhas and Fijians, who have served in Iraq, Afghanistan and elsewhere. Veterans who served a minimum period had the right to UK citizenship, but bureaucratic errors, poor advice and increased feeshave left some as illegal immigrants in the country for which they once served. One, Taitusi Ratacaucau, was told he needed to pay more than £50,000 to cover NHS hospital bills after an emergency operation to remove a brain tumour in 2020 because he was no longer considered a British citizen. Ratacaucau and seven others tried and failed to win a legal battle to have their visa fees waived – but were eventually granted leave to remain in the UK last year by the Home Office after a high profile campaign. The campaign group Citizenship4Soldiers said they also wanted ministers to ensure the fee waiver would be backdated, estimating that there are 600 Fijian veterans who could benefit. The group also said it was concerned that “families have been excluded”. Ben Wallace, the defence secretary said he was “delighted to announce” that serving personnel and veterans who have served for six years or more “will no longer have to pay the visa fee”. The move was an “important step to express our sincere gratitude”, the minister added.Facebook has launched its short video feature Reels globally, its owner Meta Platforms said on Tuesday, in a move to expand its fastest growing content format after reports that overall user numbers are down. The social media giant, which recently announced a massive pivot into virtual reality products, lost a third of its market value after a dismal earnings report in February. It has highlighted Reels as a key priority to court younger users. The focus on Reels comes as younger users have flocked in large numbers to rival platforms like TikTok. Internal research from Meta, leaked by former employee and whistleblower Frances Haugen, showed young users have been on the decline since 2012 and “only users 25 and above are increasing their use of Facebook”. Reels had already been available in the US and elsewhere, but will now expand to a total of 150 countries and be more prominently featured on the Facebook and Instagram apps. The video tool will also offer more editing and sharing features, including allowing users to “remix” others’ videos to add their own commentary. Meta launched Reels on Instagram in 2020 and on Facebook in 2021 as its answer to the explosively popular short-video app TikTok, which is owned by Chinese tech giant ByteDance. The near-copy of the rival platform drew criticisms and allegations of anti-competitive behavior, as Facebook has a history of borrowing key features of its biggest rivals. “Reels is already our fastest growing content format by far, and today we’re making it available to everyone on Facebook globally,” Meta CEO Mark Zuckerberg said in a Facebook post on Tuesday. The company, which says video now accounts for half of the time people spend on Facebook, also announced new ways for creators to make money through the Reels feature. It said it was expanding its program to pay creators bonuses to more countries and was testing overlay ads using banners and stickers for creators to earn ad revenue. It would roll out full-screen ads between Reels soon. Meta said during its latest earnings that it had faced hits from Apple’s privacy changes to its operating system, which have made it harder for brands to target and measure their ads on Facebook and Instagram. It also cited macroeconomic issues like supply-chain disruptions. The 18-year-old tech behemoth last month also warned it expects slowing revenue growth in the coming quarter due to increased competition for users’ time and a shift of engagement toward features like Reels, which generate less revenue. In its Tuesday announcement, Meta also said it would roll out updates for users to make and see Facebook Reels in new places, such as in its Stories feature, its Watch tab and at the top of the news feed. In some countries, users will also see suggested Reels in their feed.• An article (How Eunice compares with 1987 or even 1703, 18 February, p9, early editions) said “about 9,000 people suffered power cuts” during Storm Arwen. This was the number of homes still without power into the second week after the storm; hundreds of thousands of homes lost power when the storm first hit. • We misspelled the surname of the musician Chris Maas as “Mass” (Downton’s Lady Mary to release folk record with co-star, 16 February, p3). • Other recently amended articles include: Which London-listed Russian firms could be hit by sanctions? Experts warn ‘not to get too cocky’ as US contemplates life after Covid Ottawa: police use pepper spray and stun grenades to clear trucker protest New Zealand border will open in stages from end of February, Jacinda Ardern announces ‘I forget everything’: the benefits of nature for mental health Leave Putin in no doubt: Russia will be economically crippled – and he may be tried for war crimes Lord Myners obituary I took a trip to Scotland’s ‘secret coast’ – and found a quiet haven roaring back to life Extremists see opportunity as fury over Covid rules erupts in rural California Jackson and Meyers Taylor have made history in Beijing for Black Americans Editorial complaints and correction requests can be sent to: guardian.readers@theguardian.com. You can also write to: Readers’ editor, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU, or leave a voicemail on +44 (0) 20 3353 4736.Musician Mark Lanegan has died at the age of 57. The singer, songwriter and musician was known as the lead vocalist for Screaming Trees as well as being part of Queens of the Stone Age. “Our beloved friend Mark Lanegan passed away this morning at his home in Killarney, Ireland,” read a statement posted to his Twitter account. “A beloved singer, songwriter, author and musician he was 57 and is survived by his wife Shelley. No other information is available at this time. The family asks everyone to respect their privacy at this time.” The American singer, born and raised in rural eastern Washington state, had survived a battle with Covid-19 that left him in and out of a coma for months-long stretches of 2021. His memoir Devil in a Coma, published last December, detailed his tortuous near-death experience, which included a Covid-induced fall that cracked ribs and a painful hospital stay laced with recurring hallucinations. “More and more this was reminiscent of an unending stretch in county jail that I couldn’t shake, with my trial date being intentionally undetermined, constantly moved around just to keep me inside,” he wrote in an excerpt published in the Guardian. “Whatever was in this shitwagon I’d caught a ride on, it was no fucking joke. I’d taken my share of well-deserved ass-kickings over the years but this thing was trying to dismantle me, body and mind, and I could see no end to it in sight.” Once a long-time drug user and friend of Kurt Cobain, Jeffrey Lee Pierce of the Gun Club, and Alice in Chains’s Layne Staley – all of which he detailed in his 2020 memoir Sing Backwards and Weep – Lanegan was called “rock’s great survivor”. By 12, according to his memoir, he was a “compulsive gambler, a fledgling alcoholic, a thief, a porno fiend”. By 18, he had a lengthy criminal record which included breaking and entering, shoplifting, drug possession, vandalism, insurance fraud and 26 counts of underage drinking. “I wanted excitement, adventure, decadence, depravity, anything, everything,” he wrote in Sing Backwards and Weeps. Lanegan had been clean for more than a decade at the time of his death. In 1985, at age 21, Lanegan was working for a video store in his hometown of Ellensburg, Washington – what he described as a “dusty, isolated cow town” – when he formed a band with his boss’s sons, guitarist Gary Lee Conner and bassist Van Conner. The Screaming Trees would go on to record seven studio albums before their breakup in 2000, and rose to fame as part of the grunge movement of the early 1990s centered around Seattle. (An eighth album, Last Words: The Final Recordings, which was recorded in 1998-1999, was released by drummer Barrett Martin’s label in 2011.) Lanegan also embarked on a solo career during the peak of the band’s fame. His 1990 solo debut The Winding Sheet included appearances from Cobain and Nirvana bassist Krist Novoselic, and numerous grunge figures appeared on subsequent releases Whiskey for the Holy Ghost, Scraps at Midnight and the collection of covers I’ll Take Care of You. Lanegan wrote his 2020 memoir at the encouragement of close friend Anthony Bourdain, the celebrity chef and TV host who died by suicide in 2018. Lanegan penned an obituary for Bourdain in the Observer. “Anthony said, ‘There needs be a level of honesty beyond what you’ll be comfortable with for it not to be some crappy rock autobiography,’” Lanegan told the Guardian in 2020. “That was the last thing I wanted to do, ever. This might sound ridiculous, but if it’s not literature, I didn’t want to do it.” Numerous musicians, many from the rock scene, paid tribute to Lanegan in the wake of his death. “Mark Lanegan rest easy mate. A real singer,” tweeted British post-punk duo Sleaford Mods. “Oh no. Terrible news that Mark Lanegan has left us. Safe travels man – you’ll be missed,” tweeted musician Tim Burgess of the Charlatans. “I am in absolute shock, a very beautiful soul has left this world. I love you brother,” tweeted friend and fellow musician Anton Newcombe. The English musician Damon Gough, who uses the stage name Badly Drawn Boy, tweeted that news of Lanegan’s death “properly stopped me in my tracks. I’m absolutely gutted. Met him on a couple of occasions and I was nervous because I loved him so much. He was a perfect gentleman, really kind. One of THE great singers of the last 30 years.” Lanegan was “a supremely gifted performer, songwriter, artist and author, and we are devastated to hear he has passed away,” his UK publishing house, White Rabbit Books, said in a statement posted to Twitter. “His art will endure and only grow in stature.” Lanegan is survived by his second wife, Shelley Brien.Students from disadvantaged backgrounds in England could be blocked from going to university unless they get strong GCSE or A-level grades, under proposals to be announced by the government this week. On Thursday the government is to publish its long-awaited response to the Augar review of higher education funding, and the Guardian has learned that a key part of the response will be the launch of a consultation on minimum entry requirements for students to be eligible for government-backed loans for tuition and maintenance. University leaders warn that setting minimum entry requirements too high, such as requiring a grade 5 in GCSE maths and English, would effectively end the hopes of many school leavers from disadvantaged backgrounds and others who could not be able to afford the £9,250 annual undergraduate tuition fee or living expenses without student loans. A key determinant will be whether a GCSE grade 4 or 5 is determined to be the minimum entry standard. About 71% of pupils in England achieve a grade 4 in GCSE English and maths, falling to 52% amoung disadvantaged households. Bridget Phillipson, Labour’s shadow education secretary, said: “After nearly three years of inaction, this meagre response shows the government does not share the ambitions of young people and their families for their futures and the future of our country. “Instead of looking to widen access to university education, or supporting the success of our universities, the government is slamming the door on opportunity.” A DfE spokesperson said: “Higher education is an investment and we need to ensure that graduates are being rewarded for the money, time and effort they put into their studies with an educational experience and jobs that match their skills and help contribute to the economy.” The announcement comes as record numbers of school leavers apply for undergraduate places. The Department for Education has been battling with the Treasury over the cost of financing for nearly three years since the Augar review was published under the then prime minister Theresa May. A further consultation will be announced on the future of foundation year courses taught at universities. Those are offered to students who don’t meet an institution’s academic requirements and remain a key point of access for many, especially mature students. However, the Augar review recommended that foundation years be restricted to further education colleges. Other headline measures to be announced include the freezing of the tuition fee at £9,250 for another two years, until the end of the current parliament. That will result in an effective cut in university incomes from teaching undergraduates, with the value of the tuition fee already considerably eroded by inflation. In real terms its value by 2024 is likely to be much less than £7,000, depending on the rate of inflation. The government will also announce a similar freeze on the threshold earnings for student loan repayments, hitting recent graduates who will find themselves having to make higher repayments as their wages rise more quickly above the threshold. Earlier this year the DfE announced that the repayment threshold – the amount at which graduates in England pay off their student loans – would be frozen at £27,295, which the Institute for Fiscal Studies estimates would cost graduates earning £30,000 an extra £113 a year each. The IFS also calculated that the move would save the Treasury around £600m a year in higher repayments than it would have received if the threshold had been indexed to inflation as originally intended. However, the proposals to be unveiled on Thursday are expected to include some good news on capping the interest charged on student loans, although that will have no immediate effect on the level of repayments. The consultation is the government’s long delayed response to the Augar review of post-18 education and funding in England, which was announced by former prime minister Teresa May in February 2018 after Labour’s buoyant performance in the 2017 general election, thanks in part to its pledge to scrap student tuition fees. The review was launched at a time of mounting concern about the cost – and value – of higher education, after annual tuition fees rose to £9,250 and maintenance grants were scrapped, sending individual student debt spiralling to almost £50,000. When it finally reported on 30 May 2019, it included 53 recommendations on the future for the sector, including a reduction of tuition fees to £7,500, an extension of student loan repayments from 30 to 40 years and the reintroduction of maintenance grants for the most disadvantaged students. However, as time has gone on and the political climate has changed, many of Augar’s recommendations have looked increasingly unlikely. With outstanding student loans reaching £140bn last year the Treasury’s priority has been to reduce the cost of student loans to itself rather than ease the burden on students. Higher education staff and management are currently locked in a bitter industrial dispute over pensions, pay and working conditions. On Tuesday evening a key negotiating committee of the University Superannuation Scheme, which administers the pension fund for many university staff, rejected funding proposals by the University and College Union in favour of those put forward by the employers. Jo Grady, the UCU chair, warned that the decision would lead to further industrial action. “University vice-chancellors have today chosen to steal tens of thousands from the retirement income of staff. This is a deplorable attack which our members won’t take lying down,” Grady said.Looking at the positives from Thomas Tuchel’s big selection call, at least Romelu Lukaku has a better understanding of how Chelsea aspire to play now. This was a flexible and smart performance from the European champions, who functioned perfectly well with their £97.5m conundrum watching from the bench for the entire 90 minutes, and on this evidence Lukaku could be forgiven for wondering if his new diminished role is here to stay. After all there is little reason for Tuchel to bring the Belgian back when Chelsea meet Liverpool in the Carabao Cup final on Sunday. It could well be further humiliation for Lukaku after this comfortable win against Lille. Chelsea were far more effective with Kai Havertz offering movement, mobility and incision up front and they have a firm grip on this last-16 tie after the impressive Christian Pulisic gave them a 2-0 lead to take to France next month, by which point Lukaku might already be plotting his path back to Internazionale. The increasing sense is that a clean break would suit all parties. “A look of tiredness” was how Tuchel had explained his decision to drop Chelsea’s record signing but nobody was buying that. As ever the evidence was on the pitch. Lukaku had mustered a mere seven touches against Crystal Palace in his previous outing, the fewest registered by any Premier League player over 90 minutes since Opta began keeping track in 2003. Numbers of such anonymity made it simple for Tuchel, who seemed to be on to something by picking a front three that gave his side pace, trickery and unpredictability in the final third. It was a controversial decision, though, and one that Tuchel needed to come off. Chelsea have stumbled of late, their title challenge unravelling during a bleak winter period, injuries taking a toll. The next drama has never felt far away and, although there was a nice moment before kick-off – the injured trio of Ben Chilwell, Callum Hudson-Odoi and Reece James parading the club’s latest trophy around the pitch – the crowd’s applause was accompanied by an awareness that this season is not going to be defined by Club World Cup glory. This was more important than Abu Dhabi and it looked as if Chelsea knew it early on. Pulisic took the game to Lille with some snaking runs and the opening goal should have arrived inside four minutes, Havertz somehow turning César Azpilicueta’s cross over from close range. Would Lukaku have scored? Probably. The point, though, is that Chelsea are far more fluid with Havertz operating as a false nine. His graceful movement unsettled Sven Botman and José Fonte, Lille’s centre-backs, and he quickly put his early miss behind him, shifting inside before drawing an excellent save from Léo Jardim after seven minutes. Eleventh in Ligue 1, Lille soon cracked. Hakim Ziyech lifted in a corner from the left and Havertz made it look easy in the middle, rising unmarked to send a bouncing header beyond Jardim. Tuchel had his vindication. For a while, with N’Golo Kanté and Mateo Kovacic controlling midfield, it was one-way traffic. Marcos Alonso went close with a volley. Pulisic kept running. Havertz floated around menacingly. Cautiously, though, Lille came into the contest. Tuchel grew irritable, roaring when Ziyech wasted a chance to shoot. Chelsea were making too many mistakes and Lille were growing in confidence. Jonathan Bamba and Jonathan David looked dangerous and Chelsea, who survived a few skirmishes in their area, were relieved to escape when Antonio Rüdiger almost sliced Renato Sanches’s cross past Édouard Mendy. Lille had hope after the break. Azpilicueta was working hard to contain Bamba and Chelsea were starting to retreat. Too many counterattacks were fizzling out and the worries for Tuchel increased when Kovacic made way for Ruben Loftus-Cheek before hobbling down the tunnel. Chelsea were wavering. Alonso had a volley blocked by Zeki Celik and Havertz fired over, but the game had become bitty and Tuchel was forced into another adjustment when Ziyech went down with an ankle problem just before the hour. That, though, allowed Tuchel to regain control. He chose to bring on Saúl Ñíguez instead of another attacker and more bodies in the middle meant there was a chance to release Kanté, who accepted his new role with relish, dousing Lille’s optimism with the run that led to Chelsea’s second goal. The surge came out of nowhere. Suddenly, after an aimless Lille attack broke down, Kanté was tearing through the middle and carrying Chelsea up the pitch. Nobody could keep up with him and there was quality at the end of the run, the midfielder’s weighted pass sending Pulisic through to score with a lovely dink. It was a deserved goal for Pulisic and Chelsea were able to relax. Andreas Christensen, Thiago Silva and Rüdiger were determined to protect the clean sheet and the introduction of Hatem Ben Arfa was not enough for Lille, though at least the former Newcastle winger got on the pitch. With Timo Werner sent on before him, the same could not be said of Lukaku.The footballer Troy Deeney is launching an impassioned plea for more widespread teaching of black, Asian and minority ethnic experiences by schools in England, to help combat racism and give children “a balanced and inclusive understanding” of Britain. In an open letter to the education secretary, Nadhim Zahawi, Deeney said he had been frustrated by the lack of progress on tackling racism in the two years since the killing of George Floyd in the US, saying that “an eerie quiet” had ended public debate. The Birmingham City striker said he was still receiving “vile racist abuse on social media and, at times, in public,” and with three children in the education system he felt an urgent need for schools to include black, Asian and minority ethnic experiences in their curriculum. “I have seen more and more how important it is for my children to be able to see themselves represented in what they are being taught, and learn about the contribution and background of people who look like them,” Deeney said. “The importance of education at an early age to inform identity and combat racist beliefs and stereotypes cannot be understated.” Deeney’s letter follows the success of Marcus Rashford, the England and Manchester United forward, in changing government policy. In 2020 and 2021, Rashford’s public interventions and a groundswell of support led to the government reversing its decision not to provide food for children eligible for free school meals during the school holidays in the midst of the Covid pandemic. Deeney, who signed for Birmingham City this season after playing almost 400 games for Watford, is launching an online petition. He has commissioned research by the polling company YouGov into teachers’ attitudes to rebut claims that the national curriculum in England already contains ample black and minority ethnic representation. The survey of 1,000 secondary and primary school teachers, carried out this month, found that only 12% felt empowered to teach “optional” black-related topics such as colonialism, migration and identity ahead of competing optional topics, while 75% said they were not aware that resources to teach cultural diversity across the curriculum were available. It found that 54% of teachers believed the school system or national curriculum has a racial bias, rising to 93% among minority ethnic teachers. “My only experience of black history or black culture was through the food or music I experienced at home, whilst at school I felt detached. Not only was I not taught about positive role models who looked like me, I was even told by one teacher that I’d be dead by the time I was 25,” Deeney said. He was excluded from school at the age of 15 and left without any qualifications. Later, as a professional footballer, he studied and passed GCSEs in English, maths and science. “As my mum always says to me, you can’t understand where you’re going if you don’t understand where you’ve come from. Whether it’s too late for my generation, we need to lay a pathway for longer-lasting change for our kids as I believe the current system is failing children from ethnic minorities,” Deeney said. Denney’s call was backed by Lavinya Stennett, founder of The Black Curriculum which promotes a wider range of Black content to be taught in schools. “The students and the teachers are asking for our work, and it’s the time to listen and mandate,” Stennett said. In response, a Department for Education spokesperson said the current curriculum offers pupils the opportunity to study significant figures from black and ethnic minority backgrounds and the contributions they have made to the nation. “Schools play a crucial role in helping young people understand the world around them and their place within it. We continue to be informed by the work of committed individuals and groups when it comes to supporting the teaching of black and minority ethnic history,” the spokesperson said.Wales have been warned to expect a fast and furious welcome from England at Twickenham on Saturday in a game the home team are billing as a knockout eliminator. With Manu Tuilagi and Courtney Lawes back, Eddie Jones’s side are determined to up the tempo and improve their chances of claiming this year’s Six Nations title. According to Jones’s assistant Martin Gleeson, the former Great Britain rugby league international who is now England’s attack coach, there is a realisation among the players that, as at a World Cup, they must now win their final three games to hoist the trophy. “It’s a massive game for us,” Gleeson said. “It’s the first time crowds have been back for a Six Nations game for a couple of years and we’re treating it like a quarter-final. If we don’t get the result on Saturday, we’re out.” Gleeson will be urging his side to take the game to Wales from the outset, having rated their training session on Tuesday as the best he has seen since he took the job last August. “We want to take it to them as quickly and early in the game as possible,” he said. “We don’t want to be playing in our shell. We want to play the brand of rugby we want straight from the kick-off. We need to have some line speed in defence and hit hard. When we’ve got the ball there’s a few opportunities we can see. We want to play with intent and go after teams.” This go-faster mission statement would appear perfectly suited to a player like Tuilagi, set to feature for the first time since damaging a hamstring against South Africa in the autumn. The statistician Russ Petty has even dug into the archives and found that England have not lost at Twickenham with Tuilagi in their matchday squad since November 2012. “Manu can just take the ball, make metres and get us quick ruck ball by himself. Not everyone can do that,” Gleeson said. “That’s why Manu is the player he is. He’s a guy who can add another dimension to your attack. You don’t always have to create overlaps or gaps in defences; he can punch holes on his own. His acceleration and the power with that is phenomenal. He’ll be good to have in the mix.” The winds of change, though, continue to blow, with two experienced Joes – Marchant and Launchbury – released from the squad last night. In recent days, too, two members of England’s matchday squad from their 2019 Rugby World Cup semi-final win over New Zealand have signalled their retirements, with George Kruis set to join Mark Wilson in stepping away from the game at the age of 32. Both Kruis and Wilson were popular squad men and highly valuable players, with 68 caps for England between them. The former is quitting to devote more time to his burgeoning business career while injury has finally caught up with the latter but, in their different ways, both underline the fierce dedication and sacrifice required to stay at the top of the professional game. It also shows just how swiftly the picture can change from a team-building perspective. There had been talk of Kruis returning to the Premiership with a view to chasing a place in next year’s World Cup in France. Instead Jones and his assistants will have to hope their forward options remain deep enough for it not to matter unduly if they lose any more big men between now and the autumn of 2023. Equally important, though, is to bed in some lasting combinations in key areas rather than simply adding random individuals to the mix here and there. Ben Youngs is set to become England’s most capped player in history this weekend but will be 34 by the time next year’s World Cup kicks off. England’s other two scrum-halves, Harry Randall and Raffi Quirke, have barely started their Test careers and no team in history has won the Webb Ellis Cup with a relative rookie in the No 9 jersey. Tuilagi and Henry Slade, however, are already a proven midfield double act and, with Owen Farrell still sidelined by injury, the big centre has been seeking to establish a good understanding with Marcus Smith. The pair roomed together during England’s training camp in Jersey and Tuilagi has been trying to put the squad’s younger players at ease. “You don’t want them to feel pressure,” the 30-year-old said. “We were just relaxing with nice tea and a couple of biscuits, nice shortbread. That’s the important thing … to connect and get to know each other.”That’s it from me today, after an eventful day in Washington. Here’s how the day unfolded: Joe Biden said the world is witnessing “the beginning of a Russian invasion of Ukraine”, as Vladimir Putin ordered troops into east Ukraine. In his speech this afternoon, Biden argued that Putin’s recognition of the two self-proclaimed territories in Luhansk and Donetsk represented “a flagrant violation of international law”. Biden announced the first round of US sanctions against Russia in response to Putin’s military actions in Ukraine. The sanctions will target Russia’s financial institutions, sovereign debt and elite families. “And if Russia goes further with this invasion, we stand prepared to go further as with sanctions,” Biden said. Biden is also deploying US forces and equipment to Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania to help fortify those countries’ defenses. “Let me be clear, these are totally defensive moves on our part. We have no intention of fighting Russia,” Biden said. “We want to send an unmistakable message though, that the United States – together with our allies – will defend every inch of Nato territory and abide by the commitments we made to Nato.” Some Republicans criticized Biden’s sanctions as an insufficient response to Russian aggression in Ukraine. “The sanctions outlined are woefully inadequate to deter Putin’s efforts to redraw the European map and dismember a neighboring democracy,” said Republican Senator Lindsey Graham. “I will continue to try to work with the Biden administration and Senate Democrats to create crippling sanctions for Putin’s invasion.” Meanwhile, Russian lawmakers granted Putin permission to use force outside the country, which could clear the way for a broader attack on Ukraine. “Whatever Russia does next, we’re ready to respond with unity, clarity and conviction,” Biden said this afternoon. “I’m hoping diplomacy is still available.” The US politics blog will return tomorrow with more updates from Washington. Until then, make sure to follow the Guardian’s live blog on the Ukraine crisis: National security council officials are expected to soon brief congressional leaders and committee staff on the first round of US sanctions against Russia, according to NBC News. In his remarks this afternoon, Joe Biden said the first round of sanctions in response to Vladimir Putin’s military actions in east Ukraine would target Russian financial institutions, sovereign debt and elite families. Joe Biden held a virtual event this afternoon to discuss strengthening America’s supply chains and bolstering clean-energy manufacturing in the US. The president made a brief mention of the Ukraine crisis before moving on to the topic at hand. While greeting the president, California Governor Gavin Newsom said he was “impressed” Biden was still holding the meeting, given everything else happening today. “We don’t have much going on -- you know, other than Russia and Ukraine,” Biden joked. As they were escorted out of the meeting, several reporters tried to ask Biden questions about his administration’s response to Russian aggression in Ukraine, but the president again declined to answer. Some Republican lawmakers are criticizing Joe Biden’s response to Vladimir Putin’s military actions in Ukraine, arguing that the administration’s newly announced sanctions are “woefully inadequate”. “This is a critical moment in history…..and President Biden is NOT seizing the moment,” said Lindsey Graham, a Republican senator and an ally of Donald Trump. “The sanctions outlined are woefully inadequate to deter Putin’s efforts to redraw the European map and dismember a neighboring democracy.” Graham promised that he would continue to work with his Senate colleagues and the White House to “create crippling sanctions for Putin’s invasion”. Speaking to reporters in his home state of South Carolina earlier today, Graham similarly warned that Biden’s handling of the Ukraine crisis so far would only encourage Putin to invade further. “Right now, Mr President, you’re playing footsie with Putin and you’re losing,” Graham said. “He’s walking all over you and our allies. The White House has also shared a photo of Joe Biden’s meeting today with Ukraine’s foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, on the need to protect Ukrainian sovereignty. The photo shows the two men shaking hands in the Oval Office: According to the White House readout of the meeting, Biden used the meeting with Kuleba to “reaffirm the United States’ commitment to Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity”. “President Biden reiterated the readiness of the United States, in close cooperation with our allies and partners, to respond swiftly and decisively to any further Russian aggression against Ukraine,” the White House said. Joe Biden has attracted some support from his Democratic allies in Congress after announcing the first round of US sanctions on Russia in response to Vladimir Putin’s military maneuvers in Ukraine. “I support @POTUS imposing sanctions for Putin’s invasion of Ukraine,” progressive Senator Elizabeth Warren said on Twitter. “Together with our NATO allies and international partners, the United States should continue using all diplomatic, political, and economic tools to stop further Russian aggression against the Ukrainian people.” Joe Biden met today with Ukraine’s foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, as Vladimir Putin ordered Russian troops into east Ukraine after two independent republics were proclaimed there. “President Biden updated Foreign Minister Kuleba on the United States’ response to Russia’s decision to recognize the purported ‘independence’ of the so-called DNR and LNR regions of Ukraine, including the Executive Order issued last night and new sanctions announced today,” the White House said in its readout of the meeting. Biden signed an executive order yesterday barring any investment or financing by Americans in the two east Ukraine regions, and he has since announced the first round of US sanctions on Russia in response to Putin’s military maneuvers. “He also affirmed that the United States would continue providing security assistance and macroeconomic support to Ukraine,” the White House said of Biden’s meeting with Kuleba. “President Biden reiterated the readiness of the United States, in close cooperation with our allies and partners, to respond swiftly and decisively to any further Russian aggression against Ukraine.” Despite Joe Biden’s assessment that Russia has started its invasion of Ukraine, the president said there is “still time to avert the worst-case scenario”. The US and its allies remain open to a diplomatic solution even as the White House announces its first round of sanctions on Russia, Biden said. “When all is said and done, we’re going to judge Russia by its actions, not its words. And whatever Russia does next, we’re ready to respond with unity, clarity and conviction,” Biden said. “I’m hoping diplomacy is still available.” With that, Biden concluded his prepared remarks and walked away from the podium without taking any of reporters’ shouted questions. Joe Biden said the US would continue to provide defensive assistance to Ukraine, as Russia moves troops into the country’s eastern region, where two independent republics have been proclaimed. Biden also announced that US forces and equipment currently stationed in Europe would be deployed to Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania to help fortify those country’s defenses. “Let me be clear, these are totally defensive moves on our part. We have no intention of fighting Russia,” Biden said. “We want to send an unmistakable message though, that the United States -- together with our allies -- will defend every inch of Nato territory and abide by the commitments we made to Nato.” Joe Biden acknowledged that the newly announced sanctions on Russia may result in higher gas prices for Americans, and he pledged to work to limit the financial impact on average families. “Defending freedom will have costs for us as well and here at home. We need to be honest about that,” Biden said. He added, “But as we do this, I’m going to take robust action to make sure the pain of our sanctions is targeted at the Russian economy, not ours.” Biden said his administration was closely monitoring energy supplies to prepare for any potential disruption and coordinating with oil producers to help mitigate price hikes. “I want to limit the pain the American people are feeling at the gas pump,” Biden said. “This is critical to me.” Joe Biden noted that the sanctions his administration will issue against Russia will be much more severe than those enacted after the 2014 annexation of Crimea. “And if Russia goes further with this invasion, we stand prepared to go further as with sanctions,” Biden said. The US president argued that Vladimir Putin’s recognition of the two self-proclaimed republics in east Ukraine represented “a flagrant violation of international law” and demanded a “firm response from the international community”. “Who in the Lord’s name does Putin think gives him the right to declare new so-called ‘countries’ on territory that belonged to his neighbors?” Biden said. Joe Biden has announced he will enact the “first tranche” of sanctions on Russia in response to Vladimir Putin’s recognition of two self-proclaimed republics in east Ukraine and his decision to move troops into the region. The president said the US would impose sanctions on Russian financial institutions, sovereign debt and the country’s elites and their family members. “They share in the corrupt games of the Kremlin policies and should share in the pain as well,” Biden said of the sanctions on Russia’s elite families. Joe Biden has now appeared at the podium in the East Room for his speech on Russia and Ukraine, after Vladimir Putin acknowledged the two self-proclaimed republics in Luhansk and Donetsk and ordered troops into the region. The US president warned that Putin is “setting up a rationale to go much further” in Ukraine, predicting a larger-scale attack in the days to come. “This is the beginning of a Russian invasion of Ukraine,” Biden said. White House pool reporters are now in the East Room for Joe Biden’s remarks on Russia and Ukraine, which were originally supposed to start more than an hour ago. Stay tuned. Democrat Bob Menendez, the chairman of the Senate foreign relations committee, argued that Joe Biden needs to enact severe sanctions on Russia in response to Vladimir Putin’s latest maneuvers in eastern Ukraine. “I think we can stop equivocating as to whether we have an invasion or not,” Menendez told CNN this afternoon. “I think the West, the United States has to make it very clear to Putin that the consequences begin now.” Menendez argued it was crucial for the US and its allies to enact sanctions on Russian banks, Russian oligarchs and Russian sovereign debt, among other entities. “Those are just some of the beginning salvos that I think would need to be done,” Menendez said. “Because unless the West this time acts resolutely, strongly and decisively, we will have repeats of 2008 and 2014 with Putin.” It’s unclear when Joe Biden will actually begin his speech on Russia and Ukraine, which was originally supposed to start at 1pm ET. A White House official told the press pool, “We are holding on gathering. Please wait for an update from us. Thank you.” The White House press briefing, which is currently scheduled to start at 2.30pm ET, may get pushed back as well. Stay tuned. Joe Biden appears to be running late for his remarks on Russia and Ukraine, which were supposed to start about 20 minutes ago. The White House has also announced that press secretary Jen Psaki’s daily briefing has now been pushed back to 2.30pm ET. She will be joined by deputy national security advisor Daleep Singh. The blog will have updates and analysis of Biden’s speech once it begins, so stay tuned. The Russian president has recognised the independence of two Russian-controlled territories in east Ukraine. They call themselves the Donetsk and Luhansk People’s Republics. The territories have been armed, financed and politically controlled by Russia since 2014. But until this week, Russia still recognised them as part of Ukraine. Vladimir Putin has now sent his military on a “peacekeeping mission” to Ukraine, meaning that Russia will formally occupy sovereign Ukrainian territory for a second time following the 2014 annexation of Crimea. But in this case, Russia has not annexed the territories. A document signed by Putin on Monday also allows him to establish military bases or place missiles in the territories. Why is Putin targeting Ukraine? Putin has indicated that he questions Ukraine’s right to statehood, calling modern Ukraine an artificial construct of the Soviet Union. He also sees Russians and Ukrainians as “one people”. Putin thinks that a western-leaning Ukraine is dangerous for Russia. He has called the possibility of Nato membership for Ukraine a “red line”. Putin wants to show that popular revolutions such as the one that took place in Kyiv in 2014 do not succeed in the long run. That helps to prop up his own rule in Russia. What might happen next? The decision marks the end of the Minsk peace deal, that would have left the territories in Ukraine. Russia’s military is likely to make a formal entrance into the territories soon. Its troops and vehicles have secretly taken part in the fighting since 2014, in which more than 14,000 people have died, but this deployment will probably be much larger. Moscow will now threaten Ukraine with a broader war if it continues to fight the “separatists”, telling Kyiv Russia is now obliged by treaty to defend them from attack. Russia could also justify a further invasion by recognising the claims of the separatist governments. They include the large city of Mariupol. If Russia recognises expanded borders, it may order its troops to begin an offensive against the Ukrainian army. That could be a prelude to a broader conflict. Russia has gathered up to 190,000 troops and is positioned to launch an attack that could threaten the capital, Kyiv, and much of the country. An offensive of that size has not been seen in Europe since the second world war. Full story: We also have a statement on Ukraine from Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the Senate minority leader. It’s much more respectful of Biden than the remarks by Lindsey Graham, reported below. Interesting (ish) sidenote: Joe Biden still calls McConnell a friend, despite the Republican’s ruthless approach to partisan politics which has included such highlights as committing to making Barack Obama (Biden’s old boss, lest we forget) a “one-term president” and blocking Obama’s pick, Merrick Garland, from even a hearing for a supreme court seat. Biden does not still call Graham a friend, because of Graham’s loyal support for Donald Trump through thick and thin. Anyway, in his statement on Ukraine, McConnell condemns Vladimir Putin and says “all the free nations of the world will be affected if [his] aggression is allowed to stand unchallenged”. “The world is watching,” McConnell says. “Our allies, our adversaries, and neutral countries will all judge the west by our response – and plan their futures accordingly.” Putin, McConnell says, “must be made to pay a far heavier price than he paid for his previous invasions of Georgia and Ukraine. This should begin, but not end, with devastating sanctions against the Kremlin and its enablers. The president should waste no time in using his extensive existing authorities to impose these costs.” McConnell also wants Nato and EU actions. He welcomes Germany suspending the Nord Stream 2 pipeline, which he says “must be turned into permanent cancellation”. McConnell praises Ukraine for standing up to Russia, and concludes: “The United States and our allies across the world must fully acknowledge the growing threats posed by decades of Chinese and Russian military modernisation. We need to rebuild our atrophied ability to deter and defend against aggression by these adversaries. That means we must invest more robustly in our own military capabilities to keep pace. Our budgets have to reflect reality. “America and its partners are strongest when we act together, but the collective response to these threats must be led by Washington, by President Biden and his administration.” More on Biden and McConnell: Republicans in Congress have plenty of advice or abuse for Joe Biden over how he’s handling the Ukraine crisis. Of course they do. Here’s Lindsey Graham, senator from the great state of South Carolina, this morning: “You said a couple of years ago that [Vladimir] Putin does not want you to win, because you’re the only person that could go toe to toe with him. “Right now, Mr President, you’re playing footsie with Putin and you’re losing. He’s walking all over you and our allies. We have too many Neville Chamberlains in this world. We need more [Winston] Churchills.” Here, for what it’s worth, is our review of Munich: The Edge of War, the new film based on a Robert Harris thriller in which Chamberlain, the British prime minister who appeased Adolf Hitler, is played by Jeremy Irons. More from Graham: “The administration has pushed back against bipartisan sanctions legislation that had pre-invasion consequences to Putin that were really tough on the oil and gas sector, believing that if we did that up front, it would be a provocation that would make him more likely to invade. The administration has misjudged Putin about as badly as anyone since the world misjudged Hitler.” Here’s where the day stands so far: Joe Biden will deliver remarks on Ukraine and Russia at 1pm ET. The US president’s speech comes after Vladimir Putin announced that Russia would move troops into eastern Ukraine, following the Kremlin’s recognition of the self-proclaimed republics in Luhansk and Donetsk. Biden is facing calls from Democrats and Republicans to enact harsh sanctions against Russia. Biden has repeatedly promised that Russia will suffer severe economic consequences if Putin gave the order to invade, and lawmakers have said now is the time to follow through on those threats. The White House is now describing Russia’s actions in eastern Ukraine as an “invasion,” after US officials initially seemed hesitant to use that word yesterday. The principal deputy national security adviser, Jon Finer, told CNN this morning, “We think this is, yes, the beginning of an invasion, Russia’s latest invasion into Ukraine.” The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned. Vladimir Putin has now received permission from lawmakers to use force outside Russia, which could clear the way for a broader attack on Ukraine. The AP reports: Several European leaders said earlier in the day that Russian troops have moved into rebel-held areas in eastern Ukraine after Putin recognized their independence. But it was unclear how large the movements were, and Ukraine and its Western allies have said Russian troops have been fighting in the region since the separatist conflict erupted in 2014. Moscow denies those allegations. Members of the upper house, the Federation Council, voted unanimously to allow Putin to use military force outside Russia — effectively formalizing a Russian military deployment to the rebel regions, where an eight-year conflict has killed nearly 14,000 people. Joe Biden will likely address those latest developments when he delivers his speech on Russia and Ukraine in about an hour. The US president may also outline new sanctions on Russia in response to the movement of troops into eastern Ukraine. Stay tuned. Schedule change: Joe Biden is now expected to deliver his remarks on Russia and Ukraine at 1pm ET, instead of 2pm ET as the White House initially announced. The White House press secretary, Jen Psaki, was originally scheduled to hold her daily briefing at 2pm ET, but it’s unclear whether the timing of that will change to accommodate Biden’s speech. The president is also scheduled to participate in a virtual event at 3.30pm ET to discuss strengthening US supply chains and bolstering clean-energy manufacturing. Stay tuned. Joe Biden will deliver a speech this afternoon on Russia’s latest maneuvers in eastern Ukraine and America’s potential responses to Vladimir Putin’s actions. The White House has just announced that Biden will provide an update on Russia and Ukraine at 2pm ET in the East Room. The speech comes as members of both parties are urging Biden to follow through on his repeated threats to enact severe sanctions if Russia invades Ukraine. Senior administration officials seemed hesitant yesterday to describe Russia’s planned troop movement into eastern Ukraine as an “invasion,” but that stance appears to have shifted today. The principal deputy national security adviser, Jon Finer, told CNN this morning, “We think this is, yes, the beginning of an invasion, Russia’s latest invasion into Ukraine.” The supreme court has formally rejected Donald Trump’s request to block the House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection from accessing his White House records related to the attack. The court announced in its latest list of orders that it would not take up Trump’s appeal to a lower-court ruling allowing the select committee access to the documents. The news comes one month after the supreme court rejected Trump’s emergency motion to block the release of the documents as his case regarding executive privilege claims made its way through the courts. The court’s January ruling cleared the way for the select committee to start receiving Trump White House documents, and they have already started combing through the records. Vladimir Putin’s angry and rambling hour-long potted history of Ukraine’s failings on Monday night, culminating in a commitment to recognise the self-proclaimed republics in Donetsk and Luhansk, left western diplomats scratching their heads and wondering whether they had been made redundant. The Russian president not only said he would recognise Russian-controlled territory in Ukraine, rendering eight years of negotiations over their future pointless, but he also signalled that Russia could not tolerate an independent Ukraine on its borders. Nato was hardly mentioned. His target at one point seemed to be the Bolsheviks, for relinquishing land to the nationalists. The lecture was a far cry from a statement from Emmanuel Macron’s office 24 hours earlier saying the French and Russian leaders had “made firm commitments to carry out all useful actions to avoid escalation, reduce risks and preserve peace”. Following the logic of Putin’s speech, it seems only a matter of time before a full invasion of Ukraine to reunite the two peoples will have to take place. Russia, viewed through this lens, cannot face the risk of assault from Ukrainian territory. The “puppet regime” will have to be removed. The principal deputy national security adviser, Jon Finer, emphasized the White House’s assessment that Russia’s latest actions in Ukraine qualify as an invasion. “We think this is, yes, the beginning of an invasion, Russia’s latest invasion into Ukraine,” Finer told CNN in an interview this morning. Finer made a point to note that the White House views the order to move Russian troops into eastern Ukraine as the Kremlin’s latest incursion into the neighboring country. The deputy national security adviser described the troop movement as an extension of Russia’s annexation of Crimea in 2014. “I think ‘latest’ is important here,” Finer said. “An invasion is an invasion, and that is what is underway, but Russia has been invading Ukraine since 2014.” The White House is now describing Russia’s actions in eastern Ukraine as an “invasion,” even though US officials appeared hesitant to use that word yesterday. The White House press secretary, Jen Psaki, acknowledged the invasion in a tweet that praised Germany for halting the approval process for the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline. “@POTUS made clear that if Russia invaded Ukraine, we would act with Germany to ensure Nord Stream 2 does not move forward,” Psaki said. “We have been in close consultations with Germany overnight and welcome their announcement. We will be following up with our own measures today.” In a background press call yesterday, a senior administration official tiptoed around questions on whether Russia’s latest maneuvers qualified as an invasion, saying the White House is focused on Vladimir Putin’s actions rather than words. “As has been the case throughout this crisis, we are going to assess what Russia does and not focus on what Russia says,” the official told reporters. “We’ve taken a number of actions today, including the president’s executive order. We’ve indicated that we have further actions to take tomorrow. Beyond that, I’m not going to get into any more details.” Germany has stopped the certification process for the controversial Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline in reaction to Russia’s recognition of the self-proclaimed republics in Luhansk and Donetsk in east Ukraine, chancellor Olaf Scholz has announced. Germany’s energy minister, Robert Habeck, on Tuesday morning instructed the withdrawal of a security of supply assessment granted under Angela Merkel’s tenure, which is required to authorise the pipeline between Russia and Germany. “This may sound technical, but it is the necessary administrative step without which the pipeline cannot be certified,” Scholz said at a press conference in Berlin at midday. “Without this certification Nord Stream 2 cannot go into operation”. Scholz said he has commissioned a new assessment into Germany’s energy security in the light of geopolitical developments in east Ukraine. Greetings from Washington, live blog readers. Joe Biden is facing calls from Democrats and Republicans to impose severe sanctions on Russia following Vladimir Putin’s latest actions in Ukraine. Putin has announced he will recognize the self-proclaimed republics in Luhansk and Donetsk in east Ukraine, and the Russian president has already ordered troops into the region. In response to Putin’s maneuvers, Biden signed an executive order prohibiting new investment in the region, and he has warned of further recriminations depending on Russia’s next moves. But Putin’s actions have already sparked calls from members of both US political parties to move forward with the harsh sanctions that Biden has repeatedly promised to issue in the event of an invasion. “Russia has invaded Ukraine. The Biden Administration and our allies must impose full set of crippling sanctions now,” said Republican congresswoman Liz Cheney. Senator Chris Coons, one of Biden’s top congressional allies, added, “The time for taking action to impose significant costs on President Putin and the Kremlin starts now.” Biden may give a clearer indication today regarding when sanctions will be issued. Stay tuned.Jacob Steinberg was at Stamford Bridge this evening. His report has landed, so feel free to click away. Thanks for reading this MBM. Nighty night! Thomas Tuchel speaks to BT. “With away goals, it would be better! We have another clean sheet. It was well deserved, it was hard work to not allow chances, they were a strong opponent. There was a little bit of up and down, some very good moments, some weak moments, but we never gave big chances away. A tough game but a deserved win. We were a bit passive and too deep, and we suffered in ball possession. But we kept the belief, we fought back, and scored a very good second goal.” He doesn’t have any news on the fitness of Kovacic and Ziyech. “We have a lot of days to recover. Let’s see, I hope they will be ready for Sunday.” Kai Havertz talks to BT Sport. “We knew it was a difficult game. They played very good football. The first half was difficult for us. It’s half time now, and we have to win there as well. We have a lot of good strikers, so it’s always good to change, to not make it easy for the opponent. We didn’t play our best football, it was hard, but the win is the most important thing, and it’s another competition on Sunday. We have a chance to win another trophy on Sunday, we hope to win this game.” That’s a fine result for the reigning European and world champions, who now have one foot in the quarter-finals. A calm and confident display, with Kai Havertz, Thiago Silva and N’Golo Kante the star men. Lille didn’t warm Edouard Mendy’s hands once this evening, a fact that suggests they’ve got quite the job on if they’re to turn this around at the Stade Pierre-Mauroy in three weeks’ time. Chelsea can now attend to Sunday’s League Cup final against Liverpool in a positive frame of mind, although they’ll be hoping Mateo Kovacic’s injury wasn’t as bad as it looked. The whistle goes, and Chelsea take a healthy two-goal lead to France for the second leg in three weeks’ time! 90 min +5: Mendy restarts the game ... and slips while kicking the ball, sending it straight to the nearby Ben Arfa. The Chelsea keeper is very fortunate that the Lille man can’t control. 90 min +4: Silva goes down to receive some treatment, a clock-management masterclass. 90 min +3: Ben Arfa drives down the left and nearly wins another corner. Nearly. Pressure off, though Chelsea could do with hearing the final whistle, because the visitors are desperate for that narrative-changing late goal. 90 min +1: In the first of five extra minutes, the corner’s worked back to Gudmundsson, who may have just broken some of the windows in the Chelsea hotel with one of the wildest volleys you’ll see for a while. 90 min: Bamba hoicks in. Chelsea clear ... but then Kante brings the bouncing ball down with an arm, and it’s another free kick, on the left this time. Ben Arfa takes long, forcing Havertz to head out for a corner. 89 min: Saul needlessly clips Ben Arfa out on the Lille right. A chance for the hosts to load the box, in search of a late goal that would completely alter the complexion of this tie. 88 min: Azpilicueta, out on the right, floats towards Havertz at the far stick. Celik does well to get in front of the Chelsea man, who was winding his neck back and waiting to head home from close range. Corner. 87 min: ... Werner, breaking down the right, is cynically hauled back by Ben Arfa. In true London bus style, you wait 83 minutes for a booking, then two come along at once. 86 min: Gudmundsson strides down the left and nearly gets clear of Silva, but the Brazilian veteran extends a leg to poke out for a corner. The set piece is worked back to Ben Arfa, who shoots through a crowded box. Deflected. Corner take two. This one’s cleared by Chelsea, and ... 85 min: Havertz and Werner combine down the inside-right channel and into the box. They continue to busy themselves until the former reaches the byline and scoops a cross into Leo Jardim’s arms. 83 min: The first booking of the evening, as Loftus-Cheek clips Bamba with a late lunge. 82 min: In terms of possession, it’s been exactly 50-50 up to this point ... but Chelsea have a cutting edge, something Lille signally have not. 81 min: Both teams make a couple of changes. Chelsea send on Werner and Sarr in place of Alonso and Pulisic, while Sanches and the disappointing David make way for Ben Arfa and Zhegrova. 80 min: Kante slips wide right for Azpilicueta, whose low cross deflects out for a corner ... or is it a goal kick? Goal kick. Must have pinballed back off the Chelsea captain. 78 min: Sanches works hard down the right to earn himself a bit of space. But with options available either side, he carelessly clanks the ball out for a goal kick. Lille have played some attractive stuff in the middle of the park, but they’ve been no use whatsoever in the final third. Mendy hasn’t had his hands warmed once. 76 min: Djalo has picked up a knock and is replaced by Gudmundsson. 75 min: Havertz is shoulder barged into the advertising hoardings by Botman. An old-fashioned but legal challenge. Havertz takes a while to regain his composure, but he’s OK to continue. 73 min: Lille deal with the corner in a much less frantic style. 72 min: Saul crosses low from the left. Nobody in blue attacks the ball as it trundles through the six-yard box. Nobody in white deals with it, either, until Botman slaps wide right in a panic. 70 min: ... so David takes things into his own hands, and probes down the left. His speculative shot earns a corner. Bamba takes. Half cleared, back to Bamba, who loops take two towards the far stick. Botman wins a header, but it’s a soft one that wafts into Mendy’s arms. 69 min: Lille enjoy a bit of possession, but it’s all in their own half. Chelsea are more than happy to sit and watch them go nowhere. 67 min: Chelsea were beginning to look a little ragged before their second goal. Now they’ve got new reserves of energy and are first to most things. 65 min: Lille respond with an attacking substitution, sending on Burak Yilmaz in place of Onana, striker for attacking midfielder. Pulisic scores this, but it’s all about Kante, who bursts down the middle from deep, ball glued to his toe. He reaches the edge of the D, and slips to Pulisic on his left. Pulisic takes a touch to steady himself and draw Leo Jardim, before dinking over the keeper and into the bottom right. Lovely finish, but what a run by Kante! 61 min: Lille stroke it around awhile. Their fans respond by giving it plenty. 60 min: Ziyech comes back on, then goes straight down again. He hauls himself back up, and trudges off sadly, Saul Niguez coming on in his place. 58 min: With Ziyech off the field of play, still receiving treatment, Havertz opts to go it alone. He wheechs down the left at warp speed, before flashing a rising shot over the bar from a tight angle. 57 min: Now Ziyech is down feeling his heel. He suddenly pulled up with nobody near him. 55 min: Footage of Kovacic limping extremely gingerly down the tunnel and towards the treatment room. He looks in a fair bit of pain. Not a great sight for Chelsea with the League Cup final against Liverpool coming up on Sunday. 53 min: Kante diddles into some space down the right. He loops across the face of goal. Alonso, bombing in from the right, creams a low volleyed drive towards the bottom left. Celik does extremely well to block. That was heading in, and at some pace to boot. 52 min: Lille are winning the majority of the 50-50s in midfield right now. The home crowd are a little on-edge as a result. 51 min: Kovacic looks to have tweaked something. He’s replaced by Loftus-Cheek. 49 min: Bamba twists and turns down the left and somehow whips across to the far stick, despite Azpilicueta sticking to him like glue. The ball drops to Sanches, who tries to cream a volley from an extremely tight angle. Nope! Goal kick. 47 min: Lille go up the other end, probing down the left through David. Nothing doing. Chelsea come straight back at the visitors, Azpilicueta whooshing a low shot-cum-cross into the arms of Leo Jardim from a tight position on the right. A sense that both teams have been given the old half-time hairdryer. 46 min: Pulisic romps down the middle and prepares to shoot. He’s brazenly nudged in the back by Andre. No free kick, though, because the ball breaks right to Ziyech, who has a shooting opportunity in the box. His attempt to find the bottom left is blocked by Botman. Chelsea get the second half underway. No half-time changes. “There aren’t many footballing stories more heartening than Renato Sanches’ revival at Lille,” writes Kári Tulinius. “Having seen him lost at Swansea, passing to the advertising hoardings and all that, it’s wonderful that he reached safe harbour.” Half-time entertainment. A big game tomorrow night between Atletico Madrid and Manchester United. Which Atleti will turn up? Which United? Sid Lowe previews an unpredictable but mouthwatering tie. Chelsea started fast, getting their reward through Havertz, but the French side have since worked their way into the match. Fascinating second half coming right up! 45 min: Chelsea have the ball in the net, but it’s disallowed. Ziyech dances his way along the byline, to the right of goal, beating Sanches and cutting back for Havertz, who artfully backflicks into the net. But Ziyech had run the ball out for a goal kick. Up goes the flag. 43 min: Happy to report that Tuchel has a fresh stick of gum, and is enjoying it right now. 41 min: Bamba scampers away from Alonso down the right. He looks to find David in the middle, but his cross is deflected by the ever-alert Silva into the hands of Mendy. For a second, Chelsea looked open and vulnerable. Silva accordingly gives Alonso the what-for. 40 min: Sanches bustles in from the left and goes for the top-right corner from distance. He doesn’t get enough curl on his shot and the ball sails harmlessly into the Matthew Harding Stand. 39 min: See 37 min. Since the goal, Chelsea haven’t worked Leo Jardim much, either. 37 min: The game has gone a little flat. Lille will be fairly pleased with the way this is going right now. 35 min: Onana has a dig from distance. Easy for Mendy, who otherwise has had very little to do. 33 min: Lille paint some pretty triangles in midfield, Sanches seemingly at every other point. They don’t go anywhere in particular, however. On the touchline, Tuchel rants and raves at his team, his hunk of chewing gum flying out of his mouth in the comedic style. Oh for the ability to add slide-whistle FX to the MBM. One day, perhaps. 31 min: Given the start Chelsea enjoyed, Lille have done well to quieten the Stamford Bridge crowd. All is calm at the moment. 29 min: Kante snaffles possession and slips a pass down the inside-right channel for Ziyech, who enters the box but, in attempting to switch feet, allows Botman to whip the ball off his toe. 27 min: Another glorious Rudiger diagonal sails wide right. Ziyech takes it down gracefully, white paint on his boots, and wins a corner. Nothing comes of the set piece, but the balletic manner in which Ziyech controlled that rake was lovely to watch. 25 min: Lille are seeing plenty of the ball now. A fair bit of time is spent probing at the front of the Chelsea box. There’s no way through, but for now, the French side look to have steadied the previously listing ship. 23 min: 20:22 comes and goes. Our perfect palindrome thing was never going to happen, was it? Not least because Timothy Weah is on the bench. The plus side: no portals open to another dimension, and the space-time continuum remains intact. 21 min: Sanchez spins into space in the centre circle and sprays a delightful first-time pass down the left, hoping to release Bamba on goal. He would be through, but Mendy is alert, and races out of the box to blooter clear, just before the Lille forward can latch onto the pass. Great football all round. 19 min: Ziyech skedaddles down the right and pulls back for Kante, who loops instantly towards the far stick. Alonso races in from the left to meet it, attempting to steer a sidefoot across Leo Jardim and into the bottom right. His weak shot flies straight at the keeper. 17 min: David takes a quick free kick but clanks the ball straight out of play. Ironic cheers all round. The home fans enjoyed that. 16 min: Space for Alonso out on the left. He curls into the middle, in the hope of finding Ziyech. Botman batters clear. Lille go up the other end, Onana nearly finding Celik in space down the right. Chelsea shut the door just in time. It’s a fast and open game. 14 min: Lille win another corner, out on the right. Bamba whips in strongly. Onana can only bundle his effort wide left. The French champions appear to have settled after their extremely shaky start. 12 min: Lille respond magnificently to going behind. First up, some space for Celik down the right. He can’t find David in the middle. Chelsea half clear. Sanches curls in from the right. Rudiger shanks hysterically over his own bar. From the resulting corner, some pinball, then finally an optimistic effort from distance by David flies over the bar. Hell of a start to this match. 10 min: Three touches, three chances, one goal. If those aren’t Havertz’s actual stats, they’re not far off it. The TV director, understandably from a professional viewpoint, rather less so when factoring humanity into it, cuts from a cavorting Havertz to Lukaku. He’s got the thousand-yard stare on. Poor man’s out of sorts, leave him be. Ziyech sends an outswinger towards the near post. Havertz rises highest, and plants an unstoppable header into the bottom left. He could easily have scored three already. One will do! 7 min: Havertz is undeterred by that early miss. He strides down the inside right, cuts into the box, and curls powerfully for the bottom left. It’s heading in, but Leo Jardim extends fully to tip around the post. And from the corner ... 6 min: Azpilicueta clumsily takes down Bamba out on the right. The resulting free kick is curled into the Chelsea box. Onana competes for the high ball but can’t guide it goalwards. A decent response from the visitors. 4 min: Rudiger, quarterbacking from deep, rakes a glorious diagonal pass wide right for Azpilicueta, who whistles a vicious low cross into the mixer. Havertz, scorer of the winners in both the Champions League and Club World Cup finals, should score, six yards out, but leans back and hoicks over the bar. What a move, and one heck of a chance. 2 min: Chelsea come again, Rudiger embarking on one of his Beckenbaueresque power strides down the middle of the park, then slipping wide left for Alonso, who crosses deep. Neither Azpilicueta nor Havertz can bring the ball down at the far stick. Fast start by the hosts, though. 1 min: Chelsea get on the front foot immediately, Pulisic grooving down the left and slipping infield for Ziyech, who nearly releases Havertz with a clever ball down the inside-left channel. Not quite. Lille clear their lines. Lille get the first leg of this round of 16 tie underway ... but only after both teams take the knee. Stamford Bridge responds with warm applause. There’s no room for racism. The teams are out! Chelsea are in royal blue with a shiny new gold Fifa Club World Cup badge; reigning French champions Lille sport second-choice white, an ersatz Real Madrid / Leeds United / Preston North End. A cracking atmosphere at the Bridge. We’re one bespoke blast of Zadok the Priest away from kick-off. In the meantime, let’s join Neil McGwyre in his nostalgic reverie: “Just looking at the picture of Stamford Bridge, I had to wonder what you’d have more trouble convincing the yoof of today was true: that this was Stamford Bridge before its rebuilding by Cuddly Ken et al, or that those four gentlemen cavorting in the foreground are, in fact, professional footballers. I punched a few keys on the Google machine and it seems that Graham Roberts was about seven years younger in that photograph than Cristiano Ronaldo is today! I assume that Ronaldo’s diet has contained fewer portions of chips and pints of mild.” Thomas Tuchel has Romelu Lukaku’s back, telling BT Sport: “I felt him a little bit tired, a bit exhausted. He played a lot, a lot of extra time, a lot of travelling. [The Palace game] was not the best performance, it was a difficult game for him. But maybe it is easier to come from the bench and turn things around, if needed.” Palindrome Corner with Kurt Barker. “Tim Weah, who wears No. 22 for Lille, turns 22 today, on 22/2/22. 2-2 draw. It is destiny.” Kurt, that’s blown my tiny brain sky high. Here’s to Weah scoring tonight after 22 minutes, at 20:22 GMT. Such a feat may well crack open a portal to a parallel universe. Perhaps a place where they still park cars around the pitch? Chelsea will tonight take to the Stamford Bridge pitch as champions of the world for the first time. On BT Sport, the aforementioned Joe Cole, formerly of said parish, has been reminiscing about the club’s giddy rags-to-riches story. “I remember being a ball boy by the Shed End, having to get a ball from under a car and throw it back ... and now look at the amount of trophies we have won!” Younger viewers currently midway through a double-take are invited to look at the evidence presented below. Jacob called it: seven-touch sensation Romelu Lukaku has been dropped by Thomas Tuchel. The £97.5m striker took his heptaptych of touches against Crystal Palace last weekend. Just the two in the first half, and one of those was the kick-off. No surprise, then, that he’s been benched by his manager, despite Tuchel claiming that the Belgian “will always be part of the solution”. Subtraction can be part of a solution, of course. Lukaku is one of three changes to the side named for that now-notorious trip to Selhurst Park. Jorginho and Malang Sarr also drop to the bench. Stepping up: Marcos Alonso, Mateo Kovacic and captain Cesar Azpilicueta. Chelsea: Mendy, Christensen, Thiago Silva, Rudiger, Azpilicueta, Kante, Kovacic, Alonso, Ziyech, Havertz, Pulisic. Subs: Arrizabalaga, Jorginho, Lukaku, Werner, Loftus-Cheek, Bettinelli, Chalobah, Saul, Mount, Kenedy, Sarr, Vale. Lille: Leo Jardim, Celik, Fonte, Botman, Djalo, Onana, Xeka, Andre, Sanches, David, Bamba. Subs: Grbic, Gudmundsson, Ben Arfa, Yilmaz, Lihadji, Gomes, Weah, Zhegrova, Bradaric, Raux. Referee: Jesús Gil Manzano (Spain). The teamsheets should be through any moment now. Our man Jacob Steinberg, like everybody else, is on tenterhooks: “Just heading to Stamford Bridge and waiting for team news, but it’s going to be interesting to see if Romelu Lukaku is in. He might be getting as many touches as me tonight.” It’s fair to say that Roman Abramovich may have one or two other things on his mind right now. Or maybe this is a welcome distraction. Either way, world champions Chelsea continue their defence of the Champions League against Lille, currently 11th in Ligue 1 and in the knockout stage for the first time since 2007, when the French side lost home and away to English opposition. It was Manchester United then, and both bookies and critics strongly fancy Chelsea now. The Derby de Joe Cole kicks off at 8pm GMT. It’s on!For Antonio Conte, defeat has always felt like a mortal insult, a scar on the soul, and it is not difficult to imagine how low he was after Tottenham’s shambolic home loss to Wolves on the Sunday before last. It came hard on the heels of the defeat against Southampton – also at home, also deserved – and nobody was particularly optimistic about their chances when they went to the Premier League leaders, Manchester City, on Saturday. Cue the Harry Kane-inspired 3-2 win, one of the shock results of the season and, certainly, the statement performance of Conte’s near four-month tenure. Kane scored two, including a 95th-minute winner, and might have had four but he helped to set the tone with his work rate, always “linking with the team defensively”, to borrow Conte’s words. Conte’s players ran their socks off, they put their bodies on the line, they followed his tactical instructions to the letter. There was even a bit of nastiness, at times. And, for Conte, it added up to evidence that his messages about mentality were getting through. It is doubtful that anyone at Spurs will ever torture themselves quite so much as the manager after a bad result. But Conte suggested that those against Wolves and Southampton had stirred something in his players; something he wants to see again and again, picking up at Burnley on Wednesday night. “It’s very simple,” Conte said . “We lost two games against Wolverhampton and Southampton and then we won against City. The first step to change your mentality is, after a loss, you have to understand that you lost a game and, for sure, the atmosphere has to be different. When you lose a game and you come back to the training ground and, OK, it’s the same like yesterday … but yesterday you lost! “If we start to change the atmosphere, to understand that atmosphere also depends on the win or the defeat … because when you know that the atmosphere is different, you try during the game to do everything to have a good atmosphere the day after or two days after.” Conte brought up Bayern Munich, who suffered a shock Bundesliga defeat at Bochum on the Saturday before last and then drew at Red Bull Salzburg in the Champions League. They got back on track with a home win over Greuther Fürth on Sunday. “I read that the Bayern players were very, very angry,” Conte said. “They said: ‘No. We can’t continue this way. We have to be strong.’ You show you are feeling that. The situation has to be different when you win and lose. Otherwise, if the atmosphere is always the same, always joy and celebrations, it will be very difficult to install the right mentality. You have to suffer. If you don’t suffer, it means that you don’t want to improve your winning mentality.” Conte can count on Kane and his goalkeeper and captain, Hugo Lloris, even if the latter made goal-costing errors against Wolves and City. “I continue to say that it’s important to match experienced players with young players because when you have players with experience, the young players learn a lot,” Conte said. “We are lucky to have these two players, who are top, top players.” Conte mentioned a somewhat injudicious line from his friend Pantaleo Corvino, the veteran sporting director at Lecce. “He says that you can make a mistake about your wife but not about your striker and goalkeeper – for me, that is the best quote I understand in football,” Conte said. And when asked whether the knock that Kane took to his back at City might rule him out of the Burnley game, Conte replied: “No. He had a hit in his back but he has to play. If he has one leg, he has to play.” Conte went on to say that he was only joking and he would never force an injured player to play, but, with Kane his only specialist, senior centre-forward, his tongue might not have been entirely in his cheek. It was striking, though, to see Conte in such upbeat mood. He has done plenty of complaining during his time at Spurs, especially about the level of his squad, stoking lots of creative tensions. Post-City, has something changed in him? In the aftermath of victory, Conte had described the group as the best he had coached. “I’m finding a lot of availability of these players to work, to improve, to have more football knowledge,” Conte said. “They are very open. And it’s not certain that this type of situation can happen in every team. Sometimes you find players who want to stay in their comfortable zone, saying: ‘OK, I had my career and I don’t want to prove [anything] and follow you.’ “I come to the training ground with a smile because I know I stay two to three hours with people who want to work seriously and follow a path to improve the level and try to go another step.”Jürgen Klopp has said the punishing demands of a title race with Manchester City ensure Liverpool can never afford to “get a bit soft” in their pursuit of the Premier League leaders. Klopp’s team can close the gap to three points on Wednesday by winning their game in hand on City against Leeds at Anfield. Liverpool, who recently trailed Pep Guardiola’s team by 12 points, have won their past eight matches and suffered only two defeats in 48 games in all competitions. Klopp admits that relentlessness must continue to reclaim the title from City. The Liverpool manager said: “Obviously both teams were able to do some special stuff, I have to say. With all respect, what Man City is doing is incredible and we are pushing each other as well. It is not only us because there is also Chelsea, United, Arsenal, Tottenham, whoever is there. I don’t forget all the other teams. But I think we can say we are pushing each other. It keeps you going. There is no chance to get a bit soft or whatever because the other one will be there immediately to catch you.” Guardiola jokingly referred to Liverpool recently as “a pain in the ass all the time” given the continued threat they pose to City in the Premier League and Champions League. Klopp concurred: “I think Pep said we are the pain in the … lower back. That is a good description and that is how it should be. “We try to be as annoying as possible until we have a chance to overtake. I don’t know when that will be or if it will be the case but in the decisive moments of the season – which is not now in February but in March or April – you have to be close enough to make a decision in your direction. “We have to be at our absolute best to play the best possible season for us. And unfortunately only twice a year we face the ‘other team’ in the Premier League. The first one was a draw when we were not brilliant but good enough to get a point. The next one has not been played yet and we play all the others as well. “It is just difficult, but what the boys did over the past four years is pretty special. I am happy with that but not overly happy where I think that is enough. We have to go from now on. So far it is not a bad season but the decisions will be made later. We just have to make sure that we are always in and around when these decisions are made.” Diogo Jota and Roberto Firmino will again be absent against Leeds as they recover from ankle and muscle injuries respectively. The strikers have not been ruled out of Sunday’s Carabao Cup final against Chelsea but Klopp cautioned: “They are not on the pitch for training and that is not a good sign.”The Australian Bureau of Statistics last week released a new report on Covid mortality in Australia. The data is important – it exposes the inequality in how the pandemic is affecting Australians, with deaths higher among people from lower socioeconomic areas, and shockingly high death rates for people born outside Australia. Experts told Guardian Australia a key reason for this is Australia’s reliance on migrants to undertake essential, insecure work and a failure of government to engage migrant communities early in pandemic planning. These are issues rarely heard about from politicians and some media outlets during the pandemic, despite the trends being clear since at least August 2020. However, rightwing radio hosts and columnists saw something different in the figures – support for an ongoing narrative that lockdowns and other interventions represented an “overreaction” or were the result of a “scare campaign”. Paul Murray, on SkyNews Australia: Of the 2,639 deaths, 96.7% of those already had serious, life-threatening underlying health conditions … So, how many people have actually died, not with, but exclusively from Covid in Australia in the past couple of years? It is 83. Now every one of those is absolutely a tragedy, as is the two and a bit thousand before that. Murray went on to use this figure to question government responses: Get rid of the codes, pull down the borders, take care of the people that are most at risk. Ben Fordham, on 2GB and then repeated on news.com.au: We know Covid-19 is serious, but it doesn’t warrant the fear campaign we’ve been seeing. Today we have further proof. This isn’t opinion, it is certified data from the Australian Bureau of Statistics. Then later in the broadcast Fordham said: Again, let me be clear because some people take these stats the wrong way. We’re not playing down the situation, we’re not ignoring the grief of families. But these records expose the overblown scare campaign that we’ve witnessed. In 92% of our Covid-related deaths to 31 January each patient had roughly three other underlying health conditions. In other words it wasn’t just Covid that claimed their lives. And finally, he summed up: If you’re overweight or smoking, you’re putting yourself in danger, and you’re more likely to be in the 1% of Australians who have died with coronavirus. Yes, 1%. If you need any further evidence that it’s time to get on with our lives, you’ve just heard it. Rita Panahi, writing in the Herald Sun (the online version is different to the original): The Australian Bureau of Statistics put out some crucial data this week that should shame every alarmist bureaucrat, politician and media blowhard who championed lockdowns, school closures and mandates. Of the 2,639 deaths from or with Covid-19 in Australia, 2,556 had serious pre-existing conditions, on average three pre-existing conditions. That means more than 91% of Covid-19 deaths in Australia, up until 31 January 2022, had underlying health issues, with cancer, dementia and chronic cardiac conditions among the most common pre-existing conditions. And then later in the article, after comparing the number of Covid deaths to the annual number of deaths: It’s hard not to conclude we needlessly crippled our societies, debased our hard fought for liberties and caused untold damage to children, not to mention accumulating enormous debt and destroying countless lives and livelihoods. Joe Hildebrand, writing in news.com.au: And now we have formal confirmation from the Australian Bureau of Statistics that not only did so-called “Covid deaths” account for just 1% of fatalities during the pandemic, but 92% of that 1% were people with pre-existing health problems ranging from pneumonia to heart disease. All the scare-mongering was wrong, all the catastrophic predictions were wrong, all the fear and fury at lifting of restrictions was wrong, wrong, wrong. The wrong end of the stick Besides the lack of originality in these opinion pieces, there are quite a few problems here. All of them managed to get at least one of the basic numbers from the ABS report wrong, with some of them messing up multiple stats. They’re also misrepresenting what the numbers actually mean. Paul Murray got both the number of people who died from Covid wrong, and the proportion of deaths where people had a chronic condition, prompting this fact check by AAP after his incorrect numbers were shared on Facebook and Twitter. The actual number of deaths where only Covid was reported on the death certificate was 220, not 83 – which is actually the number of people who died primarily due to something else, but who had also tested positive to Covid. The same mistake was made by the Herald Sun in a now-deleted tweet linking to Rita Panahi’s piece, which is strange as Panahi does not use the 83 figure. Fordham, Panahi, Hildebrand and Murray all got the percentage of Covid deaths with underlying health conditions wrong, citing 91% or 92% when it should actually be 69.5%. They’ve used the number of cases where only Covid was reported on the death certificate, which is 220 or 8.6% of total Covid deaths in this period, and subtracted this from the total. However, they should have included a further 560 deaths where another condition was “reported with causal sequence of events only”. This means those people did not have a pre-existing chronic condition prior to the chain of events leading to death, but conditions that developed due to Covid-19, such as pneumonia. While this may seem a bit complicated, the ABS clearly states within the same report the actual number of deaths with pre-existing chronic conditions in very plain terms: “Pre-existing chronic conditions were reported on death certificates for 1,776 (69.5%) of the 2,556 deaths due to Covid-19 deaths outlined in this report.” A chronic problem Another major issue is that several of these commentators imply that deaths are somehow not fully attributable to Covid if people had a chronic health condition. Again, the ABS report states in clear terms that this is not the case: “The majority [2,556] of these 2,639 deaths were due directly to Covid-19”. While various health conditions and other factors such as age can put you at an increased risk of dying if you catch Covid, it is an increased risk, not a guaranteed death sentence. To put it another way – if it weren’t for Covid these people would not have died when they did. It’s also important to realise that a very large number of Australians have chronic health conditions (I’ve got one myself!), so implying that deaths of entirely healthy people are somehow more important is unhelpful. The Australian Institute of Health and Welfare (AIHW) estimates that 47% of Australians aged 18 and over had one or more chronic health conditions, and this rises to 60% in the 45 to 64 age bracket, and to 80% for those over 65. While the AIHW figures include conditions like back problems and mental and behavioural conditions not included in the ABS Covid deaths report, other figures show how widespread these conditions are. One in three Australians have high blood pressure, and a similar proportion of adults are obese. Both are on the list of the pre-existing chronic conditions listed in the ABS report. Unfortunately, according to data from social media monitoring tool CrowdTangle, most of these articles have been enthusiastically shared by accounts known for sharing anti-vaccination and anti-lockdown conspiracy theories. This is likely because questioning how many deaths are actually due to Covid alone is an ongoing theme for these communities. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The Y2K fallacy Another issue with several of the opinion pieces is that they make an argument that I’ve taken to calling the “Y2K fallacy“ for lack of a better term. They’re using the comparatively low number of Covid deaths relative to other deaths over the same period to make the argument that people overstated the seriousness of Covid or the need for various interventions. However, this ignores the fact that this comparatively low number of deaths has been achieved by interventions including lockdowns, border controls, mask rules and vaccinations, and without these, the death toll would have undoubtedly been higher. One estimate in October 2020 suggested Australia’s interventions may have saved 16,000 lives. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, suggested in May 2021 that Australia had avoided the loss of 30,000 lives. That’s not to say that every intervention necessarily worked, or that there wasn’t a health and financial cost to strict policies like lockdowns and border controls, but to argue that these death numbers show that we have “needlessly crippled our societies” is misleading in the extreme.Fred believes Manchester United being led by an interim manager in Ralf Rangnick is causing uncertainty that is “a little bit bad” for the team. Although Rangnick has lost only one league game since his arrival, Fred claimed United are unstable as a result of the temporary nature of his role. “It’s a bit strange,” the midfielder told TNT Sports Brazil. “I know in football it’s important to get good results as soon as possible but it’s also important to have a long-term plan. I think it’s a little bit bad for us not to have one. At the moment it’s all about the short-term goals. We don’t know how it’s going to be after the end of this season.” Although Rangnick has a chance of being appointed as the permanent manager, Paris Saint-Germain’s Mauricio Pochettino and Ajax’s Erik ten Hag are the frontrunners. Rangnick takes United to Atlético Madrid for their Champions League last-16 first leg on Wednesday. Fred expects a feisty tie against Diego Simeone’s side, who are 15 points off Real Madrid at the summit of La Liga. “Even when not playing well, they’re a hard team to beat,” the Brazilian said. “Their manager is Argentinian, so they’re warriors, defend really well. They like a bit of a fight on the pitch and play collectively as a unit. So it really doesn’t matter if Atlético is going through a bad moment. It’s a match for players that have balls – pardon my French. They’re the most South American team in the Champions League.” Fred said he was aware of the criticism his displays can draw from United supporters. “It’s a mixed bag: some fans like me and others don’t,” he said. “It’s all about the results and they will dictate the supporters’ mood. But sometimes even with good results you’ll be criticised as well. “I’m not the best player, the most technical, but I give my blood and life every time I’m on the pitch. As we say in Brazil, I carry the piano for the artists to play. It’s been nice to play lately more as a box-to-box midfielder. It’s my favourite position – I’ve been creating chances and even scoring. It’s similar to the position I play internationally for Brazil.” The 28-year-oldHe embraces how his midfield partnership with Scott McTominay has been nicknamed “McFred”. “I like it,” he said. “I’m very happy to play alongside him but also it’s important to value every member of our midfield.” Bruno Fernandes believes United have more identity under Rangnick than under Ole Gunnar Solskjær, who was sacked in November. “We have to follow what the manager thinks is the best way for us,” Fernandes said. “In this club I never heard someone complain about the tactics. I hope no one will do that – it is not respectful to the manager. We have been doing so well since he arrived. We have more identity as a team, I think.”Dusan Vlahovic scored the second-fastest goal for a Champions League debutant as his Juventus side were held to a 1-1 draw at Villarreal in their last-16 first leg on Tuesday. Read on ... Max Allegri speaks: “We made a bad mistake on their equaliser,” says the Juve coach. “We perfectly knew that they were trying that move and we still allowed them to score. However, the team played a good game in general. We made a few mistakes also in attack, straying offside when we had good chances on the counterattack. In general, I’m quite satisfied with the performance.” Dusan Vlahovic speaks: ““It was huge to score on my debut; it was very emotional,” says the Juventus striker. “However, I cannot be 100% satisfied because we have not won the game. We have to keep working hard. We played a good game and we could have won. There are some regrets but we must just focus on the next game. “We tried to play well also in the second half but sometimes the opponents do not allow you to do what you want to do do. So congratulations to them for equalising. Personally, I have already forgotten this game and I’m focused on the next.” Villarreal 1-1 Juventus: The second leg of this tie will be played in Turin on 16 March. Meanwhile at Stamford Bridge: Chelsea have beaten Lille 2-0 in the first leg of their Round of 16 tie, the goals coming either side of half-time from Kai Havertz and Christian Pulisic. Peep! Peep! Peeeeeeeeeeep! It’s nicely poised at the end of the first leg, where it’s finished all square. Dusan Vlahovic put the visitors ahead in the opening minute but Villarreal kept plugging away and restored parity courtesy of a second half strike from Dani Parejo. 90+3 min: Foyth sends Lo Celso scuttling along the edge of the Juve penalty area but the VIllarreal defender goes to ground and appeals half-heartedly for a penalty before he can unleash a shot or move the ball on. 90+1 min: We’re into added time in a game where one suspects both managers will be pleased enough with a draw but dissatisfied with the overall performances of their teams. Villarreal were ponderous and unimaginative for much of the game after going behind in the opening minute, while Juve were in complete control of the game before losing their discipline and conceding a very sloppy goal. 88 min: Chukwueze tries to thread a clever pass into the path of Trigueros but it’s cut out. It’s the Nigerian’s last action of the game before being replaced by Yeremi Pino. 87 min: There’s a break in play as Mattia de Sciglio receives treatment from a team-mate for cramp. He makes way for Luca Pellegrini. 85 min: Dusan Vlahovic goes close to scoring his second of the evening, making room for a shot on the edge of the Villarreal area after running on to a short pass from Morata. His low drive is on target but Rulli gets down to keep it out with a strong hand. 83 min: Weston McKennie is being helped around the touchline from one side of the pitch to the other by two members of Juve’s backroom staff. He may just have twisted or sprained his ankle but his grimace suggests it may be a more serious injury. 82 min: Mattia De Sciglio escapes down the left wing but overhits his cross into the Villarreal penalty. It’s Juve’s first sortie of note into the home side’s territory in quite some time. 81 min: Not for the first time this evening, Weston McKennie is down hurt. He hobbles to the sideline with an injured ankle and is replaced by Denis Zakaria. 78 min: Villarreal double-substitution: Pervis Estupinan and Manu Trigueros on for Alfonso Pedraza and Alberto Moreno. 76 min: Villarreal have been in the ascendency since equalising and have visibly upped the tempo with which they are going about their business. 73 min: Referee Daniel Siebert gets his yellow card out of his pocket to book Adrien Rabiot for a high, nasty, studs-up challenge on Samuel Chukwueze. The German official is immediately surrounded by Villarreal players who think it Rabiot deserves a red card. He books the home side’s goalkeeper, Geronimo Rulli, who had travelled a long way out of his goal to complain, then shows the card to Rabiot, who is very lucky not to have been sent off. 71 min: Juve substitution: Arthur on, Locatelli off. 69 min: Juventus had been creaking at the back for a few minutes, so you can’t say that equaliser wasn’t coming. The source was unlikely, however, with Daniel Parejo running completely untracked from midfield into acres of space in the Juve penalty area to fire past the fairly helpless Szczesny. It’s level! Villarreal equalise, with Daniel Parejo sweeping an Etienne Capoue dink over the top past Szczesny on the half volley with his left foot from about 10 yards out. He was completely unmarked as he ran between defenders. 65 min: Bonucci heads an Alfonso Pedraza clear at the near post. 64 min: Alberto Moreno gallops into the Juventus penalty area with the ball at his feet but is crowded out by several defenders before he can fashion a shot or lay it off to a team-mate. 63 min: Samuel Chukwueze sends a cross into the Juventus penalty area from the right flank but it’s headed clear. 60 min: The game has descended into all manner of scrappiness, a state of affairs that is unlikely to be improved by the inevitable series of imminent subsitutions now we’ve reached the hour mark. It’s not much fun to watch but Juventus won’t care. 59 min: Juan Cuadrado cuts inside from the right and blasts the ball high over the bar, incurring the wrath of Juve strikers Alvaro Morata and Dusan Vlahovic in the process. On the touchline, the greedy Colombian’s manager Max Allegri didn’t look too impressed either. 57 min: Wojciech Szczesny saves comfortably from a Alberto Moreno mis-kick after good work through the centre by Giovani Lo Celso. It was a decent move by Villarreal, albeit as slow and ponderous as much of their attacking play has been tonight. 54 min: Adrien Rabiot sticks a leg out to nip a blossoming Villarreal attack in the bud. Villarreal win a free-kick wide on the left and Daniel Parejo curls the ball into the penalty area. Bonucci heads it out for a corner, from which Juve break up the field. 52 min: Juventus are completely bossing the early stages of this second half but VIllarreal manager Unai Emery has yet to make any changes. The Italian side look very comfortable. 49 min: McKennie plays the ball wide to Cuadrado, who’s low drive into the penalty area is cleared by Juan Foyth, preventing McKennie from finishing the move he’d started. The American collides with Foyth and goes down injured but is soon fit to continue. 47 min: Alvaro Morata sidefoots a volley wide of the upright when a man of his talents should have at least hit the target. Other opinions are available. 46 min: Play resumes at La Madrigal, where Juventus have brought on Leonardo Bonucci. Alex Sandro makes way. Chelsea v Lille: There’s been a goal in the game at Stamford Bridge, where Chelsea are labouring. Find out who has scored with Scott Murray ... Peep! Juventus lead at the break courtesy of Dusan Vlahovic’s maiden Champions League goal after 33 seconds. They’ve had Villarreal’s measure for most of the half, although the Yellow Submarine will feel they should have equalised through a glorious opportunity that Giovani Lo Celso thumped off the woodwork when scoring looked a formality. 44 min: Juan Foyth goes down holding his face after shipping an arm in the face from Alvaro Morata, who escapes a booking. 41 min: Looking out of ideas and in need of some urgent half-time instruction, Villarreal attack down the left flank. Alfonso Pedraza’s attempted cross is blocked and put out for a throw-in by Alex Sandro. Juve can defend those kinds of moves all night long. 39 min: Danjuma tries to drive the ball across the face of the Juventus goal but his delivery is cut out by Matthijs De Ligt. Good defending. 38 min: Weston McKennie has a shot from close range blocked by VIllarreal skipper Albiol after the ball was squared by the menacing Mattia De Sciglio. Weston McKennie it was, who played ther ball wide to the Juve left wing-back. 36 min: Another hopeful ball forward from Villarreal, but Arnaut Danjuma is unable to bring it down before it goes out of play for a goal kick. 35 min: “They’re caught in a tactical straitjacket,” says BT’s Ian Darke, as the hosts are reduced to lumping the ball long. Mind you, it’s a tactic that’s serving Juventus fairly well, even if it probably isn’t what Villarreal boss Unai Emery had in mind. 32 min: Alvaro Morata wildly hits the ball high and wide from a tightish angle on the left after picking up a pass from Weston McKennie. He probably should have tried to pick out Vlahovic in the middle. 28 min: Villarreal keep trying to get the ball wide to Samuel Chukwueze on the right touchline but the Nigerian winger is getting fairly short shrift as far as getting cutting inside or getting crosses into the Juve penalty area is concerned. 25 min: With his back to goal, Vlahovic shields the ball from Albiol and is quickly surrounded by opposition players. He manages to play the ball back to Manuel Locatelli, who shoots from the edge of the area. His effort is rushed and sails high over the bar. 24 min: Villarreal central defender Pau Torres and Juve striker Dusan Vlahovic are having quite the battle, the Spain international attempting to stick to his man like glue through fair means or foul but being given the run-around. 22 min: McKennie and Morata combine on the edge of the final third, with the latter playing the ball wide to De Sciglio. His shot from a ridiculously tight angle is blocked by Villarreal skipper Albiol. 19 min: Juan Foyt tries his luck with a low fizzing daisy-cutter from distance but his effort is wide of the far post. 17 min: Another cross from the right from Chuckwueze, but former Bournemouth striker Arnaut Danjuma’s back-heel flick doesn’t have enough on it to beat Szczcesny despite taking a deflection off a defender. 16 min: Villarreal attack down the right flank but Samuel Chuckwueze’s cross is blocked and cleared. 15 min: Villarreal win their first corner of the game. Morata heads the inswinger straight up in the air at the near post, before Wojciech Szczesny emerges from his goal to claim the dropping ball. 14 min: Giovani Lo Celso misses a sitter, thumping the ball off the angle of upright and cross-bar after being teed up by Alfonso Pedraza, who’d cut inside a few defenders from the left wing like a hot knife through butter. That’s an awful miss by the Villarreal striker. 12 min: Vlahovic goes down holding his knee in the centre-circle after being challenged for the ball by Pau Torres. It was an accidental collision and the big striker is OK. 10 min: Danilo goes long again from deep inside his own half. Vlahovic chests down the ball, this time with his back to goal halfway inside his own half and wins a free-kick after being barged off the ball. Nothing comes of it. 9 min: Juve try to break the Villarreal press but a cross-field pass to left wing-back Mattia De Sciglio goes out for a throw-in. 7 min: Villarreal don’t look too rattled by that early setback which had its roots in an error in midfield by Alberto Moreno, who gave the ball away. They’ve enjoyed a spell of sustained possession but have yet to threaten the Juve goal. 5 min: It was Danilo who provided the assist for Vlahovic, launching the ball long from inside his own half to send Juve’s striker haring between Raul Albiol and Pau Torres before beating Geronimo Rulli in the Villarreal goal. 2 min: Well, well. The man everyone wanted in January, Dusan Vlahovic, sprints between VIllarreal’s two central defenders to latch on to a long ball from deep, chests it down and veers a little right. Having teed up the shot, he squeezes a low diagonal shot into the far corner with his weaker right foot. Juve lead! Dusan Vlahovic scores with his first touch after 33 seconds. 1 min: Villarreal get the ball rolling, their players wearing yellow shirts, shorts and socks. Juve’s representatives wear black and white striped shirts, white shorts and white socks. Not long now: Your reminder that away goals no longer count for “extra” in the Champions League, as the teams march out on to the La Madrigal sward. Raul Albiol leads out the hosts, while Alex Sandro wears the armband for Juve. Both sets of players stand for the Champions League anthem and kick-off is just a few handshakes, an exchange of pennants, a few handshakes, a coin-toss and a shrill blast of German referee Daniel Siebert’s whistle away. A debutant to look out for: Dusan Vlahovic makes his European debut tonight, having signed for Juve from Fiorentina during the transfer window. The 22-year-old Serb has scored 26 goals for club(s) and country so far this season, one of them in four appearances for his new club. Chelsea v Lille: Following his seven touches against Crystal Palace on Saturday, Romelu Lukaku has been deemed surplus to requirements in Chelsea’s starting line-up at Stamford Bridge tonight and drops to the bench. Perhaps he’s tired. Scott Murray has the latest ... The Road to St Petersburg : Or possibly somewhere else. As for Gazprom ... well, hoo-boy. Uefa is ready to drop St Petersburg as the venue for this year’s Champions League final, but has yet to take a decision, as the military crisis in Ukraine deepens. The final of Europe’s most prestigious club competition is due to be played in Russia’s second-largest city on 28 May but Uefa finds itself under increasing pressure to move the venue after Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin, announced a decision to send troops into Ukraine’s eastern Donbas region. Rerad on ... Villarreal: Rulli, Foyth, Albiol, Torres, Pedraza, Chukwueze, Capoue, Parejo, Moreno, Lo Celso, Danjuma. Subs: Sergio Asenjo, Mario, Iborra, Estupinan, Trigueros, Dia, Pino, Mandi, Moi Gomez, Aurier, Jorgensen. Juventus: Szczesny, De Sciglio, Danilo, de Ligt, Alex Sandro, Cuadrado, Locatelli, Rabiot, McKennie, Vlahovic, Morata. Subs: Arthur, Pellegrini, Kean, Bonucci, Pinsoglio, Zakaria, Perin, Soule. Referee: Daniel Siebert (Germany) Tonight’s match officials Referee: Daniel Siebert Assistant referees: Jan Seidel and Rafael Foltyn Fourth official: Sven Jablonski Video Assistant Referee: Bastian Dankert This will be the first ever meeting between Villarreal and Juventus, which makes it the only one of the eight last 16 ties that has never been played before. Villarreal, the reigning Europa League champions, have been streaky this season in La Liga. They started the campaign with four draws, had a dip at the start of winter and then put together a run of four wins before Christmas to climb up the table. Following a short winless run in January they are now unbeaten in four and welcome Juventus to Spain on the back of a 4-1 win at Granada. Having been 13th at the start of December, they have their sights set on a top-four finish. It is difficult to know which Villarreal will turn up. January arrival Giovani Lo Celso lasted 70 minutes against Granada on Saturday but he was pictured with ice on his leg after he came off and will, along with another former Tottenham man Étienne Capoue, need a late fitness test. Villarreal are without injured trio Rubén Peña, Francis Coquelin and Gerard Moreno, but Yéremy Pino is back in contention having missed their final group game with Atalanta in December due to a ban. Arnaut Danjuma recently returned to action following a spell on the sidelines and scored a hat-trick against Granada, which will give Unai Emery a boost. Even though Emery has won the Europa League four times, he has never taken a club past the last 16 of the Champions League. Villarreal striker Gerard Moreno is sidelined with a calf injury that forced him off in a La Liga match against Real Betis a little over two weeks ago, while Ruben Pena and former Arsenal midfielder Francois Coquelin are also out. Formerly of the Premier League parish, Gio Lo Celso and Etienne Capoue were facing late assessments. Juventus have injury woes of their own and Max Allegri has had to plan for this game without a brace of wingers named Federico: Bernardeschi and Chiesa and skipper Giorgio Chiellini. His fellow central defender Daniele Rugani and striker Paulo Dybala are also expected to sit this one out. The Estadio de la Ceramica is the venue for tonight’s Round of 16 first leg match between Villarreal and Juventus. The Spanish hosts finished second in their group behind Manchester United, while their Italian visitors finished two points clear of reigning champions Chelsea as they won five games out of six in Group H. Currently fourth in Serie A, nine points behind leaders AC Milan, Juventus arrive in Castellón hoping to go some way towards adding to the paltry – by their own high standards – two European titles they won in 1985 and 1996 bvy seeing off a Spanish side who have never made it further than the semi-finals, in 2006 when they lost to Arsenal. Kick-off in the first ever competitive meeting between these grand old clubs is at 8pm (GMT) but stay tuned in the meantime for team news and build-up.