The Morrison government has faced one of the biggest parliamentary revolts in decades. Five Liberal MPs crossed the floor to pass Labor amendments to the government’s religious discrimination bill in the early hours of Thursday. The last time any Australian government faced a revolt of this magnitude was when six Coalition senators crossed the floor in November 1982 to support a Labor bill to curtail the power of the Senate to bring down governments by blocking or threatening to block supply. Crossing the floor is rare, and only seems to be getting rarer, with a minority of federal politicians having ever crossed the floor and just a single politician involved in more than half of all floor crossing divisions between 1950 and 2019, according to data compiled by the parliamentary library. Large defections have scuttled significant legislation before. In 2006, then prime minister John Howard was forced to drop a bill that aimed to send asylum seekers who arrived by boat to Nauru for processing. Despite three lower house MPs crossing the floor against the bill, with one abstaining, the bill made it to the Senate. But Howard was unable to secure a majority in the Senate despite the government having a slim majority of 39 (out of 76) Senate seats. At the time, Liberal senator Judith Troeth had vowed to cross the floor against the legislation, and Nationals senator Barnaby Joyce said he planned to abstain from the vote. Troeth would also later cross the floor with senator Susan Boyce to vote in favour of Labor’s carbon pollution reduction scheme. In 1994, six Coalition senators – three Liberals and three Nationals – crossed the floor to vote against legislation introduced by the Labor government, and supported by the Coalition, which would override Tasmania’s anti-gay laws. Four Coalition MPs had also crossed the floor in the lower house against the bill. The legislation still passed, legalising sex between consenting adults in Australia and eventually leading to Tasmania repealing its anti-gay laws. The vast majority of floor crossings happened in the middle of last century according to parliamentary library data, with more than 160 floor crossing divisions by Coalition members while Sir Robert Menzies was prime minister. Malcolm Fraser also saw more than 100 floor crossing divisions while prime minister. But in the past few decades the numbers have dropped off. There were just over 35 floor crossings by Coalition members while John Howard was prime minister between 1996 and 2007. Malcolm Turnbull’s tenure saw 15 but there were just three under Tony Abbott. The Labor party had just 29 individuals cross the floor between 1950 and 2019, according to the parliamentary library. Members of the Coalition tend to cross the floor more often when they are in government than when in opposition. The reverse tends to hold for Labor. Although the Labor party has only been in government for six years in the past thirty, and has seen far fewer floor crossings in total. The Labor party has strict rules against crossing the floor, with members expected to vote with the party or face potential expulsion. The Liberal and National parties do not enforce voting as strictly. Data from They Vote For You shows that there were no floor crossings in 2019, one in 2020 and 35 in 2021. But these counts include conscience votes, where parties allow members to vote freely. Only a minority of MPs ever cross the floor against their party. Since the 50s less than 30% of all members of parliament have ever crossed the floor. The percentage is slightly higher for senators than it is for members of the House of Representatives.“You sure know the way to a Polynesian’s heart,” said Olsen Filipaina, eyeing a large pile of grilled Greek lamb chops. I had finally enticed the legend of Australian and New Zealand rugby league to commit to a story about his life for the Guardian Australia in their “Forgotten story of” series. “Why would anybody be interested after 35 years?” So the journey began. It turns out that a lot of fans are still interested in a cult hero who became one of the most lovable figures in rugby league. However, beyond the stories and statistics lies an impact and legacy still felt today as the “Pacific Revolution” culturally disrupts rugby league across the world. Today the NRL boasts 46% of its players with Pasifika/Māori background. Olsen played 29 Tests and 50 total games for New Zealand and over 100 first grade games for the Balmain Tigers, Eastern Suburbs Roosters and North Sydney Bears. Yet pioneers have different metrics beyond cold statistics: soft measures matter like inspiration, role modelling, resilience and restraint. He was born on 23 April 1957, under a cabbage tree in the small village of Awarua, near Kaikohe. His mother, Sissie, was his guiding light, and she was a tough, proud and compassionate Māori woman of the Ngāpuhi nation north of New Zealand. His father was a tough Samoan boxer who migrated to Auckland, a pioneer of the mass migration of Polynesians into New Zealand. The Filipaina family moved to Auckland when Olsen was five and he gravitated from dominating bullrush to terrorising opponents in Auckland rugby league. His heady mix of brute strength and silky skills turned his beloved Mangere East Hawks into a contender and at 20 made his debut for the Kiwis. At 23, at the urging of his mother he signed with the Balmain Tigers and began his journey. There had been a smattering of Pasifika/Māori players in the NSWRL but Olsen was the first to carry the burden of expectation. His form fluctuated in Sydney and he was dropped a number of times for non-performance related issues. Playing in the NSWRL, a new monocultural world hostile to outsiders, he promised his mother that regardless of the physical or verbal abuse he received, he would never use his fists to fight back and give Pasifika/Māori a bad name. Olsen was a confidence player who needed coaches to love him and, without that key relationship in place, he suffered from homesickness, depression and was particularly affected by racism. There were many months when his phone bill to his mother in New Zealand exceeded his combined salary as a ‘garbo’ and a rugby league player. He received the aroha/love he needed from revolutionary Kiwis coach Sir Graham Lowe and rewarded Lowe’s cultural competence with a dominant Player of the Series display for the Kiwis in the 1985 test matches against the Kangaroos billed as “the world championship”. To achieve this on a losing team is a major achievement. To do so facing Wally Lewis, who had the year before won the inaugural Golden Boot award for the best player in the world, was a shock to rugby league’s cosmic order. “The influence, domination and magic of Polynesian players in the NRL was created by Olsen,” Lowe reflected. “He knew what would follow him .” Olsen’s influence went beyond rugby league. As the first Pasifika superhero his inspirational feats were celebrated across the sporting divides. For former All Black Eroni Clarke, Olsen was the chosen one: “We talk about how we as Pacific people navigated the oceans of the Pacific by just using stars. Olsen was like those stars for us; he dared to open the pathway. Olsen gave us permission to dream, express our talent and individuality without conforming and he gifted us a map to navigate through.” Wally Lewis, an NRL Immortal considered one of the greatest players of all time, recalls Olsen’s impact: “The Kiwis were desperate to increase their standings in the international rankings … and thanks to his injection, New Zealand immediately became almost unbeatable on the international stage. He was an instant inspiration to teammates and fans, but Olsen was so humble he rarely sought credit … He was a wonderful player, but an even better bloke.” Olsen was also a man of principle. He refused to accept his prestigious Hall of Fame, Legends of League induction unless family were allowed into the event having driven for four hours to pay tribute to their relative. And when he was asked to captain Samoa late in his career, Olsen accepted on the strict condition that 50% of the players be local based Samoans to help the development of the local game. As the Māori All Stars honour the memory of Olsen Filipaina in the 2022 Indigenous All Stars match, they will know that they are paying respect to a key person in their rugby league whakapapa (lineage). John Devonshire, chair of Māori Rugby League calls Olsen: “A man with humility and humour and whose playing skills spoke for themselves’ “He was the flagship for the Māori and Polynesian pathway and most importantly he has unquestionable mana – his respect, his stature and his reason for being.” Patrick Skene is the author of The Big O: The Life and Times of Olsen Filipaina - Pacific Revolution Pioneer, available in bookstores. @patrick_skeneYou could hear this match between Ireland and France coming way back in the autumn. The anticipation has been building like a drum fill since the two teams beat New Zealand on back-to-back Saturdays last November. Right now, the world rankings will tell you that Ireland are the best team in Europe. The French, who were, after all, the last team to beat Ireland when they won 15-13 in Dublin last year, believe differently. They are playing to settle that, the shot at the grand slam, and something more, too. The winner will step forward full of confidence that they can beat the best teams in the biggest games, with the ringing conviction that they are the top team. The loser will have to live with the knowledge that they came up short when it counted most, and deal with the doubt that follows a step backwards. At the start of the week, you could have made a case that the Irish were just about favourites, even though they are going away from home. They had played pitilessly well against Wales last Saturday, while France had had a harder time getting past Italy a day later. And then the news broke that Johnny Sexton had strained a hamstring and would miss this game. In a match as finely poised as this, that was enough, all of a sudden, to tilt the balance back the other way. “That’s sport,” said Ireland’s head coach, Andy Farrell. His team had trained for this, rehearsed it in practice, swapping Sexton and his replacement Joey Carbery in and out for the last three weeks. The game’s never just about one man, Farrell said, and he’s right. His Ireland team have grown over the last year, winning nine games on the bounce, and don’t depend on Sexton like they used to. But it’s true, too, that some players are easier to do without than others, and Sexton, the man who won the game with a 45-metre drop-goal the last time Ireland won in Paris, is about the last one Farrell would want to lose. For Ireland, then, the game has become a different sort of test. The question in front of them now is how they’ll go without their captain and playmaker, and whether Carbery, who has played so well off the bench since he made his debut in 2016, is the man to take over when Sexton has finally gone for good. It’s an issue they have been worrying about on and off for the last few years. It even came up in the last World Cup, when Sexton was forced out of Ireland’s pool match against Japan with a thigh injury. On that occasion, Farrell’s predecessor Joe Schmidt picked Jack Carty to start, and put Carbery on the bench. Ireland lost 19-12. This time, Farrell has them the other way round. Even so, the Irish have been talking a good game. The players and coaches have sounded calm and confident all week. “We’re very clear on where we’re sitting at the moment, how we’ve developed our game, how we’re playing the game,” says the scrum coach John Fogarty. “We’ve played France twice in the last two years, when we came here last time out we didn’t feel as ready as we do now.” They sound like a team who know exactly how they want to win. “There’s going to be times when we have to muscle up, but in general we want to be on our feet, we don’t want to be on the ground, and we don’t want to be clustered in any parts of the field. Hopefully we can spend more time playing the game than in an arm-wrestle.” The question is how well that plan holds up when the French bring the hammer down on it. Their head coach, Fabien Galthié, has brought the burly François Cros into the back row to bolster his monumental pack, and loaded his bench with six forwards too. They’ll look to soften Ireland up, and then strike. The chances are there will be a moment in there, somewhere, when it’s all Ireland can do to stay in the game. Farrell knows it, and has tried to prepare his team for it. “There’s no doubt that France are going to have a purple patch, it’s an absolute given,” Farrell says, “How we get back on task is going to be key for both sides, no doubt about that.” If they can hold on through that stretch, then the game may come down to the replacements. It’s a sign of just how strong this Ireland squad is that they have five British and Irish Lions on the bench. If the match is still in the balance at that point, it might be the young French side who start to feel the pressure. As Galthié put it, in his own inimitable way, “we are touching the summit of European rugby, the sublime side of the European game.” Which, if you need the translation, is his way of saying it’s going to be a hell of a match.We’re wrapping up our live politics coverage from today, as warnings of a Russian invasion of Ukraine dominate the news. Here’s a summary of today’s key events, from my colleague Joan Greve and me. The US warned of the “very distinct possibility” of a Russian invasion of Ukraine in the next few days, saying an attack could occur during the Beijing Olympics. “I will not comment on the details of our intelligence information,” the US national security adviser, Jake Sullivan, said at today’s White House briefing. “But I do want to be clear, it could begin during the Olympics, despite a lot of speculation that it would only happen after the Olympics. As we’ve said before, we are ready either way.” The White House urged all Americans still in Ukraine to leave in the next 24 to 48 hours. “We obviously cannot predict the future. We don’t know exactly what is going to happen,” Sullivan said. “But the risk is now high enough and the threat is now immediate enough that this is what prudence demands. If you stay, you are assuming risks with no guarantee that there will be any other opportunity to leave.” Sullivan warned a Russian attack on Ukraine may include aerial bombing that would endanger civilian lives. Joe Biden told allied leaders in a private call today that Vladimir Putin has made the decision to move forward with an invasion, according to diplomatic sources. But Sullivan said US intelligence does not currently indicate that Putin has made a final call about launching an invasion. Biden and Putin will have a phone call tomorrow to discuss the Ukraine crisis, the White House confirmed. The US president has already arrived at Camp David for the weekend, and he is expected to continue receiving updates from intelligence officials about the situation in Ukraine. Biden signed an executive order to allocate $7bn in funds to humanitarian efforts in Afghanistan and American families impacted by terrorism. The executive order involves the US-held funds of Afghanistan’s central bank, which were frozen after the Taliban takeover of the country. Biden allocated $3.5bn of those funds for humanitarian projects in Afghanistan, which is facing widespread starvation due to the country’s economic collapse, and another $3.5bn for American families affected by Taliban terrorism. Some of those families lost loved ones in the September 11 attacks and have filed lawsuits against the Taliban. A Canadian judge ordered an end to a five-day blockade of a bridge at the US-Canada border by anti-vaccine mandate protesters. The court order could mean that law enforcement officers will be sent in to forcibly remove the demonstrators, though it was not immediately clear when or if that might happen. US homeland security secretary Alejandro Mayorkas and transportation secretary, Pete Buttigieg, had asked their Canadian counterparts to use their federal powers to address the bridge blockade. State senator: VA governor congratulated wrong Black lawmaker on her Black History month speech A Black state senator from Virginia tweeted that newly elected Republican governor Glenn Youngkin confused her with another Black female senator in a text message about Black History month. Louise Lucas, a Democrat, has made headlines in recent weeks as a “social media star” for repeatedly using her Twitter account to jab at the state’s new Republican governor, who attempted to ban the teaching of “critical race theory” in public schools on the first day of his administration, and recently faced backlash after his aides attacked a high school student by name on Twitter. Lucas,78, has served in the state senate for the past 30 years. A spokesman for Youngkin did not immediately respond to a request for comment on Lucas’ tweet. White House confirms Biden with speak with Putin on Saturday morning The White House has confirmed reports that the president will have a call with Vladimir Putin on Saturday morning, as US officials have publicly warned of a “very distinct possibility” that Russia will invade Ukraine in the coming days. ‘What would your mother say?’ New Zealand urges citizens to wind back online rage Faced with a rising tide of acrimony, rage, and online crankiness, New Zealand has launched a nationwide campaign to try to calm its citizenry down, my colleague Tess McClure reports. Over the summer, pastel posters began cropping up around the cities, asking New Zealanders to “dial it down a notch,” “read it before you hit enter,” and “comment with dignity”. Cartoon characters entreat keyboard warriors to take a breath, and consider “what would your mother say?” Read more on the New Zealand approach to online rage here: Justice Department shares details of boogaloo murder guilty plea A former US air force staff sergeant and alleged member of the “boogaloo” extremist movement pleaded guilty Friday in the fatal shooting of a federal security officer in the San Francisco Bay Area amid large 2020 protests against police brutality, the Associated Press reported. The justice department said in a press release that Carrillo had admitted that he aligned himself with an anti-government movement and wanted to carry out violent acts against federal law enforcement officers, and that he had admitted to making a series of incendiary posts on Facebook referencing the boogaloo movement. Prosecutors on 31 January said they would not seek the death penalty, but US district judge Yvonne Gonzalez Rogers said Friday she is not convinced that she will accept the plea agreement between prosecutors and defense lawyers calling for a 41-year prison sentence, saying that she might reject the plea agreement if she doesn’t feel prosecutors and defense lawyers do enough to justify the sentence, the AP reported. The Guardian previously investigated how Carrillo and other alleged members of the boogaloo movement had used Facebook to find each other and plan violence: Landlords finding ways to evict after getting rental aid Although the $46.5bn Emergency Rental Assistance Program has paid out tens of billions of dollars to help avert an eviction crisis, some tenants, who received help are finding themscelves threatened with eviction again – sometimes days after getting federal help, the Associated Press reports. Many are finding it nearly impossible to find another affordable place to live. The National Housing Law Project, in a survey last fall of nearly 120 legal aid attorneys and civil rights advocates, found that 86% of respondents reported cases in which landlords either refused to take assistance or accepted the money and still moved to evict tenants. The survey also found a significant increase in cases of landlords lying in court to evict tenants and illegally locking them out. California legislation would require vaccines for all employees California would mandate that all businesses require their employees and independent contractors to receive the COVID-19 vaccine under legislation announced Friday by Democratic state lawmakers that was immediately criticized by Republicans as government overreach, the Associated Press reports. Employees or contractors who qualify for medical or religious exemptions would have to be regularly tested under a planned amendment to the bill. New employees would have to get at least one dose by the time they start work and the second dose within 45 days of being on the job. Assemblywoman Buffy Wicks introduced her bill months after delaying an original proposal last fall. The previous version would have allowed workers to submit to weekly testing as an alternative to getting vaccinated, but that is not an option in her new proposal. US regulators put brakes on Covid vaccine for children under five US regulators on Friday put the brakes on their push to speed Pfizer’s Covid vaccine to children under five, creating major uncertainty about how soon the shots could become available, the Associated Press reports. The Food and Drug Administration had urged Pfizer and its partner BioNTech to apply for authorization of extra-low doses of its vaccine for the youngest children before studies were even finished – citing the toll the Omicron variant has taken on children. But Friday, the FDA reversed course and said it had become clear it needed to wait for data on how well that third shot works for this age group. Pfizer said in a statement that it expected the data by early April. The immediate reaction from parents of kids under five was anger, as well as exhaustion. ‘Everything is on the table’ Canadian officials warn members of anti-vaccine blockade A Canadian judge ordered protesters blockading a bridge at the US-Canada border to disperse by 7pm, capping a day of warning from Canadian officials that they were prepared to take action to end the blockade. Key statements from Canadian officials, according to the Associated Press: “We heard you. It’s time to go home now,” prime minister Justin Trudeau said, cautioning that “everything is on the table” for ending the blockades. “This unlawful activity has to end and it will end.” Ontario Premier Doug Ford declared a state of emergency. Ford said he will convene the provincial cabinet on Saturday to urgently enact measures that make it “crystal clear” it is illegal to block critical infrastructure. Violators will face up to a year in prison and a maximum fine of $100,000, he said. “There will be consequences for these actions, and they will be severe,” Ford said. “This is a pivotal, pivotal moment for our nation.” Ottawa’s mayor has asked for 1,800 additional police officers, which could nearly double the manpower available to the capital city’s police force. It was not immediately clear when or if law enforcement officers would be sent in to remove the demonstrators, who parked their pickups and other vehicles in front of the bridge in a bumper-to-bumper protest against the country’s Covid-19 restrictions and against Trudeau and his liberal government, the Associated Press reported. Report: Facebook groups inspired by Canadian trucker convoy linked to content mills Facebook has confirmed that some of the Facebook groups ostensibly inspired by Canada’s anti-vaccine-mandate “Trucker Convoy” protest are being run by fake accounts linked to content mills in Asia and Europe, NBC News reports. But not all of the large groups linked to the anti-vaccine protest are run by fake accounts, Ben Collins, an NBC News reporter who specializes in disinformation, cautioned. A judge on Friday ordered protesters at the Ambassador Bridge over the US-Canadian border to end the five-day-old blockade that has disrupted the flow of goods between the two countries and forced the auto industry on both sides to roll back production, the Associated Press reports. It was not immediately clear when or if law enforcement officers would be sent in to remove the demonstrators, who parked their pickups and other vehicles near the bridge in a protest against the country’s Covid-19 restrictions and an outpouring of fury toward Prime Minister Justin Trudeau and his Liberal government. Chief Justice Geoffrey Morawetz of the Ontario superior court said during a virtual hearing that the order would be effective at 7 pm to give protesters time to leave. Windsor police immediately warned that demonstrators blocking the streets could be subject to arrest and their vehicles may be seized. CIA collecting Americans’ private information in bulk, senators say This is Lois Beckett, picking up our live politics coverage from our West Coast bureau in Los Angeles. My colleague David Smith has more on the newly declassified documents that have prompted condemnation: The Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) has been secretly collecting Americans’ private information in bulk, according to newly declassified documents that prompted condemnation from civil liberties watchdogs. The surveillance program was exposed on Thursday by two Democrats on the Senate intelligence committee. Ron Wyden of Oregon and Martin Heinrich of New Mexico alleged that the CIA has long concealed it from the public and Congress. While many basic facts about the program in question are still classified, one detail that was revealed may not spark much confidence in the guardrails currently in place: ... a pop-up box warns CIA analysts using the program that seeking any information about US citizens or others covered by privacy laws requires a foreign intelligence purpose. Read the full story here: That’s it from me today. My west coast colleague, Lois Beckett, will take over the blog for the next few hours. Here’s where the day stands so far: The US warned of the “very distinct possibility” of a Russian invasion of Ukraine in the next few days, saying an attack could occur during the Beijing Olympics. “I will not comment on the details of our intelligence information,” the US national security adviser, Jake Sullivan, said at today’s White House briefing. “But I do want to be clear, it could begin during the Olympics, despite a lot of speculation that it would only happen after the Olympics. As we’ve said before, we are ready either way.” The White House urged all Americans still in Ukraine to leave in the next 24 to 48 hours. “We obviously cannot predict the future. We don’t know exactly what is going to happen,” Sullivan said. “But the risk is now high enough and the threat is now immediate enough that this is what prudence demands. If you stay, you are assuming risks with no guarantee that there will be any other opportunity to leave.” Sullivan warned a Russian attack on Ukraine may include aerial bombing that would endanger civilian lives. Joe Biden told allied leaders in a private call today that Vladimir Putin has made the decision to move forward with an invasion, according to diplomatic sources. But Sullivan said US intelligence does not currently indicate that Putin has made a final call about launching an invasion. Biden and Putin will have a phone call tomorrow to discuss the Ukraine crisis, according to multiple reports. The US president has already arrived at Camp David for the weekend, and he is expected to continue receiving updates from intelligence officials about the situation in Ukraine. Biden signed an executive order to allocate $7bn in funds to humanitarian efforts in Afghanistan and American families impacted by terrorism. The executive order involves the US-held funds of Afghanistan’s central bank, which were frozen after the Taliban takeover of the country. Biden allocated $3.5bn of those funds for humanitarian projects in Afghanistan, which is facing widespread starvation due to the country’s economic collapse, and another $3.5bn for American families affected by Taliban terrorism. Some of those families lost loved ones in the September 11 attacks and have filed lawsuits against the Taliban. Lois will have more coming up, so stay tuned. According to the New York Times, Vladimir Putin had originally proposed a Monday phone call with Joe Biden, but the White House countered with a Saturday option, which the Kremlin accepted. The news of the call comes as the US warns that a Russian invasion of Ukraine could occur at any moment and potentially during the Beijing Olympics, which will conclude on 20 February. Joe Biden and Vladimir Putin will speak on Saturday about the crisis in Ukraine, according to CNN. The news comes as the US warns a Russian invasion of Ukraine could occur during the Beijing Olympics. The US national security adviser, Jake Sullivan, said during today’s White House press briefing that the two leaders would likely have a phone call soon, but he did not specify when that conversation would occur. “I would expect that President Biden will engage by telephone with President Putin, but I don’t have anything to announce for you on that right now,” Sullivan said. Despite a PBS report indicating Putin has already decided to launch an invasion next week, Sullivan claimed that US intelligence currently indicates the Russian leader has not yet made a final call about launching an attack. The Guardian’s Julian Borger and Dan Sabbagh report: The US has warned of the “very distinct possibility” of a Russian invasion of Ukraine in the next few days, potentially involving an overwhelming attack on Kyiv, and told all remaining Americans to leave the country in the next 48 hours. Diplomatic sources said that Joe Biden had told allies leaders in a call that Vladimir Putin had taken a decision to go ahead with an invasion, but Jake Sullivan, the national security adviser, said that the US did not believe the Putin had given “a final go order”. “I will say that the way that he has built up his forces and put them in place, along with the other indicators that we have collected through intelligence, makes it clear to us that there is a very distinct possibility that Russia will choose to act militarily, and there is reason to believe that that could happen on a reasonably swift timeframe,” Sullivan said. “Now, we can’t pinpoint the day at this point, and we can’t pinpoint the hour but what we can say is that there is a credible prospect that a Russian military action would take place, even before the end of the Olympics.” The Winter Olympics in China close on 20 February. Joe Biden held a video call with several European leaders today to discuss the crisis in Ukraine and potential responses if Russia moves forward with an invasion. “The leaders expressed their concern about Russia’s continued build-up of military forces around Ukraine and reaffirmed their support for Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity,” the White House said in its readout of the call. “They expressed their desire for a diplomatic solution to the crisis, and discussed recent engagements with Russia in multiple formats. The leaders agreed on the importance of coordinated efforts to deter further Russian aggression against Ukraine, including their readiness to impose massive consequences and severe economic costs on Russia should it choose military escalation, and to continue reinforcing the defensive posture on NATO’s eastern flank.” The participants of the call included British Prime Minister Boris Johnson, Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau, French President Emmanuel Macron and German Chancellor Olaf Scholz. Joe Biden has just left the White House and boarded Marine One to start the trip to Camp David, where he will spend the weekend. As the president walked out to the helicopter, reporters shouted questions about the imminent threat of a Russian attack on Ukraine, as the White House warns an invasion could occur during the Beijing Olympics. But the US president did not answer any questions. The Guardian’s Andrew Roth, Dan Sabbagh and Shaun Walker report: Western intelligence agencies increasingly believe that Vladimir Putin has now put in place enough troops to attempt an invasion, a sentiment reflected in warnings in the last 24 hours from both Joe Biden and Boris Johnson. Nevertheless, they continue to believe no final decision by the Russian leader has been made. A number of invasion scenarios are considered possible, but there is a prevailing belief that any military intervention ordered by Putin would be designed to achieve regime change in Kyiv. That could see a lightning attack, aimed at encircling the capital, with the intention of forcing the collapse of Volodymyr Zelenskiy’s government, and trying to install a pro-Russian regime without urban warfare. Johnson emphasised on Thursday that any invasion would amount to a massive miscalculation by Putin because Ukraine would “fight and they will resist very strongly”. Any belief in the Kremlin that a Russian intervention would be welcome by anything other than a tiny minority was mistaken, British ministers said. A reporter asked Jake Sullivan whether the Biden administration feels obligated to provide underlying intelligence to justify officials’ claims about the imminent threat of a Russian invasion of Ukraine. The reporter nodded to the 2003 invasion of Iraq, when faulty US intelligence about weapons of mass destruction was used to justify a massive military operation. Sullivan argued that there was a “fundamental distinction” between the invasion of Iraq and the crisis in Ukraine, saying the US was now attempting to prevent a bloody war. “In the situation in Iraq, intelligence was used and deployed from this very podium to start a war,” Sullivan said. “We are trying to stop a war, to prevent a war, to avert a war.” Sullivan also noted that Americans can see for themselves that Russia is building up its troop presence along Ukraine’s borders, unlike when the US falsely claimed there were weapons of mass destruction in Iraq. “You can believe your own eyes that the Russians have put in place the capabilities to conduct a massive military operation against Ukraine should they choose to do so,” Sullivan said. Jake Sullivan contradicted the report from PBS Newshour, saying US intelligence does not currently indicate that Russian President Vladimir Putin has made a final decision about invading Ukraine. A reporter then asked the national security adviser whether Joe Biden intends to speak to Putin soon to continue diplomatic efforts to avoid an invasion. “I would expect that President Biden will engage by telephone with President Putin, but I don’t have anything to announce for you on that right now,” Sullivan said. The US national security adviser, Jake Sullivan, urged all Americans still in Ukraine to leave in the next 24 to 48 hours, citing the danger of a potential Russian invasion. “We obviously cannot predict the future. We don’t know exactly what is going to happen,” Sullivan said at the White House press briefing. “But the risk is now high enough and the threat is now immediate enough that this is what prudence demands. If you stay, you are assuming risks with no guarantee that there will be any other opportunity to leave.” Sullivan added that there would be “no prospect of a US military evacuation in the event of a Russian invasion” so American citizens need to make plans to leave the country immediately. “If a Russian attack on Ukraine precedes, it is likely to begin with aerial bombing and missile attacks that could obviously kill civilians without regard to their nationality,” Sullivan said. Joe Biden delivered a similar message yesterday, urging all Americans still in Ukraine to leave because “things could go crazy quickly” if Russia invades. “American citizens should leave, should leave now,” Biden told NBC News. “We’re dealing with one of the largest armies in the world. This is a very different situation and things could go crazy quickly.” The US is “ready either way” whether Russian President Vladimir Putin decides to invade Ukraine or not, said Jake Sullivan, the US national security adviser. “As we’ve said before, we are in the window when an invasion could begin,” Sullivan told reporters at the White House press briefing. Sullivan would not confirm the PBS Newshour report that Putin has decided to invade Ukraine and has communicated that choice to Russian military leaders. “I will not comment on the details of our intelligence information,” Sullivan said. “But I do want to be clear, it could begin during the Olympics, despite a lot of speculation that it would only happen after the Olympics. As we’ve said before, we are ready either way.” Sullivan emphasized that the US and its allies continue to explore diplomatic options to deescalate tensions in Ukraine, even as Russia has continued to built up its troop presence along Ukrainian borders. Sullivan warned that, if Russia should decide to invade Ukraine, the US and its allies will “respond decisively” through severe economic sanctions. US officials believe Russian President Vladimir Putin has decided to invade Ukraine, and the operation is expected to begin next week, according to PBS Newshour. The PBS report comes hours after the US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, said a Russian invasion could occur at any moment and may happen during the Beijing Olympics. However, US officials have not yet publicly confirmed that they expect an invasion to occur next week , and the White House has not declassified any intelligence to substantiate that claim. The US national security adviser, Jake Sullivan, is now speaking at the White House press briefing, and he is addressing the Ukraine crisis. Stay tuned for more details. In the latest episode of Politics Weekly Extra, the Guardian’s Jonathan Freedland speaks to local Ohioan politics reporter, Andrew Tobias, about why the Senate and gubernatorial midterm races are shaping up to be a litmus test for the influence of Trumpism in Republican success. Listen to the full episode: US urges Canada to end trucker border blockade and Ontario declares state of emergency The US homeland security secretary, Alejandro Mayorkas, and the transportation secretary, Pete Buttigieg, have urged their Canadian counterparts to use federal powers to ease the growing economic disruption caused by the blockade of the Ambassador Bridge in Windsor, Ontario, which borders Detroit. Protesters opposed to coronavirus mandates began blocking the Ambassador Bridge on Monday and have since shut two smaller border crossings in Alberta and Manitoba provinces. The closure of North America’s busiest international land border crossing, a vital supply route for Detroit’s carmakers, has halted some auto output and left officials scrambling to limit economic damage. Mayorkas and Buttigieg, urged their Canadian counterparts “to use federal powers to resolve this situation at our joint border”, a White House official said on Thursday. On Friday the province of Ontario invoked a state of emergency and says it will use the threat of hefty fines, jail time and vehicle licence seizures to end a blockade that has crippled trade between Canada and the United States. A court hearing is scheduled for noon on Friday as the city of Windsor seeks an injunction to forcibly remove protesters from the international bridge. Here’s where the day stands so far: Joe Biden urged Americans in Ukraine to leave the country, saying “things could go crazy quickly” if Russia invades. Biden’s message came as his secretary of state, Antony Blinken, warned that Russia may move forward with an attack before the end of the Beijing Olympics, an analysis that contradicts previous assessments by the US and its allies. Biden spoke to several leaders of allied nations this morning about the crisis in Ukraine. Biden arranged a virtual meeting with European leaders to discuss “our shared concerns about Russia’s continued buildup of military forces around Ukraine and continued coordination on both diplomacy and deterrence,” the White House said. Biden signed an executive order to allocate $7bn in funds to humanitarian efforts in Afghanistan and American families impacted by terrorism. The executive order involves the US-held funds of Afghanistan’s central bank, which were frozen after the Taliban takeover of the country. Biden allocated $3.5bn of those funds for humanitarian projects in Afghanistan, which is facing widespread starvation due to the country’s economic collapse, and another $3.5bn for American families affected by Taliban terrorism. Some of those families lost loved ones in the September 11 attacks and have filed lawsuits against the Taliban. The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned. US Secretary of State Antony Blinken was in Melbourne today for a meeting with foreign ministers of the Quad, an increasingly active diplomatic grouping that is viewed warily by China, which sees it as an effort to contain its influence. The meeting comes a week after China’s Xi Jinping and Vladimir Putin of Russia signed a joint statement calling on the west to “abandon the ideologised approaches of the cold war”, as the two leaders showcased their warming relationship in Beijing at the start of the Winter Olympics. This so-called “no limits” agreement was one of the developments discussed at Friday’s meeting of the Quad foreign ministers. The Australian foreign minister, Marise Payne, said Russia and China’s agreement was “concerning because it doesn’t represent a global order that squares with those ambitions for freedom and openness and sovereignty and the protection of territorial integrity”. Speaking at a joint news conference with her Quad counterparts, Payne said rules and norms were “under pressure, in particular from authoritarian regimes”. The US and its allies have gathered intelligence suggesting Russia may move to invade Ukraine even before the Beijing Olympics end later this month, according to CNN. US officials had previously indicated they thought Vladimir Putin would wait to stage an attack until after the Olympics to avoid angering his ally, Chinese President Xi Jinping. But US Secretary of State Antony Blinken indicated those assessments had shifted, saying in Melbourne today, “We’re in a window when an invasion could begin at any time – and to be clear, that includes during the Olympics.” The Biden administration has previously been pressed to declassify some intelligence to corroborate its claims about Russia’s plans in Ukraine, and CNN reports that the US may declassify some of its reports later today. A Republican Senate primary candidate in Arizona has been condemned for a “disgusting” campaign ad in which he shoots at lookalike actors portraying Joe Biden, Nancy Pelosi and incumbent Arizona senator Mark Kelly. Jim Lamon, an energy executive, shared the ad on Twitter, saying it would be aired at this year’s Super Bowl. Lamon would face Kelly in a general election in the autumn should he secure the Republican nomination. Kelly is the husband of former Democratic congressman Gabrielle Giffords of Arizona, who was shot in the head in 2011 while greeting constituents outside of a local grocery store. Criticism towards the ad has been swift, with many people pointing out other recent instances of violent imagery used by members of the Republican Party. Last November, Paul Gosar, Republican representative for Arizona, was officially censured by the House after sharing an animated video depicting him killing the Democratic congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez and attacking Biden. The process to distribute the funds from Da Afghanistan Bank to humanitarian efforts and families affected by terrorism is likely to be long and arduous, as legal battles over the money unfold. But some American families affected by terrorism have said that all of the $7bn should go to humanitarian projects in Afghanistan, where the country’s economic collapse has spurred widespread starvation and a looming refugee crisis. Barry Amundson, who lost his brother Craig in the September 11 attacks and now belongs to the group September 11th Families for Peaceful Tomorrows, said the policy would unfairly punish innocent Afghans. “I can’t think of a worse betrayal of the people of Afghanistan than to freeze their assets and give it to 9/11 families,” Amundson told the New York Times. “While 9/11 families are seeking justice for their loss through these suits, I fear that the end result of seizing this money will be to cause further harm to innocent Afghans who have already suffered greatly.” The Taliban took over the central bank – known as Da Afghanistan Bank – and immediately claimed a right to the money, but under longstanding counter-terrorism sanctions it is illegal to engage in financial transactions with the organisation. Furthermore, the US does not recognize the Taliban as the legitimate government of Afghanistan. As the Biden administration mulled over what to do with the funds, a group of relatives of victims of the September 11 attacks, who years ago won a default judgment against the Taliban and al-Qaida, sought to seize the Afghan bank assets. In a case known as Havlish, the plaintiffs persuaded a judge to dispatch a US marshal to serve the Federal Reserve with a “writ of execution” to seize the Afghan money. The Biden government has intervened in the lawsuit, and is expected to tell the court that the victims’ claims for half the money should be heard (several other victims’ groups have also asked for a share). If the judge agrees, Joe Biden will seek to direct the remainder toward some sort of trust fund to be spent on food and other humanitarian aid in Afghanistan – while keeping it out of the hands of the Taliban. Joe Biden has signed an executive order to allocate $7bn in frozen funds to humanitarian efforts in Afghanistan and Americans affected by terrorism, including families of September 11 victims. The order involves assets held by Afghanistan’s central bank, Da Afghanistan Bank, in the US. Biden’s directive calls for those funds to be consolidated into an account at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. The US president is calling for $3.5bn in DAB funds to be allocated for “the benefit of the Afghan people and for Afghanistan’s future,” as the country faces the threat of massive famine following the Taliban takeover. According to the executive order, even with the allocation of funds for humanitarian projects in Afghanistan, there will still be more than $3.5bn in DAB assets left for US families who have been affected by terrorism and have filed lawsuits against the Taliban. Some of those families lost loved ones in the September 11 attacks. “This is one step forward in the United States’ effort to authorize the transfer of a significant portion of the funds to meet the needs of the Afghan people,” the White House said in its fact sheet about the order. “The E.O. is designed to provide a path for the funds to reach the people of Afghanistan, while keeping them out of the hands of the Taliban and malicious actors.” Joe Biden’s national security adviser, Jake Sullivan, will join press secretary Jen Psaki at the daily White House briefing this afternoon. Sullivan is expected to provide an update on the diplomatic efforts to deescalate tensions in Ukraine, following Biden’s virtual meeting this morning with leaders of several allied nations. The secretary of state, Antony Blinken, has warned that a Russian invasion of Ukraine could come at any moment, as Vladimir Putin has amassed more than 100,000 military personnel along Ukrainian borders. “We’re in a window when an invasion could begin at any time – and to be clear, that includes during the Olympics,” Blinken said in Melbourne today. US officials had previously argued that Putin would likely wait until after the Beijing Olympics to stage an invasion, out of concern for his ally, Chinese President Xi Jinping. Joe Biden will speak to the leaders of allied nations this morning to continue their discussions about the escalating crisis in Ukraine, the White House has confirmed. The White House told the press pool that Biden will hold an 11am ET call with Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau, European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen, European Council President Charles Michel, French President Emmanuel Macron, German Chancellor Olaf Scholz, Italian Prime Minister Mario Draghi, NATO Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg, Polish President Andrzej Duda, Romanian President Klaus Iohannis and British Prime Minister Boris Johnson. The leaders will “discuss our shared concerns about Russia’s continued buildup of military forces around Ukraine and continued coordination on both diplomacy and deterrence,” the White House said. Trudeau’s office had already indicated the virtual meeting would be taking place, although it did not appear on Biden’s original schedule released by the White House last night. The call comes as Biden has urged all Americans to leave Ukraine out of concern of a potential Russian invasion, and talks with the Kremlin have so far failed to deescalate tensions. When Emmanuel Macron visited Vladimir Putin in Moscow on Monday, the French president refused to take a coronavirus test requested by the Kremlin out of fear of the Russians obtaining his DNA. “We knew very well that meant no handshake and that long table. But we could not accept that they get their hands on the president’s DNA,” one of Macron’s aides told Reuters. Macron’s refusal meant that the two leaders held their talks on the crisis in Ukraine at a 13-foot-long table to maintain distance from each other. The set-up attracted widespread mockery on social media, and it prompted questions about whether Putin was using the comical situation to send a message about his refusal to back down in Ukraine. But Putin’s spokesperson insisted the decision was merely meant to protect the Russian president’s health because of Macron’s refusal to take a test. “There is no politics in this, it does not interfere with negotiations in any way,” Dmitry Peskov said, per Reuters. Joe Biden is not expected to make any public appearance until this afternoon, when he leaves the White House to travel to Camp David for the weekend. But according to the office of Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau, Biden is hosting a meeting with several other leaders to discuss the escalating crisis in Ukraine. Trudeau’s schedule indicates that the virtual meeting will also be attended by the leaders of France, Germany, Italy, Poland, the UK, the EU and Nato. The stability of the Indo-Pacific will also be in danger if Russia is allowed to threaten Ukraine with impunity, the US secretary of state has warned during a visit to Australia. Antony Blinken said on Friday there were “very troubling signs of Russian escalation”, adding: “We’re in a window when an invasion could begin at any time – and to be clear, that includes during the Olympics.” He said the US would continue to draw down its embassy in Kyiv and reiterated calls for any American citizens who remain in Ukraine to leave immediately, following Joe Biden’s comment that “things could go crazy quickly”. After joining with his Australian, Indian and Japanese counterparts for a meeting of the Quad in Melbourne, Blinken made the case that allowing Russia to further invade Ukraine would have far wider consequences and could embolden other countries, such as China, to pursue military aggression. Greetings from Washington, live blog readers. Joe Biden sent an urgent message to Americans in Ukraine yesterday, urging them to leave the country because “things could go crazy quickly” if Russia moves forward with an invasion. “American citizens should leave, should leave now,” Biden told NBC News. “We’re dealing with one of the largest armies in the world. This is a very different situation and things could go crazy quickly.” Meanwhile, diplomatic efforts to deescalate tensions along Ukraine’s border, where Russia has amassed more than 100,000 troops, have not yet resulted in a peaceful resolution. The AP reports: Britain’s defense secretary visited Moscow Friday for talks on easing tensions amid massive Russian war games near Ukraine. Ben Wallace’s trip comes a day after British Foreign Secretary Liz Truss held talks in Moscow, urging Russia to pull back over 100,000 troops amassed near Ukraine and warning that attacking its neighbor would ‘have massive consequences and carry severe costs.’ Russia says it has no plans to invade Ukraine but wants the West to keep Ukraine and other former Soviet countries out of NATO. It also wants NATO to refrain from deploying weapons there and roll back alliance forces from Eastern Europe — demands flatly rejected by the West. The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned.Salesforce employees will soon be able to hold meetings in California’s redwood forests after the company announced plans to open its own luxury ranch to help staff “connect” after two years of remote working. The 75-acre property known as Trailblazer Ranch is located near Santa Cruz, California, and boasts an outdoor amphitheater, a communal kitchen, fitness and learning centers and conference rooms. The property also features sleeping pods and suites equipped with fireplaces and employees will be able to partake in guided nature walks, yoga sessions, garden tours, group cooking classes, art journaling and meditation. The company says Salesforce workers will be able to visit the property from next month for onboarding, training, skills building and talent development. “Since the pandemic began, we’ve onboarded tens of thousands of employees remotely. Those employees have never met their manager or teams in person. And many of our existing employees haven’t seen their colleagues face-to-face in two years,” the company said in a statement on Thursday. Salesforce said that, according to an internal survey, the number one thing employees asked for was “finding ways to connect”. The Covid-19 pandemic brought a temporary hiatus to Silicon Valley’s famously over the top office spaces as thousands of tech workers went remote. And while the pandemic fueled speculation that this could spell the end for Silicon Valley, the recent reopening of office spaces appears to prove otherwise. Some companies are starting to coax people back and companies, including Google and Facebook, are taking out leases on even more offices. Last year, Silicon Valley witnessed a building boom that led to the most office construction in six years. In December, Meta rented 719,000 sq ft at a campus in Sunnyvale in what was the largest private-sector office lease of 2021. “Silicon Valley remains the global center of innovation and its importance will continue to grow even as other innovation hubs emerge,” said Tishman Speyer, a veteran developer who bought the campus seven months before Facebook’s purchase. Other new construction projects that were completed in 2021 include a 657,000 sq ft Yahoo office campus in San Jose, as well as a 611,000 sq ft Google office campus nearby. Salesforce’s new ranch reaffirms the company’s – and Silicon Valley’s – continued belief in the importance of working in person. “Trailblazer Ranch is an exciting new gathering place where employees can forge trusted relationships with their colleagues, learn from one another, get inspired, grow in their career, get trained on the company, and give back to the community in a fun and safe environment,” the company said. Salesforce said the ranch is an “opportunity to disconnect from technology and connect with each other”. The company went on to cite a recent study by Deloitte that revealed employees are working three more hours a day compared with before the pandemic. Moreover, 80% of the study’s respondents listed wellbeing as important or very important to their company’s success. The ranch is temporarily located at 1440 Multiversity in the town of Scotts Valley, as the company solidifies its long-term Trailblazer Ranch site. The ranch space will also be open to local non-profits and the surrounding community, the company said.The US secretary of state’s lightning visit to Fiji may be sudden, but not surprising. That Antony Blinken is the first US secretary of state to visit Fiji in 37 years reflects just how much has changed geopolitically. It is also an indication of Fiji’s influential role in this part of the world, being a strong, if not the strongest, Pacific ally of China, the arch-rival of the US in the Pacific. In what is an election year for Fiji, Blinken appeared keen to meet the Fijian prime minister Frank Bainimarama, who is known to be close to China, but he remains hospitalised in Australia, after a serious operation, so the acting prime minister Aiyaz-Sayed Khaiyum plays host. Blinken’s team will use the visit to reassure Pacific Island leaders of the Biden administration’s commitment to regional concerns, chief of which is climate change, following America’s return to the Paris Agreement. Maritime security and illegal fishing will also be on the table, according to US officials, which means that China’s shadow looms large in the meeting. Not for the first time, Blinken raised the spectre speaking this week to The Australian of China’s ambitions to become the “leading military, economic, diplomatic and political power, not just in the region, but in the world” and the need for a united front against Chinese expansionism. This is an old memo with a new sense of urgency, at least for the US and its allies, not the least because of the latest Russia-Ukraine conflict, which has seen China and Russia bonding ever more strongly over a common foe. The US clearly sees a need to draw its friends closer, even far-flung Pacific friends, but unlike the cold war, communist China is no longer seen as a threat in Fiji and the region. To the contrary, China is regarded more as a friend than a foe and a crucial partner in development, a status China has worked long and hard to achieve. As the US downsized its presence in the region after the cold war, China quietly stepped into the vacuum, and decades of consistent work on the diplomatic front, topped by dollops of aid, grants and loans, has seen it make major inroads in the region, where it is now firmly ensconced. According to the Australian thinktank Lowy Institute, Australia is still the chief aid donor in Fiji, but China is committing more and more money in the region, particularly in the form of loans. China’s 10 Pacific allies, including Fiji, have signed on to the US$1tn belt and road initiative. Unlike the cold war, it will be harder for Fiji and the Pacific to choose between “friends”, if that is the US intention, judging from Blinken’s comments to The Australian this week that “our (liberal) values must be defended against whomever is challenging them.” It was China that firmly backed Fiji after the 2006 military coup, when it was suspended from the Pacific Islands Forum grouping and faced sanctions from Australia and New Zealand. China’s longstanding foreign policy principle of non-interference in other countries’ internal affairs has endeared it to many Pacific leaders, causing some commentators to question whether western countries have adopted a similar strategy with regards to their apparent silence on human rights issues, lest any criticism drives Pacific leaders further into China’s arms. Prof Biman Prasad, leader of Fiji’s opposition National Federation party has been vocal about what he sees as a culture of “sycophancy and servility” in the international diplomatic community in the Pacific, warning that traditional partners “pandering to dictatorial governments and ignoring basic human rights will not only serve to impede meaningful development in the Pacific, but also allow countries that do not care about democracy to have a stronger foothold in the region, shifting the geopolitical balance for good”. Of all the Pacific countries, China certainly has a strong foothold in Fiji, which is now home to a growing Chinese population of about 10,000, a Confucius Centre located at the regional University of the South Pacific, as well as presence of Chinese state media in the capital city, Suva-symbols of Chinese soft power inroads into the island nation. In his speech at the 2015 China-Fiji 40th Anniversary diplomatic symposium in Suva, Bainimarama lauded China as not only having “a great history but a great present and a great future”, adding that “Fiji looks to China for leadership in the global community on the great issues of our time”. It’s clear that for Fiji and the Pacific, global warming, not China, is the clear and present danger, and US president Trump did not do America in the Pacific any favours by withdrawing from the Paris accord. If his goal is to curtail Chinese influence in Fiji and the region, Blinken has his work cut out. Pacific leaders will want some tangible outcomes from this historic meeting as concrete assurance of the United States’ commitment to the Pacific Islands. Shailendra Singh is Associate Professor of Pacific Journalism at the University of the South Pacific in Suva, Fiji, and the 2022 Pacific Research Fellow at the Australian National UniversityProtesters opposing pandemic restrictions were still occupying a vital Canada-US trade corridor hours after an injunction order to end the blockade that has disrupted North America’s auto industry took effect. Prime minister Justin Trudeau has promised president Joe Biden quick action to end the crisis and earlier on Friday a Canadian judge ordered an end to the four-daylong blockade of the Ambassador Bridge, North America’s busiest land border crossing. That order came into effect at 7pm Eastern Time but more than two hours after the deadline, about 200 protesters, including children, milled around the entrance to the bridge, waving Canadian flags, while others set off fireworks. Police, who started to gather in a parking lot a few blocks away from the protesters, began handing out pamphlets that outlined penalties under Ontario’s emergency order, which takes effect at midnight. Traffic at the Ambassador Bridge has been blocked by protests since Monday as part of a broader, nationwide demonstration against pandemic restrictions, including vaccine mandates for essential workers. Windsor police had previously warned demonstrators they would face arrest and possible vehicle seizure if they remained near the bridge after the 7PM deadline to end the blockade. Of the nearly C$300m (US$235m) of trade each day that crosses the bridge, C$50m is related to auto manufacturing. Carmakers have already scaled back shifts in response to the supply chain delays. The city’s mayor has called the standoff a “national crisis” and on Friday, Ontario premier Doug Ford unveiled a plan to end the “disruption, intimidation, and chaos” of protests. “There will be consequences for these actions, and they will be severe,” he said. Penalties for blocking key routes, including bridges and highways, would include fines as high as C$100,000 and up to a year in jail, Ford said. On Thursday, Michigan governor Gretchen Whitmer called with Canadian officials to end the barricade. “They must take all necessary and appropriate steps to immediately and safely reopen traffic so we can continue growing our economy,” she said in a statement. The city of Ottawa announced on Friday it too would seek an injunction to remove protesters from the nation’s capital amid an occupation that has lasted 15 days shows little sign of easing. The “Freedom Convoy” protests, started by Canadian truckers opposing a vaccinate-or-quarantine mandate for cross-border drivers, have also blocked two smaller US crossings. The protests have inspired similar convoys and plans in France, New Zealand, Australia and the United States, whose Department of Homeland Security is working to ensure that a “Freedom Convoy” event due in early March in Washington DC., “does not disrupt lawful trade”. Adding to earlier calls for action by US officials and business leaders, Biden expressed concerns over auto plant closures and production slowdowns during a phone call with Trudeau, the White House said in a statement. “The two leaders agreed that the actions of the individuals who are obstructing travel and commerce between our two countries are having significant direct impacts on citizens’ lives and livelihoods,” the statement said. Trudeau told reporters that he agreed with Biden that the blockades cannot continue. “Everything is on the table because this unlawful activity has to end and it will end,” Trudeau said. Biden’s administration had urged Canada to use federal powers to ease the Ambassador Bridge blockade, a step Trudeau’s government has not taken. Trudeau said on Friday his government was not seriously contemplating calling in the military over the protests. The prime minister met with opposition leaders Thursday night, but Trudeau has so far ruled out meeting with the protesters, who have called for pandemic health measures like vaccine and mask mandates to be fully repealed. Alberta, Manitoba and Saskatchewan have scaled back their public health restrictions in recent days and Ontario has indicated it too might rescind certain rules.“Sat like a Cormorant,” Milton wrote of Satan in Paradise Lost, “devising death to them who lived.” I recall these lines now because the fisherman I met at this lovely country park was of similar mind. “If that’s a gun you’ve got,” he said, referring to my camera and monopod, “can you shoot them; they steal all my fish.” “Your fish?” I asked. Yet there was probably one point on which we agreed. Cormorants are better at catching fish than he is. The reservoir here is narrow but deep-watered and bound on both shores by steep-sided beech woods, which immerse the western half in a well of late afternoon winter shadow. Twelve cormorants, some of the southern race Phalacrocorax carbo sinensis, descended on to its silky green-black surface. They worked as a pack, sending out patterns of sparkling spray and white-edged ripples across the water’s quaking plane. One after the other, birds made quick-fire dives. Each was a perfect lesson in instant line and ancient purpose. The head and neck were recurved but arrowed down in the exact split second that the heavy body was raised clear of the water to drag thick paddle-feet hard behind. It made of each bird an exquisite ellipse of sinew and muscle from beak to tail. Down they went. The submerged snake-lines were marked by slight swellings in the surface sheen. No dive was less than 30 seconds. Then up they thrust again, splitting the plate of closed water like a gutting knife. I’ve seen them hunt like this on Lake Prespa in Greece, where 300 sinensis cormorants will encircle a fishing party of pelicans. I’ve also watched them do it in Portugal, where herons and egrets become so excited by the frenzy of fish-catching that they plunge in themselves and surround the melee in short, awkward failed sorties. Then a signal seemed to go out. The fish were done. Twelve birds lumbered up, and by the time I’d sorted exposure, adjusted ISO and shutter speed, got focus and pulled the monopod to the correct length, there was a beautiful vision of silvery fractal patterns spreading from so many black feet as their owners flew away. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryIt may be February, but sunglasses are a year-round essential. Think of them as an easy win – a way to add instant cool on one of those blue-sky, frozen-ground kind of days. If you’re considering investing, go for a pair with surefire classic status. Square designs give a nod to 1960s Michael Caine, while Wayfarer shapes have an 80s-in-LA vibe. They don’t have to impact the environment either – look out for brands that use recycled plastic and plant-based materials. To experiment with more fashion-forward shapes, try renting. “Go big or go home” designs are popular at the moment. Thrifting will no doubt turn up some curios. Brands such as Gucci have pushed 70s-style shades for a while. Or, for a blue-chip style reference, google Steve McQueen – a shades icon if ever there was one. Lauren Cochrane Buy Recycled wood, £76, woodzee.com Bring some LA cool with frames made from recycled Californian skateboards. Bio-acetate, £99, findyourbirds.com Need options? Choose four pairs to try on at home before you buy. Gold, £205, kimeze.com Keep it minimal with this understated, timeless style. Rent Tom Ford, from £39 for three days’ rental from frontrow.uk.com Take inspo from Michael Caine and up the style ante in black-rim specs. Versace, from £30 for four days’ rental, from hurrcollective.com Wraparounds are perfect for sunny snow days. Wire, from £6 for a day’s rental, from mywardrobehq.com Make your sunnies a focal point in these retro-futuristic shades. Thrift 80s retro, £180, edandsarna.com Get an extra pair of UV or prescription lenses custom-cut and fitted with each vintage pair. Balenciaga, £70, vestiarecollective.com Contrast these mirrored pilot shades with a jeans-and-trainer look. Matrix style, £55, retrospecced.co.uk A fifth of the profits from these recycled and refurbished vintage frames goes directly to Vision Aid Overseas.Going Out: Cinema Uncharted Out now Tom Holland and Mark Wahlberg star as Nathan Drake and his wisecracking partner Victor “Sully” Sullivan in a big-screen adaptation of one of the bestselling video game franchises of all time. Join them on their efficient multi-tasking quest to find both long-lost treasure and a long-lost brother. Marry Me Out now Don’t be fooled by the rocks that she’s got, Jennifer Lopez still knows how to head up a daft romcom. This glossy high-concept romance – in which a jilted megastar spontaneously marries a random guy (Owen Wilson) – makes for perfect Valentine-adjacent fromage. Romeo &amp; Juliet – ROH 14 February If the J-Lo joint doesn’t represent quite the right flavour of romance for you this Valentine’s Day, never fear. The Royal Opera House has you covered, with 205 minutes of livestreamed ballet, in the form of Kenneth MacMillan’s take on Romeo and Juliet, an instant classic since its 1965 premiere. Wheel of Fortune and Fantasy Out now Written and directed by Ryusuke Hamaguchi, this Japanese romantic drama weaves together themes of infidelity, hidden attraction, mistaken identity and sexual intrigue, with a comic lightness of touch that belies Hamaguchi’s keen insights into human nature. The best film out this week. Catherine Bray *** Going Out: Gigs Melanie C 12 to 16 February; tour starts Glasgow The sportiest Spice Girl heads out on her delayed tour in support of 2020’s Carly Rae Jepsen-esque eighth album, her third to grace the UK Top 10. Expect a smattering of the guitar-heavy likes of debut solo single Goin’ Down and 2003’s Yeh Yeh Yeh. Michael Cragg Snoh Aalegra 13 to 16 February; tour starts Manchester Released last summer, R&amp;B experimentalist Aalegra’s third album, Temporary Highs in the Violet Skies, was a slowburn success, earning the Swedish singer a Grammy nod. Allow its laid-back, healing qualities to wash away your winter blues. MC Psappha at 30 Kettle’s Yard, Cambridge, 17 February; touring to 29 April The Manchester-based new-music group marks its 30th anniversary with a programme that includes its latest commission – Simon Holt’s The Sower, which features a cimbalomin its instrumentation and was inspired by a poem by Antonio Machado. Psappha also plays Harrison Birtwistle’s The Axe Manual, and works by Ninfea Cruttwell-Reade and Joanna Ward. Andrew Clements Ruth Goller’s Skylla Holywell Music Room, Oxford, 15 February, then touring In recent years, UK bass guitarist Ruth Goller has driven jazz, funk and global outfits from Acoustic Ladyland and Melt Yourself Down to Vula Viel – but Skylla is her own unique venture, a mix of edgy improv and haunting vocals, in an eerily tone-bending but inviting soundworld. John Fordham *** Going Out: Stage The Forest Hampstead theatre, London, to 12 March A new play from the fiendishly clever Florian Zeller with a stellar cast including Toby Stephens, Gina McKee, Paul McGann and Angel Coulby. MG Lost Dog: A Tale of Two Cities Warwick Arts Centre, Coventry, 16 to 18 February, then touring Lost Dog’s Ben Duke has created golden nuggets of dance theatre with his imaginative (and very funny) revisions of Paradise Lost and Romeo and Juliet. Now he takes a similarly skewed view of Dickens’s London-Paris classic, focusing on the character of Lucie Manette. Lyndsey Winship Much Ado About Nothing Royal Shakespeare theatre, Stratford-upon-Avon, to 12 March Director Roy Alexander Weise helms a new version starring Michael Balogun and Akiya Henry. An exciting creative team includes Mobo-nominated composer Femi Temowo. Miriam Gillinson Phil’s Fun Factory Moth Club, London, 12 February A new monthly night from the gleefully camp character comedian Phil Dunning. Expect freewheeling sketches, strange musical numbers and special guests including Feel Good star Mae Martin and brilliantly funny newcomer Freddie Meredith. Rachel Aroesti *** Going Out: Art Ai Weiwei Kettle’s Yard, Cambridge, to 19 June One of the most spectacular artists on the planet offers a quieter, more intimate experience than his Sunflower Seeds at Tate Modern might make you expect. The nature of liberty and contrasting attitudes to authenticity in China and the west are among the themes of an exhibition that plays fast and loose with art’s histories. The World of Stonehenge British Museum, London, 17 February to 17 July The medieval chronicler Geoffrey of Monmouth claimed the strange stones on Salisbury Plain were magicked from Ireland by Merlin. William Blake pictured them towering over tiny druids, Jeremy Deller recreated them as a bouncy castle. This exhibition promises the latest archaeology on Britain’s neolithic wonder. Suzanne Jackson Modern Institute, Glasgow, to 19 March Saggy, splashy paintings that spread across the gallery space, hanging happily from the ceiling, mixing images with abstract impulses. Jackson works in Savannah, Georgia, and you might see her as carrying on the tradition of the radical southern artist Robert Rauschenberg with her theatrical scale and verve. Pissarro Ashmolean Museum, Oxford, 18 February to 12 June This revolutionary painter of modern life can stop you in your tracks with the sheer intelligence of his eyes. Pissarro was not just one of the founders of impressionism in 1870s France but a deep observer whose city streets and people at work always have a gravitas that goes beyond beauty. Jonathan Jones *** Staying In: Streaming Louis Theroux: Forbidden America 13 February, 9pm, BBC Two Having been forced to podcast for his supper during the first lockdown, the documentarian embraces freedom with a brand new three-parter. In episode one, he deadpans his way through a series of meetings with the far-right extremists stoking the internet culture wars. Severance Out 18 February, Apple TV+ A group of employees agree to have their minds meddled with so they don’t remember their work outside office hours. Ben Stiller directs and Adam Scott (Parks and Recreation) stars as a staff member on the brink of rediscovering what he does all day. Jeen-yuhs: A Kanye Trilogy Out 16 February, Netflix Kanye West is a singular figure: sonically trailblazing, politically incendiary, determined to reinvent both the music industry and celebrity itself in his own image. This film, directed by longtime friends, follows the giddy early years before observing his megastardom from farther afield. The Marvelous Mrs Maisel Out 18 February, Amazon Prime Video The fourth season of this richly realised mid-century New York-set dramedy returns to follow Midge Maisel’s rollercoaster of a standup comedy career. The year is 1960 and Midge’s pioneering work continues amid some very messy family dynamics. Meanwhile, romance with Lenny Bruce may still be on the cards. RA *** Staying In: Games Assassin’s Creed: The Ezio Collection Out 17 February, Nintendo Switch Three classic games, finally available to play on Nintendo Switch. Modern Assassin’s Creed games suck up a hundred hours of your life – this is a throwback to when they were more manageable. Horizon: Forbidden West Out 18 February, PlayStation 4/5 The adventures of Aloy the flame-haired robot dinosaur hunter continue in this gorgeous sci-fi epic. A game about rediscovering the Earth after it’s been reclaimed by nature and machines. Keza MacDonald *** Staying In: Albums Foxes – The Kick Out now Six years after her second album, newly independent synthpop exponent Foxes returns with the pulsating The Kick. Created with producer James Greenwood in lockdown, it’s a 12-track ode to escapism led by the galloping single Sister Ray and the disco-tinged Sky Love. Mary J Blige – Good Morning Gorgeous Out now Ahead of her appearance at Sunday’s Super Bowl half-time show alongside Dr Dre, Eminem and Kendrick Lamar, the queen of hip-hop soul releases her 14th album. Featuring the likes of Usher, Anderson .Paak and ubiquitous hype man DJ Khaled, it’s further proof of Blige’s influence on a new generation of R&amp;B singers. Big Thief – Dragon New Warm Mountain I Believe in You Out now The Brooklyn quartet recorded their fifth album, an 80-minute, 20-track opus, across the US after hunkering down for writing sessions in the woods in Vermont. Its mutable sound reflects the different locales, ranging from crisp indie rock to stripped back folk via the swirling psychedelia of last August’s Little Things. Alt-J – The Dream Out now After their debut album An Awesome Wave scooped the 2012 Mercury music prize, Cambridge brainiacs Alt-J and their fidgety post-rock split opinion. Some hailed them the new Radiohead, while others dismissed them as ripe for parody. On their fourth album they finally sound happy enough with being a mix of the two. Michael Cragg *** Staying In: Brain food Maintenance Phase Podcast As we emerge from the enforced health fads of January, this podcast from Aubrey Gordon and Michael Hobbes helps debunk the latest wellness trends. Investigate the science (or lack thereof) in everything from sleep loss manuals to celebrity diets. Line Goes Up: The Problem With NFTs YouTube It’s an abbreviation that is popping up everywhere and no one quite understands: the NFT. YouTuber Dan Olson tackles the art trend with typical rigour in this film, explaining why we should be very wary of their spread. Lincoln’s Dilemma Apple TV+, 18 February Actor Jeffrey Wright narrates this four-part documentary series on Abraham Lincoln’s journey to end slavery. Based on historian David S Reynolds’s 2020 book, the series provides a nuanced take on the era’s often oversimplified political battles. Ammar KaliaStarstruck 8.30pm, ITV “Tonight Matthew, I’m going to be … ” Oh, wrong show – but this might please those who still mourn Stars in Their Eyes. Over six weeks, we’ll see teams of three contestants transform into their favourite singers and jointly perform their hits on stage. Judges Adam Lambert, Sheridan Smith, Beverley Knight and Jason Manford decide on their best team before the voting audience pick just one person to go through to the series final. In the first round: Freddie Mercurys meet Ariana Grandes. Hollie Richardson The Masked Singer: The Final 7pm, ITV Can you believe that an actual member of Destiny’s Child (Michelle Williams) was Rockhopper? We have reached the final, and it’s time for Mushroom, Panda or Robobunny to be crowned this season’s winner. HR Matt Baker: Our Farm in the Dales 7.30pm, Channel 4 Season two of the family farm-fixing series. High in the Durham Dales, three generations of the Baker clan prepare for their first lambing season with Herdwick sheep. If that isn’t cute enough for you, there are also pygmy goats and a reunion with some terrier pups. Graeme Virtue The Wall 7.45pm, BBC One The silly but undeniably watchable gameshow that combines general knowledge, a smidgeon of strategy and lashings of luck continues. Its trump card is, of course, host Danny Dyer, whose enthusiasm often borders on the boisterous but who manages to be oddly charming at the same time. Tonight’s contestants: Roops and Rita from Banbury. Phil Harrison Wondrous Wales 8.30pm, Channel 4 The return of a series that has a title that’s impossible to hear in your head without an accompanying rich, Welsh baritone. Garry and his family deliver lambs on the Black Mountains of the Brecon Beacons, while artist Charlotte Cortazzi creates a stunning, if temporary, work of art in the sands of Pembrokeshire’s Broad Haven South Beach. Ali Catterall The Promise 9pm, BBC Four For fans of French crime drama Spiral, here’s another series from its showrunner, Anne Landois. The six-parter concerns an investigation into a missing girl, which might be linked to 11-year-old Charlotte, who vanished in the middle of a storm in 1999. The prime suspect in that case was released due to lack of evidence – might they have struck again? HR Film choices Booksmart 10pm, BBC Three What if you can be an academic high-achiever and have a wild social life at the same time? The horrible realisation that you can dawns on nerdy friends Amy and Molly on the last day of high school in Olivia Wilde’s terrific comedy. Kaitlyn Dever and Beanie Feldstein play the joined-at-the-hip pals who struggle to get to a house party the night before graduation, hoping for the extracurricular experiences they’ve missed out on. With a whip-smart script, a big dose of narrative rug-pulling (the slut-shamed girl is going to Yale; the stoner has been recruited by Google) and even some hallucinatory animation, it’s a film infused with the joys of youthful but enduring friendship. Simon Wardell Sicario 11.35pm, Channel 4 This tremendously tense, edge-of-your-seat 2015 thriller saw future Dune and Arrival director Denis Villeneuve break out of his “best in Canada” reputation into global recognition. Emily Blunt was an unusual pick to play an FBI special agent in Arizona, but she’s surprisingly convincing as an ethical, if naive, character drawn into a semi-legal, cross-border war against Mexican drug cartels. Josh Brolin brooks no dissent as the murky CIA operative running the show, while Benicio Del Toro is even murkier as a Mexican lawyer with opaque motives. SW Live sport Premier League Football: Man United v Southampton, 11.30am, BT Sport 1 From Old Trafford. Followed by Norwich v Man City from Carrow Road Stadium at 5pm on Sky Sports Main Event. Super League Rugby League: Leeds Rhinos v Warrington Wolves, noon, Channel 4 From Headingley Stadium, the first Super League match ever to be shown live on terrestrial TV. Six Nations Rugby Union: Scotland v Wales, 1.15pm, BBC One From Principality Stadium. Followed by France v Ireland from Stade de France at 4pm on ITV. Club World Cup Football Final, 4pm, Channel 4 Held at Mohammed bin Zayed Stadium in Abu Dhabi.People in the Spanish region of Castilla y León vote on Sunday in a snap election that represents a massive gamble for the ruling conservative People’s party (PP). It could see a breakthrough by a new political platform campaigning on behalf of depopulated and underdeveloped parts of Spain. The vote was called in December after the regional president, the PP’s Alfonso Fernández Mañueco, kicked his partners in the centre-right Citizens party out of the coalition government, claiming that he could no longer rely on their loyalty. It follows a turbulent few weeks in Spanish politics that have included a row over the country’s meat industry and rightwing fury after the socialist-led central government managed to get its flagship labour reforms approved by parliament thanks to a PP MP accidentally voting against his party. Buoyed by its performance in national polls – and by its strong result in the Madrid region last May – the PP had hoped to use the Castilla y León poll to win a majority there and to score an emphatic victory before a looming election in Andalucía and next year’s general election. But its momentum appears to be waning. Recent polls suggest that the party, led by Pablo Casado, will have to rely on the support of the far-right Vox party if it wants to remain in office. The socialists are predicted to finish not far behind the PP, with Vox in third place and Citizens – already a party in its death throes across Spain – coming a distant fourth. While the PP has already relied on Vox to govern in regions such as Madrid and Andalucía, relations between the two parties have been strained since October 2020, when Casado rounded on the far-right grouping, accusing it of practising a politics based on “fear, anger, resentment and revenge”. Since then, however, Casado has dragged his party rightwards and enthusiastically sought out culture wars and wedge issues. Both the PP and Vox have seized on comments that the consumer affairs minister, Alberto Garzón, made in an interview with the Guardian last December. Although the minister had renewed his calls for Spaniards to reduce their meat consumption for the sake of their health and the planet – and contrasted meat from traditional farming with meat from intensive megafarms – his words were twisted and presented as an attack on Spain’s meat industry. Standing in front of a field of cows on a traditional farm near the small town of Las Navas del Marqués in the Ávila province of Castilla y León last month, Casado said the government was “insulting livestock farmers, insulting the Mediterranean diet and threatening Spain’s international image”. He also said that megafarms were subject to strict legislation and that, as he saw it, “they don’t cause pollution”. Asked why some PP councils had campaigned to stop the construction of new megafarms, Casado said those were political decisions. In recent days, Casado has also accused the Spanish government of attacking the country’s cheeses, beets, and of spending “a million euros on tourism for other races”. Last week, he suggested that the socialist prime minister, Pedro Sánchez, presided over a “Dracula coalition”, but went on to mix his metaphors by claiming that everyone Sánchez bit “turns into a zombie, like him”. With the PP’s fortunes in the traditionally conservative region suddenly in doubt, the party drafted in Isabel Díaz Ayuso, who is widely seen as a possible rival to Casado because of her electoral clout and ability to appeal to Vox voters. It did not take her long to stake her conservative credentials. Responding to questions about the sexual abuse of children by Catholic priests in Spain, Ayuso said, “All institutions make mistakes”, adding that few people wanted to talk about the church’s cultural legacy in Spain or about “the charity, solidarity, values and comfort it offered”. Pablo Simón, a political scientist at Madrid’s Carlos III University, said things in Castilla y León were not going according to plan for Casado and his party. “The problem is that when they called the elections, they thought they’d do so well that they’d be able to govern alone, like in Madrid,” he said. “But all the polls point at things getting worse for them than they’d thought.” Anything the PP do now, added Simón, will come at a cost: “They’ll either have to depend on Vox, with all that depending on a more radical parliamentary partner implies, or they could even lose the government. Either scenario is worse for the PP than how things were, or how they wanted them to be.” Simón also noted that the so-called España vaciada, or hollowed-out Spain platform, could play a role in the shape of the new regional parliament as “there are nine provinces that are very different with local phenomena”. Voters sick of 35 years of PP rule could decide to give their votes to these grassroots groups on Sunday. The people of Las Navas del Marqués, however, are not holding their breath for an imminent improvement in their daily lives. Javier, who owns a bar in the town, said locals were more worried about depopulation and basic services than the meat row. “It’s about all kinds of infrastructure, from telecoms and internet to roads,” he said. “There’s also a shortage of doctors.” Given that most of the meat in the area was raised on traditional farms, he added, few people would take issue with Garzón’s words. Miguel, who was born in a house on the main square in Las Navas del Marqués 74 years ago, didn’t hesitate when asked what the most pressing electoral issue was. “Jobs, jobs and jobs,” he said. “People go where the work is and that’s how towns die. A lot of people here have always felt left behind and abandoned by the authorities. Castilla y León needs to be thought about a bit more. It’s not just about Catalonia and the Basque country and Andalucía.”Lottie on Tim What were you hoping for? A good meal, some posh vino and to meet someone interesting. First impressions? He looked very smart and had a friendly smile and kind eyes. What did you talk about? What “maxillofacial” means. Music festivals. How social media is life-sapping. What Guildford’s really like. The frustrations and joys of working in the NHS. Climate change. Any awkward moments? I made a bad joke about Colgate Max toothpaste that I then had to explain. Tim very kindly laughed. Good table manners? Absolutely. He poured the wine and talked me through how to eat oysters. Best thing about Tim? Good company, interesting and easy to talk to. Would you introduce him to your friends? Sure, he’s a lovely guy. Describe Tim in three words Genuine, caring, a good listener. What do you think he made of you? Slow eater, but hopefully a fun dinner partner. Did you go on somewhere? No, we made good use of the cocktail bar at the restaurant. And … did you kiss? No. If you could change one thing about the evening what would it be? Maybe one less glass of wine – the hangover was real. Marks out of 10? 8. I had a very lovely time, with great food and drink. Would you meet again? I’d be open to the idea. Tim on Lottie What were you hoping for? Good food, good company and not to embarrass myself. First impressions? Sharp as a tack. What did you talk about? Our work. Travelling experiences. Her past career as a steel band musician. And cats. Any awkward moments? I think I tried to mansplain what a negroni was, and got it wrong. Good table manners? Absolutely. We both handled our oysters like grownups. Best thing about Lottie? She is a really good communicator. Would you introduce her to your friends? Yes, of course. Describe Lottie in three words Confident, fashionable, grounded. What do you think she made of you? Apart from charming and handsome? Probably that I was quite awkward. Did you go on somewhere? No, but we did make the most of their lovely cocktail menu. And … did you kiss? No, although she did tell me she had a negative lateral flow test. Is that today’s version of making a pass? If you could change one thing about the evening what would it be? We managed to solve all the problems in the NHS over dinner, but I got too pissed and have unfortunately forgotten our solution. Marks out of 10? I would say 8 but her superb fringe makes it a 9. Would you meet again? I’m not sure we had a spark. Lottie and Tim ate at 28-50, London SW3. Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.comOn Sunday morning I wake to the sound of the dog and the cat fighting at the foot of the bed. Looking over the edge, I see a miniature re-enactment of a wildlife programme: a small leopard trying to take down a tusk-less warthog, only the warthog thinks it’s a game. You can imagine how frustrating this is for the would-be predator. It leaps out from behind a chair and pounces, sinking its teeth into the dog’s flank; the dog, wagging its tail, reaches round and presses the cat’s head to the floor. Then they pause, resume their former positions and start again. “It’s not natural,” I say. “They’re playing,” says my wife, who already seems to be up and dressed. “It will end badly,” I say. “I’ve got us an appointment at the dump for 11,” she says. “So you might want to think about getting up.” With this, she leaves the room. The animals stop fighting and follow her. My wife does her best to make the trip to the dump sound like both a date and a hot ticket, as though she’d had to pull a few strings to make it happen. I will later find out that dump appointments are not at all hard to come by. Not even on a Sunday. Our dump appointment comes the day after I spent an hour searching for a particular kitchen implement and failed to find it, which puts me in a suspicious frame of mind at loading-up time. “Of course, I’ll need to check all these bags,” I say to my wife. “Don’t start,” she says. “You threw away my bench scraper, so I know what you’re capable of,” I say. The dog and the cat roll past between us, end over end. “I don’t even know what a bench scraper is,” my wife says. “Exactly,” I say. “So you just put it in the bin.” “We’re going to miss our slot,” she says. The most exciting thing about our date is that we’re going to a new dump. They closed the old dump, which was overseen by an angry man who sat in a folding garden chair and shouted at people for mixing plastics. The new dump is a mystery. My wife drives. The dog sits on my knees, watching the road. “Will they let us dump paint?” I say. “Who knows?” my wife says. The new dump is miles away, down a long straight road that ends in a sentry hut with a man in it. “We’re ridiculously early,” my wife tells him. “What’s your booking reference?” he says. “No idea,” she says. She picks up her phone and scrolls through her emails. “I can’t find it. What do you do with people who can’t find their booking reference?” “Go on up,” he says. This is when I realise the dump is not quite as exclusive as I had been led to believe. The new dump is staffed by a man who does not sit in a garden chair; instead he approaches you and answers questions politely, like a waiter. There are the usual containers for metal and cardboard, but there is also a giant concrete pit where you can dump everything else. “Can I put this in there?” my wife says, holding up a flattened old suitcase. “Of course, madam,” says the man. “What about this?” I say, opening a bin liner full of glass and cardboard. “Put it all in cardboard,” he says. “What, all together?” I say. “Yes, it’s all recycling,” he says, smiling. I grab another bag full of heavy broken things, too tightly knotted at the top to check its contents, and with a pang of guilt I sling it into the big pit. But when I peer over the edge my sack of mystery waste seems uncontroversial: there are whole living rooms of stuff down there, whole kitchens, tumbled up in piles, waiting to be crushed. The guilt ends up in the pit with everything else. “Well, I would definitely go there again,” I say as we glide down the exit ramp. “I wish I’d brought more stuff now,” my wife says. “Yes, you could have thrown away all my shoes and books,” I say. “Next time,” she says. Sitting on my knees, the dog is shaking uncontrollably. “What’s wrong with you?” I say. “She’s frightened of the dump,” my wife says. “Frightened of that dump?” I say. The dog goes still for a second, and then resumes its shaking. “Come on,” I say. “Let’s get you back to the cat.”Lindsay-Jean Hard is one of my zero-waste heroes. Her book Cooking With Scraps (Workman, £14.99), which was born out of her column of the same name for Food52, is full of intriguing recipes and ideas such as artichoke leaf nachos, coffee ground cashew butter and her renowned recipe for banana peel cake, in which the surprisingly flavourful peel replaces the bananas themselves. Here is my wholemeal version of that cake, which, with the addition of unrefined sugar and wholegrain flour, becomes seriously toffee-like (and especially so when drowned in the toffee sauce icing). I’ve also introduced brown bananas into the recipe, baking them on top of each cake, but that’s entirely optional if you have another use for them. Banana peel toffee cake For this cake, Hard keeps banana peels in the freezer until she needs them; she also says they’re great in smoothies. Although my version of her cake is wholemeal, it’s still light and fluffy. Serve with or without the toffee sauce icing. For the cake 2 organic brown bananas 100g salted butter 250g unrefined sugar 3 small eggs, separated 120ml buttermilk or yoghurt 200g light wholegrain spelt flour 2 tsp baking powder 1 tsp baking soda For the toffee sauce icing 100g salted butter 150g muscovado sugar 40-50ml whole milk 200-250g icing sugar – I make my own by blending muscovado or unrefined sugar to a powder in a high-speed upright blender Peel the bananas, set aside the fruit, and soak the skins in cold water for an hour, replacing the water twice during that time. Drain, put the skins in a saucepan, add fresh water to cover, then bring to a boil and simmer for five minutes. Drain, then blend the skins to a puree, loosening the mix, if need be, with some of the cooking liquid. Cream the softened butter and unrefined sugar until light and fluffy. Beat in the egg yolks, reserving the whites for now, then add the pureed banana peel and the buttermilk or yoghurt, followed by the spelt flour, baking powder and baking soda. Whisk the egg whites to soft peaks, then fold into the cake batter. Divide the cake mix between two greased and lined 18cm round cake tins. Cut the reserved brown bananas in half lengthways and lay them cut side up on top of the batter. Bake in a 200C (180C fan)/390F/gas 6 oven for 35 minutes, until a skewer comes out clean, then remove and leave to cool. To make the frosting, if using, melt the butter and muscovado, stirring to dissolve the sugar. Add the whole milk and bring to a boil, stirring constantly. Leave to cool a little, then stir in the icing sugar. The mixture should now be spreadable; if not, add more icing sugar until it is. Unmould the cakes, put one on a platter and spread a third of the icing over the top. Put the second cake on top, and spread the remaining icing over the top and sides, allowing it to drip down, then slice and serve.The vaquita, the world’s tiniest marine mammal, has long teetered on the brink of extinction. The population of porpoises marked with black ringed eyes and smiling, upturned mouths has dwindled by a devastating 99% over the last decade. Now scientists say their future is more precarious than ever, after a recent survey found fewer than 10 individuals left in the waters of their limited home range between Baja California and Mexico. But some say there is still hope for the endangered species that has persisted against the odds. “We are looking for a needle in the haystack – but we know the needle is there,” says Barbara Taylor, a marine conservation biologist for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, noting how researchers can still hear their high-pitched calls and echolocation clicks, collected on auditory monitoring equipment placed throughout their habitat. Taylor has tracked endangered species that have been pushed out of existence before and she’s determined to stop the small, shy, cetacean from joining that list. The task won’t be easy. Vaquitas continue to face a host of threats, including a lucrative illegal fishing industry, political apathy and conservation measures that have been largely ineffective. Dangers from the fishing industry Vaquitas share the Gulf of California with highly coveted sea creatures including the totoaba, an endangered fish with perceived medicinal properties that retails in China’s black market for thousands of dollars. Vaquitas, alongside sea turtles and whales, can easily become entangled in the massive mesh netting known as “gillnets” used by totoaba poachers and local fishers. The US has sought to put pressure on Mexico over the issue. On Thursday, the Office of the United States Trade Representative announced that it was requesting consultations with the Mexican government over whether environmental commitments made under the United States-Mexico-Canada Agreement – which replaced Nafta in 2020 – that were intended to protect vaquitas had fallen short. The US has also enacted embargoes on the Mexican seafood industry, including banning importation of seafood typically caught in gillnets in vaquita territory. Last year, the US also stopped importing all Mexican wild-caught shrimp citing concerns over sea turtle protections. The Mexican government has outlawed totoaba fishing and made the use of gillnets in the area illegal, but few of the promised penalties have been carried out. There have also been efforts made to compensate fishers who replace the dangerous gear but the funds were not equitably distributed, frustrating fishers who were left in the lurch. Mexican president Andrés Manuel López Obrador, who oversaw a policy reversal and rolled back enforcement in the protected area has spoken out about sanctions against the Mexican seafood industry and international interventions. Meanwhile, as enforcement from authorities waned, illegal fishing has flourished. Backed by the cartels, the expansion of the totoaba market has coincided with vaquita numbers dropping roughly 50% annually. International advocates have struggled to shift the tides. “When we were out there the last three times it was gillnets everywhere,” Taylor says of survey trips that took place in 2018, 2019, and earlier this year. Without strong consequences or enough compensation, there’s little motivation to change. Called the “cocaine of the sea”, totoaba prices far outpace anything fishers could make in above-board markets. Cartels have cashed in, further increasing the incentives to ignore the regulations. “There was no one that was trying to hide anything from us,” Taylor said. Conservation versus the local economy Even those who appreciate the danger vaquitas are in have raised questions about the value of protecting them at the expense of local livelihoods. Local economies and culture are closely entwined with fisheries in the vaquita range. Even before the totoaba market exploded, gillnets were used to catch blue shrimp and other species that dwell in the biodiverse waters. “The government still hasn’t given us a solution or an effective way to support our families without going out to fish illegally,” Ramón Franco Díaz, president of a federation of fishing cooperatives in San Felipe, told the New York Times last autumn. “The children need food and clothes.” “For many of the local community the vaquita is a nuisance that the sooner it goes extinct the better, because then they can poach unhampered,” said Vanda Felbab-Brown, a senior fellow in the Center for Security, Strategy, and Technology in the Foreign Policy program at Brookings. She noted that these issues have existed in the Gulf of California for decades, predating the spike in overseas demand for totoaba, and highlights the “enormous challenge” inherent in environmental conservation. “The issue of how to fund conservation - paying communities not to poach - is something that we are really going to be confronting at a greater scale,” she said. Vaquitas have never been particularly abundant. They tend to produce calves only once every two years and it takes decades for them to mature and reproduce. But Felbab-Brown says that the absence of law enforcement in the area has only exacerbated the issue. “The sense is that anything goes,” she said. “Now in a situation where we have 7 or 8 vaquitas left.” Without local support and enforcement, environmentalists say it will be even more difficult to pull the species back from the brink, especially now that time is running out. “The reason it really is not working is there isn’t the governance to enforce another way of fishing and to support and compensate fishers who fish in a way that would allow vaquita to survive,” says Francis Gulland, Commissioner at the US Marine Mammal Commission, who added that working to get buy-in from the community is a far more effective strategy than attempting to enforce top-down bans. It’s a lesson she hopes can be learned in time to spare other species, which could soon also be subject to precipitous decline. “We tend to not pay attention until we are in total crisis mode,” she says, noting that conservation efforts didn’t really start until there were just a few hundred vaquitas left. When the population fell further, advocates attempted to catch vaquitas to relocate them to protected areas, but the program was promptly stopped after it resulted in one vaquita’s death. “If there had been 10 thousand animals we would have time to learn what to do to improve the techniques,” Gulland said. “They could have been moved to a protected area but it was all too late.” There is still time to save the vaquita, she says, but not much. “If we can prevent them from being caught in nets,” she says, “they will survive.”A Black FedEx driver who was allegedly shot at by a white father and son in Mississippi while delivering packages said he “can definitely see the similarities” between his case and that of Ahmaud Arbery, a 25-year-old Black man who was murdered in 2020 by three white men while jogging in Georgia. “Because Ahmaud Arbery didn’t survive to speak up for himself, so I want to take that upon myself to do that for me and him as well,” said D’Monterrio Gibson, 24, in an interview with CNN on Friday. The father and son, Brandon and Gregory Case, were reportedly arrested and charged this week over the incident. According to Gibson, he was delivering packages on an evening route in Brookhaven, Mississippi, on 24 January when the two men allegedly chased him in a truck for several minutes and fired at least five shots towards his van. “They came out of nowhere,” he said at a news conference on Thursday. “Even if [the van] was unmarked, civilians still can’t take the law into their own hands … I’m thinking this is a racism thing,” he added. According to the Washington Post, Gregory Case was driving the pickup truck and attempted to cut Gibson off as he was trying to leave. Gibson then swerved around the truck to get out of the neighborhood. Gibson described the alleged attack in an interview with the Mississippi Free press. “I drive down about two or three houses,” Gibson said. “There’s another guy [Brandon Case] standing in the middle of the street pointing a gun at my windows and signaling me to stop with his hands, as well as mouthing the word, ‘Stop.’ I shake my head no, I hide behind the steering wheel, and I swerve around him as well. As I swerve around him, he starts firing shots into my vehicle.” He added that when he called the police to report the shootings, a dispatcher interrupted him and asked if he had been on Junior Trail, the street where he was delivering the packages. “I said, ‘Yes.’ He was like, ‘Well I just got a call of a suspicious person at this address,” Gibson recalled at Thursday’s press briefing. He replied to the dispatcher and said: “Sir, I’m not a suspicious person. I work for FedEx. I was just doing my job.” The Cases were arrested on 1 February, over a week after the incident. According to court records reviewed by the Washington Post, Brandon Case, 35, was charged with feloniously attempting to cause bodily harm with a firearm and a deadly weapon. His 58-year-old father, Gregory Case, was charged with unlawfully and feloniously conspiring to commit aggravated assault. The father and son were released from jail the next day on bail. Despite the charges, Gibson and his lawyers argue that the local police are not taking the case seriously and are calling for a federal hate crimes investigation. “Some semblance of justice was served, but we’re disappointed since we think the charges should be attempted murder because that’s what it was,” said Carlos E Moore, one of Gibson’s lawyers. Gibson said he was initially reluctant to speak out about the incident until he was reminded of Arbery’s murder – which also involved a white father and son - and similar incidents over the years in which Black people were killed while simply going about their lives. “I thought about all the people who ain’t here to speak [for themselves],” Gibson told reporters. “I’m just looking at everything way different now … You can just die doing your job.” The Cases and their attorneys have yet to comment publicly on the situation. In a statement to the Associated Press, FedEx condemned the incident, saying, “FedEx takes situations of this nature very seriously, and we are shocked by this criminal act against our team member. ... The safety of our team members is our top priority, and we remain focused on his wellbeing. We will continue to support Mr Gibson as we cooperate with investigating authorities.”Matching extreme weather events to voting patterns has revealed that in Europe people who have experienced flooding, heatwaves and forest fires are more likely to vote green. This trend has developed over six European elections between 1994 and 2019, a period when climate change has gone from a theoretical threat to voters to many having experienced devastating events not previously seen in their lifetimes. The realisation that urgent action is needed for climate mitigation and adaptation has led voters to support green party candidates. Greens have done better wherever the calamities have been worst. The trend is more marked in the north and west of the EU where the climate is more moderate and colder, presumably because extremes have become more noticeable. The researchers noted that the tendency to vote green was enhanced where the population was generally fairly affluent and economic conditions were good. When the economic conditions worsened, this factor again assumed greater importance in voting choices. The European elections are by proportional representation, so that minority parties, which the greens are in all of the 34 countries involved, will get some seats even if their overall vote is relatively small. Currently greens hold 69 seats out of 705 in the European parliament.US president Joe Biden and his Russian counterpart Vladimir Putin will speak on Saturday as Western nations warned that a war in Ukraine could ignite at any moment. The US warned on Friday of the “very distinct possibility” of a Russian invasion of Ukraine in the next few days and told all remaining Americans to leave the country in the next 48 hours. On Saturday, Biden will speak with Putin by phone. Putin requested the telephone call between the leaders to take place on Monday, a White House official said, but Biden wanted to conduct it sooner as Washington detailed increasingly vivid accounts of a possible attack on Ukraine. Ahead of the discussion, Australia and New Zealand became the latest countries to urge their citizens to leave Ukraine as soon as possible, joining Britain, Japan, Latvia, Norway and the Netherlands. Israel said it was evacuating relatives of embassy staff. The US is also set to evacuate its embassy in Kyiv. The Associated Press reported the state department will announce early Saturday that all American staff at the Kyiv embassy will be required to leave the country ahead of a feared Russian invasion. The department had earlier ordered families of US embassy staffers in Kyiv to leave, but left it to the discretion of nonessential personnel if they wanted to depart. Diplomatic sources said that the US president had told allied leaders in a call that the Russian leader had taken a decision to go ahead with an invasion, but Jake Sullivan, the national security adviser, said: “We have not seen anything come to us that says a final decision has been taken, [that] the go order has been given.” “I will say that the way that he has built up his forces and put them in place, along with the other indicators that we have collected through intelligence, makes it clear to us that there is a very distinct possibility that Russia will choose to act militarily, and there is reason to believe that that could happen on a reasonably swift timeframe,” Sullivan said. “Now, we can’t pinpoint the day at this point, and we can’t pinpoint the hour but what we can say is that there is a credible prospect that a Russian military action would take place, even before the end of the Olympics.” The Winter Olympics in China close on 20 February. “We continue to see signs of Russian escalation, including new forces arriving at the Ukrainian border,” Sullivan told reporters. “We are in the window when an invasion could begin at any time.” US secretary of state Antony Blinken described the situation as at a “pivotal moment” and said he would speak to Russian counterpart Sergei Lavrov on Saturday. “If Russia is genuinely interested in resolving this crisis of its own making through diplomacy and dialogue, we’re prepared to do that,” he said. “But it must take place in the context of de-escalation. So far, we’ve only seen escalation from Moscow,” he said. “This is a pivotal moment. We’re prepared for whatever should happen,” he said. Biden has told other Nato and EU leaders that the US believes Putin has decided to carry out an invasion of Ukraine, which could happen in the next few days, according to diplomatic sources. Biden’s call to allies followed a situation room meeting at the White House to discuss the latest intelligence on the Russian military buildup, and on Putin’s thinking. “Practical things will start to happen on the ground as a result of this decision, but that doesn’t mean that Putin couldn’t still row back,” a European diplomat said, insisting it was not too late to deter the Russian leader. “There are further decision points along the line.” Sullivan said US citizens still in Ukraine should leave in the next two days. “If you stay you are assuming risk with no guarantee that there will be any other opportunity to leave, and there is no prospect of a US military evacuation in the event of a Russian invasion,” Sullivan said. “If a Russian attack on Ukraine proceeds, it is likely to begin with aerial bombing and missile attacks that could obviously kill civilians without regard to their nationality. A subsequent ground invasion would involve the onslaught of a massive force with virtually no notice. Communications to arrange a departure could be severed and commercial transit halted.” Russia wants guarantees from the West, including a promise of no missile deployments near its borders, no Nato membership for Ukraine, and a scaling back of the alliance’s military infrastructure. The West describes Russia’s main demands as “non-starters” but is willing to talk about arms control and confidence-building steps. Late on Friday the Russian foreign ministry accused Western countries of spreading false information with help from the media, in order to distract attention from their own aggressive actions. The White House said Biden was calling transatlantic leaders “to discuss our shared concerns about Russia’s continued buildup of military forces around Ukraine, and continued coordination on both diplomacy and deterrence”. A European diplomat said that the US had asked for the urgent call with Nato allies and the heads of the EU council and commission, to share the new intelligence. Western intelligence agencies believe that the most likely goal of a Russian offensive would be to surround Kyiv and force regime change. A number of invasion scenarios are considered possible, but there is a prevailing belief that any military intervention could see a lightning attack, aimed at encircling Kyiv, with the intention of forcing the collapse of President Zelenskiy’s government, and trying to install a pro-Russian regime without urban warfare. They also believe that the signal for such an invasion would be a false-flag attack, possibly including allegations of Ukrainian use of chemical weapons, that would be used as a pretext for Russian intervention. Within minutes of Biden’s call, the UK Foreign Office urged British citizens in Ukraine “to leave now via commercial means while they remain available”. The Russian embassy in Kiev said it was considering telling non-essential staff to leave, according to Tass news agency. Other embassies stepped up evacuations on Friday. According to Walla News, Israel ordered family members of diplomatic staff out of the country, and the Kyiv Post reported that the US had called for American members of the Ukraine monitoring mission run by the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe to leave the country by Tuesday. Vice-Admiral Nils Andreas Stensønes, the head of the Norwegian intelligence service, said Russia now had 150,000 troops massed around Ukraine, and said the decision on whether to attack rested with Vladimir Putin. “Now it is first and foremost up to President Putin if he chooses to do so,” Stensønes said. “It is difficult to say whether it is probable or not probable, because it is solely up to the Russian president to make that decision.” He added that Russians “have all they need to carry everything out, from a minor invasion in the east to minor attacks here and there in Ukraine, or a complete invasion, with, possibly, an occupation of all or parts of Ukraine”. Western intelligence agencies largely agree that Putin has now put in place enough troops to attempt an invasion, a sentiment reflected in warnings in the last 24 hours from Biden and the UK prime minister, Boris Johnson. He emphasised on Thursday that any invasion would amount to a massive miscalculation by Putin because Ukraine would “fight and they will resist very strongly”. . The raised alert follows the failure of several diplomatic initiatives to lead to a breakthrough. Reports suggested that much of Emmanuel Macron’s more than five hours of talks with Putin in Moscow on Monday, was taken up by lengthy historical lectures from the Russian leader, with very little substance on current events. Accounts from German officials on “Normandy format” talks in Berlin between Russian, Ukrainian, German and French officials had been difficult and offered no prospects of defusing tensions. The German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, is due to visit Moscow to see Putin on Tuesday, but his spokesman said he was taking no new diplomatic initiatives with him. The head of the foreign affairs committee in the Bundestag, Michael Roth, a former minister, said on Twitter: “Russia has effectively annexed Belarus militarily. What are being called “exercises” is really the encirclement of Ukraine, and a concrete threat to Poland and the Baltic States. The situation remains dangerous.” The Associated Press and Reuters contributed to this reportThe United States plans to re-establish an embassy in Solomon Islands, a senior US state department official said, as Washington seeks to beef up its presence in a region where China is rapidly expanding its influence. Secretary of state Antony Blinken is set to announce the opening of a new embassy on the Pacific island state during a visit to nearby Fiji – 29 years after the United States downgraded its diplomatic presence in Honiara. The move comes just a few months after riots in the island chain of 800,000 people in November when protesters tried to storm parliament and then went on a three-day rampage, torching much of the capital Honiara’s Chinatown. The unrest was sparked by opposition to veteran prime minister Manasseh Sogavare and partly fuelled by poverty, unemployment and inter-island rivalries, but anti-China sentiment also played a role. The United States closed its embassy in the Solomons Island capital in 1993 and is now represented by a consulate there, with an embassy in the Papua New Guinea capital of Port Moresby. Blinken flew to Fiji after a meeting in Melbourne of the United States, Japan, India and Australia, at which the so-called Quad pledged to deepen cooperation to ensure an Indo-Pacific region free from “coercion,” a thinly veiled swipe at China’s economic and military expansion. In a briefing on the flight, a senior US administration official told travelling reporters that “there are very clear indications that (China) want to create military relationships in the Pacific”. “The most pressing case right now is what’s going on in the Solomon Islands. With Chinese security personnel bucking up an increasingly besieged president in a way that has caused a lot of anxieties across the region,” the official said. China said in December it would send police advisers and riot gear to Solomon Islands as foreign peacekeepers began leaving the Pacific nation after being deployed during the deadly protests. A subplot to November’s unrest was Sogavare’s efforts to forge closer ties with Beijing after abruptly breaking off the island’s longtime ties with Taiwan in 2019. China balks at any official exchanges between other countries and self-ruled Taiwan, which it sees as its own territory awaiting reunification. The Solomons government said in December it had accepted Beijing’s offer of six “liaison officers” to train its police force and equipment including shields, helmets, batons and other “non-lethal” gear. In recent years China has stepped up pressure to isolate Taiwan internationally, getting eight nations to switch diplomatic recognition from Taipei to Beijing since 2016. A diplomat at the US embassy in Port Moresby said the reopening of the mission in the Solomons Islands would build on US efforts to place more diplomatic staff throughout the region. The aim was to “further engage with our Pacific neighbours, connect US programs and resources with needs on the ground, and build people-to-people ties,” the diplomat said. The US government had provided vaccines and other help to Solomon Islands in combating the Covid-19 pandemic, the diplomat said. The US Congress and the White House will need to approve the embassy proposal. The Associated Press, Reuters and Agence-France Press contributed to this reportCicero, Leonardo da Vinci and Shakespeare all thought that eyes were the windows to the soul, but with due respect to the big dogs, I beg to differ. It is shoes which tell you everything. Hype trainers worn with a bland suit; teetering heels worn in defiance of practicality; scuffed ballet pumps; haute hiking boots or polished brogues – shoes hold the clues to what you do all day and how you get there, to whether you really want to be at the party and who you are going home with. If you are wearing secondhand New Balance 550 sneakers sourced from Depop then I know, and I mean know, that you take your flat white with plant-based milk (pea, having moved on from oat) and are considering a star-sign tattoo. No offence to these creatives, but you can’t tell that from gazing into a pair of blue eyes. But the shoe currently worn both by anyone who is anyone and by everyone who is everyone else isn’t a “shoe” at all. Right now, it is all about slippers. In two decades of writing about every fashion trend you can imagine, I doubt I’ve ever written about slippers, but this most humble of footwear has finally left the fireside and entered the zeitgeist. For reference, see Jennifer Lopez at LAX dressed in the modern jet-set uniform of oversized oatmeal loungewear and designer sunglasses teamed not with Nikes or Ugg boots, but with Gucci’s furry slippers. Or Kendall Jenner’s new year weekend selfies, in North Face Thermoball indoor-outdoor puffer slipper boots (also known as sluffers). Net-a-Porter is leaning into the trend with Balenciaga’s creamy recycled faux-shearling logo-ed backless mules for £550, while Pangaia’s Jersey Sliders (£70), in a mix of recycled and organic cotton mix, come in a very non-pipe-and-slippers shade of flamingo pink. Urban Outfitters, retail’s spiritual home-from-home for Gen Z, has Ugg’s cult Fluff Yeah oversized chubby fur slippers (£60) in panther print or tie-dye. Let’s not forget either that Uggs were the shoe of choice for the late, great fashion visionary Andre Leon Talley, inside and out. At first glance, this looks like a world which has forsaken fashion for good. Karl Lagerfeld, who thought that sweatpants were a sign of having given up on life, must be turning in his grave at how lockdown’s home comforts have left us with zero tolerance for clothing that isn’t soft and squishy. Once upon a time, supermodels wouldn’t get out of bed for less than £10,000; these days, Kendall and co insist on being swaddled in cashmere, shearling or down-filled nylon at all times. Zoom having broken the fourth wall that once separated our public-facing selves from what we wore at home, we are comfortable being seen in any old thing – as long as it’s comfortable. But lean in a little closer, and you see that these slippers are not anti-fashion, but nu-fashion. All the major shoe trends of the past decade have been filtered into footwear you can wear when your outfit is accessorised by the telly remote rather than an evening bag. Furry shoes? They’ve been around since Phoebe Philo put fluff-lined pool sliders on the Celine catwalk in 2014, darling. Backless silhouettes? Some of us started wearing them in 2015 when Alessandro Michele did backless loafers in his first Gucci collection. JW Anderson’s cult padded crossover slides, a long-time front-row favourite, gave us the cartoonish proportions now found in flouncy high-street slippers. And what are North Face Thermoballs, if not puffer jackets for your feet? Wear your slippers with pride. Right now, they are as fashion forward as feet can get. Styling: Make-up: Delilah Blakeney using Charlotte Tilbury. Hair: Shukeel Murtaza at Only Agency using Bumble &amp; Bumble. Styling assistant: Peter Bevan. Models: Kimberley and Trese-San at Mrs Robinson, and Aishwarya at Body London. Clothing: Top picture, on tiled floor, from left: marble dress, £229, whistles.com, sheepskin moccasins, £48, thesmallhome.co.uk; slip dress from a selection, rag-bone.com, two-stripes sheepskin slippers, £80, mou-online.com; animal spot skirt, £115, kitristudio.com, shearling slip-ons, £117, The Sleeper at net-a-porter.com Sofa picture, from left: shirt, £85, withnothingunderneath.com, jumper, £125; jigsaw-online.com, jeans, £40, weekday.com, sheepskin moccasins, £48, thesmallhome.co.uk; skirt, £279, and top, £179, uk.sandro-paris.com; necklace, £90, mejuri.com, shearling slip-ons, £117, The Sleeper at net-a-porter.com; jumper, £165, and track pants, £165, ksubi.uk, blazer, £220, from a selection at samsoe.com, socks, £19, redwinglondon.com; scrunchy, £10, stinegoya.com, two-stripes sheepskin slippers, £80, mou-online.com Stair picture: top, £75, baumundpferdgarten.com, slip dress from a selection at rag-bone.com, scrunchy, £15, itsrooper.co.uk, socks, £19.50, falke.com, Thermoball tent mules, £45, thenorthface.co.uk; animal spot skirt, £115, kitristudio.com, cardigan set, £228, thereformation.com; necklace, £180, monicavinader.com; earrings, £85, missoma.com, socks, £7.99 set of two, sockshop.co.uk, beatnik slides, £90, reebok.co.ukThe questions 1 Which king of Corinth had a proverbially fruitless task? 2 What winter sport is played at a bonspiel? 3 Which ceramicist produced Bizarre ware? 4 What is the highest mountain in the southern hemisphere? 5 Who was first played by Pal in a 1943 film? 6 Which Booker nominee has been called the “poet laureate of Twitter”? 7 The great black-backed is the largest of which bird family? 8 Which lumberjack created the Grand Canyon? What links: 9 Caret; dinkus; guillemet; obelus; pilcrow? 10 Kookaburra; nitrous oxide; Charles Penrose; David Bowie; Frans Hals? 11 Picric acid; magenta; mauveine; Congo red? 12 Wellington Beehive; Coventry Cathedral; Hyde Park Barracks? 13 Vickers; Brinell; Rockwell; Leeb; Mohs? 14 BBC; Soviet Union; Irish Free State? 15 Hay fever; volcanic activity; egg-eating mammals; asteroid strike? The answers 1 Sisyphus. 2 Curling. 3 Clarice Cliff. 4 Aconcagua (Argentina). 5 Lassie (Lassie Come Home). 6 Patricia Lockwood. 7 Gull. 8 Paul Bunyan (in legend). 9 Typographical symbols. 10 Laughing: L jackass (nickname); L gas; L Policeman song; L Gnome song; L Cavalier portrait. 11 Early synthetic dyes. 12 Designed by Basil Spence. 13 Tests/scales measuring hardness. 14 100th anniversaries this year: founded in 1922. 15 Suggested causes of dinosaur extinction.For the past 12 years Anthony Welch and his partner Theresa have been living a Robinson Crusoe life alone on a South Pacific island mostly untouched by humanity. Welch, a retired British property investor, hopes the tranquility will soon be shattered by 21,000 cryptocurrency investors he is trying to convince to move to his island and form a regulation-free “crypto utopia”. Under Welch’s plan, the 3 million sq metre (32 million sq ft) island, which is part of the Vanuatu archipelago between Australia and Fiji, would be transformed from 90% undisturbed rainforest into a “sustainable smart city”, filled with multistorey apartment blocks and offices for cryptocurrency investors from around the world. Welch, who has renamed the island from its native name Lataro to Satoshi (in a nod to Satoshi Nakamoto the pseudonym of the person who invented bitcoin), has joined forces with cryptocurrency evangelists to create a “blockchain-based democracy” and “the crypto capital of the world”. However, Welch will first have to unwind his previous marketing of the island as a “wildlife nature reserve” home to rare giant crabs. In his previous attempt to sell the island for $12m (£9m), Lataro is described as an ecological paradise “covered in lush rainforests, together with a wonderful array of flora and fauna that’s been here for thousands of years undisturbed and will surely make anyone believe they have gone back in time”. A video promoting the island for sale in 2017 boasts that the 4 miles of “pristine coral reef surrounding the island is a marine conservation area” that “teems with beautiful fish and coral life”. It says only a handful of people have ever dived at the reef and “most parts of it have never been explored”. The Welches have previously petitioned the Vanuatu government to designate the island as a wildlife reserve to “prevent the extinction” of the rare coconut crab. “The ultimate goal is to re-establish the breed strongly on the island,” Theresa said. A website describing the couple’s efforts to establish the wildlife reserve was deleted soon after the Guardian approached Welch for comment. He said the reserve was “voluntary” and one that he could “dismantle at any time” to allow for the building of the crypto city. “This was the last place with coconut crabs, they [the local population] had decimated them absolutely everywhere else on Espiritu Santo [Vanuatu’s largest island nearby],” Welch told the Guardian. “We formed the reserve to try to stop them decimating them here to get the numbers back up … the government department for the environment have supported us creating a wildlife refuge here.” The Satoshi island project is the latest in a series of schemes aimed at bringing cryptocurrency fanatics out from behind the blockchain in their bedrooms and into real-world community in small island states. The president of Palau, another Pacific island nation about 3,000 miles to the northeast of Vanuatu, has launched plans to become “the world’s first government-backed national stablecoin” by the end of the year. President Surangel Whipps Jr says the country has partnered with Ripple, a US cryptocurrency firm whose executives have been charged by the Securities and Exchange Commission of stealing $1.3bn worth of the tokens, “to create a national digital currency, providing the citizens of Palau with greater financial access”. Plans to establish Cryptoland on an island in Fiji – where investors were told they would “enjoy a first-class crypto lifestyle” – collapsed earlier this month when the promoters failed to buy the island. Welch says Satoshi Island will succeed where Cryptoland failed because he and his partners own the island, and claims the development plans have the support of both the Vanuatu government and the local community. However, the Vanuatu government failed to respond to requests for comment, and Welch was unable to provide contact details for any current local residents. “We’re trying to build a community,” Welch said in an interview over satellite link to the island which currently has no mains electricity, water, phone or internet connection. “We’re not trying to develop and make a profit.” He said a team of cryptocurrency evangelists who had been searching the world for a location to form a “crypto society” approached Welch after seeing his island advertised for sale for $12m on private island real estate website. Welch took the island off the market and entered into a complex partnership with Hong Kong-based architect James Law, Australian crypto entrepreneur Denys Troyak and Daniel Agius, chief operating officer of the Vanuatu Investment Migration Bureau, an agency that sells Vanuatu citizenship. “The crypto paradise they want to build is a really cool idea, and a wonderful use of a place we have been able to live on for 12 years,” Welch said. “The team had been working to find a location for some time, the key issue was trying to find a government that would … permit a society to exist on crypto transactions. Most countries in the world want to collect tax, and they therefore don’t want crypto transactions happening because they can’t monitor what’s happening. Vanuatu has no income taxes of any sort.” The trio are promising 21,000 investors the island will “become home for crypto professionals and enthusiasts, with a goal to be considered the crypto capital of the world”. “Life on the island will be an experience like no other, giving the crypto community a way to live and work amongst like-minded people in a place designed around the industry we love,” they say on a website promoting the island. Successful applicants wanting to live on the island will be granted with a non-fungible token (NFT) granting them “Satoshi Island citizenship”. However, the small print details that they will also have to gain Vanuatu citizenship to live on the island. Vanuatu citizenship costs $130,000 and allows “golden passport” visa-free travel to 129 countries, including the UK and all Schengen countries in Europe. The country is heavily promoting its “citizenship by investment” programme despite concerns that the scheme has been exploited by fugitives, politicians and disgraced businesspeople. A Guardian investigation last year found that among the 2,200 foreign nationals granted citizenship in 2020 were a Syrian businessman with US sanctions against his businesses, a suspected North Korean politician, an Italian businessman accused of extorting the Vatican and South African brothers accused of a $3.6bn cryptocurrency heist. Vanuatu this month appointed Mayfair-based citizenship marketing firm CS Global Partners to attract more to buy Vanuatu nationality, which is granted with an online “oath swearing ceremony” and does not require the new citizen to ever visit the country. Selling citizenships equates to almost 50% of Vanuatu’s total annual revenue, according to the International Monetary Fund (IMF). • This article was amended on 12 February 2022. The island is 3 million sq metres (32m sq ft), not 3,000 sq metres (32,000 sq ft) as stated in an earlier version.Several animal charities offer help with vet bills to pet owners who receive benefits. Among the best known are PDSA and Blue Cross, which both run a number of pet hospitals around the country. PDSA offers free veterinary treatments and medications to pet owners who live within the catchment area of one of its hospitals and are in receipt of at least one of the following means-tested benefits: housing benefit, council tax support or universal credit with a housing element. Only one pet per household qualifies for free help, although additional pets will qualify for the charity’s low-cost service. This offers cheap treatments and medicines, and is also available to pet owners who live near a hospital and receive benefits such as working tax credits, pension credit and the disability living allowance. Retired state pensioners who live in properties in council tax bands A to D may also qualify for help. The charity says its low-cost prices are typically 20% to 30% cheaper than private vet practices. Blue Cross offers free treatments – although it asks for a voluntary donation – to pet owners who live with the catchment area of its hospitals and pet care clinics. To qualify they must receive either universal credit (where there has not been a reduction in payment because of work or other income such as savings), income support, income-based jobseeker’s allowance, the income-related employment and support allowance or pension credit. Pet owners in receipt of other benefits may be eligible for reduced-price vet care. The primary focus of the RSPCA is to rescue and rehabilitate animals who have been cruelly treated. RSPCA branches may, however, in rare circumstances, provide welfare assistance to pet owners who can provide evidence of financial hardship who receive at least one state benefit. However, payment will only be offered when the procedure will result in a definite improvement in the pet’s welfare and he or she will have a good chance to recover and “live a long life”. In very limited circumstances, the charity may also assist pet owners with a contribution if their pet requires emergency treatment and they have exhausted all other avenues. To donate to PDSA, visit pdsa.org.uk/donate. To donate to Blue Cross, visit bluecross.org.uk/support-us. To donate to the RSPCA, visit rspca.org.uk/getinvolved/donate/onlineIt promises to be the celebrity separation of the year, unfolding in a dizzying hybrid of IRL (In Real Life) and virtual spheres. The epic split between Kim Kardashian and Kanye West, with its generous cast of plus-ones, parenting responsibilities, brand fortunes, a family TV franchise, political and racial trolling, is a perfect divorce for the Instagram age. The couple’s split appeared to be progressing smoothly enough, with West stepping in to dress Kardashian for TV and social balls. But with the introduction of new love interests, battle lines have been drawn. As ever, the couple’s children find themselves in a no man’s land in a parental trench war grinding back and forth. It began, after months of trailing previews, in February last year when Kardashian, 41, central star of the reality show Keeping Up With the Kardashians, underwear and beauty entrepreneur, and a certified criminal justice lawyer, filed to end a nearly seven-year marriage to West, 44, the rapper, record producer and Yeezy fashion designer, who recently changed his name to Ye. The couple have four children: North, Saint, Chicago and Psalm. At the time, Ye was at their Cody, Wyoming, compound; Kardashian at her spread, en famille, in the Hidden Hills of the San Fernando Valley, California. “He goes and moves to a different state every year,” she fretted. “I have to be, like together, so I can raise the kids.” Both parents have fortunes estimated at $1.8bn, though Kardashian’s Skims – initially fronted by Kate Moss – was recently valued at $3.2bn. “For so long, I did what made other people happy,” she told Vogue this week. “And I think in the last two years I decided I’m going to make myself happy. And that feels really good.” This week, she told Vogue her 40s were about “being Team Me”. But this is no easy split. Ye said he’s owed an apology from his in-laws for failing to give him the address to his daughter Chicago’s birthday party that included an allegation of kidnapping. The post has since been deleted. Then he asked his followers what recourse he had when their eight-year-old daughter North was “put on TikTok against my will”. “This is the kind of thing that really has affected my health for the longest and I’m just not playing,” he said. “I’m taking control of my narrative this year. I’m being the best father – the Ye version of a father – and I’m not finna let this happen.” Inevitably, whereas previous divorces of the century unfolded in society columns and gossip magazines, the Kardashian/Ye tussle hit social media. West was unfollowed on Instagram by Kourtney, Khloé and Rob Kardashian, by model Kendall Jenner and makeup billionaire Kylie Jenner, before Kim addressed the TikTok dispute directly. “Divorce is difficult enough on our children, and Ye’s obsession with trying to control and manipulate our situation so negatively and publicly is only causing further pain for all,” she said. She also made an appeal for privacy. The TikTok dispute has even worked its way into the political realm. Candace Owens, the conservative commentator, said Kardashian was “wrong on this one”. “The psychological effects of social media on young girls is real and documented. It’s actually Kanye that is trying to protect his daughter in this regard and Kim is spinning this as ‘obsession’ and ‘control’. There are other creative outlets for kids,” Owens tweeted. That, in turn, prompted Azealia Banks to come out punching for Team Kim. “Kanye is an abusive psychopath, it’s beyond mental illness,” she said. “Stop trying to help him and start trying to help the poor child that he keeps on trying to embarrass and abuse publicly to garner sympathy for his ashy ass.” To mere mortals, it can be baffling and confusing: a hall of online smoke, mirrors, likes and unfollows. “We’re talking about just two larger-than-life entities, who seemed like a perfect match who both love, cultivate and curate attention,” says Maiysha Kai, culture editor at the Grio. “They’re four children in and one marriage down and it’s unfortunate or unrealistic to think that given the platform the Kardashians built, their children would never be part of that.” To Kai, Ye’s positioning has a clear subtext – one familiar, perhaps, to many successful women seeking freedom from a husband. “I build you up, I make you into this thing that I want you to be, and then when you step outside of that I am angry and I will potentially lash out at you. It looks like he’s trying to reclaim some power in a situation that is largely out of his control.” “Out of control” is a description often applied to Ye in recent years. He has variously presented himself as a Trump supporter, and seemed to suggest in an interview that slavery was “a choice”. (He later apologized.) He made an unlikely and short-lived bid for president as a Christian revivalist. Ye said he and his wife considered terminating their first pregnancy – but didn’t after he had a “vision from God”. He’s also spoken of a bipolar disorder diagnosis. “Some in the Black community feel he’s racializing the situation and situated himself as a disempowered Black father in relation to a powerful white family,” says Kai. “He said slavery was a choice, right? So maybe he can’t have it both ways.” The Kardashian-Ye battle, then, is for personal and narrative control. Ye, an emotionally erratic musical, styling and branding visionary, played a large part in shaping her brand. He helped channel her LA style toward minimalism and advised her to simplify. “He expressed that there were too many branding situations,” she told the Wall Street Journal. “He’s always super simple. I really wanted to condense my beauty brands. I wanted one place, one website, where everything can live.” But there’s a branding and personal chasm now where Kardashian, with 302 million Instagram followers, meets West, with 11 million. It wasn’t always that way. As recently as last October, during a Saturday Night Live hosting gig, Kardashian was upbeat about the split and in praise of her soon-to-be ex. “I married the best rapper of all time. Not only that, he’s the richest Black man in America, a talented, legit genius, who gave me four incredible kids,” she said. Kardashian joked about her “movie” – a 2007 sex tape Kim Kardashian, Superstar, with her then-boyfriend Ray J: “I didn’t know it was even premiering.” But she could not resists a dig. Her divorce, she added, came down to one thing: “His personality.” But now both sides are also playing the field: in ways that only celebrities can. They flaunt high-profile dalliances with fellow bold-face names, insuring more coverage, more clicks, more shares, more branding. Kardashian stepped out with Pete Davidson, the comedian and Saturday Night Live regular. The pair have been spotted on dates and he calls her his girlfriend; her reciprocation is unknown. Well-timed promotional gloss is, of course, part of the Kardashian conglomerate’s branding genius, accompanied by reality or something designed to look like it, with the endgame of brand building in the most lucrative sectors of the luxury economy. There have been recent stumbles, though. Kardashian had her knuckles rapped for initially naming her underwear line brand Kimono, and for promoting a minor cryptocurrency, EthereumMax. Kardashian and boxer Floyd Mayweather have been named in a US lawsuit alleging they encouraged followers to join “the EthereumMax Community” and that the token itself was a “pump and dump” scheme that deceived investors. Charles Randell, head of the UK’s Financial Conduct Authority, said in a speech to an economic crime symposium that he couldn’t say if the particular token was a “scam … but social media influencers are routinely paid by scammers to help them pump and dump new tokens on the back of pure speculation”. EthereumMax disputes the allegations. “The deceptive narrative associated with the recent allegations is riddled with misinformation,” a company spokesman said. Ye, meanwhile, has taken up variously with the Instagram model and Kim lookalike Chaney Jones, plus Julia Fox, 32, an actor, downtown New York art figure and podcaster of Spotify’s Forbidden Fruits. Ye and Fox met in Miami, and on their second date he gave her a room full of clothes and gifted her close friends baby Birkin bags. The couple have been documenting their romance in Interview magazine. Last week, Fox gave an interview to the Call Her Daddy podcast saying that being a (former) dominatrix allowed her to explore her sexuality. Fox, through friends, says she and Ye were “evolved beings” in an open relationship. “It’s a beautiful portal we all get to see into,” says New York curator KO Nnamdie. “Kanye turned his life into full art and they push each other into art. People like to think he’s doing a Kim-ification or Disney-fication on Julia, but he loves Walt Disney, and sees himself as Disney, as one of the greats. Which he kind of is.” Then Fox announced she was taking her posts down. “Suddenly Instagram was not a fun place any more,” she said to her 1.1 million followers. “I read the comments and everyone was like, ‘Oh my God, you clearly only posted photos you looked good in.’” Being near a messy divorce, it seems, does come with a cost no matter who you are. Which may in its own fashion be the truest statement of the whole unfolding drama. “Sometimes I don’t know what I’m watching, or if I want to be watching,” said Nnamdie. “Yes, they’re celebrities. Yes, they’re insulated. Yes, their money affords lots of things. At the same time, the real dynamics of divorce are playing out in living rooms across America.”Molly Oldfield hosts Everything Under the Sun, a weekly podcast answering children’s questions, out now as a book. Does your child have a question? Submit one hereOnline shoppers in the UK can expect more identity checks – and probably more card-declined messages – over the coming weeks, as retailers get ready for new anti-fraud rules that come into force on 14 March. Buyers have already started seeing more requests to verify their ID as payments providers and retailers adopt the new strong customer authentication (SCA) rules. Under the changes, before a retailer can accept an electronic (online) payment it will have to verify that the customer is who they claim to be. The measures are similar to those already faced by people logging into online banking. While most low-value retail purchases will go ahead as before, with checks carried out in the background, shoppers buying more expensive items online will have to input a password, a pin or a one-time-passcode they have been sent via a text or landline, or log into their banking app and approve the purchase. The rules, which have been introduced by the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA), were supposed to come into force a year ago but were delayed to give retailers more time to adapt. The legislation came out of the European Banking Authority, and was adopted into UK law before Brexit. It will apply to debit and credit card purchases, and will have the biggest impact on those making what are deemed to be the riskiest purchases. The new rules do not apply if you buy something over the phone. High-value purchases, or those outside a buyer’s normal spending habits or transacted on a previously unused device, are likely to prompt the extra security check. Mastercard says it expects about 25% of online transactions to require some form of extra verification by the customer after 14 March. Until now, only 1% of online purchases triggered the need to input a password, or similar. Under the EU rules, payments under €30 (£25) are considered low value but there are exemptions that mean that not all spending above that level will prompt SCA. Similarly, multiple low-value payments could prompt a request for verification. If you have already noticed it happening, it is because card issuers began declining some noncompliant transactions on 18 January as part of the “ramp-up” to SCA’s full implementation. There have already been some anecdotal reports of payments being declined. Before Christmas the FCA warned in an update that merchants that are not able to fully comply with anti-fraud requirements “risk their customers’ online transactions being declined”. Jana Mackintosh, the managing director of payments at UK Finance, which represents the banking industry, says: “Fraud is a growing problem, with criminals stealing more than £750m in the first half of 2021 alone. That is why it is more important than ever that additional protections like SCA are put in place. For retailers, implementing SCA will provide customers peace of mind that payment processes are more secure.” In 2019, the consumer group Which? warned that those without a mobile phone, or a signal at home, risked being disfranchised by the changes. The FCA appears to have taken this on board and has told the payments firms that it expects them to develop SCA solutions that work for all groups of consumers. “This means that you may need to provide several different methods of authentication for your customers. This includes methods that don’t rely on mobile phones, to cater for consumers who don’t have, or don’t want to use, a mobile phone,” it says. The relatively small group of people who shop online but do not use a mobile phone will have to choose to verify their ID in some other way. Those who have a smartphone but don’t receive a signal at home are advised to download their bank’s app, which will work over wifi. Nationwide building society is typical in that it has told its customers who do not use its banking app that they can opt to receive a code via a message to a landline, or by using their card reader and debit card. It has advised customers to make sure it has the correct mobile number, email address and landline, “so you’ll get any authentication codes we send quickly, and you won’t get interrupted while shopping online”.Jonathan White is a professor at Christopher Newport University in Virginia, a historian of Abraham Lincoln and the American civil war. His new book, A House Built By Slaves, studies meetings between the 16th president and Black Americans. Its title comes from Michelle Obama’s speech to the Democratic convention in 2016. By email, I asked White about his career, about Lincoln, and about a book published at a time of considerable controversy over the role of race and racism in American history. How did you become a Lincoln scholar? I always loved history – in part because I grew up in a house outside Philadelphia from the 1720s and used to dig up old stuff in the back yard. I started college, Penn State, as a business major but I quickly changed to history. During my first year at Christopher Newport I wrote a book on civil liberties called Abraham Lincoln and Treason in the Civil War. I think that’s when I began to think of myself as a Lincoln scholar. Why is Lincoln seen as one of the greatest presidents? I think Lincoln is usually ranked at the top because he accomplished so much against such great odds. He grew up on the frontier with an education he called “defective”, but he rose above his environment to lead the nation through its greatest constitutional conflict. His presidency was far from perfect, but he managed to both save the Union and end slavery. Why should Americans read about Lincoln? I’ve been teaching Lincoln speeches every semester since I got to CNU in 2009, and yet I always find them to be so relevant. In his 1860 Cooper Union speech, he called on Americans to fight for what they believe in but to engage one another in open, respectful debate. The themes of self-reflection and forgiveness in his second inaugural address also continue to resonate with students. My hope is that people won’t just read about Lincoln, but that they’ll also read his own words. How did you come to study Lincoln and race? In 2014, I started gathering letters written by African Americans to Lincoln. My initial idea was to publish a book of “correspondence and conversations” but I soon realized I had way too much for one book. So I broke it into two. In October 2021, I published To Address You As My Friend: African Americans’ Letters to Abraham Lincoln. On 12 February, Lincoln’s birthday, I’ll publish A House Built By Slaves: African American Visitors to the Lincoln White House. I got the title from Michelle Obama’s 2016 DNC speech. She talked about how the struggles for freedom and civil rights throughout American history eventually led to her, as the first African American first lady, to wake up “every morning in a house that was built by slaves”. There’s irony in this image, and it captures how the White House has been a place of both oppression and racial transformation. My work shows some of the progress that was made. African Americans came to the Lincoln White House to discuss matters of national importance, and to call for equality and equal rights. In short, they were saying, “We are citizens, and our voices should be heard.” In light of the 1619 Project, the murder of George Floyd and the national conversation about race, does Lincoln need defending? I think he does. Nikole Hannah-Jones’s lead 1619 essay in the New York Times Magazine is beautifully written and does important work of reminding Americans of the centrality of race to the American story. But she gets Lincoln wrong. She focuses on one moment in August 1862 when Lincoln condescendingly told a Black delegation they should lead the freedpeople out of the country through a process known as colonization. But she doesn’t give the context for that meeting or explain why he did what he did. A reader would be left with the impression that Lincoln did not treat Black visitors well, but nothing could be further from the truth. In every other instance, he welcomed them warmly, and listened to their concerns. In A House Built By Slaves, I explain what Lincoln was doing in that infamous meeting and show how it was an anomaly that needs to be understood in context. In light of Republican attacks on history in schools, does history need defending? I think it’s a big mistake for legislatures and governors to try to keep children from learning about controversial aspects of our history. Students need to learn and understand the complicated history of race in this country. I know it’s a cliche, but we really can’t make sense of where we are today unless we have a sense of where we’ve come from. And that means teaching a variety of voices and perspectives. The readings for my classes are almost entirely primary sources, and I love using documents written by authors who disagree with each other. I don’t tell my students how to think, I just try to get them to think critically about the readings so that they can come to their own conclusions. That’s what I think we should be encouraging in our education system. What was it like to be part of the discovery of a Frederick Douglass letter about the Freedmen’s Memorial in Washington, in 2020? That was a real thrill. Shortly after the murder of George Floyd, activists in DC began to talk about tearing down the Freedmen’s Memorial in Lincoln Park – a statue that was paid for entirely by former slaves. One night I was in a text exchange with my friend Scott Sandage, who teaches at Carnegie Mellon. He and I were debating how Douglass felt about the pose in the statue, since it features Lincoln towering over an enslaved man. Our discussion set Scott to searching on newspapers.com and that’s how he found the letter. The media interest was unlike anything I’ve ever experienced before. Can studying Douglass help us understand Lincoln? I’m currently teaching a course on emancipation, and my students are reading a lot of Douglass. I think they have been surprised by how critical Douglass was of Lincoln during the first few years of the war. Douglass said Lincoln was abolitionism’s worst enemy and the south’s greatest slave hound. But his views changed. After meeting Lincoln in 1864, he came to see Lincoln’s heart was fully in emancipation, that it was not just about “military necessity”. When Douglass dedicated the statue in DC in 1876, he recounted his wartime criticisms of Lincoln but essentially conceded that Lincoln’s slow and steady approach had been right. Sure, Douglass wished Lincoln had acted against slavery more quickly, but in the end he recognized that Lincoln got the job done. What’s next? A biography of a man named Appleton Oaksmith, who was convicted of slave trading during the civil war. After that, I’m thinking about emancipation in DC, or Henry Wadsworth Longfellow’s experiences during the civil war. A House Built By Slaves: African American Visitors to the Lincoln White House is published in the US by Rowman &amp; LittlefieldDavid Friedman was Donald Trump’s ambassador to Israel. But that job title alone fails to adequately convey his proximity to the 45th president and his impact on US policy. Their time together marked a repudiation of Barack Obama’s vision for the Middle East. Sledgehammer, Friedman’s memoir, reminds the reader of all of this as insistently as its title suggests. With Friedman’s assistance, the US helped forge the Abraham Accords, normalizing relations between Israel and four Arab countries. The US also moved its embassy to Jerusalem and left the Iran nuclear deal. As for the Palestinians, put it this way: they no longer occupy rent-free space in the Republican conscience. Unlike other Trump appointees, Friedman was often in the room when it happened. To all intents and purposes, he was not subordinate to Rex Tillerson, Trump’s first secretary of state. And as an enthusiastic backer of Israeli settlements in occupied territories, he had little interest in preserving the status quo. More than a half-century had elapsed since 1967 and the six-day war. Israel’s hold on the West Bank had grown organic. The Oslo Accords gave way to the second intifada and Gaza continued to smolder, despite Israel’s withdrawal more than a decade before. Godot had failed to arrive. Friedman’s book with its unsubtle title has a subtitle too: “How Breaking with the Past Brought Peace to the Middle East”. Obviously, he overstates. The Palestinians are not, of course, content. War rages in Yemen. Drones and missiles hit the Emirates. Things between Israel and Iran can get worse and probably will. Friedman was Trump’s bankruptcy lawyer. When Trump announced his presidential campaign, Friedman was doubtful. Both men venerated their fathers but, as Friedman acknowledges, they had little else in common. The author is still married to his first wife. Religion is central to his life. He is an Orthodox Jew, the son of a rabbi. While ambassador, his daughter made aliyah. That is, she moved to Israel and became a citizen. Friedman quotes a senior but unidentified state department aide as telling him: “Don’t be so Jewish. You represent the United States of America … Just a free word of advice.” Suffice to say, Friedman was not amused. Although he held a presidential appointment, he was not part of the club. Sledgehammer is also about ethnic grievance and expectations of Jewish solidarity – perhaps misplaced. Before joining the Trump administration, Friedman branded Obama antisemitic and trashed J Street, a liberal Jewish group, as “worse than kapos” – Jewish prisoners who worked as guards in Nazi concentration camps. Such intemperate comments came with a political cost. The Senate confirmed him by the narrowest of margins, 52-46. On the page, Friedman says those were sincere expressions. He used the term “kapos”, he says, because he felt “J Street had betrayed the Jewish people”. Elsewhere, he admonishes American Jews against criticizing the Israeli government. He laments a growing schism among US Jews, even while describing his own testy relationship with the Reform movement. In 2020, American Jews went for Joe Biden by nearly 40 points but Trump was the clear favorite in Orthodox enclaves. In Israel, Trump is lionized. “Loved” is Friedman’s word. He likes wielding his sledgehammer at the left. The right, not so much. He castigates Ilhan Omar and Rashida Tlaib, progressive Democratic congresswomen, for hostility to Israel. As ambassador, he was fine with an attempt to stop them entering Israel as part of a congressional delegation. On the other hand, he has nothing to say about Charlottesville in August 2017, its tiki torches and cries of “Jews will not replace us” and Trump’s view that there were “very fine people” on the neo-Nazi side on that day of violence and shame. Friedman’s outrage appears selective. He is also silent on Trump delivering a tart “fuck him” to Benjamin Netanyahu – Israel’s former prime minister and a Friedman friend – in an interview memorialized in Barak Ravid’s book, Trump’s Peace. Instead, Friedman swings repeatedly at Mahmoud Abbas, challenging the Palestinian leader’s desire to reach an agreement with Israel. Once again, Trump might well disagree. Trump told Ravid he believed Netanyahu “did not want to make peace. Never did”. As for Abbas, “We spent a lot of time together, talking about many things. And it was almost like a father. I mean, he was so nice, couldn’t have been nicer.” Friedman was particularly close to Netanyahu, so much so that lines could blur. According to Ravid, Friedman sat in on Israeli government meetings until he was tossed out by cabinet members. Friedman’s memoir does nothing to dispel that report. He describes his efforts to help Netanyahu cobble together a government. He zings Avigdor Lieberman, former Netanyahu confidant and current Israeli finance minister, for refusing to come to the struggling prime minister’s rescue. The fact Netanyahu was then under a legal cloud and now stands on trial for corruption escapes real mention. Elsewhere, Friedman criticizes Benny Gantz, Israel’s defense minister and Netanyahu’s jilted coalition partner. Although Gantz had been chief of staff of Israel’s military, says Friedman, he was not the politician Netanyahu was. Then again, Friedman also expresses his gratitude for his relationship with Gantz, who he describes as “6ft 4in and ruggedly handsome, an unusual look for an Israeli politician”. Trump too has praised Gantz, albeit at Netanyahu’s expense. What Friedman does next will be interesting. Like Trump, he has left New York for Florida. His book jacket posts a blurb from Nikki Haley, formerly governor of South Carolina and a potential candidate for the Republican nomination if Trump does not seek it. Friedman has also described Ron DeSantis, of Florida, as Israel’s greatest friend among all 50 current governors. Friedman is far from finished. Sledgehammer is not just a memoir. It is a well-written audition for 2024 and beyond. Sledgehammer: How Breaking With the Past Brought Peace to the Middle East, is published in the US by Broadside BooksThere may be bigger collisions to come in this Six Nations but this weekend’s Italian job holds plenty of significance for several individuals on England’s teamsheet. Fail to “light up Rome” as Eddie Jones has been repeatedly urging and the head coach may just consider pulling the plug on some Test careers. Shine in a ruthless all-round performance, on the other hand, and a brighter future may well beckon. Few would have predicted this reshuffled England combination even a fortnight ago and it feels like an appropriately thumbs up/down moment for certain players. Will Stuart, Charlie Ewels, Alex Dombrandt, Harry Randall, Joe Marchant and the fit-again Jack Nowell, plus the uncapped replacement Ollie Chessum, will all feel that this is an opportunity they badly need to take. With Jones going out of his way to mention the seven injured senior players currently unavailable to him, last weekend’s loss in Edinburgh has further raised the stakes. While Luke Cowan-Dickie would probably have started again had he been able to train more this week, Jones appears to be stress-testing virtually every unit of the team ahead of loftier challenges down the track. Perhaps the most significant area of all, assuming Maro Itoje is not going to make a permanent switch to the back row, is the 8-9-10 axis of Dombrandt, Randall and Marcus Smith. Depending on your taste in such things, it is either the most exciting of English boy band trios or a major risk. Those who have been following the Gallagher Premiership for the last 12 months will almost certainly tend towards the former. Ben Youngs, now set to win his record-equalling 114th England cap off the bench, may not be among them but for anyone else keen to see what England can really do if they take the handbrake off the chariot and attack with the tempo, dexterity and verve of which they are capable, it promises to be an instructive afternoon. Given England have racked up 50 tries in their last eight games against Italy and average six tries per game at the Stadio Olimpico since 2014, however, the final verdict will not simply hinge on the numbers. The search for consistent English rhythm goes on and so does the slight sense of not, as yet, fulfilling their true potential. Playing Smith without his good Quins mate Dombrandt has always felt a bit like hiring only half of the Two Ronnies. With the nippy Randall between them, lightening quick and with a keen eye for a gap, the Azzurri are going to have their hands full if they give England time, space and a steady stream of quick ball. Which is where England’s rejigged pack come in. There were good aspects of Murrayfield – the return of the maul as a dominant weapon high among them – but Ewels and Stuart have been enduring a torrid season with Bath and will be want to prove there is a big difference between club and country form. The return of Jamie George and the myriad jumping options bode well for the lineout but Jones will be primarily looking for a collective reaction to the disappointment of the last quarter at Murrayfield. In short, England need to make a statement and Jones will not mind if there is a flash or two of anger in their demeanour. In midfield the latest partnership of Henry Slade and Joe Marchant also looks better balanced, even if Gloucester’s Mark Atkinson must be wondering what he has to do to get a start at 12. Jones, though, now believes the way forward lies in picking players capable of reacting on the hoof rather than sticking to set patterns largely dictated by the numbers on their back. As ever, it sounds great as long as it works. If it does not, England do at least have the insurance of a seasoned bench containing 409 caps, more than their entire starting line-up combined. There are almost echoes of 20 years ago when England picked the ultimate bench, comprising four England captains with 316 caps between them. The photo of Jason Leonard, Martin Johnson, Lawrence Dallaglio and Matt Dawson all taking the field together remains a classic but it does not tell the entire story. That same weekend France were scooping the title having previously beaten Clive Woodward’s side in Paris, making England’s comfortable win in Rome an afterthought. This time Italy may initially prove more of a handful than some anticipate with Kieran Crowley determined to instil some fresh zest into a side that has now lost 33 consecutive Six Nations games. If it is hard to imagine KC and his blue-clad sunshine band delivering the biggest hit in this fixture’s history, it might be a rockier first 40 minutes than the visitors expect. Equally it will surprise no-one if England subsequently enjoy a far more enjoyable last 20 minutes than they did last week.Do we really deserve good TV? It’s a question I have been mulling over since being subjected to Starstruck (Saturday, 8.30pm), ITV’s bombastic new panel show designed for five or so million people to eat a takeaway to. It’s an over-glossy mashup of Stars in Their Eyes and The X Factor, which is very, very bad in a way that makes my soul feel quite empty and my mind quite blank. Is it just the presence of Olly Murs as the host that is doing this, or is there something even more ghoulish and hollow baked into the very format of it? The only way to find out, sadly, is to make me watch an entire hour of it so you don’t have to. This is the first time since writing this column that I am going to actively ask for danger money. Here is the format of Starstruck: instead of letting one singer trot out and do a celebrity tribute act, three complete strangers come out and sing the same song together at once – so three Freddie Mercurys might sing I Want to Break Free, line-by-line or three Ariana Grandes might squabble over a rendition of One Last Time. There is something very mildly interesting about watching three singers try to perform a cohesive song while also trying to outshine each other at the same time – fans of the Kitty Brucknell series of The X Factor will recognise this delightful energy from the group songs that used to open the show – but that’s where the entertainment begins and ends. To judge the performances, ITV has assembled one of the strangest and most erratic judging panels I’ve ever seen on TV (we were warned when Amanda Holden started judging Britain’s Got Talent that this would happen to judging panels, but we refused to listen): Beverley Knight, an immaculately styled Jason Manford, Sheridan Smith and Queen singer Adam Lambert. Between them, they do all the TV judging tics and tropes they are meant to do – they put both palms flat on the table and lean forward, mouthing: “OH MY GOD!” to another judge. They clap above their head while standing up inelegantly in an outfit that is not designed to be stood up in, and hold their temples in sheer astonishment after hearing half of one opening note. They give each of the three teams effusive, breathless compliments, then at the end of the show the members of one team sing off against each other and the best performer goes into some abstract, distant “final”. The problem here is that a lot of the singers aren’t actually very good, so to hear the judges outrageously praise them rings utterly, dreadfully hollow. I am not going to name names, but at least three performers in the opening show deliver woefully flat notes (they only have to sing one-third of a song each! They’ve had all week to practise! Why are they still rubbish?) and a couple of them are quite noticeably out of time. I mean, this is fine – these are not sins – but if an idiot with a tin ear (me) can hear it, so can an audience at home. So when Adam Lambert throws both arms up in the air and says: “That. Was. Amazing!” and Beverley Knight says it was like “looking at someone famous”, you sort of go: well, it wasn’t, though, was it? They’ve spent more than six hours in hair and makeup and they are doing it on TV, and millions of people can see that it wasn’t very good. So why say it was good? Why is everyone in the studio clapping as if it were good? Why is Olly Murs laughing? He shouldn’t be laughing. He shouldn’t be encouraging these people. One immutable truth about this country is: we always think someone absolutely smashing it at karaoke is entertaining, and we will until the sun engulfs the Earth. But I can’t help feeling that Starstruck has been completely informed by the bombastic Saturday night TV that has come before it – that golden The X Factor run! The half-term-saving Britain’s Got Talent series! Dancing on Ice! The Masked Singer, almost! – in a way that feels as if it’s shaping future iterations of this, too. In 10 years’ time, ITV will still have a Saturday night singing show. In 20 years, too, and 30 more after that. What caricatures of TV panel judging will we be watching by then, I wonder?After waiting 16 years to win a first Olympic gold medal, Lindsey Jacobellis captured her second in four days on Saturday after pairing with Nick Baumgartner to win the inaugural mixed team snowboard cross event. In a heart-pounding final race, Jacobellis frittered away the 0.04sec head start supplied by her team-mate in the first wave, but made a late move to overtake Italy’s Michela Moioli on the inside of the final right-banked turn and held on over the final jump to win by 0.20sec beneath heavy snowfall at the Genting Snow Park in the mountain village of Zhangjiakou. Moioli and Omar Visintin settled for the silver medal, while Canada’s Eliot Grondin and Meryeta O’Dine won bronze. Baumgartner, 40, and Jacobellis, 36, the elder statesmen of the US snowboarding team, become the oldest snowboarders to win any Olympic medal and the oldest Americans to win gold at the Winter Games since 1948, when Frank Tyler piloted the US team to victory in the four-man bobsleigh. “We’re 80s babies and we were comin’ in hot today,” said Jacobellis, who won Team USA’s first gold of the Beijing Olympics on Wednesday in the women’s snowboard cross final, the same event where she infamously squandered a certain victory with a showboat move near the finish line at the 2006 Olympics, when she was 20. On Saturday, Jacobellis punctuated what may have been her final Olympic ride with a similar board grab over the final jump. “I’ve been on this team for 20 years, Nick’s been on this team for 17 years, we are like a family,” Jacobellis said. “It’s the experience in snowboard cross, because it’s so hard to replicate the same scenario, because there’s so many uncontrolled variables. It really helps to have the years behind you, so you can make the best execution and call what you need to do in that moment because you have mere seconds or less to make a decision.” In snowboard cross, which has been described as Nascar on snow, four snowboarders race simultaneously down an obstacle course with a series of jumps, berms, turns and drops. In the mixed team event, the men race first and the women follow with staggered start times based on their teammate’s finishing times. While the mixed team event was making its Olympic debut on Saturday, it has been a feature on the snowboard circuit for nearly a decade, including at numerous World Cups since 2012. The degree of difficulty for Saturday’s final was compounded by low visibility and -11C (12.2F) air temperatures in the mountains roughly 120km northwest of Beijing. Among those troubled by the conditions was Australia’s Belle Brockhoff, who was stretchered off the course after clipping another rider during her quarter-final race. The 20-year-old from East Melbourne was taken to a local hospital in a neck collar but was returned to the Olympic athletes’ village after CT and MRI scans revealed no serious damage, Australian officials said. Jacobellis said that she was able to use the fresh snow that impacted the conditions on the 1,310m course to her advantage. “I tried to remember my old X Games days and jump as hard as I can on every jump to try to make the landing and use the draft when possible,” said Jacobellis, who becomes the second snowboarder to win two golds at a single Olympics after Russia’s Vic Wild won the the parallel slalom and parallel giant slalom champion in 2014. “I definitely am very comfortable riding very closely to other riders and then trying to execute off that speed that I gain from them.” The oldest snowboarder to ever represent the United States at the Olympics, Baumgartner gave an emotional televised interview after a 10th-place finish in Thursday’s men’s snowboard cross, where a late wide turn in the semi-finals torpedoed his medal chances. On Saturday, the four-time Olympian could finally celebrate his first career medal. “It’s unbelievable, it’s days like two days ago that make today feels so good,” Baumgartner said. “These tears are so much better than the ones from the other day. I can’t tell you how much pressure is off you when you know you’ve got someone like Lindsey in the gate after you.” He added: “It’s tough to watch the young kids take over and try to push you out of the sport so that hunger is strong. And as long as you’re willing to put in the work, and you still have the dedication for the hard work, you can really push yourself to a new level.” The United States have now racked up five gold medals since Wednesday when Jacobellis ended the Americans’ longest-ever wait for their first gold at a Winter Games: three in snowboarding, one in figure skating and one in freestyle skiing.The time has come to wind down the blog for the evening. Here’s a summary of the day’s key developments: Thousands of anti-vaccine activists, conspiracy theorists and people from the sovereign citizen movement protested in Canberra. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, said he “understands” the concerns of protesters and blamed vaccine mandates on state governments. Morrison also urged Australian citizens in Ukraine to leave immediately as the situation there becomes increasingly dangerous. People in four electorates in New South Wales headed to the polling booths today, with byelections in Strathfield, Monaro, Bega and Willoughby. Soggy weather and a high proportion of postal votes made for a muted affair. The Australian Capital Territory’s top prosecutor warned against “officers of the court and public figures” making public comment on active cases following the furore over Morrison’s comments to Brittany Higgins. Australia is set to face more pressure to increase its 2030 emissions reduction targets after a new US strategy for the Indo-Pacific was released today, which calls climate change a “major challenge” for the region. Thanks for following along! Staying with sport, Australian skeleton racer Jaclyn Narracott is on the brink of Olympic history – she will enter tonight’s final runs in Beijing in gold medal position. Skeleton (or as I like to think of it, scarier bobsled) sees athletes race head-first down a frozen track in a tiny sled at speeds of up to 140km/h. Australia has never medalled in any of the sliding events at a Winter Olympics. You can read more about Narracott here, via AAP: Another Australian Olympian, Belle Brockhoff, has meanwhile had a rougher run. Brockhoff, 29, was taken to hospital for x-rays following a heavy crash in the quarter-finals of the mixed snowboard cross teams event. She has been cleared of serious injury after complaining of neck soreness following the crash. From AAP: Brockhoff was in a qualifying position in second when she got too much speed off a jump and clipped the board of the leader, American Lindsey Jacobellis, who won gold in the women’s event. Countrywoman Josie Baff also crashed out, ending Australian hopes of a medal in the new addition to the Olympic program. Both Australian pairings were drawn in the second of four quarter-finals and male boarders Cameron Bolton and Adam Lambert successfully navigated the opening leg. But with snow falling at Genting Snow Park, the luckless Brockhoff and Baff both failed to finish the second leg, ensuring that the US and Switzerland claimed the top two positions. Victorian batsman Will Pucovski has suffered yet another concussion setback, AAP reports. The 24-year-old left the field earlier today after just one over of Victoria’s Sheffield Shield match against South Australia. It is believed to be the 11th concussion he has suffered during his frequently interrupted career. Cricket Victoria said in a statement: Pucovski reported concussion symptoms to medical staff while fielding in the first session of play this morning … He will continue to be monitored by Cricket Victoria medical staff. Read the full story here: A spokesperson for the energy minister Angus Taylor has told Guardian Australia the federal government’s 2030 emissions reduction target will not change, in relation to the US’s newly released Indo-Pacific strategy. That strategy outlines climate change as a “major challenge” for the Asia-Pacific region, and states the US “will work with partners to develop 2030 and 2050 targets, strategies, plans and policies consistent with limiting the global temperature increase to 1.5C”. A spokesperson for Taylor said: Australia welcomes the US’s commitment to the Indo-Pacific region. Australia is one of only a handful of countries to set out a detailed plan to achieve net zero emissions by 2050. Our 2030 target is fixed, and our commitment to the Australian people is to meet and beat it. The latest official forecasts show we will deliver on that commitment, beating our 2030 target by up to 9%. Australia was the only major developed country that refused to lift its 2030 emissions reduction targets at Cop26 in Glasgow last year. In November, former US vice president Al Gore said a 2050 net-zero target “without a near-term pledge has very little meaning”. Labor leader Anthony Albanese has been out campaigning for Jason Yat-Sen Li in the New South Wales electorate of Strathfield today. Speaking alongside the shadow climate change minister, Chris Bowen, he said Yat-Sen Li would make a “major contribution” to the state if he was elected, as would Labor’s other candidates. Albanese said: We’re hopeful of a good outcome for the state byelections, not just here in Strathfield, but, of course, in Bega and Monaro we’re also running Labor candidates. It’s been a long day on the polling booths across the four electorates up for grabs today. Campaigners in every seat told the Guardian the soggy weather and high proportion of postal votes meant it had been one of the “slowest” election Saturdays they had ever seen. Scott Morrison has urged Australian citizens in Ukraine to leave immediately as the situation there has become increasingly dangerous. He said: It has been a clear message for some time now that Australians in Ukraine should be seeking to get out of the country. It comes after the US Secretary of State, Antony Blinken, who visited Australia this week, said Russia could invade Ukraine at any time. The US and other countries have also urged their citizens to leave. AAP has the full story here: The reverend and former World Vision Australia chief executive Tim Costello has joined the Freedom Cage campaign outside the Park Hotel in Carlton. In a recent video calling on the federal government to release the men detained there, Costello said: These refugees fled unthinkable horror in their homelands to save their and their families’ lives, only to find a different horror in Australia … Our politicians are using these people in the most callous and cruel way, in a way that no dog would ever be treated. Costello was preceded in the cage by Sister Brigid Arthur, co-founder of Brigidine Asylum Seekers Project. John Farnham’s You’re the Voice has been in heavy rotation at Canberra’s anti–vaccination mandate protests. It’s worth noting that Farnham’s former manager, the late Glenn Wheatley, previously criticised anti-lockdown protesters for using the song. “It’s very offensive to John and I that they choose to use You’re the Voice as the theme,” Wheatley said in a September 2020 interview. (Wheatley died in early February, at the age of 74, after being hospitalised with Covid-19.) The novelist Arnold Zable has locked himself in a cage outside the Park Hotel in the Melbourne suburb of Carlton, in protest against the indefinite detention of refugees. The gesture is part of the Freedom Cage campaign, which is calling for the immediate release of all detained refugees and asylum seekers. Other notable figures to participate in the campaign include the retired soccer player Craig Foster and the bishops Philip Huggins and Paul Barker. The Park Hotel currently holds 25 refugees and asylum seekers, most of whom have been detained for nearly nine years. Thanks Cait! I’ll be here all afternoon. If you have any news to share, you can tweet me @donnadlu or email Donna.Lu@theguardian.com. South Australia has reported one new Covid-related death – a woman in her 90s – and 1,372 new infections. The state’s death toll from the beginning of pandemic is now 149 people. There are 213 people in hospital with Covid, including 17 in ICU, with four on ventilators. And with that, I am going to hand you over to my colleague Donna Lu who will take you through into the evening. Thank you for a great day on the blog. At least two homes have been destroyed by a bushfire in Western Australia. Crews have been battling fires in WA’s Great Southern region since Friday after lightning sparked fires across the region. The fire and emergency services commissioner, Darren Klemm, confirmed the homes had been destroyed and that the conditions yesterday had been “incredibly severe”. “The conditions in the Great Southern last night were incredibly severe – the winds were so strong that they actually tore roofs off homes near the fireground,” he said. “A sudden wind change also changed the direction of the bushfires and firefighters had to move extremely quickly to prevent the fires from reaching more homes. “There has been some rainfall overnight that has helped firefighters get the situation under control and our immediate priority is to control and extinguish these bushfires.” Earlier today the NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, visited a polling booth in Willoughby with the Liberal candidate, Tim James. The safe Liberal seat on Sydney’s north shore was held by Gladys Berejiklian until she resigned as premier last September. Asked if he would interpret the results from the four byelections today as a referendum on his leadership, Perrottet said it was about what direction voters wanted to see the state move in. Perrottet said: I see it as a vote in terms of making sure a clear decision between do you want to go backwards as a state or do you want to go forwards? That’s what the Liberals and Nationals here in NSW want to do – we want to take our state forward. We need to open up and we don’t want to go back into lockdown. He pointed to schools being open and kids being back in classrooms as a sign his government was leading the state though the pandemic. Labor is not running a candidate in Willoughby. Voters are also heading to the polls in Bega, Strathfield and Monaro today following a series of high-profile resignations last year. As house prices soar to record levels across capital cities, an increasing number of younger Australians are giving up on the hope of owning a house with a backyard. Raising a family in an apartment is fast becoming the new, compact Australian dream. Read more here: We mentioned before Pauline Hanson had missed a few parliamentary sitting days – but still managed to turn up for the protest today. Turns out last week wasn’t the only ones she missed: The number of Australians who have had their booster hasn’t been put into a % in the daily vaccine graph. Maybe because it is so low? Australia is set to face more pressure to increase its 2030 emissions reduction targets after a new Biden administration strategy for the Indo-Pacific was released today. The White House published an Indo-Pacific strategy document on Saturday, ahead of the US secretary of state Antony Blinken’s visit to Fiji. Blinken arrived in Australia earlier this week for a meeting with the foreign affairs minister, Marise Payne, and her Indian and Japanese counterparts, a grouping known as the Quad. The US strategy document outlines climate change as a “major challenge” for the Asia-Pacific region: Climate change is growing ever-more severe as South Asia’s glaciers melt and the Pacific Islands battle existential rises in sea levels ... The Indo-Pacific is the epicenter of the climate crisis, but it is also essential to climate solutions. Achieving the goals of the Paris agreement will require the major economies in the region to align their targets with the agreement’s temperature goals ... The United States will work with partners to develop 2030 and 2050 targets, strategies, plans, and policies consistent with limiting the global temperature increase to 1.5C, and will seek to serve as the preferred partner as the region transitions to a net-zero future. Australia was the only major developed country that refused to lift its 2030 emissions reduction targets – formally known as a nationally determined contribution – at the Cop26 summit in Glasgow last year. Former US vice president Al Gore criticised the Morrison government in November for failing to increase its 2030 emissions reduction ambitions, saying a 2050 net-zero target “without a near-term pledge has very little meaning”. The state’s number have dipped to 27 new cases, down from the 51 recorded on Friday. There are also 22 cases from returned travellers in quarantine. More to come. After being absent in parliament this week, Pauline Hanson went to the protest in Canberra today. Cool. We’ve got more info on Victoria’s Covid deaths here: The 19 people who died were in their 70s, 80s, 90s and 100s. Twelve of them occurred in the past week and the others were in the past fortnight. Here are the latest coronavirus numbers so far from around Australia today: ACT Deaths: 0 Cases: 428 In hospital: 51 people, three in ICU NSW Deaths: 32 Cases: 8,183 In hospital: 1,650 people, 104 in ICU Queensland Deaths: 13 Cases: 3,600 In hospital: 508 people, 49 in ICU Victoria Deaths: 19 Cases: 7,224 In hospital: 487 people, 79 in ICU Tasmania Deaths: 0 Cases: 456 In hospital: 17 people, one in ICU Northern Territory Deaths: 0 Cases: 1,425 In hospital: 170 people, two in ICU Western Australia Deaths: 0 Cases: 27 South Australia Deaths: 1 Cases: 1,372 In hospital: 213 people, 17 in ICU Politicians are out in force in NSW today, here’s a rundown of whose been seen campaigning in the byelections from AAP: Premier Dominic Perrottet made campaign pit stops in both Sydney seats, Strathfield and Willoughby, while opposition leader Chris Minns started his morning in the Bega electorate. Prime minister Scott Morrison gave a shout out to his “dear friend” Bridget Sakr vying to win for the Liberals in Strathfield, as federal Labor leader Anthony Albanese lent a hand in pitching for votes on the ground in the same electorate. Former deputy premier John Barilaro was also out spruiking for the Nationals candidate he backed to replace him in Monaro. However, a notable absence on polling day is Ms Berejiklian. Liberal candidate Tim James is tipped to be her successor as the member for Willoughby, a safe blue-ribbon seat on Sydney’s north shore. It’s another story in Bega, where Labor is hoping it can net a “historic win”. The seat on the state’s south coast was held by Liberal and former transport minister Andrew Constance on 6.9 per cent margin. Labor has never won it, but the party is hopeful local gynaecologist and obstetrician Michael Holland is about to break the drought. Queensland Covid stats for today have dropped on socials: The Morrison government has faced one of the biggest parliamentary revolts in decades. Five Liberal MPs crossed the floor to pass Labor amendments to the government’s religious discrimination bill in the early hours of Thursday. The last time any Australian government faced a revolt of this magnitude was when six Coalition senators crossed the floor in November 1982 to support a Labor bill to curtail the power of the Senate to bring down governments by blocking or threatening to block supply. Crossing the floor is rare, and only seems to be getting rarer, with a minority of federal politicians having ever crossed the floor and just a single politician involved in more than half of all floor crossing divisions between 1950 and 2019, according to data compiled by the parliamentary library. Hello everyone – this is Cait, I am back in the blog seat to take you through the afternoon. If you want to flag any news with me – tweet me @cait__kelly or email cait.kelly@theguardian.com. Let’s get into it. Some reactions to the Lifeline Canberra book fair shutting due to protesters: Turning to Victoria, there are also protesters currently marching up Swanston Street in Melbourne’s CBD. My colleague Ben Butler estimates there are around 500 people, who are moving towards the inner-north suburb of Carlton under police escort. Ongoing protests in the Australian Capital Territory against vaccine mandates have forced the closure of the Lifeline Canberra charity book fair today, a major fundraising event for the organisation. The Exhibition Park in Canberra (EPIC) saw an influx of people overnight. Protestors have moved from EPIC, where they have been staying for more than a week – and must leave by Sunday – to Parliament House. An update on the Covid figures in Victoria: There are 487 people in hospital with Covid-19 in the state, 49 of whom are in ICU, including 20 on a ventilator. It’s the first time since January 3 that the hospitalisation figures have dropped below 500 in Victoria. Of Victorians aged 18 and older, 49.9% have now had three vaccine doses. The health department has further confirmed that Omicron is the dominant variant: “extensive genomic test results” found that, of 10,222 samples sequenced between early December and early February, 98% were Omicron. While campaigning in the Sydney seat of Strathfield today, where a byelection is being held, Labor leader Anthony Albanese was asked about the government’s now shelved religious discrimination bill. Albanese said: We believe that no child deserves to be discriminated against because of who they are and that is consistent with what the prime minister wrote to me last year, saying that was his position. They put it out on the front page of newspapers and then walked away from it. It shows they can’t be trusted. The other thing we’re committed to is all of the amendments that we put forward, which include any vilification provisions. How is it that a Muslim woman can be vilified for wearing a hijab, or a Sikh man because of the fact they’re easily identifiable? We need strong provisions which prevent discrimination against all people, whether it be on the basis of gender, or age, or race or faith or sexuality. Albanese accused Scott Morrison of “playing politics”, saying: What the prime minister has to … explain is why has he pulled a bill that is now consistent with what he said was his objective. It just was all about wedging and playing politics … It’s just all about the politics all about the game. And that’s why he ends up wedging himself, like he did last Thursday morning. Hello, it’s Donna Lu here, keeping the blog warm for a while. Millionaire businessman Neville Power is facing a possible jail term after pleading guilty to breaches of Western Australia’s strict Covid quarantine laws during a private helicopter trip. Power, 63, and his son, Nicholas Power, 36, on Friday admitted failing to self-quarantine upon returning from Queensland in October last year, an offence that carries a maximum penalty of 12 months’ imprisonment. The breach came just 18 months after Neville Power was appointed to head up prime minister Scott Morrison’s since-disbanded National Covid-19 Coordination Commission. From AAP: Labor has urged voters to send the NSW premier a message at the ballot box, hoping anger at his government could net them a “historic win” in at least one of four seats up for grabs in byelections. Four months after Gladys Berejiklian’s sudden resignation prompted three other MPs to follow suit, polling day has finally arrived in Bega, Monaro, Strathfield and Willoughby. While about 40% of constituents in the electorates have already picked their candidate – voting early or via post – people began turning out to booths saturated with signage on Saturday morning. The contests are the first electoral test for Liberal premier Dominic Perrottet and Labor leader Chris Minns, and come a year before all NSW voters heads to the polls in a general election. Both men were recently elevated to their position and both are painting their parties as the underdog. For Mr Perrottet, there is the usual swing against the government in by-elections, the loss of popular and senior MPs, as well as scrutiny of his handling of the surging Omicron wave. The government is already in minority, and a loss of any further seats would force it to rely more heavily on the votes of independent or minor party MPs. Lastly, the PM has offered his “support” to the Liberal candidates in today’s NSW by-elections. The PM has been asked about the anti-vaccination/anti-mandate/anti-establishment protests in Canberra today: My message to them today as Australia is a free country and they have a right to protest. I would ask them to do that in a peaceful and respectful way. I want to be very clear when it comes to the issue of action mandates. Commonwealth government have only ever unsupported mandates that relate to aged care workers, disability workers and those that are working in high-risk situations in health system. All other mandates that relate to vaccines have been imposed unilaterally by state governments. They have not been put in place by the commonwealth government. In fact, the commonwealth government cannot impose such a mandate. So I understand their concerns about these issues. Here are some pics from scenes earlier in Canberra: The PM is speaking in Sydney: The situation in Ukraine is very serious. Starting last year, when we began to say to Australians who were in Ukraine to take their own decisions, to put themselves in a position of safety. We have continued that well into last month and it has been a clear message for some time now that Australians in Ukraine should be seeking to get out of the country. There are many Ukrainians, Australians of Ukrainian descent and citizens that are living there and will make their own decisions. We respect their decisions but our advice is clear, this is a dangerous situation and bring your own safety, you should seek to make your way out of Ukraine. We have some more info from NSW on today’s Covid numbers: Of people aged 16 plus, 47.3% have now received a third dose of a Covid-19 vaccine. This represents 51.6% of the eligible population that received their second dose more than three months ago. Of the 32 people who died; one person was in their 40s, two people were in their 50s, seven people were in their 60s, 11 people were in their 70s, six people were in their 80s and five people were in their 90s. Eight people who died were aged under 65. Three of these people had received three doses of a Covid-19 vaccine, three people had received two doses and two people were not vaccinated. Seven people had known underlying health conditions. From AAP: Swimming Australia has appointed three-time Olympic gold medallist Tracy Stockwell as its new president – to replace the departing Kieran Perkins. Stockwell, who has been on the Swimming Australia board since 2016, will assume the presidency on Monday while Perkins transitions into his new role as chief executive of the Australian Sports Commission. Stockwell – who capped off her swimming career with three gold medals at the 1984 Los Angeles Olympic Games, where she captained the United States team – said she was keen to get started in her new job in the decade-long lead-up to the 2032 Games in Brisbane. “Swimming has played such an important role in my life, and I feel privileged to take on a role that will empower me to give something back to the sport that has provided me with so many opportunities,” Stockwell said. “As we begin the journey to Brisbane 2032, we must do everything within our capability to fulfill our vision to be globally admired for our performance in and out of the water.” Stockwell, who is also a five-times world champion and set five world records, was inducted into both the US Olympic and International Swimming Halls of Fame in 1990. Patients in ACT hospitals as at 8pm yesterday: 51 (including 3 in intensive care and 1 who is ventilated). ACT residents aged 12 and over who are fully vaccinated: 98.6% ACT residents aged 16 and over who have received their booster: 58.9% ACT residents aged 5-11 who have received one dose: 75.1% New deaths: 0 Total deaths since the pandemic started: 31 New cases of COVID-19 recorded in the ACT in the 24 hours to 8pm yesterday: 428 (255 PCR and 173 RAT) Active cases: 2,618 (1,444 PCR and 1,174 RAT) Total number of cases: 40,946 (30,438 PCR and 10,508 RAT) Gerrard said the technical issues with the Covid data should be sorted out today so we will bring you more on that when we have an update. John Gerrard: In terms of the hospital situation, this continues to improve significantly. We have 508 people in our public hospitals being treated for Covid-19. That is down from 535 yesterday. Those falling numbers continue on a daily basis, 49 patients are currently in intensive care. We do know that the intensive care admissions tends to lag behind as well, and in the private hospitals also the numbers of inpatients continue to fall, down to 30 in the last 24 hours, from 49 for the previous reporting period. In terms of school-aged children, there has been an issue with data collection pertaining to PCR results, but we do have the self-reported rapid antigen test results for children, in the last 24 hours there were 655, about the same number as the last period when it was 633, so no major change there. Queensland health authorities are giving an update about data issues with today’s Covid cases. Chief health officer Dr John Gerrard says: [We’re] reporting 3,660 cases, but they have had some technical issues with regards to data collation, so that is probably likely to be a bit of an underestimate and we will report on the additional cases that are likely to occur in the next 24 hours. So there are some slight data problems there in the last 24 hours. As we have said, we have 13 deaths to report today, one person in their 50s, two in their 60s, three in their 70s, five in their 80s and two in the 90s. Six of these 13 were not vaccinated. Lastly, McKenzie is asked about an article in the Saturday Paper this morning saying the prime minister’s apology to victims in Parliament House was never intended to happen, only intended to come from the presiding officers. At the last minute, the PM decided he would speak after finding out the opposition leader was speaking, the article alleges. This is what she said (and you might notice, she completely dodged the question): I‘m a National party Senate leader and, on that particular day in my chamber, every single leader, both the Liberal party, the Labor party, the Greens and the National party stood up and welcome to the Jenkins report, spoke very much and my comments were around our generation of MPs being the generation of change. For too long sexual assault has been okayed not just in our workplace but in many workplaces in the broader community in Australia. It’s not OK anywhere, anytime. And I’m very buoyed by the fact that all sides of politics, all parties, agree on that. McKenzie is asked if she thinks the five Liberal MPs who crossed the floor “misled” the government (as Peter Dutton has claimed). This is what she said: Well obviously I’m disappointed that government MPs who won an election in 2019 on the back of delivering a religious discrimination bill chose to at the 11th hour not support the government’s position. That’s always disappointing because we took that to the election and we won the election on the basis of that. McKenzie: It would be inappropriate and actually negligent for us to immediately the next day actually pass the bill that we don’t know the impact of those amendments to the Senate. McKenzie on religious discrimination: We ran on delivering a religious discrimination act and heavily consulted on that. The bill that was put before parliament this week was actually a compromise between faith groups, the broader community – making sure that we had an a religious discrimination bill that balanced the competing rights, shall we say. It’s always about competing rights and getting the balance right. We heavily consulted that bill in the broader community and the consensus position was put to the House. McKenzie has been asked about the government failing to deliver the religious discrimination bill – an election promise in 2019. It was a larger commitment and we put that to the floor of the House of Representatives and it passed. Unfortunately, because of matters within the Senate and the waging of amendments that Labor put on the table in the wee hours of the morning ... we were unable to proceed without into the Senate. The minister for emergency management and national recovery and resilience, Bridget McKenzie, is on the ABC right now. She is talking bushfire funding. The Australian government continues to stand with those bushfire affected communities, long into the recovery, because we know it takes time. You mentioned in your early comments we put $280m on the table for our bushfire recovery grants program, to get those locally led recovery solutions, and because of the calibre of applications were received, from right across those communities we’ve been able to extend that funding by $110m, to see $390m into communities. These 524 projects across the 110 local government that were affected during those devastating fires, include things like not just the community infrastructure type of project we are seeing here in Wodonga, but support for our emergency service providers and those longer-term social support projects like mental health support. The $390m [builds] on and is included in our over $2.2bn we have put on the table. The Australian Capital Territory’s top prosecutor has issued a warning against “officers of the court and public figures” making public comment on active cases following the furore over prime minister Scott Morrison’s comments to Brittany Higgins. Morrison was forced to clarify comments to Higgins earlier in the week relating to her time in parliament. The comments prompted a rebuke from Warwick Korn, the lawyer representing the man accused of her rape, Bruce Lehrmann, and other leading legal figures, who feared they could be prejudicial. From AAP: Queensland’s health chief is “personally reluctant” to repeal a venue vaccine mandate before the end of winter and says it could in fact be the very last pandemic restriction ditched. The state’s Omicron outbreak peaked on January 25 with 928 patients in hospital and 71 in intensive care, well below a predicted 3000-7000 general admissions and an ICU intake of several hundred. Double-dose vaccine coverage is above 90 per cent and natural immunity high, with at least 343,000 Queenslanders having officially had Covid-19. Chief health officer Dr John Gerrard, who hasn’t knowingly had the virus himself, believes the real number could be as high as 1.7 million. He says infection and vaccination have created “a substantial wall of immunity”. But easing remaining restrictions – mandatory indoor face masks, vaccine mandates in venues, and quarantine and isolation – will depend on what happens over the next two months. Authorities are wary of the virus spreading in schools, which reopened this week, and the onset of winter. After the week we had in federal politics, I thought it would be good to highlight the trans-inclusive schools that are changing lives through inclusion. You can read more here: Two bushfire warnings in Western Australia’s south have been downgraded from emergency to watch and act. Authorities are still warning though that there is a possible threat to lives and homes in Hopetoun in the shire of Ravensthorpe, on the state’s south coast, and part of the Jerramungup townsite in the Great Southern. Evacuation centres have been set up in both areas. More info here: NSW has lost 32 more people to Covid-19, 1650 people are in hospital and of those, 104 are in ICU. Vicotria has lost 19 more people to Covid-19 while there are 487 people in hospital, and of those 79 are in ICU. The stability of the Indo-Pacific will also be in danger if Russia is allowed to threaten Ukraine with impunity, the US secretary of state has warned during a visit to Australia. Antony Blinken said on Friday there were “very troubling signs of Russian escalation”, adding: “We’re in a window when an invasion could begin at any time – and to be clear, that includes during the Olympics.” He said the US would continue to draw down its embassy in Kyiv and reiterated calls for any American citizens who remain in Ukraine to leave immediately, following Joe Biden’s comment that “things could go crazy quickly”. From AAP: Australian health authorities are hoping the availability of the Novavax Covid vaccine from Monday will inject new momentum into the program. So far 93.9% of Australians over 16 are double-dosed, according to official figures. But the second-dose rate is below this in Western Australia, Queensland, South Australia, the Northern Territory and Victoria. Some people have been holding off getting vaccinated until the protein-based Novavax was approved and rolled out. Novavax will be made available at GP clinics, community pharmacies and state-run vaccine clinics. The first batches of the vaccine arrived in the country earlier this week, with the government having purchased 51 million Novavax doses. “Despite high vaccination rates in Australia, there has been demand for a protein-based formula. For some people, the arrival of Novavax will be the extra push they need to get their first jab,” health minister Greg Hunt said. The company behind Australia’s offshore processing regime on Nauru made a $101m profit last financial year – more than $500,000 for each of the fewer than 200 people held on the island. Rard No 3, the holding company for Canstruct International, which has the government contract to run the Nauru offshore processing centre, has more than $340m in cash and investments, according to its most recent accounts filed with the corporate regulator. When Canstruct International was initially awarded the Nauru contract in 2017 the company had $8 in assets. Read more from Ben Doherty and Ben Butler here: After almost 11 years of Coalition dominance in New South Wales, could Labor be about to mount its comeback? Saturday’s byelections in four New South Wales state electorates are likely to have wide-ranging impacts. The worst case scenario for the premier, Dominic Perrottet, would see the state government lose its stable majority in the lower house of parliament. More likely, though, is that these byelections could set the tone for next year’s state election. Read Ben Raue’s analysis of today’s byelections here: Good morning, Stuart MacFarlane here to guide you through the news this Saturday morning for the next hour or so. Polling day has arrived for four New South Wales electorates heading to the ballot box in byelections triggered by the resignations of senior state MPs. Within days of former premier Gladys Berejiklian quitting her leadership in October, the then Nationals leader, John Barilaro, former transport minister Andrew Constance and former Labor leader Jodi McKay announced they would leave state parliament too. They left vacant the Sydney seats of Willoughby and Strathfield, and regional seats of Bega and Monaro. The contest to find their replacements is the first electoral test for Dominic Perrottet and Chris Minns and comes a year before all NSW voters heads to the polls in a general election. But election day is likely to look quite different than previously due to precautions put in place amid the state’s Omicron Covid wave. Voters have previously needed a suitable reason to vote early, or via post, but all constituents in the four seats were this time allowed to do either. However that means results will be delayed, NSW electoral commissioner John Schmidt has warned. Further protests against vaccine mandates are expected in Canberra today, with police predicting protest numbers will reach up to 4,000 on Saturday before a planned march to Parliament House today. Authorities are also preparing for the possibility the protesters will target and disrupt a “Superhero Day” being held at the mass vaccination site at the Australian Institute of Sport, which is aimed at boosting child vaccination rates. Anti-vaccination protesters have been ordered to leave Exhibition Park in Canberra, where they have been staying for more than a week, by Sunday. Emergency bushfire warnings have been issued for residents in parts of Jerramungup, Hopetoun and Mount Sheridan in Western Australia. “You are in danger and need to act immediately to survive. There is a threat to lives and homes,” the Department of Fire and Emergency Services warnings said. All fires were out of control and conditions were worsening for the Jerramungup fire, which was moving fast in a southeasterly direction. Residents in the three communities have been advised to leave for a safer place if the way is clear or to shelter in their homes if they cannot leave. We will also have all the latest Covid news. Let’s jump in.Andrew Miller is interested in human failure – specifically “those sudden tests of worth and courage” which, if not passed, can destroy a life, as the exiled Hungarian playwright László Lázár finds in 2001’s Oxygen. Many years ago, a few seconds’ hesitation by Lázár led to his lover’s death, and he’s been trying to reconstruct his idea of who he is ever since. Miller’s novels are often built around such moments of disruption: Oxygen gives us not just Lázár himself, but the ironically named Alec Valentine, who is aware that he is letting down his terminally ill mother through his own incapacity to love. At other times the disruption is a broader failure to connect: in Miller’s 1997 debut, Ingenious Pain, we meet James Dyer, an 18th-century doctor who can’t feel either pain or pleasure, while 2015’s The Crossing features the scientist Maud Stamp (another of Miller’s carefully chosen names), whose blunt sense of purpose translates into a profound emotional isolation from those around her. Most recently Captain John Lacroix, the hero of 2018’s Now We Shall Be Entirely Free, set during the Napoleonic wars, is tormented by the mistakes he made during the British retreat to Corunna. Miller’s ninth novel revisits the theme, and it’s handled in a way that is bolder and more exquisitely menacing than anything he’s done before. Stephen Rose is a former soldier and recovering alcoholic who served in Northern Ireland during the Troubles. Thirty years later he’s living quietly in Somerset, trying to establish a relationship with his daughter, Maggie, whose upbringing he missed. He is in infrequent contact with Maggie’s mother, Evie (the memory of their youthful love affair is, as her name suggests, a lost Eden). Stephen has a job at a garden centre called Plant World: plants and gardens are important in a story that draws on the work of the Romantic poets in a way that’s unabashedly allusive, but entirely Miller’s own. This Rose is, in William Blake’s phrase, sick. He has a canker, an invisible “slow worm” of regret, that is consuming his life. Like Lacroix, he is crucified by the memory of a particular failure of judgment: in this case, an incident that took place in Ardoyne, north Belfast, in the distant summer of 1982, when he was a new recruit to the British army. The question of what exactly happened that day (there are conscious echoes of Bloody Sunday here) is resurrected when he receives a summons to an inquiry in Belfast. Instead of responding immediately, he begins to write a version of his past for Maggie that’s both a confession and a love letter. It’s also a peculiarly moving account of casual youthful error, and of the hell that such errors can send us to. When Stephen says that the document he is writing seems like “a record of madness”, we believe him. Miller delineates the details of life in an urban barracks: the boredom, the pointless routine, the obsessive pursuit of order as a bulwark against introspection. He conjures the fear and the confusion of being out on patrol, “everything on you jangling, shifting, chafing, your breath coming hard”, with extraordinary immediacy. But he’s equally good at evoking its opposite, the dream of a pastoral escape, in the shape of the “damp, untidy acre of Somerset” where Stephen grows up and to which he retreats after the disaster of Belfast. For a while Stephen lives rough beneath apple trees, though this period is never sentimentalised (when a letter from Evie about their daughter doesn’t reach him, he remarks dryly: “Even in Somerset letters are not delivered to orchards”). We intuit that he might achieve redemption in this bucolic setting when he reads a biography of “the country poet John Clare” to his dying father, a countryman and lifelong Quaker. Clare, you’ll remember, had spells of extraordinary poetic lucidity, in between going periodically mad. So, what happened in Belfast? What did Stephen do? The revelation, when it comes, is unsensational: a pitiful, inadvertent atrocity, and all the more shocking for that. The title of The Slowworm’s Song is taken from an image in Basil Bunting’s poem Briggflatts, but the novel sits far closer to Clare’s ecstatic apprehension of the beauty and terror at the heart of the created world, and shares that poet’s awareness of the world’s relentless drive to renew itself. “I have been drenched, been drunk,” Stephen says, as Clare himself might have, “been right at the edge of what I could bear, and at times filled with a sort of simple hopefulness that seems to flow out of hedgerows and from the tips of grass.” At the level of the sentence, the writing is near perfect. But the novel’s excellence goes far beyond this. There’s a depth and a sweetness, a gravity, to Stephen’s simplest observations, such as his remark, of his dying father stumbling across the landing – “I know the creak of his sandals, the clicking of the little bones in his ankles” – that sets it apart. Miller is awake to the dreadful ordinariness of death (and life), in all its manifestations, and all its narrative forms. There are kinds of elective silence that shut down meaning, and others – the Quaker kind, perhaps – that open it up. As Stephen’s rehab counsellor tells him: “We have to be careful not to get trapped in our own stories. That’s one of the things we can learn.” Though the truth is elusive, it’s not impossible to discover it. “Are the men here not already real? Am I not?” Stephen asks after a rehab therapy session in which he’s challenged to access his “real” self. It’s all real, and all fictional, gorgeously so. You read what might have been a perfectly commonplace story of failure and redemption with your pulse racing, all your senses awake. Miller’s last novel didn’t make the Booker list, but this restrained, beautifully written apologia for our common frailty surely should. • Elizabeth Lowry’s novel The Chosen will be published by Riverrun in April. The Slowworm’s Song by Andrew Miller is published by Sceptre (£18.99). To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Government attacks on judges and lawyers are fuelling distrust of the courts and encouraging bogus notions of ancient “common law” being pushed by conspiracy theorists, according to the Law Society. The use of bogus interpretations of common law to portray courts, fines and regulations, particularly in relation to the Covid-19, as invalid or wrong is becoming an increasingly common strand across the full spectrum of extremist groups, ranging from anti-vax conspiracy theorists to the far right. The trend – which draws on non-existent common law and has seen activists handing out fake legal “writs” at schools and hospitals as well as alleging crimes by doctors and journalists – was a factor this week during the harassment of the Labour leader, Keir Starmer, when extremists in viral footage of the incident could be heard yelling at him to “protect the constitution”. It briefly brought what is a fringe theory into the public eye, and the movement is growing at pace on social media channels, anti-vaccine newspapers and in the real world. Training classes in bogus common law are being held around the country by a range of groups, in some cases run by military veterans who are blending it with training in civil disobedience tactics. One group is running classes around the country at up to £20 a person to train “an army of common law constables” who are “mandated to uphold constitutional laws” by exercising arrests and attending where the “rights of members are subject to intervention from bailiffs, council employees or police officers and other agencies”. It claims to have trained 850 “constables.” Beyond the activities of extremist groups, the bogus theories have gained traction among members of the public such as a West Yorkshire hair salon owner who was fined thousands of pounds after attempting to keep her business open during lockdown by putting a sign in the window citing article 61 of Magna Carta. However, legal figures warned that a number of factors may be fuelling the growth of the bogus theories, while experts on extremism warned of the potential long-term risks for the growth of activism which regarded courts, authorities and the government as illegitimate. Ellie Cumbo, head of public law at the Law Society, described what was being propagated as a “wildly out of date” notion of the law which had been superseded by the modern court system and civil procedure rules. In terms of such beliefs taking root, she added: “You might ask whether some government rhetoric around judges, such as during the Brexit debate and the case relating to the prorogation of parliament, has played a role.” Cumbo cited media coverage such as a Daily Mail headline describing judges during the Brexit debate as “enemies of the people” as well as a description in a Home Office video – since removed – of lawyers providing advice to migrants as “activist lawyers”. The Law Society has said the description was “misleading and dangerous”. Boris Johnson, who heavily criticised the supreme court in 2020 after judges ruled that his decision to suspend parliament was unlawful, has also previously claimed delays in the criminal justice system should be blamed on “lefty human rights lawyers”. Cumbo suggested that a programme of civic and constitutional education in schools, universities and adult education – recommended by the independent Human Rights Act review – could help to counter distrust and the fake interpretations of the law. However, others voiced concerns about the language used by politicians and the media. Sailesh Mehta, a barrister who also sits as a part-time crown court judge, said attacks on the rule of law were a worrying trend, including the vilification of judges, lawyers, the law and political opponents. He added: “A relatively recent variation has been an unjustified denial of the applicability of some laws and a reliance on ancient outdated laws (or even a made-up law) which the protester prefers to be bound by. If enough people subscribe to this pick-and-mix approach to law, then there will be an erosion of the rule of law which binds all democratic societies together.” Tim Squirrell, the head of communications at the Institute for Strategic Dialogue, said the modern bogus common law movement had roots in US sovereign citizen movements, making its way to the UK via Canada. It had two strands, one revolving around resistance to the state and another focusing on pseudo-legal litigation to avoid paying income tax or debts. “It can boil down to a claim that by a clever sleight of hand you can get out of everything and that is really resonant with a lot of the conspiratorial thinking around Covid, that the vaccine is fake, lockdown is illegitimate and there is a duty to wake others up. “But concerns about it come along two lines. One is around the direct action in the form of harassment of politicians and others, citizens arrests and a pseudo-legal framework. If people believe they are vested with the power of the law then it can lead to them believing that they can enforce it. “Secondly, there might be less worry in the UK that the whole movement could turn violent, but there is always the potential for individuals who act, whether by citizens’ arrests or something else. Wherever you have real conflict with the state there is also the potential for the creation of a martyr, particularly in a febrile political environment.”I was young the first time I watched porn. I didn’t have hips or enjoy eating olives. My parents still paid my phone bill and I’d never kissed anyone, despite the story I used to tell about some guy I met on my family holiday to Spain. I was on the school playing fields at lunchtime and a boy from my form came over and put his Sony Ericsson slider phone right in my face. On the screen I could see a blurred video of a woman in red suspenders pleasuring herself, letting tense breaths hiss out from behind her teeth. The space between her legs was smooth and hairless, like the skin of an unripe nectarine. She looked like I did, except I was 13 and she must have been older. “I bet you do this, don’t you?” the boy said, his eyes hidden beneath floppy hair. At the time I didn’t think much about the video, except it was a bit gross that she was doing that alone. There was no way I would have believed it affected me or that seeing more images like that eventually would. But porn was already shaping how I, and the men I would later share relationships with, viewed my body. It was implementing a code of behaviour we would draw and learn from. It was telling us what sex was when the only way we were educated about it in school was via condoms on bananas and photos of untreated gonorrhoea. *** Back in the mid 00s, gaining access to porn was still quite difficult for teenagers. Not many of us had phones that could connect to the internet, so watching it meant waiting until your parents were out or asleep, when you could sit in front of the desktop computer. I still managed it. I needed to, because everyone who should have been telling me about sex was too embarrassed to. And I wasn’t going to learn on the job: I’d overheard too many horror stories about toothy blowjobs. I wanted to learn to be like those malleable, impressive bodies. I remember being stressed about what happened between missionary, eagle and doggy because so many videos cut out when people changed positions. I wanted to watch those hidden gaps. Was it clumsy and awkward, like getting out of a car in a short dress? Do you say with your voice where you want the other person to go? Or should the voice only be used to say things such as “Don’t stop!” and “Harder!”? Many say the best people to have sex with are those with a sense of humour, who smile when you fanny fart or nearly fall off the bed. Except I didn’t see any of that when I watched porn. It looked seamless, like a choreographed dance. The only clumsy part was the bad acting at the beginning when the masseur would ask his client to lie down on the table. While the men I saw on screen did lots of different things to the women they slept with – slapping, choking, pulling, gagging – it always had the same effect. She would arch her back and moan louder. We didn’t read this as unrealistic or uninspiring because it fitted in with the world we were already learning to live with. We laughed at the guys in school, even when their jokes weren’t funny; spent our lunch breaks watching them play football, knowing that if we attempted to join in it would look as if we were trying too hard. People act as if porn has created a world in which women’s desires are placed in service of men’s, when really it is an expression of that world. When it came to having sex, my friends and I knew to pretend to like it when guys started using that aggressive gun finger motion between our legs or mistook a thigh crease for a clitoris. That seemed to be women’s role in sex, as in life: liking stuff. We were trying to make men feel good, but the whole time teaching them they didn’t need to do the same for us. “I think I’m just one of those people who doesn’t like sex,” a girl friend of mine said at the time, glum but resigned after a disappointing night with her boyfriend. *** When I was 15, MindGeek bought Pornhub, making millions of videos available for free each week. In the absence of any other guidelines, my friends and I continued to be influenced by what we saw, trying for something most of us weren’t getting much enjoyment out of. Porn stars were bald from the eyebrows down, and as we viewed them as the prototype, we copied what they did, removing what little hair was already there. I remember sitting on the bathroom tiles aged 17, breathing through my mouth in order to avoid that eggy sulphur smell in Veet hair removal cream. I moved on to razors when the hairs became coarser, ones that gave shaving rashes so itchy I often had to leave class to furiously dig my nails into the ingrown hairs. It felt more orgasmic than anything a man was doing to me. “But why would you want to look like a child?” Mum asked when she heard about girls my age giving themselves Brazilians. I just thought she didn’t get it, like she didn’t get Paramore or clothes from American Apparel. Truthfully, I didn’t give much thought to the performers in these videos and what they might be going through for my entertainment. I know, of course, that for many women it is impossible to enjoy something that is so obviously foregrounded in male pleasure at the expense of the women on screen. At the time, mainstream feminism seemed to associate almost anything sexual with liberation, and any criticisms of porn as puritanical. I was more aware of the arguments people used to patronise porn stars – telling them they couldn’t be enjoying their work even as they said they were – than I was of the porn stars themselves. But in 2015 a number of reports emerged about abuse on porn sets. I tried watching ethical porn, directed and filmed by women, but it was often behind a paywall. I wasn’t used to paying for porn, so I would stay only until the free trial ran out. From what I did see, a lot of ethical porn looked the same to me – only instead of naughty nurses on screen, the women were art dealers, and there was a nicer filter on the video. At university I got a laptop and a door with a lock on it, and then I started watching more porn. I realised that, with more of it in my life, any masturbation unaccompanied by porn made it almost impossible to climax. I used to spend ages dreaming up long, complex scenarios about teachers telling me off or that guy who smoked out of the window of the block of flats opposite. But porn made all that easy: you didn’t have to think at all because it was right there in front of you, screaming yes, yes, yes. Even if afterwards it left you with a distaste on your tongue, like when you’ve eaten loads of crisps. When I tried to masturbate without it, my hand would cramp up and all the images I tried to invent faded out. I couldn’t see anything but blankness. So I’d open up my screen again and type in “amateur”. I can see how for some people it can begin to eclipse their whole sex life. The dopamine rush from it hits you like a kick in the teeth. I spoke a lot about porn with my peers; especially my male friends. I knew that one liked glossy videos featuring women with big fake breasts, because he wanted the escapism that came from watching someone he probably would never sleep with in real life. I often dropped porn into conversation, because I was desperate to be a “cool girl” in their eyes. Someone who drinks beer and plays video games. And cool girls definitely watched porn. Only later would I find out that some of these men were questioning their own relationship with porn; that they wanted to cut down on it. A friend of mine told me that her ex-boyfriend used to watch porn on his phone four times a day, mostly in the toilet cubicle of his office building. Once, over coffee, she described to me what sex with him was like. “He could only come in one really specific position,” she said and then tried to demonstrate it to me: he would stand up and she’d be upside down on her head with her ankles either side of his head. “Often he’d shush me because he needed to concentrate on what he was doing.” My friend claimed she didn’t really mind – she just accepted she’d be uncomfortable. We’d all learned to prioritise male pleasure. *** I’m 26 now and porn is everywhere. Fifteen million UK adults said they watched porn during the pandemic. And while it kills off some people’s imaginations, it inflames others, encouraging people to become more experimental in their sex lives. Lots of my friends watch it with their partners to help them think of new positions; some have discovered their queerness through it, or kinks they had no idea about. You see this in how many guys nowadays are willing to try rimming. Initially seen as quite a taboo sexual practice, it became popularised through porn. Then rappers began referencing it in their lyrics (most notably Megan Thee Stallion’s “If he ate my ass he’s a bottom feeder” and Jhené Aiko’s “Gotta eat the booty like groceries” in Omarion’s Post to Be). Finally, it manifested in memes. It is so common now that when I was watching football with eight guy mates, they all said they do it essentially every time they have sex. I asked the only other girl at the table what she thought. “It’s quite nice having men do something … ” She paused for a moment because she couldn’t find the right word. “Something like that for our pleasure.” Porn does this a lot. It takes something previously considered niche and shows it again and again in a mainstream context until it becomes normalised. Before, if you wanted to see rough sex, you had to search deep into the corners of the internet to find it. After Pornhub and other websites like it put BDSM right next to “blowjobs” and “lesbian” and all the other categories, this made it much easier to find. By the end of university, between this, Fifty Shades of Grey and my own insecurities, I had internalised the idea that if you weren’t into hardcore stuff, you were boring in bed. A guy pulled my hair and all I could think about was whether any of it had fallen out. Someone left bruises on my bum from spanking and I dug my nails into my fist like I do when I’m getting a tattoo or a piercing and I want to distract myself from the pain. And throughout both of those experiences, I stayed true to the lesson I had learned all those years ago when I first watched porn: I pretended to like it. This pretence was present in a lot of other aspects of my life. I nodded along when men told me about albums I had already listened to, acted impressed by films I thought were boring. It’s hard to see what came first: whether I pretended to like things in life because I’d learned to do so in bed, or whether learning to do it in bed meant I did so more in life. All I know is that my entire personality was built around wanting to please. Some of my friends had worse interactions, where things veered into the nonconsensual. “He put his hand round my neck,” began a friend; she had been at a festival and gone back to a guy’s tent. “It was light at first, so I was all right with it, but he was doing it so hard I started to panic. When he stopped, I felt light-headed.” My friend is far from alone in this. In 2019, a BBC survey found that more than a third of UK women under 40 have experienced “unwanted slapping, choking, gagging or spitting” during consensual sex. A lot of people would blame this on porn, including the Centre for Women’s Justice, which said: “This is likely to be due to the widespread availability, normalisation and use of extreme pornography.” I disagree. Violence against women has a lot more to do with a society that emboldens men to position their desires above women. Though I do think there’s something to say about the way porn blurs many of the nuances of sex, especially when it comes to rough sex. In kink communities, a heavy emphasis is placed on consent: safe words and no-goes. Most porn videos show these practices – choking, restraining, spanking – without showing scenes of consent, which is necessary in order to ensure they’re safe and enjoyable for those participating. That’s fine if it’s a fantasy but not when you’ve never been taught to interpret it as such. *** My friends and I grew up with porn, but we still had a couple of years of development without it. Old phones using 3G took ages to load sites, and there were far fewer videos to choose from. But teenagers now can access it whenever they want to. In 2019, research commissioned by the British Board of Film Classification [pdf] saw more than half of 11- to 13-year-olds admitting to watching porn, rising to 66% of 14- to 15-year-olds. Sex education hasn’t changed much since I was growing up, and in a world that has become even more digital, teenagers are at real risk of receiving entirely wrong messaging about porn and sex. More and more they seem to think that porn is sex and sex is porn, and that is confirmed every time they open up their phone and watch it without anyone in school or at home telling them any different. I’m not against porn, but kids need to be told that it’s a fantasy projection, like made-up storylines on Made in Chelsea, or a show home. I hope that future generations demand more from their sex life; that they come of age with an enhanced sense of what is real and what is fake. In 2020 the government updated official guidance on relationships and sex education, for the first time in 20 years. Now compulsory from primary school, sex education must cover consent, abortion and domestic abuse. There’s also a large portion of guidance on the evolving digital cultures of sex and relationships, including sexting and porn. It shouldn’t be too hard to improve, given the last government guidance came before Instagram or iPhones. Disappointingly, though perhaps predictably, there’s no mention of pleasure. There is also concern over the flexibility of the new guidance. Schools are not being handed a curriculum but are being asked to develop their own based on the government guidelines, which are far from comprehensive. Topics to be covered are listed without any information about when or how they should be taught, meaning reluctant schools could get away with teaching one or two classes before heading back to the textbook. And given the opposition to schools teaching sex education in detail – one sex educator in the US was bombarded by the press for offering “masturbation videos for first-graders” after showing a cartoon in which two characters used anatomically correct names for their genitals – it’s likely this will be the path most taken. A teacher couldn’t have got there in time to shield my eyes from what I saw on that phone when I was 13, but they could have explained to me what to think when I did see stuff like that. Such as: porn isn’t real, all bodies look different, very often you have to show people how to touch you, and there’s a lot of trial and error involved. Yes, it can look clumsy when you change positions, but no one remembers those bits anyway. How few orgasms come that easy. That sex is a bit like a packet of Revels, where you might love the chocolate counters but hate the coffee-flavoured ones, and just because they’re all in the same packet doesn’t mean you’ll like them all. In the same way that you might like getting tied up by your hands but hate another form of bondage. Not to judge a penis by its size because sometimes it can have some imperceptible bend in it that leaves you screaming. How sometimes sex is lazy and slow and much hotter for it. That there are times when you don’t think you’re going to orgasm and then suddenly you’re twitching on the bed like roadkill. Then I would have enjoyed porn from an arm’s-length distance rather than trying to bring it into my bed and act it out, like a ventriloquist’s dummy. I still watch porn, but I don’t see it as a manual on how I should behave. I see it as a way of getting out of my head after a long day, something to make me excited about sex again when things have stagnated with a partner. I’ve become more confident and, as a result, men’s approval seems less pivotal, making it easier to say what I want, both during sex and outside it. Male pleasure is not the only focus. What I want is, too. Plus, I have other ways to learn. I’m not afraid of embarrassing myself in front of my girl friends any more, so I ask lots of questions about sex. “Do you guys still shave everything off?” I asked one of my girl friends the other day. “No, I stopped that a while ago,” she said. “I want to look more womanly now.” Recently, I’ve been thinking about growing my pubic hair out, but I don’t even know what colour those short, dark spikes would smooth out into. I’m naturally strawberry blond, so maybe it would be ginger? Or mousy brown? I asked another friend who trims and waxes hers into a bikini line and she sent me a reference picture. And I thought about how strange it is that I’m so far away from my body that I don’t even know what the natural state of it might look like. But I’ll find my way back.Climate change is terrifying, so why don’t we do more to stop it? Read any headline on the climate crisis, and it seems unbelievable that we’re not all chaining ourselves to the headquarters of oil and gas companies, or at least hammering on MPs’ office doors. But we’re not. “Of course, I care about climate change,” we say. “But … ” Then they come out, the reasons for apathy. We’ve all heard them. We’ve probably all said some of them. But do they really excuse us? Let’s look at some of them, starting with: “It’s so far in the future.” It’s not. This is already happening: in wildfires, storms and floods in Europe, Australia, the US and the UK, and in decades of devastation in the global south. The victims of climate change include future generations, but they also include the 11-year-old in Bangladesh whose friend drowned, the New Orleans family who lost everything in Hurricane Katrina and the girl forced into child marriage because her parents can no longer feed her. Even if this were “just” about future generations, they matter too. Because they are our children and grandchildren, and because they are people. Take the least controversial moral rule you’re likely to find: don’t seriously harm other people. Suppose, says the philosopher Henry Shue, you plant a landmine on a busy path. That’s wrong if it will explode tomorrow. It’s still wrong if it won’t go off for another 150 years. Climate change is that landmine – and a whole lot more of them. “It’s too expensive!” This is the so-called economic argument against mitigating climate change: that it’s cheaper to adjust to a hotter planet. Even if this were factually unassailable (spoiler alert: it’s not), it would be morally flawed. It relies on what philosophers call utilitarianism – the view that we should maximise overall welfare (often, in practice, overall money) even if some people suffer desperately along the way. That’s in direct contradiction to the most basic intuition of commonsense morality. It disregards human rights. Even if we swallowed this pill, it takes another questionable assumption to make the anti-mitigation sums add up. These economic arguments, says the philosopher Simon Caney, assume that future people’s pain, even their deaths, count for less in the cost-benefit calculations if these are further in the future. That isn’t standard economic discounting; it’s discounting the lives of our descendants. “It’s the government’s problem.” Climate change is a catastrophic failure by governments. But we are voters, and governments act on our behalf. Many of us are drivers, flyers, meat-eaters. Morally speaking, we can share responsibility for harms we are part of or those we fail to prevent between us. I’m not saying you (or I) should feel guilty about this unfolding global disaster, but we should feel ashamed. We should act. “I’m already vegan and don’t fly.” This one is the flipside to “it’s all the government’s fault”: putting it all on individuals. That’s inefficient, unfair, and doesn’t work anyway. Going car-free is harder without a good public transport system; leaving mitigation to individuals means putting all the burden on those who happen to make the effort. And individual carbon-cutting, although important, isn’t enough. It won’t avert this catastrophe without governments on board or fossil fuel giants being held accountable. Faced with institutional failure, we shouldn’t feel powerless, but we should all be climate activists, using our own actions to bring about change from above. “Lying in front of lorries isn’t my thing.” So don’t do that! But perhaps look past the optics that make you uncomfortable and ask yourself why anyone would feel desperate enough to glue themselves to a road. It’s not because they enjoy it. Then ask what it is that you will do. Write to your MP? Wave banners outside parliament? Demand that your bank or pension fund divest from fossil fuels? Donate to climate justice NGOs? Progress takes a combination of tactics, from lobbying politicians to civil disobedience. Do what you’re good at, as part of a bigger picture. “I won’t make a difference.” But we could. And that should matter to each of us. Philosophers explain this in various ways. Sure, some say, it probably won’t change the world if you turn up to a protest or ditch your car. But you might be a trigger, making the protest big enough for politicians to listen, saving untold lives. In any case, you would have helped – by being part of the group who made a difference. And what’s the alternative? Sitting on the sidelines, while others right this collective wrong? That’s not fair on them. “I’ve got enough to do already!” I get this. I really do. But climate justice isn’t some esoteric goal. It’s about living in a way that doesn’t kill people: doesn’t drown them, burn their homes or give them malaria. So how much money or time or emotional effort should each of us put in for this basic collective morality? I don’t have a final answer because the ethical debate is continuing. But I have an answer that will do for now, for those living comfortably in rich countries. However much we should do to avert this tragedy, it’s more than most of us do now. Elizabeth Cripps is a writer and moral philosopher at the University of Edinburgh, and author of What Climate Justice Means and Why We Should CareAround the Tory heartland of Chichester, the government’s promise to build 300,000 homes a year has prompted loyal followers to take to the streets in protest. At first glance it might look like nimbyism, but dig deeper and the uprising exposes a problem that touches on England’s national infrastructure, the climate crisis and an ongoing environmental scandal. People in the towns, villages and hamlets stretching west and south from Chichester live in an area served by Southern Water, which was fined a record £90m last year for illegally discharging billions of litres of raw sewage into the protected coastal waters off the south coast of Hampshire and Kent. Much of the sewage infrastructure in the area is at capacity or nearly at capacity, as the case against the water company exposed. Chichester, Thornham, Lavant and Bosham wastewater treatment works have been identified by Southern Water as “environmentally constrained” – they cannot take more volumes without harm to the environment. But the pressure is on areas such as Chichester to take their share of the government’s housing target. According to the district council, the allocation for the area is 638 dwellings a year from 2021 to 2039, equating to 10,778 over the whole period. In the next five years alone, it means Chichester and its surrounding areas will host more than 3,000 new homes under government allocation. Nearly 70% of the land, however, is a national park, so the housing would be concentrated in 20-30% to the west and south of the city. The government has so far refused requests by the council to be treated as an exceptional case and have its housing allocation reduced. Susan Taylor, the council’s deputy leader and cabinet member for planning, said it was working on a review of its local plan to show ministers what level of housing might be achievable. “We have publicly said that we do not believe this target is achievable as things stand, due to infrastructure constraints,” said Taylor. One problem is transport links, with heavy congestion on the A27. Sewage infrastructure is another concern. “Wastewater treatment plants are reaching the limits of their permits and headroom,” Taylor said. To keep the system from backing up into people’s homes, untreated sewage and wastewater continues to be discharged, often for days at a time, from treatment works into Chichester harbour, one of the most highly protected marine environments in England. Demonstrators who took to the streets last month carrying banners saying “Save our south coast” are concerned that any more pressure on wastewater treatment works will cause an environmental disaster. Mike Owens, who co-founded the Clean Harbours Partnership, said: “All five sewage treatment works close by are all at, or very close to, their maximum capacity, yet development continues unabated and Southern Water investment plans are not accurately tracking demand. We are now at a stage where, due to insufficient capacity, illegal sewage discharges are inevitably going to be routine, dumping human waste and unacceptable concentrations of chemicals into our harbours. “We are demanding that councils, water companies and regulators collaborate to … ensure any development does not proceed until sufficient and operational sewage infrastructure is in place to protect our precious environment.” If crumbling concrete and pipes are one issue, the threat of the climate crisis is another constraint on the scale of housebuilding demanded. Much of the land that would have to support housing is surrounded by water. On the Manhood peninsula, home to the coastal villages of East and West Wittering and Selsey, climate maps predict much of the land will be underwater in just a few decades. Joan Foster, the chair of the Save the Manhood Peninsula campaign, said: “The potential for sea level rises could put most of the Manhood underwater in 50 years’ time. It is simply immoral to build houses and ask people to settle there knowing this.” More than 5,000 people have signed a petition addressed to Michael Gove, the housing secretary, calling on him to stop development on the Manhood peninsula and in villages around the harbour. Several hundred people marched through Chichester last month. “Protesting like this is very unusual for Chichester. It is a true blue Tory seat but people are very concerned,” said Foster. She said the delay in completion of the review of the local plan – due in 2019 but now expected by 2023-4 – left the whole area vulnerable to speculative planning applications for housing from developers. Roger Mavity, also of the Save the Manhood Peninsula campaign, has collated data on development. He said there were 378 homes recently completed or under construction, 832 going through the planning application process, and space for a further 1,248 classified as “developable” under the housing and economic land availability assessment. “So that’s potentially 2,458 new homes on the drawing board as we speak,” he said. Next month developers will appeal against a refusal by the council to allow the building of 70 homes outside East Wittering. Sandra Norval, a future growth leader at Southern Water, said there were options to be explored such as using long sea outfalls for effluent, and in a project due to be completed this spring, wastewater was being diverted from Chichester treatment plants via a new pipeline to Tangmere wastewater treatment works, which does not discharge into the harbour. She said the company was working with the best available technology to remove nutrients from wastewater to the level required, and any increase in volumes into wastewater treatment plants would have to involve changing permits with the Environment Agency or using as yet undeveloped technology. The state of the sewage system presented a “challenging obstacle to development, which we are working hard to overcome, in partnership with all the key stakeholders in the area,” she said. A spokesperson from the Department for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities said: “Councils, not central government, set their own housing targets in their local plan. Our guidance should be considered alongside local constraints, including the need for infrastructure to support new development, and consideration for the environment.”There’s not much that I miss about my youth, but if I could permanently restore my lost smattering of nose freckles, I would. Few things are as attractive as a constellation of pigment clusters imprinted across the face, and the more densely they’re packed, the less makeup you’ll need to wear (a girlfriend of mine is covered completely in freckles and it’s as though she wakes up each morning in a perfect face of foundation). That said, women with freckles will simultaneously have other skin concerns and may crave coverage, but I’d urge them not to throw the baby out with the bathwater. A thick foundation will send freckles grey and dull. Better to unify the surrounding skin tone with a clean, more transparent base like Chanel’s Les Beiges Water Fresh Tint (£50) or, for a little more coverage, MAC Cosmetics Face &amp; Body Foundation (£32 for a bottle four times the size of most). Then use a full coverage concealer to camouflage any spots or dark circles. Those bereft of their former freckles, or those who’ve never known the joy at all, can fake them if they’ve the inclination. There are now several faux freckle pens on the market, Freck (£17) being the original and most famous, but for something so novelty, I’d suggest Lottie London Freckle Tint, for a less risky £6.95. Whichever you choose, the most natural application method is to get as many freckles from each brush-to-pot dip as possible – this mimics the naturally varied shade density of real melanin dots – some lighter or smaller, some darker or bigger. When the dotted-on freckles are semi-dry, tap your finger on to them, and then again on to the unmarked surrounding skin, effectively copy and pasting your freckles across the nose and cheeks. This haphazard, blurry approach gives an authentically scattered freckle pattern, as opposed to the uniformly dotted brow pencil method that unfailingly looks too St Trinian’s fancy dress. It’s a fun, pretty look to try once in a while, though its wash-off nature makes it a faff for anything approaching daily wear. That said, do not make like a TikToker and use longer lasting henna, unless you’ve got your technique down and are absolutely sure it’s natural henna sold specifically for skin, not hair. Never, ever use “black henna” (PPD dye that can trigger a reaction and kickstart lifelong allergies), and remember any errors will take days to fade.The cost of living crisis is poised to deepen in April, when national insurance contributions will rise by 1.25 percentage points, just as inflation, energy and water bills soar. There may not be a way to reduce your outgoings but it is possible to boost what you have coming into your account or to make your earnings go further. Do as much ‘salary sacrifice’ as you can From 6 April 2022, the planned rise in national insurance contributions means a worker earning £30,000 a year will see their take-home pay fall by £17 a month, or £214 a year, while someone earning £50,000 will lose £38 a month, or £456 a year. However, you may be able to avoid some of this increase in your bill by paying for some things before you are taxed. Your employer may allow you to buy a bike or purchase an ultra-low emission car via a salary sacrifice scheme. These payments are taken off your gross income. The lower your gross income, the less you must pay in income tax and national insurance contributions. “A lot of employees aren’t aware of the savings they can make by opting in to salary sacrifice,” says Dan Tomassen, a spokesperson for the accountancy firm HW Fisher. This is particularly true of employees who have been auto-enrolled into a pension scheme, he says. “A lot of the time, the pension deductions that the employee has to contribute are taken from their net salary – so after tax has been deducted.” However, salary sacrifice schemes allow employers to reduce your gross salary in return for paying directly into your pension, thus reducing the amount of national insurance you have to pay on your lowered salary. Note that your employer may allow you to donate to charity via a payroll giving scheme, such as the Charities Aid Foundation’s Give as You Earn programme. The donations will not reduce your national insurance contributions because they are taken from your pay after these are removed. However, they are taken before income tax is calculated and deducted, which could lower your tax bracket and reduce the amount of tax you pay. Employees used to be able to pay for childcare through salary sacrifice but that scheme has been replaced and is only available to those who signed up before October 2018. Another option, if your employer offers a share incentive plan, is to buy “partnership shares” in the company you work for out of your pre-tax salary. This will cut the amount of national insurance you have to pay this year and – if you keep the shares for at least five years – you will never pay any income tax on their value. However, you may be liable for capital gains tax if the shares increase in value. Claim your unused tax allowances Another way to offset the national insurance increase is to take advantage of tax allowances you are entitled to claim. For example, if you have been told to work from home – no matter how often – you are entitled to help from HMRC with expenses such as energy, internet costs and business calls. Your employer can pay you a fixed amount of up to £6 a week, tax free, to cover these costs or you can claim tax relief on £6 a week from the government instead. “Your claim can be backdated for the last tax year as well, and even if you only worked at home for one day in the tax year, you can claim for the entire year,” says Paul Gibbons, a payroll specialist at PayDashboard. Bear in mind you will get relief at the rate at which you pay tax – so a basic-rate taxpayer will get £1.20 a week in tax relief (20% of £6), while a higher-rate taxpayer will get £2.40 a week. This means basic-rate taxpayers who work from home can claw back £62.40 a year in tax, while higher rate taxpayers are entitled to £124.80. Another tax relief you may be able to claim is the marriage allowance, which applies not only to marriages but also to civil partnerships. About 2.4 million eligible couples are estimated to be missing out on this tax relief, worth up to £252 a year. “A lot of people don’t actually know this allowance exists,” Gibbons says. To claim, one member of the couple must earn less than £12,570 and their spouse or civil partner must be a basic-rate taxpayer. “Cohabitation is not sufficient,” says Emma Rawson, a technical officer at the Association of Taxation Technicians. You can backdate your claim to any tax year since 5 April 2017 that you were eligible, and if your spouse or civil partner has died since then, you can still claim by calling HMRC. If you are required to wear a specific uniform at work, you may be able to claim tax relief on the cost of buying, cleaning, repairing or replacing it. This is “one of the most underused deductions that is available to a lot of people”, Tomassen says. To qualify for the relief, you must be required to wear “clothing of a specialised nature that is recognisable as a uniform”, which demonstrates to a member of the public that you have a particular occupation. If your employer simply asks you to turn up to work wearing a shirt in a certain colour, you won’t qualify. You can claim the relief on the cost of repairing or replacing “small tools” such as drill bits or scissors you need to do your job, along with specialist boots or particular shoes you need to wear as part of your uniform. It is worth noting that a deduction is not permitted for personal protective equipment. The standard sum you can claim tax relief on is £60 a year, so basic-rate taxpayers who claim this relief will be £12 better off, while higher-rate taxpayers will get £24. Some industries qualify for larger allowances. An NHS ambulance worker who launders their uniform at home, for example, can claim tax relief on £185 of uniform expenses each year, meaning they will take home an extra £74 a year if they are a higher-rate taxpayer. Check you are claiming benefits you are entitled to It takes only 10 minutes, on average, to check whether there are state benefits you may be entitled to claim via the free benefits calculator on entitledto.co.uk. “We think that around £15bn of benefits are unclaimed across the population,” said Dr Phil Agulnik, an entitledto director. The main problem, he says, is that people assume their income is too high to qualify for any benefits, “so they don’t bother checking”. In fact, means-tested benefits are awarded by assessing your income and your needs. “The more needs you’ve got, the more likely you are to qualify because you need more help,” Agulnik says. Pensioners with large council tax bills and people who are in work but on a low income are often entitled to claim more benefits than they realise, he says. You may be eligible for universal credit, for example, even if you have a job. This benefit acts like a passport, enabling you to then claim other benefits. Recipients of universal credit may be entitled to help with health costs, housing grants, free school meals, energy efficient grants and the warm home discount. So even if you discover you are only eligible to receive a few pennies of universal credit each week, it is worth claiming this benefit to gain access to other help you may be entitled to. “Check it for yourself,” Agulnik urges. “Go through the calculator – £15bn is a lot of money.” Unclaimed benefits: who is missing out? Entitledto’s estimates of unclaimed benefits are based on what it describes as “sketchy statistics” because published government data is not good – and it is about to get worse. The Department for Work and Pensions recently put out a notice saying that it would no longer be publishing takeup rates for a number of benefits paid to working-age adults. Of the benefits included in the figures, the two largest relate to housing – an estimated 900,000 families have been missing out on housing benefit worth a total of £2.8bn. Council tax support – a reduction of up to 100% of your bill – was going unclaimed by 2.8 million families (although the figures were last updated more than a decade ago). That help was worth a combined £2.6bn. Hundreds of thousands of households were also missing out on child tax credit or working tax credit, with about £2.5bn of each going unclaimed. Hilary Osborne • This article was amended on 12 February 2022. The relevant earnings for marriage allowance eligibility are less than £12,570, not £12,500. It was further amended on 16 and 17 February 2022 to clarify how salary sacrifice schemes work in relation to pension contributions to help reduce national insurance contributions and tax; and to make clear that charitable giving via such schemes will not affect NICs. Also, it is not possible to claim housing benefit or tax credits while on universal credit.The tables have turned. When Manchester United step out at the Academy Stadium on Sunday they will do so with a five-point advantage over Manchester City. Aided by an injury crisis that has strangled the first third of City’s season, United are nine games away from finishing above them for the first time in their short history. With the gap closing, the relatively new rivalry is intensifying. For the United forward Leah Galton there is nothing quite like the derby. “It’s probably one of the best feelings,” she says. “It gives the game a bit more hunger and bite, you just want to put that extra challenge in and to go that extra mile.” The game is sold out, albeit still with a reduced capacity because of Covid, and a record crowd being on the cards reinforces the sense the rivalry is increasing. Ellen White’s late equaliser denied United the win in the reverse fixture and City are finding their rhythm now as injured players have returned, but United are the more in-sync unit. That, though, has also taken time, with the players having to get to grips with the vision of Marc Skinner, who replaced Casey Stoney as manager during the summer. “I can’t speak for any of the other girls, it was hard to understand it because I’m not great with change and there was a lot of change come the summer,” says Galton. “So first of all I just had to get my head around change and that’s why it took me a while to buy in and get on the same page as everyone. But we’re all pretty much there now.” That is perhaps an understatement. United have been in scintillating form and Galton has been a key component of an attacking triumvirate with Ella Toone and Alessia Russo. Skinner’s arrival perhaps hit Galton harder than most. The winger credits Stoney for reigniting her love for football after a break away from the game from which she may not have returned. “It was definitely very hard to see her go after everything she put into the team, the club and myself. She definitely made me fall in love with football again,” says the 27-year-old. “I’m just trying to continue what she taught me really and trying to keep myself in a good place with the game. Right now I think I am. I have a lot to thank her for.” Under Skinner she is a bit “more defensively minded” while trying to make sure she is in the box more and getting among the goals. It was her assist and then two goals in quick succession against a Birmingham team buoyed up by a win over Arsenal the preceding week, and a goal against Tottenham, that earned her the Barclays WSL player of the month award for January. “I did smile after those goals because getting in at the back post is the main thing we’d been working on all week in training,” says Galton. “I found myself in the box in the right place at the right time with some really good deliveries from Less and Tooney, so I’ve just got to be thankful that my teammates can deliver a good ball.” It was in January last season that United’s title challenge started to flag as injuries took hold. Galton was among those sidelined and struggled with the demands of rehab. She “hated not being able to play and help the team”. However, she says time out is an important part of maintaining her enjoyment of the game and that is why she decided not to make herself available for England during Phil Neville’s tenure. It is something she has discussed with the new manager, Sarina Wiegman. “She’s really nice, a really good person, very understanding,” says Galton. “She knows where I’m at mentally about the England situation. I’ve been open and honest with everybody and I want people to know that it’s not anything to do with the setup or the girls. It’s more about me having my own time and having a break when everyone else goes around national duty, I need that time to myself. “It’s something I have noted in my life that I need. Otherwise, I get too stuck into work mode. Then I start not enjoying it. Instead, when I come back from that break it’s nice because it’s refreshing and I’m excited to get back on the pitch.” You get the impression that, given the chance, Galton would happily avoid the spotlight. However, as a flair player, full of attacking intensity, it is hard for her not to be noticed and at times she even embraces it, not least through the elaborate hairstyles courtesy of her fiancee, Sheridan Douglas. Having the pick of the Barmy Army’s extensive list of chants – “Whoa oh, we’ve got Leah Galton” – speaks to the fondness United’s fanbase has for her, too. “After a game, to be honest, I do sometimes wake up singing it in my head, which is kind of annoying, but kind of good at the same time.” Does Douglas go round singing it to wind her up? “Yeah, she does,” she says with a laugh. “All the time.” • Leah Galton is the Barclays WSL player of the month for January. Read our interview with December’s player of the month, Ella Toone, here.What is common law? It forms part of the systems of law – used in jurisdictions of the UK as well as in many places that used to be part of the British empire – based on precedents from judges’ decisions rather than in statutory law. Common law is made by judges who study reports of older cases which have been decided and then derive principles from them that will be applied by other judges in future. What are the bogus common law beliefs? They vary, but activists and others believe they can draw on Magna Carta and ancient English law to challenge or ignore regulations and even bring politicians, scientists and journalists before supposed common law courts for “crimes”. Such courts have no legal existence, nor do bogus writs, which anti-vaccine activists have been “serving” at schools and hospitals, calling for the administration and promotion of Covid-19 vaccines to be halted. Common law writs or common law courts do not exist, nor do “common law constables”, which some activists have been “training” in order to form physical barriers against what they wrongly believe are the “unlawful” actions of the police and other legitimate authorities. Where did it come from? The modern bogus “common law” movement had roots in US sovereign citizen movements, emerging in the 1970s and gaining prominence as it merged with the growth of rightwing militias. It made its way, via Canada, to the UK, where proponents have ranged from fringe political activists who have attempted to promote it by standing for office through to others attempting to set up “shadow” police forces. Others included pro-Trump supporters who attempted to stage a citizen’s arrest of Sadiq Khan in 2018. What has happened recently? Proponents of the bogus common law became more bellicose in the run-up to Brexit. However, the belief has been turbocharged on social media and has found a bigger and more receptive audience among those seeking reasons to disobey or ignore lockdown regulations during the pandemic. A plethora of new, anti-lockdown and anti-vaccine groups are promoting it, including in some cases running bogus “courses” alongside training in civil disobedience techniques. Some have attempted to disrupt vaccination centres by claiming that police are carrying out criminal investigations into the work after activists entered stations and made allegations. Police stress that reference numbers provided on these occasions to activists, who post footage on social media, do not mean there are investigations. • This article was amended on 16 February 2022 because an earlier version described common law as “the system of law – used in the UK”. To clarify: common law forms part of the systems of law used in jurisdictions of the UK.Will Coombs (not his real name) has to test the blood of his 10-year-old son, Jamie, every two hours, even at night. Jamie has brittle diabetes, a rare form of type 1 diabetes that causes severe swings in his blood sugar levels. Before the pandemic he was hospitalised after catching a cold; on another occasion, with a stomach bug. The family decided to home school their three children to keep Jamie safe from Covid. His hospital consultant supports the family’s decision. But the government is threatening them with fines or prosecution if the children do not return to class. His parents are used to being cautious when even trivial viruses are circulating at school, because they can cause Jamie’s blood sugar to fluctuate dangerously. People with diabetes have been disproportionately affected by Covid, and are much more likely to develop serious complications. “Education is important but health should be the priority,” says Coombs. “You cannot learn if you are seriously ill or worse as a result of catching Covid.” He believes the Department for Education’s stance on attendance at all costs is discriminatory. The latest DfE data estimates 320,000 pupils were absent for Covid-related reasons in England on 3 February. With many of his children’s school friends on their second or third Covid infection and masks no longer compulsory, Coombs is adamant that he is right to teach his three children at home. The authorities disagree. Jamie’s consultant wrote recently to his brother’s secondary school urging it to be “as supportive as possible” of the family’s decision to home school until all three children had been vaccinated and case rates were lower. But now, after advice from the DfE, the local authority has instructed the school not to send any work home to the family, and threatened them with fines or prosecution. The primary school that Jamie and his sister attend has made the same threats. Coombs doesn’t blame the headteachers, or even the council. He blames the government. He says the secondary school head “understands where we are coming from” but is under pressure to lean on families like his. He says the head has been told by the DfE that shielding has finished and all pupils must now be back in school. Coombs, who trained as a teacher, says: “Heads and teachers know the families and understand the issues and individual circumstances. Why can’t they be trusted to make a sensible decision on each case?” The government is consulting on more prescriptive plans to boost attendance and end what it calls a postcode lottery of how schools manage absences. These sorts of Covid cases are a grey area for schools. The education secretary, Nadhim Zahawi, has confirmed in a letter to the Good Law Project that heads can exercise discretion over individual cases, but in practice schools say the very clear directive from the DfE is that all children must return to the classroom and they feel under pressure to deliver that. Parents who are home schooling because of Covid say schools are not giving them any work in case they are seen to support unauthorised absences. In January the Centre for Social Justice, a rightwing thinktank, raised fears about so-called “ghost children”, with a report claiming that severe absence “has spread across our school system like wildfire”. It said that in autumn 2020 more than 700 state schools were missing an entire class-worth of children. Dame Rachel de Souza, the children’s commissioner in England, has vowed to track down missing children. But families like the Coombses say theirs is a different story that needs to be heard. Their children are not vanishing, they are merely being protected by their families because they do not think there are enough mitigations in school to keep them safe. Many say, paradoxically, that the pressure from the DfE is forcing them to consider opting out of the system permanently. April Booth, a co-founder of a parent campaign group, Safe Ed For All, will appear in court on 25 February for refusing to send her son, Casper, back to his secondary school in Portsmouth while cases remain high. She risks a fine of up to £2,500, which she cannot afford, or three months in prison. She says: “I’m not an activist and I have been scared at times. I know so many people who have deregistered [their children from school] rather than face court, but my son wants to go back to school when things improve. The government is criminalising parents for trying to protect their children during a health crisis.” Booth took Casper out of school in 2020 when his grandfather was hospitalised with Covid for four months and nearly died. Casper, now in year 8, hasn’t returned since. She describes the lack of mitigations to protect children and their vulnerable family members as “mind-boggling”. “I’ll be happy to return him to school when community transmission is a lot lower, when far more children are wearing masks and ventilation has been looked at properly,” she says. Casper’s school says attendance is mandatory and “the vast majority of parents have confidence” in what it is doing. A spokesperson said: “Missing school means students fall behind, which has serious consequences for their progression.” Kim Wareham, from Bath, reluctantly deregistered her 10-year-old daughter, who has a learning disability and a rare genetic syndrome, from her special needs school last week after keeping her at home since numbers rose with Omicron. Wareham says she deregistered because, without remote work being sent home for her daughter, she felt she had been shut out of the system. “We were learning about electricity and my daughter made a torch out of a cardboard tube and wired up the circuits. She was so proud of it and we sent a photo, but so far we’ve heard nothing back. That’s sad.” “Having my daughter around all the time is wonderful,” she says. “But it is so important she mixes with peers who face similar life and learning issues. It feels really unfair that we’ve had to remove her.” The head of a primary school in Kent, who asked not to be named, said: “We use a range of strategies to try to encourage parents to bring children in. The risk is that if you push them too hard they self-select to home educate and are never seen again in the education system.” Geoff Barton, the general secretary of the Association of School and College Leaders, says cracking down on attendance will be a key part of the forthcoming schools white paper. “I’ve been saying you must be so careful not to demonise parents and make them feel they are the problem,” he says. Gemma Moss, of University College London’s Institute of Education, led a research project looking at how schools have interacted with families during the pandemic. “The problem is the government isn’t trusting teachers and is ignoring the personal relationships they have with families. You can’t map all of this from the centre,” she says. “We looked at primary schools and they are deeply embedded in their communities. Headteachers would go and knock on doors if they hadn’t heard from a family and were worried about a child.” Hannah Wilson (not her real name), from East Anglia, took her children, aged eight and 11, out of primary school because they were uneasy about the lack of Covid safety measures. Wilson and her husband had long Covid, including migraines, stomach cramps, tinnitus, leg pains and fatigue, for more than a year, and her son suffered for nine months. They don’t want the virus again. “I think the head is very sympathetic and is clearly in a difficult position,” she says. “We don’t get supported with any work. There are no concerns about their education at home, but there is pressure on the head for us to return.” She adds: “I have thought about exiting the system because of the pressure. If they were to fine me I would be very tempted to see them in court as I feel the way the government is behaving is unacceptable.” A spokesperson for the DfE said: “As we learn to live with Covid, thanks to the success of the vaccination programme, there is no longer advice for vulnerable people to shield and it is right that children attend school full-time. “The protective measures in place in schools follow scientific advice on how to strike the balance between protecting education and reducing transmission – including with enhanced ventilation and air cleaning units for classrooms that need them, and a vaccination offer for every child aged five and over with underlying health conditions.”There is a danger that what had looked like being a season to remember for West Ham could turn sour. David Moyes’ side may still be fourth but results have stuttered a little. Then Kurt Zouma was shown abusing his cat on social media and was booed by his own supporters during the 1-0 win over Watford on Tuesday. Moyes is likely to select Zouma again, despite public outrage, for the visit of a Leicester side who have problems of their own having taken just one point from their past three games while being dumped out of the FA Cup by Nottingham Forest. Stephen Hollis Sunday 4.30pm Sky Sports Premier League Venue King Power Stadium Last season Leicester 0 West Ham 3 Referee Michael Oliver This season G15 Y46 R1 3.13 cards/game Odds H 2-1 A 16-11 D 5-2 LEICESTER Subs from Ward, Jakupovic, McAteer, Daley-Campbell, Vestergaard, Choudhury, Pérez, Soumaré, Brunt, Pereira, Lookman Doubtful None Injured Fofana (ankle, 24 Feb), Castagne (thigh, Mar), Vardy (hamstring, Mar), Evans (hamstring, Apr), Bertrand (knee, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y26 R1 Form WLWLDL Leading scorer Vardy 9 WEST HAM Subs from Areola, Randolph, Ashby, Oko-Flex, Baptiste, Alese, Longelo, Johnson, Lanzini, Vlasic, Yarmolenko, Kral, Perkins, Fredericks, Noble, Diop, Kral Doubtful None Injured Masuaku (knee, unknown), Ogbonna (knee, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y29 R2 Form WWWLLW Leading scorer Antonio 8Tottenham seem to have misplaced their defensive solidity under Antonio Conte in the past few weeks. Having conceded four goals in the Italian’s first eight Premier League games in charge they have shipped eight in the past three, including Wednesday’s 3-2 home defeat to Southampton. The visit of Wolves is probably a welcome one, then, considering only Norwich and Burnley have scored fewer than their 19 this season. Conte could shake things up after back-to-back Premier League defeats by handing debuts to the January signings Rodrigo Bentancur and Dejan Kulusevski, while Bruno Lage may be tempted to give Chiquinho a first start after he impressed as a substitute in Thursday’s 1-0 defeat by Arsenal. Stephen Hollis Sunday 2pm Venue Tottenham Hotspur Stadium Last season Tottenham 2 Wolves 0 Referee Kevin Friend This season G8 Y44 R1 5.63 cards/game Odds H 7-10 A 5-1 D 11-4 TOTTENHAM Subs from Gollini, Doherty, Rodon, Clarke, White, Bergwijn, Scarlett, Paskotsi, Sessegnon, Dier, Højbjerg, Lucas Doubtful Dier (hamstring) Injured Skipp (groin, 19 Feb), Tanganga (knee, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y36 R1 Form WDWWLL Leading scorer Son 9 WOLVES Subs from Ruddy, Moulden, Cundle, Hoever, Campbell, Silva, Giles, Jordão, Lembiska, Sanderson, Kawabe, Marçal, Trincão, Moutinho, Hwang Doubtful Moutinho (calf) Injured Mosquera (hamstring, 27 Feb), Neto (knee, Mar), Boly (calf, Mar), Suspended None Discipline Y39 R1 Form WDWWWL Leading scorers Hwang, Jiménez 4Liverpool need to keep on winning to have any hope of challenging Manchester City and with Diogo Jota picking up four goals in his last four in all competitions, while Mohamed Salah and Sadio Mané return to the squad, they feel very well equipped to dispatch Burnley. Sean Dyche’s side, of course, are no pushovers, draws against Chelsea, West Ham, Wolves, Arsenal and Manchester United are proof of that but drab stalemates are not good enough. Now might not be the time to throw caution to the wind, and another creditable draw would be nice, but without wins Burnley will go down. Graham Searles Sunday 2pm Venue Turf Moor Last season Burnley 0 Liverpool 3 Referee Martin Atkinson This season G14 Y33 R2 2.5 cards/game Odds H 10-1 A 1-3 D 5-1 BURNLEY Subs from Hennessey, Norris, Bardsley, Thomas, Collins, Barnes, Taylor, Cork, Lennon, Lowton, Stephens, Long Doubtful Taylor (ankle) Injured Gudmundsson (appendicitis, 23 Feb), Vydra (hernia, Mar) Suspended None Discipline Y39 R0 Form DLLLDDD Leading scorer Cornet 6 LIVERPOOL Subs from Kelleher, Adrián, Pitaluga, Gomez, Matip, Tsimikas, Milner, Oxlade-Chamberlain, Jones, Keïta, Elliott, Minamino, Mané, Firmino, Origi Doubtful None Injured None Suspended None Discipline Y30 R1 Form DLDWWW Leading scorer Salah 16Go into a park, find a tree you like, hold the tree and complain to the tree. This was Marina Abramović’s technique for staying focused during the pandemic. In 2020, she and a group of volunteers tried out this tree-hugging exercise during a five-hour programme on Sky Arts that sought to educate watchers on the history of performance art. Though at times it felt like watching a mockumentary, it was a transformative experience for the participants, according to Abramović. “It was amazing how people got emotional. How much they kept inside, and how talking to the tree [was] a kind of release.” It’s 11am in New York, where Abramović is based, and she has just finished a morning yoga session. She stretches out her arms, showing me her black fitness top before turning the web camera round to reveal a snowy landscape. “I like to do physical exercise. Walk in the snow. I don’t want to have my life in control. I hate [the] studio. I never go to the studio,” says the 75-year-old artist. “I like to put myself in very uncommon situations.” Internationally known for her performance art pieces that experiment with time, metaphysics and the human body, Abramović is teaching her fans the art of endurance, concentration, self-control and willpower through a new series of instructions intended to “reboot your life”. The Marina Abramović Method is a set of 30 cards, each featuring a different DIY task. Some instructions are overtly unconventional, such as “Walk backwards with a mirror”, which she advises you to do outdoors. Others are secretly tricky, like “Open and close a door”, which seems simple until you read the small print telling you to do this continuously for one to three hours. Many are tethered to Abramović’s previous works. One card reads “Count each grain of rice and lentil”, which takes inspiration from her 2014 work Counting the Rice in which participants laboriously tallied up a pile of grains, one by one. Abramović, who was born in Belgrade in 1946, has been teaching the art of endurance since the 1980s and exploring it in her own artworks for far longer. She passes on her wisdom via her Cleaning the House five-day workshops, in which she takes a group of students to places that are too hot, or too cold, and never comfortable. “Nobody would eat anything apart from water and herbal tea. Without any talking and doing very hard physical and mental exercises, they will then make a work of art out of this.” Still, for all the stoicism, the Marina Abramović Method is not to be taken too seriously. There is an element of fun that she is leaning into thanks to the Dalai Lama, whom she first met in the early 80s. “I always remember what [he] said to me. You have to always start with playfulness. With a joke. Make people laugh to open their heart, and then you tell them terrible truths after, because they’re ready,” she says. “These cards are playful, but at the same time, if you really do [them] properly, you actually get a very deep experience. You enter two different states of consciousness. It’s all about how much we invest in time.” Why has she decided to distil her art-making practice for the general public now? There have been many pioneering figures – such as Carolee Schneemann, Ana Mendieta and Chris Burden – at the helm of performance art, but Abramović is undoubtably the face of the form. Her endurance art, despite its intensity, often veers into trendy themes such as mindfulness, and this has ensured her work’s absorption into pop culture. (Shia LaBeouf and Jay-Z both did their own versions) Such success hasn’t come without criticism: her work has been called kitsch, and “celebrity art at its most empty”. Are these cards just an exercise in self-branding; an artist making merchandise in order to capitalise on their fame? “I don’t think I will be rich by selling these cards,” she laughs. “I am such an interesting example of the art market. I have so many viewers and such a very large young audience, and still, my prices are much below the middle-career artists who make paintings,” she claims. Her only goal, she adds, is to engage people, especially young people. These methods for getting the most out of work and life aren’t your typical self-help tips, but they are in line with an artist whose oeuvre consists of pushing herself to the limit. One of her earliest works was her six-hour performance at Galleria Studio Morra in Naples, where Abramović allowed the public to interact with her body in any way they chose, using a range of 72 objects (scissors, bread, a gun) that were laid out on a table. “I was a painter before, but the first time [I performed] in front of an audience, I felt the electricity that I never felt in my studio. At my age right now, I am not able to do any more of that kind of long durational performance. I did The Artist Is Present [in which she sat at a table for eight hours a day, allowing visitors to sit silently opposite her] when I was 65. This was hell on earth to do! Now I’m 75, I’m thinking about how I can express those thoughts [in] different mediums. I just made the opera,” she says, referring to 7 Deaths of Maria Callas, a piece about the tragic myths surrounding the Greek-American soprano. Age aside, works such as The Artist Is Present, and 512 Hours, where she and gallery visitors walked around in silence, require audience participation and close contact, and that seems inconceivable in these times. The pandemic has irrevocably changed the boundaries that artists can push. “Contact with the public is absolutely essential. Because if a performer doesn’t have the public, the performance is nonexistent.” Abramović doesn’t hate technology – her 2018 work Rising uses VR technology to explore rising sea levels, and she collaborated with tech company WeTransfer in 2021 to create an immersive digital experience titled Traces – but she thinks our approach to it is all wrong. “Everything became Zoom. I absolutely don’t like working with Zoom. First, the sound is bad. Images are terrible. I always think, just have patience and wait, because this isn’t going to last for ever. We are talking about two years. It’s nothing.” Abramović’s first UK retrospective, delayed by the pandemic, is due to be held at the Royal Academy in 2023. Spanning her 50-year career, the show will recreate her live performance pieces, adapted to reflect a change in her physicality, and feature new works. “They decided to postpone it for three years. This is kind of big,” she says. “I’m 75. Time goes. I really need to do this show earlier rather than later. But at the same time, I understood that it would be a disaster if I had it in 2020, because I depend on the public.” It isn’t long before she brings up NFTs (non-fungible tokens: those much-discussed artworks that are also a unique unit of digital data stored on blockchains). “I don’t like to be some old-fashioned artist who criticises everything new,” she says. “I love everything that is new. I’m curious. But with this medium, I didn’t see any good ideas. I didn’t see great content. I only see everybody talking about how much money you can make. I never made art for money,” she says. “I’ve been asked every day to do some. They say: ‘Your work is perfect for NFTs. Why are you not doing something?’ Somebody requested if I could sell my soul as an NFT.” Abramović may not be ready to sell her soul, but she has other ways of exploring immortality. She has created the world’s first mixed-reality performance artwork, titled The Life, which uses 36 video cameras to create a simulation of her body. “This is the closest to immortality that I can get. This piece doesn’t have as much value now because I’m alive, but the moment I’m not there … I can appear in your living room, I can walk in your garden. That is something that is mind-blowing.” Abramović is clearly intent on injecting herself into the future, but how will the future feel about her? Considering how people long dead are now being held accountable for their past behaviour, what about those comments she made in her 1979 diary about Indigenous Australians? In remarks initially republished in her 2016 memoir Walk Through Walls (but later taken out), she had said that they looked “terrible”, “like dinosaurs” and are really “strange and different”. As the passage became shared and criticised, Abramović released a statement saying that she had “the greatest respect for Aborigine people” and that her earlier description “does not represent the understanding and appreciation of Aborigines that I subsequently acquired through immersion in their world and carry in my heart today”. Abramović has spent time with Indigenous people in Australia and the Siberian desert, and has taken part in retreats with Tibetan monks. Her tree-hugging exercise was inspired by time spent with Amazonian tribes, where they would, according to her, dance with the sequoia tree. “This dance with the tree was so incredibly moving and emotional, so I said: ‘Wow, why don’t I create exercise that really works for me?’” Given that her performance artworks and career have long drawn on the sacred practices picked up on her visits to Indigenous communities, I inquire about the methods she has undertaken to battle racism personally in recent years, with more attention on Black lives and indigenous people. Instead, Abramović responds by taking issue with how her words were reported in the first place. “People take out the quote and they don’t actually see the context,” she says. “I said that Aboriginal [people are] the oldest race on the planet. They are like dinosaurs. Next to that sentence. I also say they have to be treated like living treasures. They only saw my quote about dinosaurs.” She appears to have forgotten her own words – there’s a semantic difference between “they look like dinosaurs” and “they are like dinosaurs” – though either way, likening people to animals feels like textbook dehumanisation. “This is so sad,” says Abramović, before somewhat arbitrarily bringing up her longstanding collaborations with transgender people (“much longer than [people have been] talking about”), as well as her work about the Yugoslav wars, and mentioning the Dalai Lama once more. “The only way to stop violence is to learn to forgive and we are not able to forgive as human beings. We are repeating this over and over. This is not new. This is a centuries[-old] story.” Abramović believes the online criticism directed at her is due to the press manipulating people and that sexism, ultimately, is at fault: “The press is so much tougher on women than on men.” She told me earlier in the conversation that she has never used Instagram and doesn’t go online except for emails and meetings. “There’s so many people who think that what I’m doing is not art at all. If I read this, I will never even leave home.” She might not read everything, but she reads some things. She asks me who will write the headline for this interview after being outraged with the Times for an article it published last year. “The title, to me, was incredibly vulgar. I was so angry. It was ‘Marina Abramović, young lover, dirty jokes, and magic crystals’. They will not do this to male artists,” she says. “They used a photograph of me for the interview that I did not approve. I don’t know where they found it. Why don’t you put in pictures of the work?!” One of The Method’s instruction cards reads “Notice a moment of anger, then stop it”. It advises you to hold your breath until you reach your physical limit and repeat as needed, until the anger subsides. It comes to mind as Abramović discusses her treatment by the media. “I need to go, my dear,” she says abruptly. She does appear calmer for having said her piece. “It was lovely talking to you.” The Marina Abramović Method: Instruction Cards to Reboot Your Life is published by Laurence King (£16.99) on 17 February.Can Newcastle win three games in a row? Might there be a midfield beauty contest between Aston Villa’s Philippe Coutinho and Newcastle’s Brazilian new boy Bruno Guimarães? Will Eddie Howe’s £25m centre-forward Chris Wood break his Tyneside scoring duck? Is Steven Gerrard’s defence capable of succeeding where Frank Lampard’s Everton backline failed on Tuesday night in containing Howe’s very own wizard of the dribble, Allan Saint-Maximin? Another 52,000 sell-out crowd at St James’ Park will enjoy discovering the answers. Louise Taylor Sunday 2pm Sky Sports Premier League Venue St James’ Park Last season Newcastle 1 Aston Villa 1 Referee Craig Pawson This season G15 Y60 R1 4.06 cards/game Odds H 7-4 A 6-4 D 12-5 NEWCASTLE Subs from Darlow, Burn, Dummett, Krafth, Willock, Longstaff, Almirón, Murphy, Gayle Doubtful Trippier (calf), Dummett (calf) Injured Fernández (thigh, Mar) Wilson (calf, Apr), Ritchie (knee, unknown) Uanvailable Targett (loan terms) Suspended None Discipline Y61 R2 Form LLDDWW Leading scorer Wilson 6 ASTON VILLA Subs from Steer, Sinisalo, Philogene-Bidace, Carney Chukwuemeka, Archer, Young, Smith, Olsen, Hause, Bailey, Traoré, Trezeguet Doubtful Buendía (knock) Injured Nakamba (knee, Apr) Suspended Konsa (first of two) Discipline Y46 R2 Form WLLDWD Leading scorers Ramsey, Watkins 5Sheila Heti hadn’t intended to write a book about grief, but in late 2018, about a year after she’d started writing her new novel, Pure Colour, her father died. “He had been sick, but it was always going to be a shock. It has been the most profound change I’ve experienced in adulthood, having a parent die. Mother and father are connected to what life is, and you know all along they aren’t the sky, the earth – they’re people. But while your mind knows it, maybe your body doesn’t,” she says. As a result of the shock, she adds, the story in her book “suddenly breaks”. Heti and I are sitting in her cosy second-floor apartment in Toronto, which she shares with her boyfriend of 11 years, Luc, and their friendly rottweiler, Feldman. Outside, a blizzard blows, but Feldman keeps us both warm by snoozing on our feet. A mutual friend had told me beforehand that the 45-year-old Heti “will seem young to you”, and, with her girlish voice and 1990s teenager outfit of a long-sleeved T-shirt beneath a cotton blue dress, she does at first. But she seems older than I expected, too. Her short, pixie-like fringe, which she had when she wrote her previous bestselling novels, 2010’s How Should a Person Be? and 2018’s Motherhood, has gone (“I just grew out of it”), and she has a quietness and perceptiveness that is often overlooked by critics, who mistake her originality for kookiness. It is easy to imagine her, simultaneously, as the precociously artsy girl she once was and the pin‑sharp older woman she will one day be. Pure Colour exemplifies both that originality and sharpness. It encompasses the beginning and end of the world, and Adam and Eve, as well as her character Mira’s entire life, all within a slim 200 and some pages; it’s the kind of book that you start reading again as soon as you finish it, to see how on earth the author pulled it off. “With my other books, I thought as I was writing: ‘OK, this friend is going to read this and I want the book to tell this to them.’ But with this book there was no thought of that. I just felt completely cut off and it became more intuitive,” Heti says. As a result, the novel has a dreaminess to it, and some sections read as though they come straight from Heti’s subconscious, such as when Mira’s grief for her father so overwhelms her that she becomes, for quite an extended time, a leaf. “That was how [grief] felt for me – not so much being out of my body, but just feeling very far from everyone and not part of the active world,” Heti reflects. As a teenager growing up in Toronto, the daughter of Hungarian Jewish immigrants, Heti loved books by writers such as Henry Miller, Edmund White and the Marquis de Sade. They gave her a sense of the novel as a medium without a template: she could do anything that she wanted with it. In the very funny and tender How Should a Person Be?, a late-twentysomething called Sheila mooches around Toronto and New York and talks with her friends – sometimes in prose, sometimes in script format – as she tries to answer the eponymous question. In the more interior and occasionally feverish Motherhood, a late-thirtysomething, also called Sheila, mooches around Toronto, talks with her friends and boyfriend, Miles, and tries to figure out if she wants to have a baby. The novels might sound similar, but they are completely different in tone and mood, with the earlier work capturing the self-awareness and self-doubt of one’s 20s, and the latter mining the panic and anxiety that besets a certain kind of thirtysomething. Because they feature so much autobiography, many critics described them as autofiction, akin to Karl Ove Knausgård and Rachel Cusk. Heti used to wince at the word, but now accepts that “it’s a useful term because it helps people’s expectations of the book. I just call it fiction, though. All writers use their lives. Look at Proust – it’s all fucking autofiction,” she says. Her repeated use of autobiography means that Heti’s books illuminate one another: in Motherhood, she writes that her mother’s criticism of her as a child made her “desperate to live as a person beyond criticism; to prove that I was better than any of the ways she saw me”, which casts a new light on the title of her first novel. Motherhood focuses primarily on her complicated relationship with her mother, while her father, the playful caregiver, is glimpsed only in the shadows. Now, in Pure Colour, she brings him into the light. Unlike the previous two books, Pure Colour is written in the third person, and it is not asking a central question: the narrator is entirely certain what she’s talking about, telling the reader from the start why people are how they are, and why the world is as it is. This is partly a reflection of Heti herself – “Yes, I do feel more certain in myself now,” she agrees – and also because this is a novel about middle age, that point in life when “the party is happening behind a closed door”, as the book puts it, when there aren’t so many questions to be asked, just things to deal with. Initially, pure colour feels wistful and lightly satirical, with the narrator explaining that we are all living in God’s “first draft of existence”. Mira marvels at the passing of time since her youth, before the internet and social media, and what she describes as “the friendship revolution, which made being in touch of primary importance”. But then, suddenly, Mira’s father dies, and the story becomes something Heti was not expecting. “I didn’t think the experience [of my father dying] would be part of the book, but then I thought, ‘Oh, first draft of existence …’ It feels like you’re in the second draft, after the death of a parent, because it is like the world has ended, right? I saw how all of those things came together,” she says. No writer likes to be told their novel is reminiscent of someone else’s, so it is with some trepidation that I tell her at times Pure Colour made me think of Patricia Lockwood’s No One Is Talking About This, which was shortlisted for the Booker prize last year, and which also combines grief with jokey observations about how technology has changed the world. She nods. “Yes, Patricia and I are friends, and a few years ago we were telling each other about our books, and I said, ‘These books have a lot in common!’ So we exchanged manuscripts and, structurally, they feel very similar,” she says. For me, Heti’s is the stronger book, with descriptions of grief that are so surprising and true they made me gasp: “She had thought that, when someone died, it would be like they went into a different room,” she writes. “She had not known that life itself transformed into a different room, and trapped you in it without them.” In her previous books, Heti has written with similar honesty about love and sex. Does it ever feel exposing to write about such personal experiences? “I never feel exposed because there’s nothing inside me that isn’t in you. All writing is about all of us, so it doesn’t feel like I’m saying anything that isn’t just about the human experience,” she says. Yet choosing not to have a child simply because you don’t want one, as Sheila decides in Motherhood, is not a universal experience. That book sparked reams of commentary, either celebrating or questioning Heti’s reasoning. I contribute further to it by telling her the one part of the book that frustrated me was Sheila’s belief that she had to make a choice between pursuing her art and having a baby. Why couldn’t her partner look after the baby while she got on with her art? “Do you have children?” she asks, establishing the lay of the land here. I tell her I do. “I know lots of artists who have children, so that’s not the reason why I didn’t have them, because I thought I couldn’t make art,” she says. The reason she didn’t have children, Heti says, is because she didn’t want to, and that’s all that needs saying. “But you have to have reasons,” she adds wryly. Has she ever regretted making that decision so publicly, given she will be asked about it for the rest of her life? She thinks about that for a moment. “No, because I like that book,” she says, and laughs. As a child, Heti loved to act and write, putting on shows with her friends and writing stories with her father. She eventually decided that she had to choose between the two to better her chances at becoming good at something. She made her name writing for the literary journal the Believer, but left that to work on a collaborative book, Women in Clothes, which she has described as “a conversation among hundreds of women” about their fashion choices. As well as that and her novels, she has written a play, a novella, a collection of stories, two children’s books and another collaborative publication, this one about philosophy. She loves books “above all”, she says, and we are surrounded by shelves stuffed with the classics – Gide, Flaubert, Tolstoy. Heti peppers her conversation with book recommendations: Adelle Waldman’s 2013 debut, The Love Affairs of Nathaniel P; Acts of Service by Lillian Fishman, another debut which will be published in the UK this summer; and the recent autobiographical novel Fuccboi by Sean Thor Conroe, about a secretly very un-woke young man who is shagging around and trying to get his book published. “There are so many good writers!” she says happily, and the inspiration she takes from them is that “they do their own thing so well, so you need to figure out what your thing is”. One recent discovery is The Wall by Marlen Haushofer, an Austrian dystopian novel originally published in 1963. “It’s out of print at the moment and it makes you sick, because, if she wasn’t a woman, everyone would be reading it, like Robinson Crusoe,” Heti says. Does she think books by women still get treated differently from those by men? “Totally. It’s been really interesting reading the reviews for Fuccboi and comparing them to my reviews for Motherhood. Critics give him the benefit of the doubt, assume he knows what he’s doing, that he’s made conscious choices. No one’s saying, ‘[The character] is the author.’ But with Motherhood, critics were very critical of the character as a person, which surprised me.” By now, the blizzard has become a full snow storm and there are no taxis to be found. I say I’ll leave her be and go for a walk, but Heti insists I stay, and so we sit and chat about our lives for a further 45 minutes. Luc comes home and the two of them talk to one another with the kind of flirtatious frisson you rarely see in couples who have been together for more than a decade. I ask her if he’s Miles from Motherhood, and she hesitates. “He’s who I was with when I wrote it, yes,” she says, carefully delineating between her life and her books. We talk more about Motherhood and she asks if I ever regret having children. I say no, because I’d have been bereft without them. But of course, I say, looking around at her bookshelves, there are times when I miss my old life, when I could stay home alone all day and read and write in peace. “So your ideal self is to be a happily child-free woman,” she says. I agree, and I can see her filing that on an internal index card in her brain. Then she looks at me and grins. To buy a copy of Pure Colour for £14.78 go to guardianbookshop.com. • Pure Colour by Sheila Heti is published by Harvill Secker (£16.99). To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.What the Rams need to do to win … Play clean. The Rams have the talent advantage. Their defense ranks first in the league in pressure rate, and gets almost all of that with a four-man rush. Putting that up against this flaky Bengals offensive line? Yikes. Favorites lose Super Bowls by way of bone-headed plays, dodgy time management, or unforced turnovers – typically a cocktail of all three. If the Rams can keep the turnover battle even, they have the defense to take over the game. OC Jalen Ramsey is one of the few cornerbacks fierce enough to go toe-to-toe with Ja’Marr Chase. The rest of the Rams’ secondary has been less than inspiring. But Darious Williams and company must contain Joe Burrow’s other weapons. Tee Higgins, who would be the top wideout on most other teams, torched the Chiefs in the AFC Championship. MJ Duh. Attack Burrow. He has dragged his team to the league’s final game despite being sacked 12 times in these playoffs, including nine times in the divisional round against the top-seeded Titans. And while Tennessee boast a fine group of pass rushers, they ain’t got nuthin’ on Aaron Donald, unquestionably the best all-around defensive player of the era; and Von Miller, a speedy, bendy, quarterback crusher. AL It’s the duty of this vaunted Rams defense to make Penei Sewell trend on Sunday. If the Rams prevent Burrow from getting the ball off in time, there will be an entire offseason for the Bengals to second-guess themselves for drafting Chase over the offensive tackle. HF Keep their eyes off the scoreboard and their foot on the accelerator. Sean McVay needs to stick to his offensive script so Matthew Stafford can use his football intelligence to carve up the Bengals with killer throws. GS What the Bengals need to do to win … Hit explosive plays on offense. The Rams’ secondary and linebacking corps is shaky in coverage, and that’s where Cincy will look to attack. If Burrow and Co can outpace the Rams in the explosive plays category, while the defense forces the Rams to sustain long, droning drives, they’ll have a shot. OC Hello, Captain Obvious here … the Bengals must stop Donald, the best player in the NFL. No big deal, right? Cincy’s offensive line continues to be their weak link and the Rams (starring Donald) will be the unit’s toughest test yet. MJ So far Chase has yet to show there is a corner who can consistently mark him. And even though Ramsey is one of the best, he will have his hands full if the Bengals move Chase around their formations. And if the Cincinnati line gives Burrow time to find him. AL Don’t fall behind early. In the AFC championship game, the Bengals held the Kansas City Chiefs to a single field-goal after halftime. That was impressive. They were also down 21-3 in the second quarter. That’s not a repeatable strategy. HF Stuff the run. Cincinnati’s defense is unfairly maligned: they kept the Chiefs in check better than the Bills, after all. San Francisco stopped LA rushing in the NFC Championship and it almost worked. If the Bengals do stifle Sony Michel and Cam Akers that opens up extra coverage from linebackers to help slow down Cooper Kupp and Odell Beckham Jr. GS Key player for the Rams … Jalen Ramsey, cornerback. The big question for the Rams is how they will deploy their star cornerback. It would make sense for LA to double the Bengals’ best receiver, Chase, on the outside and then use Ramsey to take away Burrow’s second option inside. OC Matthew Stafford, quarterback. After toiling in the football hell otherwise known as Detroit, Stafford was rescued by McVay. He’s clearly an upgrade over Jared Goff but he’s also not a sure thing. He must play clean football, especially given the tiny window the Rams have to hoist the Lombardi Trophy. MJ Odell Beckham Jr, wide receiver. He’s been an offensive X-factor all postseason. At the Super Bowl now, he has a chance to deliver his biggest career highlight since his NFT-worthy one-handed catch on Sunday Night Football in 2014. AL Jalen Ramsey, cornerback. Ramsey has the talent to go one-and-one with Chase, freeing up the rest of the defense to sniff out other offensive threats. HF Aaron Donald, defensive tackle. Donald will be aiming to destroy the Bengals’ offensive line but Cincinnati will hopefully, for their sake, be planning how they can mitigate his power. GS Key player for the Bengals … Tyler Boyd, wide receiver. So often in the Super Bowl, it comes down to a team’s third receiver. The defense doubles one of the top two guys and finds creative schematic quirks to isolate the other. Chase and Higgins will dominate the attention of the Rams D, and so it will fall on Boyd to be the chain-mover and post-catch creator who helps Burrow to move the ball into scoring range. OC Jessie Bates, safety. Bates is the best-known member of Cincy’s “no-name” defense for a reason. He’s the one player on the Bengals defense who could force McVay into earlier-than-anticipated adjustments. MJ CJ Uzomah, tight end. While Bengals coach Zac Taylor still has Uzomah as a 50-50 prospect for Sunday, his limited participation in Bengals practices this week is an encouraging sign. Uzomah not only gives Burrow another target to play off of Chase and Higgins, he can chip in on pass protection too. AL Evan McPherson, kicker. It’s tempting to go with Burrow, or Chase, but what about the most clutch kicker in the league? If these playoffs are any indication, everything could come down to a single field goal. There’s nobody I’d trust more in that situation than McPherson. HF Joe Burrow, quarterback. He never flinches when under pressure while often creating a more explosive play when the defense shuts down the official script. The Rams’ defensive front can be as punishing as they like, Burrow enjoys his medicine. GS One bold prediction … A special team’s snafu leads to a score. This year’s postseason has been dominated by special teams mishaps. Both the Rams and Bengals are nestled comfortably in the top-eight of special teams units, but the Football Gods care not for such trivial things when there’s a good ol’ narrative on the line. OC One of the main five performers in the halftime show – Kendrick Lamar, Dr Dre, Mary J Blige, Eminem, and Snoop Dogg – will be a no show after their limo gets stuck in LA’s insufferable traffic. MJ Taylor’s gonna draw up something crazy. And given Cincinnati’s woebegone history, it feels like it will take a little crazy to beat the Rams in their backyard. AL Our Discourse-poisoned era feels like the perfect scenario for the game to be completely overshadowed by something unrelated to football. Maybe Dr Dre’s halftime show ends up going disastrously wrong or there’s a Super Bowl ad that is so ill-conceived that the on-field action turns into a subplot. HF Joe Mixon rides to the Bengals’ rescue with a Super Bowl and MVP winning performance. Quick passes galore to the back keep the chains moving as Mixon leads Cincinnati in receiving yards and racks up 150+ yards from scrimmage. GS The final score will be … Rams 24-27 Bengals. This is tricky. The Rams can score points in chunks and have the kind of defense that could elevate any side to a championship. On the other hand, there is Joe Burrow’s coat. There are the cigars. There’s the chain. There’s McPherson’s icy veins. There’s something about this Bengals team that makes you want to ditch any sense of intelligent analysis in favor of picking what’s fun. OC Rams 35-22 Bengals. I can’t get over the mismatch that is the Rams’ elite defensive front against the Bengals’ below average offensive line. The Rams also have a huge advantage playing in their hometown. No, not because they have a robust fanbase. But because they have spent the week in their facilities, sticking to their routines. The Bengals, on the other hand, are sleeping in a hotel and dealing with the insane logistics that come with the Super Bowl. MJ Rams 34-28 Bengals. Despite the Bengals’ team-of-destiny vibes, few teams make it to the top without taking some lumps in the beginning. (The legacy of lumps don’t apply.) Meanwhile, the Rams have a prime chance to take their city back – and if they flop a second time, there’s no telling if they’ll have another. GM Les Snead mortgaged the team’s future to win right now. If their stars align, I just don’t see how they miss this moment. AL Rams 24-30 Bengals (OT). The Rams lose without touching the ball in overtime, something which finally forces the NFL to change its silly rules. Everyone wins (except, obviously, the Rams). HF Rams 21-24 Bengals. The pressure is on but who will blink first? The Bengals have been excellent in the clutch and that will shade the Rams’ flashy roster. McVay’s failure from three years ago could also negatively influence his decisions. Burrow grinds against the odds to set McPherson up and McFearless drills the game-winner home. Who dey think gonna beat them Bengals? Nobody … finally! GSWe British, who like to think we’re a nation of animal lovers, have been given an opportunity to bask in the warm glow of this reassuring self-image now that more than 150,000 people have signed a petition calling for the West Ham footballer Kurt Zouma to be prosecuted after a video emerged of him kicking his cat. Within two days of his being shamed, the RSPCA had seized Zouma’s cats and his club had fined him £250,000. One-nil to the good old animal-loving Anglo-Saxons. However, we also ought be somewhat shamefaced that a different petition, calling for a footballer who lost a civil rape case to be released by his club, garnered fewer than 6,000 signatures. It took three days for Raith Rovers to do a U-turn on David Goodwillie’s signing. In the minds of many, however, all this shows is that we sometimes love our animals just a bit too much, which is not much of a confession. If we really were worried that we cared more for cats than rape victims, there would have been more outrage at the airlifting of 173 cats and dogs from Kabul at the potential expense of people. Instead, we mostly shrugged our shoulders, agreed it might have been a bit excessive, but still felt pleased that the beasts had escaped the Taliban’s extreme version of sharia law. However, our hypocrisy is much worse than this, for believing that our only flaw is that we love animals too much conveniently disguises the fact that, more often than not, human interests completely trump those of other animals. The truth is that the attitude we show towards most animals is not always real love; often it is an unhealthy anthropocentric sentimentality. Yes, we have tender feelings towards fluffy companion animals, gambolling lambs and alpacas under threat of involuntary euthanasia. But these feelings are only directed towards animals when and if they are pleasing to us. Whenever protecting or enhancing an animal’s welfare brings costs to ourselves, our so-called love mysteriously vanishes. The perfect symbol of this is pet food. We make sure our darling pets get their nutritionally complete meals and smile warmly when we see them tucking in. But that food is made mostly of other animals, and very little of it comes from high-welfare meat. So we keep one set of animals in industrial farms where many never see the light of day while we treat others as though we are honoured to be guests in their homes. No true animal lover would be indifferent to the wellbeing of one used to feed another. Yet most people not only do it, they don’t give it a second’s thought. They are as mesmerised by heartwarming animal stories as they are blind to disturbing ones. Hence they can get indignant about the court order to put down one alpaca called Geronimo but do not blink an eye over the estimated 60,000 nameless dairy bull calves slaughtered at birth so we can have our daily milk. What’s more, the way we treat our pets suggests that it isn’t true love anyway. Take so-called dog lovers. Centuries of breeding have meant that many of the most popular breeds have lifelong health issues. The flat snouts of pugs and bulldogs, for instance, often cause them respiratory and eye problems. Dachshunds suffer spinal problems, and are prone to obesity. Pretty much any hound other than a mongrel or a rescue dog is the product of an industry perpetuating animal suffering. These facts are well-enough known, but people conveniently forget them. They see facial and bodily distortions as cute rather than as harmful deformities. But real love requires an appreciation of the object of that love as it really is. Otherwise your affection is for a fantasy, an image of the beloved that bears no relation to the reality. We may not care about or notice the contradictions contained in our relationship to animals, but politicians have. They know that moral consistency doesn’t matter as long as they push the right emotional buttons. For instance, the most popular policy in Jeremy Corbyn’s 2017 Labour manifesto was the pledge to keep the foxhunting ban in place. Labour campaigners pushed this hard, especially among younger voters on social media. The Conservatives, meanwhile, tried to burnish their own animal-friendly status by talking up their plans to ban the ivory trade, even though this wasn’t in their manifesto. Neither party said much about the meat or pet industries, which have a far greater impact on animal welfare. The strategy of trying to create an animal-friendly image – call it “fur-washing” – is alive and well today. For instance, the government has been drip-feeding news of its plans to ban foie gras. But many of the duck and geese reared for foie gras have better lives than the broiler poultry cooped up in intensive units in the UK. And all the while the government is boasting about ending paltry sales of a niche product, it is also seeking to negotiate trade deals with countries such as Australia and the US that will open our borders to lower-welfare meat and dairy. Our wildly inconsistent attitudes to animals persist in part because formulating consistent ones is difficult. Even going down the vegan route and opposing all use of animals for human ends doesn’t guarantee proportionate responses. Most vegans are probably more revolted by foie gras than they are by Turkey Twizzlers. The price of our anthropocentric sentimentalism is high. It means that we too often put animal welfare over that of humans. Animal welfare is the most popular cause for charitable donors in the UK, above children and medical research. At the same time, that concern is often misdirected so the animals that suffer most are not just ignored, they are eaten with pleasure. To top it all, politicians know how to tug on these warped heartstrings, and so our irrationality becomes a means for our own manipulation. A more mature and nuanced attitude to animals is sorely needed. But when an immature and simplistic one is so deeply embedded in the national psyche, I can’t see how we’re going to get it. Julian Baggini is a writer and philosopher; his latest book is How the World ThinksThe citric kick of the limes which grow abundantly across Mexico – the world’s largest producer of the fruit – help give the country’s cuisine its distinctive flavour. But aggressive price-fixing by criminal groups has sent prices soaring, prompting some eateries to stop offering limes with their tacos – and leaving diners in a sour twist. “If you go to the taquería they tell you there is no lime, or there is one small lime for 10 people,” said Romain Le Cour, security and violence reduction program officer at the thinktank México Evalúa. “It’s almost a joke.” Prices often peak in winter but this year they have reached unprecedented highs, due to falling production, continued exports and colder weather. The average cost of limes has tripled since January 2021 – from 17 pesos (almost a dollar) to 56 pesos per kilo, according to state data. And amid an escalating cost-of-living crisis due to inflation, cartels are imposing increasing controls over producers during the bumper crop season – in part to fund an escalating war in the western state of Michoacán where the aggressive expansion of the Jalisco New Generation cartel (JNGC) has unleashed a bitter conflict with a coalition of local groups known as the United Cartels. “The lime trade is a billion-dollar industry and, for any criminal group, it’s very easy and extremely profitable for them to go to the farmers and tell them what they need to pay for protection,” said Le Cour. “It’s classic mafia.” The harvest in Michoacán in December was down 26% from the month before and almost half on the same period last year – 66,000 tons less, according to official data. In places, cartels have reportedly limited picking to just a few days a week to more easily manipulate prices. “The cartels impose the price of the lime, they decide whether or not to pick them,” an industry worker told Reforma newspaper. Some farmers have abandoned their fields to avoid dealing with the cartels amid serious harassment and fighting, while bandits have also been stealing large amounts of limes in transit. Others have reportedly been forcibly displaced. A producer in El Aguaje, Michoacán, told local media: “They took away our land, they took away our houses, they looted our lime orchards.” More than 2,800 Mexican army and national guard troops have been deployed to the state in an attempt to dampen the cartel violence after alleged JNGC members dug ditches to cut off a key road. It’s not just the lime trade which has been ensnared by cartels. A large majority of Mexico’s exports of avocados also come from Michoacán – the site of some of the fiercest battles following the launch of the militarised war on drugs in 2006. Prices of the “green gold” fruit are spiking. Already, it is rarely served at taquerías in large quantities unless guacamole is purchased separately. But there are fears that the costly lime could force widespread taco price hikes after some eateries moved to mitigate the growing expense from the citrus fruit. “These lime price rises were a long time coming,” said Gustavo Arellano, author of Taco USA: How Mexican Food Conquered America, who adds that cartels have been influencing fruit prices for years amid the growing popularity of Mexican food abroad. “It’s a perfect storm of problems with limes. And sadly, the American consumer only cares about their margarita and squeezing wedges of lime on their tacos. Limes and avocados have essentially become the edible version of drugs, due to the misery their growing consumption is causing.”With a newborn in a sling and a polystyrene tray of fish and chips in his hands, Fred MacGregor came across this scene at the end of North Yorkshire’s Saltburn Pier. The photographer was on holiday with his wife and children, so had “neither the space in the bag, nor the headspace” for his usual DSLR. “The photographer Chase Jarvis once said, ‘The best camera is the one you have with you’ and it was an iPhone 7 I had with me that day,” MacGregor says. “Sometimes shooting on a phone can have its limitations, but on this occasion it performed just fine. I only needed a few minor edits, like a bit of brightening, to really bring out the central line of the wave.” Originally from London, MacGregor has long admired the quality of light in the north of England, finding it more “clear, low and brilliant” than in the capital. The way it hit the cliffs and the water appealed to his photographic eye, as did the relatively unusual angle of the shot. “A lot of surf photographs are taken from the beach, facing out to sea, or along the barrel of the wave. With this, I was able to show the context, and position this kinetic figure in its wider environment,” MacGregor says. “The twee, colourful beach huts stand in contrast to the bleak industrial landscape to the right, but both are part of the truth,” he says. “A picture that tells the truth can be tricky to find these days.”When millions of American voters head to the polls this autumn to vote for congressional candidates, the vast majority of their votes won’t matter at all. It’s an idea that’s anathema to the very idea of US government – that politicians are accountable to the people. But America is poised to have a staggeringly low number of competitive seats in the US House, an alarming trend that makes it harder to govern and exacerbates political polarization. States have now redrawn 327 of the US House’s 435 districts so far as part of the once-a-decade redistricting process and the number of competitive districts is dropping, according to FiveThirtyEight. Just 26 of those districts are considered to be highly competitive, meaning either party has less than a five-point advantage in them. When redistricting is complete, there could be between 30 and 35 competitive seats, predicted Dave Wasserman, a redistricting expert for the non-partisan Cook Political Report. That could leave as much as 94% of the US House running in relatively safe seats. As the number of competitive seats falls, the number of super-safe seats is also rising. As of mid-January, the number of seats Donald Trump carried in 2020 by at least 15 points increased from 54 to 70, according to the Brennan Center for Justice. The number of districts Biden carried by at least 15 points had increased from 20 to 23. Competition in the US House has been falling for decades. Some of the decline can be attributed to the natural geographic sorting of likeminded voters choosing to live together. In 2012, after the last round of redistricting, there were 66 districts that were competitive, Wasserman said. By 2020, 51 districts were considered competitive. But politicians are also using their power to draw district lines to exacerbate the lack of competition. “Competitive seats are the grease that make the machinery of the House function. And we’ve seen an annihilation of competitive seats in the last several decades,” Wasserman said. “Redistricting is accelerating that decline and removing many of the incentives for parties to recruit candidates with broad appeal. The House is becoming less biased in favor of Republicans, but it’s also becoming more ossified because there will be more safe seats than ever – and the battlefield will be narrower,” he added. It’s a trend that will probably profoundly affect American politics. Instead of worrying about appealing to voters during a general election, candidates are pushed to the extremes of their parties, becoming more focused on fending off primary challengers. It also discourages compromise and bipartisanship, instead incentivizing politicians to brandish their ideological bonafides. “I’m very concerned about what’s happened,” said Richard Pildes, a law professor at New York University who has written about the dangers of non-competitive congressional elections. “The more members are in safe seats, the more they’re capable of acting as these kind of independent free agent politicians ... it could make the House even more ungovernable.” The 116th Congress, which was in session from 2019 to 2021, was one of the least productive in US history. The lack of competition, Pildes noted, also makes the US House less responsive to changes in voters’ preferences. “You can have a three-point swing in voters’ preferences, and it’s not going to affect who’s going to be elected,” he said. No state has seen a bigger drop in competition during the redistricting cycle than Texas. Recognizing Democratic gains in the state in recent years, Republicans used their redistricting power to reconfigure district lines to shore up vulnerable seats. They reduced the number of competitive districts in the state from 12 to just one. They increased the number of solidly safe Republican seats – ones Trump would have carried by at least 15 points – from 11 to 21. They also increased the number of solidly Democratic seats from eight to 12. One of the best examples of this approach is the way that Republicans redrew the state’s 24th congressional district, which is in the Dallas-Fort Worth area. The district is represented by Beth Van Duyne, a Republican, who narrowly won the general election in 2020. Republicans reconfigured the district to make it one that Trump would have easily carried by 12 points in 2020. The Democrats excised from the district were packed into a neighboring district represented by Colin Allred, a Democrat. The packing transformed the district from one that was competitive to one that was much more reliably blue. By just moving the lines, Republicans changed two districts where incumbents were vulnerable into two safe ones. “The basics in Texas are, in most cases the primaries determine who the victor is gonna be in the general election in most cases,” said Joshua Blank, the research director at the Texas Politics Project. “Candidates in both parties are adjusting to the new normal of having to seek support from a more ideologically homogenous, but also more extreme primary electorate.” A lack of competitive districts could also affect where parties choose to invest their campaign resources, said Amanda Litman, the co-founder and executive director of Run for Something, a group focused on local races. The Democratic party, she noted, tends to focus its effort in places where there is overlap between competitive congressional districts and presidential battlegrounds. “The fewer competitive elections there are, the fewer places that will be able to have concentrated effort and intentionality around,” she said. There is some preliminary evidence showing that states using commissions to draw maps are producing more competitive plans. “When commissions draw plans you do see more competitive districts emerge than when a single party has control over the process in the state legislature,” Pildes said. He also noted that there can be a tradeoff between partisan fairness and competitive districts. In a state where voters are closely divided between the two parties, lawmakers could choose to maximize drawing competitive districts or districts that lock in a split result between the two parties. Politicians, he noted, tend to choose the latter. “You can draw a map that is fair in terms of partisan outcomes in which everyone is in a safe seat,” he said. “The value of competitive districts gets sort of short shrift in the political process because there’s not a lot of political self-interest in creating competitive districts.” This article is part of the Guardian’s series The Fight to VoteToday’s recipe is loosely inspired by lo mai gai, a Cantonese dish of sticky rice with chicken that also often features dried mushrooms, Chinese sausage and dried prawns. In this version, aubergines are halved and roasted, then the flesh is added to a sweet, savoury and slightly spicy mix of sticky rice, dried mushrooms, chestnuts, ginger and chives. The rice is then stuffed back into aubergine skins and baked until it’s deliciously sticky on the inside and crisp on the outside. Incredibly flavourful and, dare I say, meaty, this dish is well worth the effort, I promise. Sticky rice-stuffed aubergines I use Thai Taste sticky rice, which needs only two hours of pre-soaking in order to cook through inside the aubergines. If you have another brand, check the packet, because the rice may well need an overnight soak. Prep 15 min Soak 2 hr+ Cook 2 hr Serves 4 4 medium aubergines (about 250g each), cut in half lengthways 10 tbsp olive oil Fine salt and black pepper Chiu chow oil, or crispy chilli oil, to finish 1 lime, cut into wedges, to serve For the rice mix 400g Thai sticky rice (aka glutinous rice) – I use Thai Taste 30g dried wild mushrooms 120g ready-cooked and peeled chestnuts, finely chopped 15g fresh ginger, peeled and finely grated 20g chives, finely chopped 2 garlic cloves, peeled and finely grated or crushed 3½ tbsp maple syrup 4 tbsp soy sauce 20g sriracha, or less, to taste For the spring onion salad 20g spring onions, julienned ½ cucumber, halved lengthways, deseeded and finely sliced at an angle 10g coriander leaves 1 fresh jalapeño chilli, sliced into thin rounds (optional) 1 tbsp lime juice Heat the oven to 240C (220C fan)/475F/gas 9. Put the rice in a bowl, add cold water to cover, then leave to soak for two hours, or overnight (see recipe introduction). Cut cross-hatches into the flesh of each aubergine half, cutting about three-quarters of the way down into the flesh, taking care not to puncture the skin and leaving a ½cm border around the edges. Lay the aubergines cut side up on a large, flat baking tray. In a small bowl, mix four tablespoons of the olive oil and a teaspoon of fine salt, then rub this mix all over the cut sides of the aubergines. Bake in the hot oven for 35-40 minutes, turning the tray once halfway, until very well browned, then remove and leave to cool. While the aubergines are baking, put the dried mushrooms in a small bowl, cover with just-boiled water and leave to soak for 15 minutes. Turn down the oven to 210C (190C fan)/410F/gas 6½. In a medium bowl, combine the chestnuts, ginger, chives, garlic, remaining six tablespoons of olive oil, maple syrup, soy sauce, sriracha, a teaspoon of fine salt and lots of pepper – I used about 30 twists of the grinder. Drain and finely chop the mushrooms, then add them to the chestnut bowl. Scoop the flesh from the cooked aubergines into the bowl, taking care not to tear the skins. Drain the soaked rice, add that to the bowl, too, then mix well to combine. Lay the scooped-out aubergine skins in a 33cm x 26cm high-sided baking tray. Fill each half with an eighth of the rice mix, then drizzle a tablespoon of water evenly over each one. Drizzle with a little more olive oil, cover very tightly with foil, so no steam can escape, and bake for an hour. Remove the foil, bake uncovered for five minutes more, then remove and leave to rest and cool for 10 minutes. Meanwhile, make the salad: in a small bowl, mix the spring onions, cucumber, coriander, jalapeño, lime juice and a good pinch of salt. Transfer the aubergines to a platter or individual plates, top with some salad, then drizzle over some chilli oil to taste and serve with lime wedges on the side. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from Ocado • Ixta Belfrage’s debut solo cookbook, Mezcla: Recipes to Excite, is published by Ebury in summer 2022. Meera Sodha is away.We are going to be pausing the Covid live blog for now to focus on the situation in Ukraine, but will resume if there are any major developments as the day progresses. Thank you all for reading! Thousands of protestors encamped on the outskirts of Paris early on Saturday resumed their way to the French capital in convoys of vehicles, defying a ban by authorities who are determined to prevent any blockade of the city, AFP reports. Inspired by Canadian truckers blocking border traffic with the US, the demonstrators include anti-Covid vaccination activists, but also people angry at fast-rising energy prices. Some drivers parked on the fringes of Chartres, about 80km from Paris, left at around 5am CET, according to messages seen by AFP. Messages said the aim was to “create a mass of vehicles that the forces of order would find impossible to contain”. “Faced with several thousand vehicles capable of stopping or being on the move” the police would not be able to do much, one message said. Nearly 7,200 police and gendarmes “are being deployed over the next three days to enforce the ban on vehicle convoys,” Paris police headquarters said. The prefect of the Paris police, Didier Lallement, said they had created a temporary car pound which, together with dozens of tow trucks, “will ... put an end to any blockage”. Police showed off their anti-blockage arsenal on Twitter, publishing photographs of loader tractors for the removal of barricades as well as trucks equipped with cranes or water cannon. Gendarmerie armoured vehicles have also been deployed in the streets of the capital for the first time since the “yellow vest” protests at the end of 2018. Prime Minister Jean Castex vowed to remain steadfast. “If they block traffic or if they try to block the capital, we must be very firm about this,” he said. Hundreds of cars, motorhomes and vans from Lille, Strasbourg, Châteaubourg and elsewhere stopped Friday evening at the gates of Paris, but a police source said no convoy had entered the capital. They are demanding a withdrawal of the government’s vaccine pass, which is required for access to many public spaces, and more help with their energy bills. “People need to see us, and to listen to the people who just want to live a normal and free life,” said Lisa, a 62-year-old retired health worker who joined a convoy of more than 1,000 vehicles leaving Châteaubourg in the western Brittany region early Friday. Like other protesters, Lisa has been active in the “yellow vest” movement that erupted over a fuel tax hike before becoming a platform for other complaints against President Emmanuel Macron. Just two months ahead of presidential elections and with the government desperate to avoid violent scenes in the capital, Macron said Friday he understood the “fatigue” linked to the Covid pandemic. “This fatigue also leads to anger. I understand it and I respect it. But I call for the utmost calm,” he told the Ouest-France newspaper. Police estimated 3,300 vehicles were involved in the various convoys by Friday afternoon. Paris police banned the gathering because of feared “public order disturbances” and said protesters who tried to block roads would face fines or arrest. The order prohibiting the assembly of convoys was upheld on Friday by the courts, which rejected two appeals. “It’s a betrayal. The basis of the order is not respectful of the law, of the freedom to demonstrate,” anti-vaccine and “yellow vest” activist Sophie Tissier told AFP. “The right to demonstrate and to have an opinion are a constitutionally guaranteed right in our republic and in our democracy. The right to block others or to prevent coming and going is not,” the prime minister said. Refuting any desire to block the capital, the demonstrators were hoping to swell the ranks of the regular Saturday protests against the government’s vaccine pass. “It’s important that we don’t interfere with other people on the roads,” said one activist, Robin, on his way from Illkirch-Graffenstaden in the eastern Alsace region. “That way we’ll keep the population on our side, like they did in Canada.” Some then want to travel on to Brussels for a “European convergence” of protesters planned there for Monday. Phil, a 58-year-old on his way by truck from Brittany, told AFP his refusal to get vaccinated had created “upheaval” in his family and work relations. As people prepare to shower each other with tokens of affection this Valentine’s Day, health authorities in Thailand are urging couples to practise safe pandemic sex – including wearing masks during intercourse, AFP reports. Daily coronavirus case numbers in the country have climbed from about 8,000 at the start of the month to almost double in the past fortnight. Health authorities have expressed concerns this 14 February could exacerbate the trend, while acknowledging people have sex on other days too. “Covid isn’t a sexually transmitted disease, but catching Covid is possible through close-contact breathing and exchanging saliva,” Bureau of Reproductive Health director Bunyarit Sukrat told AFP on Friday. He recommended couples perform antigen tests before their date night to prevent passing on the virus to their partner. Lovers are urged to “avoid face-to-face sex positions and deep kissing,”, he said. “If possible, wearing face masks while having sex can help reduce Covid risks.” This report is from Reuters. Norway will scrap nearly all its remaining Covid lockdown measures as high levels of coronavirus infections are unlikely to jeopardise health services, prime minister Jonas Gahr Støre said on Saturday. The Nordic country, which removed most curbs on 1 February, will still keep some rules for the Arctic archipelago of Svalbard. The new rules will take effect from Saturday at 10am CET. “We are removing almost all coronavirus measures,” Støre told a news conference. He went on: The coronavirus pandemic is no longer a major health threat to most of us. The Omicron virus causes far less serious illness and we are well protected by vaccines. Norwegians will no longer need to stay at least 1 metre (3ft) apart nor wear face masks in crowded settings. The removal of these measures mean nightclubs and other affected entertainment venues can resume full business. In addition, infected individuals no longer need to isolate themselves. Instead, they are recommended to stay home for four days. Travellers to Norway will no longer need to register their arrivals ahead of time and the government is also scrapping the previous requirement for proof of a negative test before departure for some visitors, such as unvaccinated people. Norway in December went into partial lockdown to combat the fast-spreading Omicron variant. Visitors to Svalbard, where health services are limited, must continue to test before and after arrival, while international charter flights to the archipelago remain suspended, the government said. Hong Kong reported a record 1,514 new Covid cases on Saturday, as officials struggling to contain a growing outbreak despite the most stringent restrictions yet met across the border to discuss support from China, Reuters reports. Hong Kong and mainland China are among the few places in the world still aiming to suppress every Covid outbreak, but the Omicron variant has proven tough to keep under control. New infections were up from Friday’s 1,325 and another three people died. Edwin Tsui, controller of the Centre for Health Protection, told reporters: This is the toughest battle against the virus of the past two years. Please stay at home. We need your cooperation. Hong Kong’s chief secretary, John Lee, health secretary, Sophia Chan, and security chief Chris Tang were in neighbouring Shenzhen on Saturday, to discuss support measures with Chinese officials. The measures are expected to include the provision of millions of testing kits and assistance to build more quarantine facilities and potentially a makeshift hospital, as medical capacity becomes stretched on all fronts. Hospital beds for patients with Covid are already at around 90% occupancy, while isolation facilities were also nearing their maximum, authorities said. Hundreds of thousands of people have been forced to test every day, including the elderly and children, queuing for hours in tightly packed lines outside overwhelmed testing centres. University of Hong Kong epidemiologists say the number of infections could reach tens of thousands a day in a matter of weeks, posing a major risk for the city’s elderly, many of whom are not vaccinated after Hong Kong’s success at keeping the virus at bay for much of the pandemic led to a sense of complacency. Infections were recorded in some 42 elder care homes, Tsui said. Some epidemiologists say only a full mainland-style lockdown for around two months could bring the infection count back to zero, but warn this would not be a definitive fix as Omicron could find its way back into the city again soon after. In a pre-recorded interview with local broadcaster Now TV published late on Friday, Chan said she did not want to impose a lockdown and that it was preferable that residents “do it themselves” by staying at home. Hong Kong has recorded more than 20,000 infections and just over 200 deaths since the start of the pandemic, far fewer than in most other places, but at significant economic and psychological cost. Hong Kong is one of the world’s most isolated large cities, with flights 90% down, and hardly any allowed to transit. This report is from Reuters. Protesters opposing pandemic restrictions flouted a court order and emergency rules, continuing to occupy a vital Canada-US trade corridor early on Saturday, hours after a judge granted an injunction to end the blockade that has crippled North America’s well-knitted auto industry. Prime minister Justin Trudeau has promised Joe Biden quick action to end the crisis, and on Friday a Canadian judge ordered an end to the four-day-long blockade of the Ambassador Bridge, North America’s busiest land border crossing. The order came into effect at 7pm ET, but five hours after the deadline, some 100 protesters were milling around the entrance to the bridge, waving Canadian flags. While the number of protesters and police dropped as the night progressed, demonstrators continued to block the bridge with trucks and pick-up vans, preventing any flow of traffic in either direction. Protesters sang the Canadian national anthem and midnight, and some shouted “Freedom!” Police, who started to gather in a parking lot a few blocks away from the protesters, began handing out pamphlets that outlined penalties under Ontario’s emergency order, which took effect at midnight. Trudeau earlier told reporters that no action was off the table. Companies have diverted cargo to stem losses amid production cuts by companies including Ford. Superior Court Justice Geoffrey Morawetz on Friday approved the request by auto industry associations and Windsor city authorities hoping to end the protests. Occupying access roads leading to the bridge on Friday, protesters voiced defiance and there was little sign of them backing down. “Canada is supposed to be a free country,” said Liz Vallee, a protester from Chatham, Ontario. “When that freedom is threatened, we must stand up.” Vallee said she and others would stay until all pandemic mandates are lifted. The “Freedom Convoy” protests, started by Canadian truckers opposing a vaccinate-or-quarantine mandate for cross-border drivers, are also occupying areas outside government buildings in the national capital Ottawa and have blocked two smaller US crossings. The protests have inspired similar convoys and plans in France, New Zealand, Australia and the US, whose Department of Homeland Security is working to ensure that a “Freedom Convoy” event due in early March in Washington, DC, “does not disrupt lawful trade.” East of Ottawa, people were expected to gather in Fredericton in the province of New Brunswick for a weekend demonstration. Local police said officers were stationed at entrances to the city to ensure traffic can continue. Canada’s financial capital Toronto was also bracing for more weekend demonstrations. Almost forgot to say - good morning from London! I’m Lucy Campbell, I’ll be bringing you all the latest global developments on the coronavirus pandemic for the next eight hours. Please feel free to get in touch with me as I work if you have a story or tips to share. Your thoughts are always welcome. Email: lucy.campbell@theguardian.com Twitter: @lucy_campbell_ Boris Johnson has been sent a questionnaire by Scotland Yard over alleged parties in Downing Street, in a move that could raise fresh concerns among Tory MPs about his leadership, Aubrey Allegretti and Vikram Dodd report. No 10 confirmed late on Friday night that the prime minister received the document, and vowed he would respond to it “as required”. About 50 people were asked to account for their presence at the dozen events under scrutiny by the police as part of their inquiry into Covid law breaches, named “Operation Hillman”. Johnson has continued to insist he broke no rules, but apologised for attending one gathering which was a “bring your own booze” garden party organised by his principal private secretary on 20 May 2020. He is also believed to have been present at a birthday celebration in No 10 on 19 June 2020 and leaving dos for aides in November that year, and January 2021. Police are also investigating a gathering in his personal flat in Downing Street. In a clear signal officers are investigating if the prime minister personally broke the law, a No 10 spokesperson said: We can confirm the prime minister has received a questionnaire from the Metropolitan police. He will respond as required. The move has the potential to spark fresh concerns among Tory MPs about Johnson’s future, though with parliament in recess, many will spend the next nine days back in their constituencies. Some backbenchers have held off calling for a ballot on his leadership until the outcome of the Met’s investigation, though suggested that they could submit a letter of no confidence if Johnson is found to have misled parliament or is fined for breaking the Covid rules he set. The Met declined to confirm the news that the prime minister had received the questionnaire nor whether those receiving them were being treated as potential suspects or witnesses. The full story is here: PM sent Downing Street lockdown party questionnaire by Met police Days-long rallies against Covid vaccination mandates picked up in numbers in New Zealand and Australia on Saturday, with protesters blocking roads and disrupting life in the countries’ capitals, Reuters reports. About 10,000 protesters gathered at Canberra’s major showgrounds, forcing the cancellation of a popular charity book fair, bringing traffic to a standstill and blocking roads in the Australian capital. Police said three people were arrested, but overall the crowd was “well behaved”. In New Zealand’s Wellington, hundreds of demonstrators gathered near the distinctive “Beehive” parliament for a fifth day despite drenching rain. Inspired by truckers’ demonstrations in Canada, the protesters have occupied and blocked several streets around parliament with their trucks, vans and motorcycles. Protests remain relatively small in highly vaccinated New Zealand and Australia, where overwhelming majority of the population supports inoculations. However, the movement has persevered, with rallies occasionally turning violent. Australia prime minister Scott Morrison said demonstrators had a right to protest, asking them to do it in a peaceful and respectful way. He noted most vaccination mandates have been imposed by the states and territories, not the federal government. “So, I understand their concerns about these issues,” Morrison, who has been urging vaccinations, told reporters in Sydney. The federal government mandated last year vaccinations for aged care workers, disability workers and those that are working in high-risk situations in health system. Most states and territories have imposed broader mandates and barred those not vaccinated from restaurants, concerts and many public venues. Australian Opposition leader Anthony Albanese, speaking at a media conference in Sydney, said the rallies were not going to gain widespread support. “Go home,” he told the demonstrators. New Zealand media footage showed one person being stretchered from the rally, carried by paramedics and police. No arrest had been made as of late Saturday, according to the police, who arrested more than 100 people on Thursday. New Zealand logged a daily record of 454 community Covid-19 cases on Saturday. A country of five million people, New Zealand has reported just under 19,000 confirmed cases and 53 deaths since the pandemic began. About 94% of eligible people are vaccinated, with shots mandatory for some staff in frontline jobs. In Australia, which is opening its borders to tourists later this month, 94% of those aged 16 and over are double-vaccinated, but the country is still battling a wave of the highly transmissible Omicron variant. There were at least 65 coronavirus-deaths reported across Australia on Saturday.It is pleasurable to think of ripening tomatoes, the undeniably summery scent of bruised tomato leaves, and all the joys of eating a sun-warmed fruit fresh off the vine. And it is wise to be thinking of them now because the early bird catches the worm (or the ripe tomato). It is true that tomatoes can be started off as late as early April, but if you have space and a little heat in the form of a propagator, those started off this month will ripen sooner and taste sweeter for it. Tomatoes can be tricky: they are easily tormented by disease such as blight, munched by caterpillars and slugs, and if the summer is wet they can taste drab and watery. The way around this is to grow them under cover in a greenhouse, cold frame or polytunnel. Many varieties are actually bred for greenhouse production and won’t do well outside. Ruthje, from Vital Seeds, is an organic greenhouse tomato bred for toughness. It doesn’t require high nutrient inputs, has a good skin that won’t split, an outstanding flavour, and stores well on and off the vine (no tomatoes dropping off to be eaten by the slugs before sunrise). It will also after-ripen, meaning that all the green toms you pick at the end of the season will continue to ripen in your kitchen. Alternatively, Santiam Sunrise is a yellow cherry with the finest flavour I’ve ever tasted. If you are able to get these to the kitchen before eating the lot off the vine then you have true willpower. They are addictively good, but do need growing under protection. I’d almost recommend buying a greenhouse just to grow them. If you are growing outside, go for varieties specifically bred for outdoor cultivation that ripen early. There are hundreds to choose from. Primabella has exceptional late blight resistance, which is a must outside a greenhouse. It has been bred to ripen early – you can expect red tomatoes by July – and has a good balance of acidity and sweetness. It’s a classic red cherry tom that won’t fail you, and open-pollinated too, so you can easily save your own seeds. Another outdoor variety worth trying is Moskvich, a cold-hardy, very early vine type from Russia that produces big red slicing toms with an excellent flavour. It is vigorous though, so you’ll have to keep on top of pinching out side shoots. But if all the talk of gardens and greenhouses is making you weep as you gaze out of your flat window, then I give you House, a tiny, tiny tom for all you flat dwellers with sunny sills. It loves life in a pot, in fact does better here than in the ground, and it’s early to produce too. Sow in the next couple of weeks and you could be eating ripe tomatoes by the end of June. But order promptly as seed will sell out fast.Chops are easy to cook, fast and reliable – the meat is so tender and yielding that it takes little effort to inject it with flavour to make it taste even more delicious. I like to use bone-in chops – meat cooked on the bone always has more flavour and is less likely to dry out, plus there is something lovely about gnawing at the spent bones on your plate. The length of time that they occupy the grill or pan is determined by the thickness of the chops, but it is essential to render down the fat until it’s beautifully amber. Glazed lamb chops with cauliflower, almond and date salad (pictured above) Sweet with dates, sour with tamarind and rounded off with earthy spice, this sticky marinade is simple to make but gives rich and complex flavour. Prep 20 min Marinate 2 hr+ Cook 50 min Serves 4 8 lamb cutlets or rib chops, French trimmed (ie, with most of the fat removed and several inches of the bones exposed and cleaned) For the marinade 75g date molasses 2 tbsp tamarind paste 2 tbsp olive oil 1 tsp toasted cumin, coarsely ground 1 tsp cinnamon 2 garlic cloves, peeled and finely chopped Salt and black pepper, to taste For the salad 1 small cauliflower, cut into florets 2 tbsp olive oil 1 tsp coriander seeds, toasted 1 tsp tfennel seeds, toasted ½ tsp pul biber 1 banana shallot, peeled and sliced into very thin crescents 5 medjool dates, thinly sliced Olive oil, to drizzle Zest and juice of 1 lemon Labneh or thick Greek yoghurt, to serve Heat the oven to 200C (180C fan)/390F/gas 6. Put the lamb in a shallow bowl. Mix all the ingredients for the marinade in a small bowl, pour this over the lamb and massage it in so the chops are well coated. Marinate for at least two hours, but preferably overnight. In the meantime, make the salad. Lay the cauliflower in a roasting pan and scatter over the coriander and fennel seeds, pul biber flakes, sea salt and pepper, then drizzle over the olive oil. Roast for 40 minutes, turning once, until the cauliflower is golden and charred. In a bowl, toss the cooked cauliflower with the dates, shallot, olive oil and lemon zest and juice. Get a griddle pan very hot, then cook the lamb cutlets for three minutes on each side, or until cooked to your liking. Make sure to prop up and cook the fatty side, too, so it gets golden and seared. Serve with the cauliflower salad and a dollop of labneh. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from Ocado Spicy yoghurt pork chops with coconut, mint, coriander and lime sambal This Indian spiced yoghurt marinade doesn’t just add incredible flavour to the chops, it makes them beautifully tender, too. Prep 20 min Marinate 5 hr+ Cook 10 min Serves 4 4 pork chops (about 250g each) For the marinade 1 handful coriander, roughly chopped 1 handful mint leaves, roughly chopped, 2 garlic cloves, peeled and roughly chopped 1 thumb fresh ginger, peeled and roughly chopped 1 green chilli, roughly chopped 4 tbsp Greek yoghurt 1 tbsp tomato puree 1 tsp turmeric 1 tsp cinnamon ½ tsp red chilli powder 1 tsp paprika 1 tsp chaat masala 1 tsp cumin, 1 tsp coriander seeds, the seeds from 3 cardamom pods, ¼ tsp peppercorns, 1 black cardamom pod, all roasted, then ground together Juice of 1 lime Salt, to taste For the sambal 150g freshly grated coconut (you can also buy this frozen) 1 bunch coriander, roughly chopped 1 handful mint leaves, roughly chopped 2 green chillies, finely chopped 1 banana shallot 1 tbsp grated ginger 1 garlic clove, finely chopped Juice of 2 limes To make the sambal, simply blend all the ingredients together in a food processor to make a smooth paste, adding a little water if necessary. Refrigerate until needed. Make the marinade by blending the coriander, mint, garlic, ginger and chilli together in a food processor till you have a smooth paste. Put the yoghurt and tomato puree into a bowl and fold in the blended paste. Add the spices, season with salt and pour in the lime juice and mix till well combined. Slather all over the chops and leave to marinade for at least 5 hours but preferably overnight. Heat the oven to 220C (200C fan)/425F/gas 7 and put a griddle pan on a high heat. Once the pan is hot, grill the chops for 90 seconds on each side, until they have good char lines, then transfer to a baking tray and roast for about five – seven minutes, depending on thickness, until the meat is just cooked. Leave to rest for five minutes before serving with the sambal. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from OcadoBritain has always been a nation of pet lovers. But since the start of the coronavirus pandemic, more than 3.2m households in the UK are thought to have acquired a pet. As demand for puppies, in particular, increased during lockdown, prices soared to an all-time high, with some dogs going for as much as £10,000, more than five times their usual price tag. The prices of kittens also rose by as much as 40%. Many new pet owners have struggled to cope with their new housemates. Animal rescue charities report a 20% jump in the number of pets being abandoned, while demand for “pet behaviour counsellors” has doubled. Rabbits have proved the biggest source of “lockdown pet regret”, with two-fifths (42%) of owners regretting their purchase during the pandemic. “Taking on a pet, at any time, is a huge responsibility and before bringing one home it’s vital people consider whether they have the time and the finances to properly care for that animal for the rest of their life,” says RSPCA pet welfare expert Dr Samantha Gaines. “Across the sector we are seeing an increase in the number of animals abandoned as well as being surrendered. We fear this could worsen as people return to the office, or struggle with the increasing costs of living. “We believe that one of the main reasons people fail to care for their pets properly, or end up abandoning them, is a lack of research before they get their pet and a misunderstanding about the cost of pet ownership.” A survey of RSPCA frontline rescuers found that 95% listed the cost of care, including vet and grooming costs, as the number one reason for pet neglect. As well as food, vet care, insurance, toys and specialist equipment, pets may also need behaviour support and training. We spoke to people who bought a pet in the pandemic to find out how the rewards of ownership stack up against the costs. ‘I bought a maltipoo to make us feel happy again’ Pet’s name: Darcie. Breed: maltipoo dog (a Maltese crossed with a poodle). Upfront cost in Oct 2020: £3,000. Food and treats: £35 a month. Grooming: £25 every six to seven weeks. Insurance: £17 a month. Flea and worming treatments: £17 a month. Total monthly cost: £87. Nicole, 46, is an assistant manager for adult care services in Hatfield. In July 2020 her husband, Garry, was unexpectedly taken ill with a suspected heart attack. “Because of Covid I wasn’t allowed to go with him in the ambulance, or visit him in hospital. Our children were in bed, and in the morning I told them daddy was unwell but he would be out soon,” she says. “This wasn’t the case, and in two days I had the dreaded phone call to tell me he had died – there was nothing they could do.” Nicole had to break the news to their three children, who were nine, 10 and 16 at the time. “Our whole world collapsed,” she says. Watching TV alone one evening, she was engulfed with feelings of grief and loneliness. There was a big gaping hole, not only in her life but in the heart of her home. “I felt like we were a bit empty,” she says. “I knew we were missing something – something to love, cuddle and give us a focus in life.” She surprised her children with Darcie, a maltipoo puppy, the following weekend. Prices for these dogs soared over lockdown and she had to pay £3,000. “I haven’t told some of my family what she cost. I’m too embarrassed. But I had some money that Garry left me and I thought, ‘I know what I’m going to do with that. I’m going to buy something that will make us feel happy again’,” she says. Words cannot describe how much joy and comfort the dog has brought to her grieving children – “and most of all, to me”. In total, Darcie costs about £107 a month to feed and look after, and is “worth every penny”, Nicole says. “It’s almost as if she knew what she was there for. It sounds dumb but she really did heal us.” The dog seems to know when the children, and especially Nicole, need love and affection. “She became my rock, my strength.” Maltipoos shed little to no fur, so Nicole pays £25 to a groomer every six to seven weeks to ensure the dog does not get matted and dirty. “You’ve got to, with a breed like hers. I brush her regularly, as well.” To avoid being hit with large unexpected bills, Nicole also pays £17 a month for insurance and a further £17 a month for a healthcare plan her vet offers. “All the flea and worming treatments and annual vaccination boosters can end up being really costly. But when you pay monthly, it’s done, it’s paid for. You don’t have to worry about it.” Small mixed breeds are notoriously fussy about food, so, to save money, Nicole buys Darcie’s online in bulk rather than at the supermarket, after discovering the only brand she likes (Lily’s Kitchen) is cheaper that way. It is affordable, but she sometimes wonders what Garry would say if he knew she had spent £3,000 on a dog. As she had owned one before, she knew before about how much Darcie would cost each month. “I knew that it was a cost I could manage,” she says. And for her, the rewards of dog ownership far outweigh those costs. “I can’t even begin to tell you how much love and happiness she has brought into our lives.” Nicole is a member of the charity WAY Widowed and Young ‘I had no human touch but I had a cat to cuddle’ Pet’s name: Mademoiselle Chai. Breed: domestic short-haired cat. Upfront cost in April 2020: free. First vet bill: £350. Food and treats: £15 a month. Insurance: £13 a month. Flea and worming treatments: £12 a month. Cat sitting: £250 for a week. Total monthly cost: £40 Alicia, 52, is a ghostwriter who lives in Westcliff-on-Sea. As the UK locked down in March 2020, she noticed a young female cat hanging around her house. “She darted in my front door and continued to visit me – after a few times, she didn’t want to leave,” she says. “I would open the door to give her the opportunity … but she wouldn’t go.” The cat wasn’t microchipped but had been neutered. News was circulating that cats could get the virus (although there is no evidence they can transmit Covid to humans) and Alicia wondered if perhaps the cat, who looked approximately four months old, had been thrown out by her owners as a result. She worked with Pet Search South East, a local group for lost and found pets, put up signs locally and asked neighbours – but no one claimed her. “So in August, I did,” she says. She called her Mademoiselle Chai, after her favourite drink and the Hebrew word for life. “I really feel like we saved each other, as I am a single woman living alone with no family in the UK,” she says. “I literally had no human touch during the lockdowns but I did have a cat to cuddle.” Although she did not have to pay for Mademoiselle Chai, it cost about £350 to get her vaccinated, chipped and checked by the vet. “Money was tight but I thought, ‘This is a worthwhile investment,’” she says. “I knew I would be able to find a way to afford her.” She pays £12 a month for flea and worming treatments and annual vaccinations via the Healthy Pet Club plan, which also means she gets a 10% discount off bills and services at her local vet, and spends £15 a month on cat food (tins of Butcher’s), which she buys in bulk from Ocado to cut costs. She decided to get “really good insurance”, initially paying £156 a year for a policy connected to the veterinary charity PDSA. Each policy taken out contributes to the charity’s work treating animals whose owners are suffering economic hardship. So when her policy went up by £14 to £170 at renewal, she was OK with that, even though she had not made a claim. “If it happens regularly, I will shop around to find another insurer,” she says. “But I like the feeling that I’m helping to support a charity and I think they are more likely to honour claims.” One of the best purchases she made was a £31 Morpilot backpack she can put the cat in when she goes for a walk. “I can also use it to take her to the vets because I don’t have a car,” she says. One of the cat’s favourite toys is a £5 fishing rod but others, such as ribbons and string that she loves to chase around, were free. The biggest waste of money was spending £45 on scratching posts, which the cat refuses to use. The biggest expense has been paying for a cat sitter to cover trips away. Recently, Alicia found a newly graduated veterinary nurse via the website Cat in a Flat and paid her £250 to stay in her house for a week while she was on a work trip. “That gave me peace of mind,” she says. Despite all these costs, Alicia has no doubt that getting a lockdown pet – or, as she puts it, a “new best buddy” – was a good financial decision. “She makes me laugh and kept my spirits high during the pandemic. She was an unexpected gift in my life. I think an angel sent her to me.” ‘There’s hay everywhere in the house’ Pets’ names: Radish and Lettuce. Breed: mini rex rabbit. Upfront cost in March 2021: £50 each. First vet bill: £100 each. Hutch, tunnel and playpen: £225. Hay: £5 for two bales, every two to three weeks. Food and treats: £15 a month. Chew toys: £5 a month. Litter tray liners: £6 a month. Nail clipping: £5 a rabbit, every two to three months. Insurance: £0. Rabbit sitting: £11 a day. Total monthly cost: about £18 a rabbit. Sophie, 50, works in Cambridge for a technology business. She decided to buy her three children a pair of rabbits in March 2021, during the third lockdown, because they had been begging for a pet and her eldest daughter, Alice, 13, had thoroughly researched getting one. “From my perspective, spending even £2 a week on them would be too much,” Sophie says. “But I knew this before we got them. It was an entirely child-related endeavour.” She opted for rabbits because she thought the children would be capable of looking after them by themselves, and it would be good for them to learn to do so. Alice has responsibility for feeding, ordering their food, cleaning out their litter trays and generally looking after the rabbits. When she came down with Covid last year and had to isolate from her parents, Lettuce and Radish were a great comfort. “I could play with them when mum and dad were working,” she says. She loves that they are excited to see her in the mornings and jump on to her lap to be stroked. “I think it’s really rewarding to have a pet.” The rabbits stay indoors, so Sophie does not see any need to insure them for theft, and plans to pay any vet bills that arise. The biggest expense was their hutch, which cost £185. Prices for double rabbit hutches start at £90 online but she decided to invest in an expensive one that would maximise the space available. She went for one from rabbit-hutches.co.uk that would fit neatly in to her kitchen. “It’s quite big, and because we keep them inside, we wanted it not to look too ugly,” Sophie says. She was also surprised to find it costs £11 a day in Cambridge to get an experienced sitter to feed the rabbits and change their litter tray (rabbits typically defecate up to 200 to 300 pellets a day) when the family go on holiday. Although the family spends £5 a month on chew toys for the rabbits, they also try to save by giving them cardboard and homemade toys that are safe to chew on. Overall, Sophie is not a big fan of the rabbits – “mostly because of the hay that is everywhere in the house, and the animal smell” – but she loves seeing how much her children care for them, and does not resent the monthly costs. “You know that they are going to be outrageous when you decide to get a pet. Whether it’s worth it or not entirely depends on how much you love the pet.”On 13 November 2015, Islamist gunmen opened fire on concertgoers at the Bataclan theatre in Paris, killing 90 people. Among the victims was Hélène Muyal-Leiris, who was survived by her husband Antoine Leiris and their 19-month-old son Melvil. Three days later Leiris, a journalist, addressed his wife’s killers in a Facebook post, declaring: “I don’t know who you are and I don’t want to know … I will not give you the satisfaction of hating you”. This wasn’t just a bereaved man’s cri de coeur, it was a pre-emptive protest against a far right that would try to leverage France’s grief for its nationalist agenda. Leiris’s post went viral, was adopted as a liberal rallying cry, and was followed in 2016 by You Will Not Have My Hate, a slim memoir which quickly became an international bestseller. Now, six years later, comes a kind of sequel. Whereas the first book zoomed in, recounting how Leiris and Melvil survived the 12 days after the attack, the second pans back. Life, After covers four years, describing how they build a life together “like two escapees from the ordinary world”. Seeking a fresh start, Leiris moves them from a historic street in Montmartre to a sixth-floor new-build apartment in the 16th arrondissement. “I am embracing the now,” he tells us in his brisk present tense, lucidly translated by Sam Taylor: “the immediate, the convenient, the practical, the ephemeral, the washable, the soundproofed”. Both father and son must deal, in their different ways, with the problem of memory. As Melvil turns four and five, Leiris wrestles with what to tell him about the mother he’ll never remember but whose absence will shape his whole life. For Leiris himself, memory is a ghost to be exorcised. At first he stores Hélène’s possessions in a basement eight flights beneath his apartment. Then, one day, he impulsively throws everything – bar two dresses and the jacket his wife was wearing the night she died – in black bin liners: “The letters, the photographs, the clothes … they were the new body that death gave Hélène. A scattered body that I am now tearing to pieces so I can rid myself of it.” Violent, troubling moments like this are what make Life, After a more interesting book than its determinedly dignified predecessor. It’s impossible to ignore the fact that this man, who became famous for disavowing hate, is in fact brimming with fury. When he’s ready to date again, he’s baffled to find himself taking out his pain on a new partner: “I became cruel. I made her pay for something that I hadn’t yet identified by showing her that I could be cowardly, vile, insecure”. The book’s most powerful and revealing passages hint that Leiris’s hate, and his need to repudiate it, go much further back. His unhappy parents quarrelled bitterly and then divorced. His mother went on to numb her pain with pills and alcohol before one day falling asleep while smoking a cigarette, sustaining burns that would go on to kill her. “From above, I watched myself acting as if nothing was wrong,” writes Leiris; “I was split in two.” When, after Hélène’s death, he occasionally finds himself angry with his son, he has “the impression that that rage doesn’t belong to me. I try to get rid of it. I wonder where it comes from.” In History of Violence, published in France in the same year as Leiris’s first book, the author Édouard Louis recounted a brutal sexual assault he suffered at the hands of a man whose father was a migrant from Algeria. For Louis, memory is a psychic and political tool, a sharp shovel blade to excavate not only his own pain but that of his attacker and the colonial racism that produced it. By looking his enemy in the eye, he attempts to see himself and his country more clearly. By contrast, Leiris’s writing can be read as a heartbreaking study in the unconscious denial that so often attends traumatic loss, as eloquent in what it doesn’t (or can’t) say as in what it does. You think back to the words Leiris addressed to Hélène’s murderers – I don’t know who you are and I don’t want to know – and wonder who else in his history of violence he might be addressing. • Matt Rowland Hill’s memoir Original Sins will be published by Chatto &amp; Windus in July. Life, After by Antoine Leiris, translated by Sam Taylor, is published by Harvill Secker (£12.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Marie Gracie never met the boy, but his fate changed her life. On 2 September 2015, three-year-old Alan Kurdi washed up, drowned, on a Turkish beach. His family were Syrian refugees, trying to reach Europe. Journalist Nilüfer Demir took a photo. Alan lies face down, in a T-shirt and shorts. His feet are so tiny. His hands are upturned, facing the sky. “I’m a mother,” says Gracie, an artist from Milton Keynes. “Can you imagine anything worse than your child being in the news like that?” She reached out to her local chapter of Refugees Welcome, set up in the wake of the Syrian war. “My family became the first buddy family for the first Syrian family that arrived in Milton Keynes,” she says. Gracie helped them with paperwork to get their children into school and set up doctors’ appointments. “Over time I haven’t had to do as much,” Gracie says, “but I still go and see them, and the mum calls me her ‘adopted mum’, because she won’t see her family again.” Over time, as the families got settled, there was less need for volunteers and Refugees Welcome disbanded, though Gracie stayed friends with her buddy family. But in August last year, US and British forces pulled out of Afghanistan and, within days, the country fell to the Taliban. Gracie began to hear whispers that Afghan families were arriving in Milton Keynes. A local charity asked for donations of toys for the children. Gracie pulled together some things, but missed the deadline for collection. A few days later, driving through town, she saw a group of people. “I realised instantly they were the refugees,” she says. As luck would have it, she had the toys in the boot, so she pulled up and handed them over. The refugees were being housed in a hotel. Gracie decided to go and introduce herself. “I went to the hotel and started chatting to people,” she says. “I said, ‘Welcome to England. How are you doing?’” The stories began to unfold. Many had fled Afghanistan with only the clothes on their backs. A church had found them some clothing, but the families still didn’t have everything they needed. Gracie appointed herself as a voluntary coordinator. She collected details of all 200 people: what they wanted, their shoe and clothing sizes. “I got a detailed picture,” she says. “Mr X needs a pair of size 8 boots; his daughters need three sets of pyjamas.” She added just about everyone she knew to a WhatsApp group, and sent out messages asking for clothes. When the donations started arriving, Gracie turned her front room into a sorting warehouse. “You can’t just dump a load of stuff on people,” she says, “because it causes rows. When people have had everything taken away from them, they’re desperate to grab on to things.” Instead, Gracie made customised packages for each family. She persuaded a hairdresser to offer free haircuts. She got English textbooks and a driving manual for every family. Many of the families have been stuck in hotel rooms for months. “They’re really fed up,” she says. “They just want a home, so they can start living. They are in limbo.” Not all the families get on. “Why would they?” Gracie says. “There’s no reason they should like each other.” The children are not in school. “It’s appalling,” she says. “What we’re doing to these people is causing them more stress. They’ve just left their family behind and watched their society fall apart and are getting daily reports of family and friends dying, and we can’t even put their kids in school on a temporary basis.” “Marie hasn’t just helped me,” says Khushal Saraj, who arrived in the UK with his family. He previously worked for the Afghan ministry of transport. “She’s helped every family here. She’s an amazing person.” Gracie is dispirited by the general public’s attitude towards refugees. “Attitudes have hardened,” she says. “The appetite for helping other people has lessened.” But her community feels different. “I haven’t found it hard to get people to say they will help,” she says. Gracie absolutely insists that her Guardian angel treat be something for the children. A local church is hosting a party and the Guardian hires Corina’s Cool Kids Parties as entertainers. Gracie phones me afterwards, buzzing but weary. “Today has been absolutely joyful” she says. The children “were contentedly screaming and jumping around and bouncing,” she says. “The entertainer made balloon hats and balloon animals and did games with the kids. It was so lovely. They all had fun.” It is the first winter for these children in a strange country. But thanks to Gracie and her fellow volunteers, they had a happy day – the children’s whoops of joy are still ringing in her ears. Want to nominate someone for Guardian angel? Email us – with their permission – and suggest a treat at guardian.angel@theguardian.comKnown as “The Cookie Lady” around Washington DC, Lacey Fisher is famous for her British- and German-inspired alcohol-infused confectionaries. Fisher launched Cookie Lane during the economic crisis of 2008, after being laid off from four different jobs as a mortgage auditor. “I ran through my six months of savings and rent was due,” Fisher says. Eventually Fisher returned to her full-time job but continued to work on her fledgling cookie empire “part-time”, baking her popular pecan and chocolate boozy Southern Gentleman, New York Oatmeal and Big Daddy Chocolate Chip. She decided to solely focus on Cookie Lane after a work commute turned into a five-hour nightmare while her three-month-old baby was at home. And in November 2020, the cookie lady quit her day job. Fisher is just one of many Black women who left the workforce during the Covid-19 pandemic. In May 2020, Working Mother Research Institute reported that 52% of Black women were debating leaving their companies in two years. One major issue is pay. A 2021 LeanIn.org survey found that on average Black women are paid 37% less than white men and 50% of Black women and Latinas had trouble paying for basic expenses with less than $300 in savings, and that’s with a job. In the same survey women of color described the pandemic as devastating to their finances. Compared with white men, Black women are almost twice as likely to say they have been laid off, furloughed, or had their hours or pay cut because of the pandemic. Nicki Tucker, social media director and contributing writer to the State of Black Women in Corporate America report at LeanIn.org, says the financial hurdles combined with hostile work environments are the catalyst for Black women to leave corporate America and start their own company. “Our research shows that Black women are more likely to face a great deal of microaggressions, especially disrespectful and othering comments on their identity or appearance and less likely to be promoted at that first, critical step up from entry-level to manager, which is what we call the broken rung,” Tucker says. “Five to 10 years ago Black women wanted a seat at the table and now Black women are building that table.” I’ll do it myself Black women have a long history of entrepreneurship, says Tucker. Tucker, who comes from a family of Black women business owners, says Covid-19 is forcing the world to see Black women as enterprising. Women of color make up only 39% of women in the US but represent 89% of new women-owned businesses. Within that demographic, Black women are leading the charge at 42% of new women-owned businesses, followed by Latina women at 31%. If grit is the number one indicator of success, then Black women are the ideal prototype. Like Fisher, most Black women fund their businesses with personal savings and side jobs. These intrepid business owners learn skills along the way and integrate innovative solutions to their unique challenges. For example, Fisher sustained her business by leveraging social media and tapping into her real estate network offering gifts for their clients. During the Covid-19 pandemic she set up shop at the local farmers’ markets in Virginia and expanded into cities with higher levels of income. “We offered free delivery within a 20-mile radius if they ordered $15 worth of cookies. We also created virtual kitchen spaces by partnering with restaurants so customers could pick up their cookies,” Fisher says. “I didn’t feel comfortable raising our prices 30% to accommodate Uber Eats or Grubhub, so I hired 1099 workers [independent contractors] for delivery services, marked down the cookies and paid the workers out of pocket.” Cookie Lane survived the 2008 economic crisis and the pandemic while generating a profit. However, Fisher’s biggest obstacles have been access to funding and scaling her business to meet the growing demand. Organizations like Walker’s Legacy Foundation in Washington DC is one of many non-profits popping up to provide a support system for women like Fisher. Roughly 90% of Walker’s Legacy Foundation stakeholders are Black women who participate in various business accelerators that give additional skills and support to female entrepreneurs of color, says Ayris Scales, managing director of Walker’s Legacy. “So often Black women are entrepreneurs out of necessity. It’s interesting that Black women are really stepping up at this point, particularly during this time of economic uncertainty, because we’ve always had to navigate economic uncertainty,” Scales says. Black women were the fastest-growing group of entrepreneurs pre-Covid, but Scales says the pandemic saw side hustles become the primary source of income. These businesses tend to have a low barrier to entry and high growth potential, like health and beauty, PR and communications, home healthcare aides, childcare, culinary arts and IT. Walker’s Legacy recently finished their Covid-19 impact study and found that nearly 80% of the women surveyed are also caregivers. The majority of those surveyed are also the sole providers for their households and are caring for nieces, nephews and parents. Having the role of primary caregiver while working in a toxic environment or thwarted out of a position required many Black women to reassess the meaning of job security. “We now have women saying if I can do this for Tom, Dick and Harry, then I can take a chance and do this for myself,” Scale says. “So, we see more women saying I want to choose a different path and different type of lifestyle that is more authentic with where I feel I should be.” Providing a support system It’s an exciting time, says Scales, who is passionate about making sure Black women business owners are “capital ready”. Black women have the necessary skills, but many don’t go through the process of developing a business plan or understanding multiple lines of revenue. “We’re saying you already have the skills, you already run the business and we want to help you put some formality to it,” Scales says. “So when it’s time to scale, navigate the next pandemic or when you’re ready to have the conversation with a financial institution, you understand what you need to have in place to access capital.” Black women business owners have struggled with the false perception that they are unbankable and high-risk. Many say that investors have a set of criteria that are not culturally sensitive to Black women entrepreneurs. Scales says Black women are no more high-risk than a white counterpart who secures funding with just an idea. “We’re coming in after having run a business for five years and are showing them we have stayed afloat with little to no support and making money … so how can we be high-risk?” When evaluating Black-led businesses traditional financial institutions compare them to someone who has 10 times the budget or a much larger team, says Roshawnna Novellus, founder of the Atlanta based fintech company EnrichHER. Novellus, who holds a PhD in systems engineering with a minor in finance, pivoted from her career in the financial sector to launch EnrichHER, a platform that connects revenue-generating companies led by women and people of color to various sources of funding. The company loans up to $250,000 to small businesses and services an 80% Black demographic. Novellus says establishing guidelines that are culturally in alignment with Black women is essential. “We have algorithms based on reducing the inherent bias in financial institutions. We build algorithms that are built on the skill set, the excellence, and the grit we illustrate that is highly correlated to our business success,” says Novellus. EnrichHER also offers educational programming for entrepreneurs to support Black women as they “try something new”. Novellus says for many Black women being a business owner is attractive and if small business is the backbone of the US economy then Black women are poised to become the largest contributors to economic growth. For women like Fisher, owning a business is about applying the grit to thrive, instead of merely surviving. “I’m a hustler,” says Fisher. “I’ll hustle just as hard for myself as I do for someone else. The problem is I was building someone else’s dream versus building my own dream. What matters is catching the dream that you have and setting that dream on fire.”A summer spent in Iceland convinced me that Ireland has much to learn from our Nordic neighbours. The mercury rarely rises above 15C in Iceland in July, but the locals compensate with frequent visits to outdoor geothermal pools that seem to feature in every town, village and crossroads. I spent many happy hours in poolside hot tubs and saunas, seeing how the locals have learned to embrace the outdoors and make the most of their subarctic climate. Then, several years ago, my wife booked us a trip around Finland in late November. Darkness fell at about 3pm and multiple coats and hats just about kept the cold at bay. But things began to look up when we discovered that most towns and villages feature steaming, outdoor saunas. We were soon thawing with the locals in a different sauna every night. Conversation flowed and I learned how the Finns have also come to embrace their cold climate with frequent visits to outdoor saunas, followed by a brief dip in one of their 188,000 lakes. Being tightly packed into a small, hot room forges a bond, which might help explain why Finland has been voted the happiest country in the world for the past four years running. Despite initial reservations about the cold and the dark, this holiday was a lesson in how the Finns’ reverence for spending time in nature could be adapted to our own shores. Those of us who live in countries where winter is often a three-season event need all the heat we can get to keep our spirits buoyant. So my antennae began to twitch when I came across a new log cabin hideaway on the shores of Lough Oughter, in Killykeen Forest Park in County Cavan. Cavan boasts 365 lakes. A local photographer spent lockdown cataloguing them to prove they all exist. Intrigued, I took a boat a few weeks ago from the Cavan Adventure Centre to explore some of them. When several architectural cabins on stilts appeared behind the tree-lined shore, I tied up at a smart, red-tin boathouse where a bearded, flannel-shirt-wearing South African welcomed me to Cabü by the Lakes. Bernard gave me a quick tour of the 100-acre grounds, featuring 28 cabins, several outdoor hot tubs and saunas, and a giant open-air bar and games room, where we nursed hot chocolates in front of a super-sized stove. The owners of Cowley Timbers, a construction firm in Nottinghamshire, took over this long-established resort from the Irish Forestry Board in 2017 and have brought all their expertise in wood construction to update the site. The company has a sister property on the Kent coast and plans to open another in the Cotswolds. I pledged to return for a stay, and within weeks I found myself driving down the dark, twisting roads leading from Cavan town towards Killykeen Forest with my wife, young son and excited dog. Ireland, not unlike Finland, can feel bleak and miserable in winter, but once we pulled into Cabü by the Lakes the strings of festoon lights adorning the wooden buildings soon banished any gloom. The views of darkening skies looked considerably more attractive when seen from the confines of a bubbling hot tub in the woods, with a gin and tonic in our hands. I began to realise how divorced my life has become from the natural world, as I initially felt unsettled by the enormity of the surrounding darkness. As the night wore on this fear was replaced by awe, as I relaxed and reset my city persona. Cavan doesn’t have the snowy charms of Finland, but being in the wild, wherever you are, can restore your connection to something bigger. Later we lit the woodburner in our gorgeously designed cabin and flung open the Crittall doors to reveal the moon lighting up the lake in the distance. My wife happily settled into our cosy, wood-clad bedroom with a small mountain of books and barely budged from there for the rest of the weekend. It was hard to believe we were still in Ireland: we all felt as if we had been transported back to Scandinavia, or to a cutting-edge retreat in upstate New York. The next morning, Bernard kitted out my son and I with lifejackets and sent us off with a map and a boat with an outboard engine, to putter for miles through flooded rivers overhung with tunnels of tangled trees, leading to countless quiet lakes. The noise of our approaching engine prompted huddles of swans to take flight. Whooper swans with yellow beaks fly here from Iceland every year, their arrival heralding the start of winter. There’s not a lot of colour in the landscape at this time of year: the lakes, trees and clouds all shimmer in multiple shades of grey, giving the impression of travelling through a 19th-century German romantic painting by Caspar David Friedrich. We turned for home when the towering skyline of Killeshandra and its milk factory come into view. On our return trip we hung a left at Lady Farnham’s cottage and steered the tiller for 13th-century Cloughoughter castle, located on a tiny island on Lough Oughter. Back at Cabü a well-earned Guinness awaited us in the newly opened bar, which we followed with a wedge of the brilliantly named Cavanbert (from nearby Corleggy Cheeses) that we picked up at the Cabü shop. An ensuing hour in an outdoor wooden bath, watching the trees sway slowly in a soft breeze, was perhaps the highlight of our trip. It rained lightly the next morning. At dawn I walked along the lake shore, marvelling at the sound of the drops falling off the leaves. The rain lifted as Bernard set off from the jetty to take us on a morning of fishing and more lake-hopping. He told us how Cavan’s hilly, drumlin landscape was formed by the retreating glaciers. Later, we rented bikes and followed the lake paths around Killykeen Forest , through acres of dense spruce and silver birch. Before we left for home that night I heard a cuckoo sing in the woods for the first time in many years. I’m so often aware of the Faustian bargain that city living entails: for all the joys of the bright lights, there is a trade-off, and we can lose the connection with nature that’s so vital for our souls. Ireland’s damp weather has its own beauty, and Cabü by the Lakes has created a Scandi-inspired retreat to access the healing power of the outdoors. My trip to Finland taught me that there’s much to love about cold climates, and I’m glad I don’t have to jump on a plane any more to experience this type of holiday. More cabin retreats and saunas are popping up beside lakes, rivers and beaches all over Ireland and the UK, and it’s a joy to be able to awaken the senses in locations that make the most of the great outdoors. The trip was provided by Cabü by the Lakes; one-bedroom cabins from €175 a night (two-night minimum, three at weekends) Full of hot air: five saunas in the UK The Saltwater Sauna, Poole Created by a Nordic sauna enthusiast this wood-fired Finnish sauna on Sandbanks beach seats eight and has views of the sea from its picture window. Bathers can manage the löyly (the steam that rises from the sauna stove), allowing control of heat and intensity. thesaltwatersauna.com Netil 360, London Enjoy views across London from four glass-fronted saunas on a Hackney rooftop, then cool down in a waterfall before hitting the open-air bar restaurant. netil360.com Beach Box Spa, Brighton This sauna/spa has just moved to a new site by the sea. The repurposed horse-trailer saunas offer views of the pier. beachboxspa.co.uk Fforest Farm, Cardigan A collection of self-catering cabins, barns, domes and bell tents in woodland near the town of Cardigan. Warm up at their wood-fired sauna after a swim at nearby Penbryn beach. coldatnight.co.uk The Hot Box, Highlands The Taymouth Marina sauna has panoramic windows with views across Loch Tay. To cool down a slide goes directly into the loch. taymouthmarina.com • This article was amended on 22 February 2022. An earlier version had an image that was captioned as being of the Saltwater Sauna in Poole, but was actually of a different sauna. The image has now been changed.Today in a nutshell: It was golden oldies day on the snowboard for the US, but there’s still no decision on whether one of the youngest athletes at the Games – Kamila Valieva –will be able to compete again Next up: There is some ski jumping, ice hockey, curling and the women’s skeleton still to be contested today. Tomorrow is the men’s giant slalom, the women’s monobob, and a couple more biathlon contests After waiting 16 years to win a first Olympic gold medal, Lindsey Jacobellis captured her second in four days, pairing with Nick Baumgartner to win the inaugural mixed team snowboard cross event for the US. Baumgartner, 40, and Jacobellis, 36, become the oldest snowboarders to win any Olympic medal and the oldest Americans to win gold at the Winter Games since 1948. “We’re 80s babies and we were comin’ in hot today,” said Jacobellis. The journalists who broke the story of Russian Olympic Committee (ROC) skater Kamila Valieva’s positive drugs test on Wednesday say they have faced death threats, abuse, and warnings that they should check their tea. Valieva’s coach Eteri Tutberidze spoke to Russian state television for the first time since the scandal emerged, to say that she was certain the skater was “clean and innocent”. “It’s unclear why an athlete with a suspected doping on 25 December was cleared to compete at the Olympics,” Tutberidze said. “Either it is an ill-fated confluence of circumstances, or it’s a very well-planned plan.” Rachael Denhollander, the first woman to publicly accuse former USA Gymnastics doctor Larry Nassar of sexual abuse, has said the failed drug test was a reminder of how vulnerable young athletes remain. “A child does not make a choice to take those kinds of medications unless they’re given to her by somebody who’s in authority.” The US men’s ice hockey team pulled off a 4-2 win over Canada in Group A of the preliminary round. It doesn’t quite guarantee the US top spot in the group – they have one more group match to go, against Germany tomorrow. With NHL stars absent from Beijing, Brian O’Neill is the lone US returnee from the 2018 Olympics. “We didn’t back down from their physical play,” said US captain Andy Miele. “I love the way our team responded. I’m so proud of this group. We took a beating. They kept on going forward, we kept on coming back at them and got the outcome that we deserved.” ROC dominated the 4x7.5km women’s cross-country skiing relay, finishing over 18 seconds ahead of Germany in second place. Sweden took bronze, just half a second ahead of Finland after the 54-minute race. Things you might have missed Suzanne Schulting scored another Netherlands gold in the short track skating, winning the women’s 1,000m yesterday. She broke the world record along the way in the quarter-finals, and afterwards said: “I skated a world record and I was really excited. And then I said, ‘Oh damn, I still have to do the semis and then we have the finals.’” Also setting a record on the ice, Japan’s women’s speed skating team posted an Olympic one in the quarter-finals today. That competition concludes on Tuesday. Gao Tingyu thrilled the home crowd at the National Speed Skating Oval with an Olympic record and a gold medal for the hosts in the men’s 500m. Cha Min-kyu of South Korea took silver – just as he had in Pyeongchang last time out. Just 0.05 of a second separated third place from sixth place, but it was Wataru Morishige of Japan who won the bronze in the end by a whisker. Canada’s women raced into an early lead and never looked back in their ice hockey quarter-final against Sweden. They won yesterday’s late match 11-0. Today’s first quarter-final saw Switzerland knock out ROC 4-2. Canada and Switzerland will play each other in the semi-finals on Monday. The US look set to face Finland who were leading Japan 5-1 going into the third period of their quarter-final. In the women’s curling, after this morning’s fourth session, the US and Switzerland remain unbeaten after three matches. Japan, South Korea and Sweden are tucked in behind them in the standings with two wins and one defeat each. In the men’s, Sweden are at the top of the standings with a perfect four victories so far. Switzerland have three wins from four and are in second place. You might also enjoy: ‘Clean and innocent’: Valieva’s coach breaks her silence on doping scandal Equipment blamed for Team GB’s dismal skeleton performances Jaclyn Narracott on brink of history as Australian skeleton queen eyes gold Farewell to the Flying Tomato: how Shaun White left an Olympic legacy The briefing’s picture of the day It was family joy for Norway in the men’s 10km spring biathlon. Johannes Thingnes Bø added a second gold to the one he won as part of the mixed relay team. His older brother Tarjel took bronze. Sandwiched in between the siblings was Quentin Fillon Maillet of France. What to look out for next Times are all in local Beijing time. For Sydney it is +3 hours, for London it is -8 hours, for New York it is -13 hours and San Francisco is -16 hours. Later today – Saturday 12 February 8pm Ski jumping – the men’s large hill individual final round 🥇 8.05pm Curling – Great Britain’s women take on the so far unbeaten US in a match you feel Team GB really need to win 🥌 8.20pm and 9.55pm Skeleton – the final two rounds for the women 🥇 9.05pm Ice hockey – the evening action is ROC v Czech Republic and Switzerland v Denmark in Group B of the men’s competition 🏒 Tomorrow – Sunday 13 February 9.05am and 2.05pm and 8.05pm Curling – various men’s and women’s round robin matches, with Team GB and the US involved in every session 🥌 9.30am and 11am Bobsleigh – heats one and two of the women’s monobob 10.15am and 1.45pm Alpine skiing – it is the men’s giant slalom 🥇 12.10pm and 4.40pm and 9.10pm Ice hockey – the US face Germany in the final game of the day 🏒 3pm Cross-country skiing – the men’s 4x10km which would last approximately 1,057 hours if they were doing it at the pace I could cover 10km on skis 🥇 5pm and 6.45pm Biathlon – they are absolutely spoiling us with the biathlon on Sunday. The women do their 10km pursuit first and then the men do their 12.5km pursuit 🥇 7pm-8.14pm Short track speed skating – the women’s 3,000m relay and the men’s 500m race today 🥇 9.56pm Speed skating – the women’s 500m 🥇 Full Winter Olympics schedule | Results, sport by sport | Medal table How things stand Here’s what the emoji table looked like at 6.25pm Beijing time. Five nations now have five gold medals or more, and Germany really have gone top – this isn’t a mistake by me this time. 1 🇩🇪 Germany 🥇 7 🥈 5 🥉 0 total: 12 2 🇳🇴 Norway 🥇 7 🥈 3 🥉 6 total: 16 3 🇺🇸 United States 🥇 5 🥈 5 🥉 1 total: 11 4 🇳🇱 Netherlands 🥇 5 🥈 4 🥉 1 total: 10 5 🇸🇪 Sweden 🥇 5 🥈 2 🥉 3 total: 10 If you are reading this just as soon as it has dropped in your email inbox, then I’ve probably just picked up the live blog. Come and join me there. The last word I’m going to pick a bit out of Barney Ronay’s column that was published after I sent the newsletter yesterday as the last word today. But I’d also recommend you read it in full. It is brilliantly written, brutal, and true. Right now Zhu Yi and Kamila Valieva, first and last in the same field, both look like victims, collateral human damage in the game of sport as geopolitics, sport as toxic global circus. The after-drama is yet to play itself out. But there is a kind of zugzwang here. There is no happy way for Valieva’s situation to resolve itself; and no outcome that doesn’t leave the Olympic Games looking just a little bit more rotten – Barney Ronay, Kamila Valieva and Zhu Yi are victims in Winter Olympics’ puppet theatre of painThe US supreme court, in a 5-4 decision, used the ruse that it was too close to an election – three months away – to scrap a racially discriminatory, Republican-drawn legislative map in Alabama. A lower court had previously ruled against the state because its gerrymandered congressional districts diluted the voting strength of African Americans by ensuring that 27% of Alabama’s population would garner only 14% of the state’s congressional representation. But that reality didn’t faze five justices; the US supreme court was just fine with letting a policy designed to disfranchise Black voters unfurl and do its damage in an oncoming federal election. The echoes of a brutal past are resonating in this decision. After the civil war, Congress passed the 1867 Reconstruction Act, which provided that Black men had the right to vote, and then Congress followed that with the 15th amendment, which banned states from using race, color or previous conditions of servitude to undermine the right to vote. In a series of decisions in the late 19th and early to mid-20th centuries, however, the supreme court systematically dismantled those protections, as well as others crafted to support African Americans’ citizenship rights and defend against white domestic terrorism waged by the Ku Klux Klan and similar organizations. Focusing on voting rights gives some indication of how pernicious the decisions were. The 1874 Minor v Happersett ruling asserted that the right to vote was not part and parcel of American citizenship. In 1876, United States v Reese et al dealt with a Black man who was trapped in a malicious catch-22 that prevented him from voting. He tried to pay his poll tax, which was required to vote, but the tax collector refused to accept the payment and the registrars would not allow him to cast a ballot without payment. The court ruled, despite this crude and brazen denial of his right to vote, that the 15th amendment “does not confer the right of suffrage upon any one”. As states then began fully implementing Jim Crow legislation to disfranchise African Americans, the court, in the Williams v Mississippi (1898) decision, looked at the poll tax and the literacy test and ruled that those chokepoints to the ballot box – which had already removed 90% of registered Black voters in Mississippi from the rolls – did not violate the 15th amendment. In a 1903 case out of Alabama, Giles v Harris, the supreme court determined that it was powerless to stop a state from disfranchising Black voters even if the methods were unconstitutional. This assault on African Americans’ right to vote was an assault on American democracy aided and abetted by the highest court in the land. The results were devastating. By 1960, there were counties in Alabama that had no Black voters registered, while simultaneously having more than 100% of white age-eligible voters on the rolls. In Mississippi a mere 6.7% of eligible Black adults were registered to vote. It took the blood, the courage and the martyrdom of civil rights workers combined with the political spine of a president and congressional leaders to break this stranglehold on the right to vote. The legislature passed and President Lyndon Johnson signed the Voting Rights Act (VRA), which would save America from its worst self. And, this time, in the late 1960s, the US supreme court came down on the side of democracy and the 15th amendment. Two crucial decisions buttressed the VRA, noting that it was not only constitutional but also created to deal with “the subtle, as well as the obvious, state regulations which have the effect of denying citizens their right to vote because of race”. The Roberts court, however, bears no resemblance to the one in the 1960s and has all the anti-voting rights earmarks of the court after the civil war. The Roberts court’s assault on the VRA and the 15th amendment has been relentless and brutal to American democracy. The Shelby County v Holder (2013) decision ended the most powerful tool in the VRA’s wheelhouse, pre-clearance, and allowed states and jurisdictions with a demonstrated history of racial discrimination to implement laws and election policies without the prior approval of the US Department of Justice or the federal court in Washington DC. Within two hours of that decision, Texas implemented a voter ID law that led district court Judge Nelva Gonzales Ramos to rule that the new measure not only had a discriminatory effect, it also had a discriminatory intent. The state appealed to the fifth circuit, pleading with the judges to not dismantle the voter ID law because it would be too disruptive to the looming midterm election in 2014. When the case reached the US supreme court, Justice Antonin Scalia’s majority ruled in favor of Texas without comment. Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg’s dissent, however, tore away at the state’s ruse that it was too close to the midterms to stop a racially discriminatory law in its tracks. The greatest threat to confidence in elections, she wrote, was to allow a “purposefully discriminatory law, one that likely imposes an unconstitutional poll tax and risks denying the right to vote to hundreds of thousands of eligible voters” to be used in a federal election. But the majority on the US supreme court was fine with letting discrimination run wild in the election system. That has been abundantly clear in a number of voting rights cases that have come before the Roberts court since the Shelby County v Holder decision. Each one, whether massive voter roll purges in violation of the National Voter Registration Act, extreme partisan gerrymandered districts, or election laws that have a disparate impact on minorities, has been approved, either by acts of commission or omission, by the US supreme court. There are consequences. The very legitimacy of the court is at stake. Right now it’s as precariously perched as the right to vote and American democracy. Unfortunately, the Roberts court has played a major, horrific role in this preventable disaster. Carol Anderson is the Charles Howard Candler professor of African American studies at Emory University and the author of White Rage: The Unspoken Truth of Our Racial Divide and One Person, No Vote: How Voter Suppression is Destroying Our Democracy. She is a contributor to the GuardianBritish troops helping with training in Ukraine will leave the country this weekend, the armed forces minister James Heappey said as he warned that Russia could launch an attack “at no notice”. Heappey said the small number of UK personnel sent to train Ukrainian troops on anti-tank missileswould be withdrawn, alongside about 100 helping with wider troop training as part of Operation Orbital. Britain, in common with all other Nato allies, has said it would not fight against any Russian attack, a point repeated by the minister in a BBC interview. Ukraine is not a member of Nato, although in 2008 it was given a promise that it would one day be able to join. “There will be no British troops in Ukraine if there is to be a conflict there,” Heappey said. “They will be leaving over the course of the weekend.” The military evacuation follows a string of warnings, led by the US but supported by the UK, that Russia had assembled a force capable of invading Ukraine. Jake Sullivan, the US national security adviser, said on Friday night: “We are in the window when an invasion could begin at any time.” Western intelligence fear the most likely scenario, in the event of a conflict, is that Russian forces would mount a lightning attack aimed at encircling Kyiv, a city of more than 3 million people, and trying to force a change of regime. As a first step, Moscow’s forces would aim to rapidly degrade Ukraine’s military in a lightning attack. Russia was now in a position to attack “very, very quickly”, Heappey said, though he hoped no invasion would take place. He told BBC Breakfast: “We are now confident that the artillery systems, the missile systems and the combat air are all in place that would allow Russia to launch – at no notice – an attack on Ukraine.” The military withdrawal follows a Foreign Office warning on Friday to British nationals, telling them to leave Ukraine immediately while commercial flights are still available and the land border with Poland remains open. The US told all remaining Americans on Friday to leave the country in the next 48 hours, with other countries following suit with similar warnings. Australia, New Zealand, Japan, Germany, Latvia, Norway and the Netherlands are among those issuing similar advice. Israel said it was evacuating relatives of embassy staff There are no plans for an emergency airlift by western air forces from Kyiv, unlike in Afghanistan last summer, the minister said. Unlike then, “the Royal Air Force will not be in a position to go in and to fly people out”, Heappey added. But US and UK forces are building up in Poland to help provide support to the eastern European country and help out if there is a mass movement of refugees in the event of an invasion. On Friday, the US said it would send 3,000 further troops to Poland, on top of 1,700 it had already agreed to send out. Britain said earlier this week it would send 350 troops to Poland, in addition to the 250 it already has in the country, and has placed a further 1,000 on standby for deployment to help with any refugee movements. The US has estimated that anywhere between 1 million and 5 million people could be displaced. Russia has repeatedly denied it has any plans to invade and its defence minister criticised Britain on Friday for delivering anti-tank weapons to Ukraine and helping with military training. Defence minister Sergei Shoigu, in a meeting with his UK counterpart, Ben Wallace, also accused the UK of sending special forces to the country. “I would like to see the reason why the United Kingdom is sending special forces to Ukraine and until when [they] will be there,” Shoigu said. On Saturday, the US president, Joe Biden, will speak with Vladimir Putin by phone in an attempt to resolve the crisis. Amid calls for Britons to leave the country as quickly as possible, the former British ambassador to the US Lord Kim Darroch described the challenge remaining embassy staff would have to undertake to help Britons leave the country, saying it would “overwhelm the embassy’s resources”. He added: “With lots of foreign nationals trying to get out, there will be chaos, there may need to be extra flights laid on so this will occupy everyone’s time for 24 hours a day for the next few days and you won’t get everyone out – some people will choose to stay,” he said.The former Conservative leader Iain Duncan Smith has warned Boris Johnson it will be hard to cling to power if the Metropolitan police finds he breached Covid rules. The comments from the senior Tory will ratchet up pressure on the prime minister to resign if he broke the law, after Johnson received a questionnaire from the Met on Friday regarding alleged parties in Downing Street. Johnson has so far remained bullish, insisting he broke no rules and having rejected calls to go. But Duncan Smith’s intervention could guide backbenchers – many of whom are said to be waiting for the Met’s probe to conclude before deciding whether to submit letters of no confidence. If Johnson broke the law, “I think it would be very tough for anyone to remain after that”, Duncan Smith told the i. “If you’ve set the laws, and you break them and the police decide you have broken them. “It will be difficult [if he’s fined], he knows that,” Duncan Smith continued. He added that Johnson should do more to convince MPs he can dig himself out of the hole, and must further reset No 10’s culture through restructuring. Duncan Smith’s words were echoed by Bob Neill, the Conservative chair of the Commons justice committee, who said that Johnson staying on after a potential breach of the law would represent an unacceptable “double standard”. “I think it will be very difficult for anyone to be in the position of the country’s principal lawmaker, and then break a law which they themselves had brought into force, and in particular, very much preached to other people to stick to,” Neill told Times Radio. “You can’t have double standards.” But Johnson’s allies have said he will refuse to stand down if the policy investigation finds he broke the law. “I will survive,” Johnson sang to Guto Harri, his new communications director, Harri told the Welsh-language news website Golwg.360. The former Conservative prime ministers Theresa May and, this week, John Major have publicly raised questions about Johnson’s leadership. May told Johnson in the Commons last month: “What the Gray report does show is that No 10 Downing Street was not observing the regulations they had imposed on members of the public. “So either my right honourable friend had not read the rules or didn’t understand what they meant and others around him, or they didn’t think the rules applied to No 10. Which was it?” The idea that No 10 indulged in boozy parties while the nation refrained from seeing loved ones to stop the spread of the deadly virus has left Johnson on the ropes. A 25 January YouGov poll of 3,550 adults found that 62% said Johnson should resign – including 38% of Conservative voters – up from 56% on 11 January. On Thursday, Major took aim at Johnson’s leadership for eroding public trust in politics. “The charge that there is one law for the government and one for everyone else is politically deadly – and it has struck home,” Major said. Major criticised the handling of the Partygate row, saying that “brazen excuses were dreamed up” for ministers to “defend the indefensible”, with the upshot of making “the government look distinctly shifty”. The most direct assault on Johnson’s premiership by a senior Tory came from the former Brexit secretary David Davis. Quoting the words of Oliver Cromwell, later said to Neville Chamberlain, Davis told the prime minister: “In the name of God, go.”Boris Johnson should not be involved in selecting the new head of the Metropolitan police while he remains under investigation for alleged lockdown breaches, a former force commissioner has said. Ian Blair, a former Met commissioner, called on the prime minister to recuse himself from involvement in the process, describing the decision about Cressida Dick’s replacement as “an enormously important choice”. Lord Blair’s remarks echo a number of calls for Johnson to stay out of the process, with the opposition warning it would entail a serious breach of ethical standards if he is involved while being investigated by the force. The prime minister was sent a legal questionnaire by Scotland Yard on Friday over the alleged parties in Downing Street, No 10 confirmed, signalling that police are investigating whether Johnson personally broke the law. He has seven days to adequately explain his attendance or be fined for breaking the rules he himself set. Discussing the process of replacing Dick after the London mayor, Sadiq Khan, made clear she had lost his confidence, Blair told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: “That’s a very difficult issue and I do accept that. I think Boris Johnson should recuse himself from being involved. “But it’s an enormously important choice and presumably it will take some time to get to being to who the commissioner is, and by that stage presumably he will have filled in his questionnaire and the matter will be over.” Dick’s dramatic resignation on Thursday evening came hours after she told a radio phone that she had “absolutely no intention” of standing down and had a plan to rid the Met of its toxic culture. She was forced out after Khan made it clear he had no confidence in her plan to reform the force after a series of scandals revealing racism, misogyny and homophobia within elements of the force. No 10 said the prime minister had no official role in choosing the Met commissioner and the final decision would be made by the home secretary, Priti Patel, who is a close ally of Johnson. However, Brian Paddick, a former senior Met officer who is now a Liberal Democrat peer, said fairness in the appointment process could only be guaranteed by Johnson stepping down as prime minister. “It is inconceivable anyone will be appointed as commissioner of the Met without the approval of the PM,” Paddick said. “When you have a PM under criminal investigation, that is very problematic. I’m unconvinced that the PM giving his personal assurance that he will take no part will reassure the public.” The calls for Johnson to distance himself from the process come after Angela Rayner, Labour’s deputy leader, expressed alarm at a Times article that quoted an unnamed “senior ally” of the prime minister saying Scotland Yard should exercise caution when making a decision that could see Johnson forced out. “This raises very serious questions about both the rule of law and basic standards of government,” she said. “If the prime minister and his allies are going to publicly lean on the police to try to get him off the hook for an offence, he cannot then get involved in appointing a commissioner who would decide whether to charge him.” Rayner urged the government to “make clear that no one under investigation will be involved in any way”, pressuring Johnson to “say now if he will recuse himself or explain how public confidence will be maintained in a fair process”.Mark Berry, better known as Bez, rose to fame as the dancer-slash-percussionist for indie dance group the Happy Mondays. He was born in 1964 in Bolton, and his mother was an auxiliary nurse and his father a chief inspector in the anti-terrorist squad. Bez served three years in a detention centre for a robbery he committed at the age of 17. With Happy Mondays and later Black Grape, he toured the world as a pioneer of the Madchester scene. Today, Bez is known for his political endeavours – in 2015 he set up the We Are the Reality party and stood as MP of Salford – as well as his work as an environmentalist and campaigner. A reality TV favourite, Bez has three sons from previous relationships, and lives in Hereford with his fiance. He is competing in Dancing on Ice on ITV, and is an ambassador for homeless charity Coffee4Craig. This was taken in Cuba. The US immigration authorities had kicked Black Grape out for smoking weed before a gig. One minute we were sitting in Central Park taking in the smoke with a beautiful view of the twin towers – the next we were surrounded by police. I found the whole thing quite funny. Cuba had just opened up to the west again – we were one of the first planes landing in the country – and it was like walking through a war zone. Everything was crumbling; it was a right old state. But families would cook you a meal in return for a bit of money. In the end we were banned from America, so the press had to come to Cuba to interview us. The journalists were all shitting themselves in fear of what might happen to them, but everyone in Cuba was so lovely to us. One of my favourite memories is sitting at the back of one of Hemingway’s favourite bars with mojitos and big fat cigars. It was unbelievable. I was always drawn to rebellion. Apparently I was a nightmare, even as a baby. I was an attention-seeker, but well liked at school. The first time I got in proper trouble was when I was five. One morning my mum gave me some money and said, “On your break at school you’ve got to buy a packet of crisps – and nothing else.” I got to the front of the queue at the tuck shop and said to the teacher, “Give us a packet of crisps,” and gave her the money. She said I didn’t have enough for the crisps and tried to give me something else. I said, “No, I’ve got to buy crisps with this money – and nothing else.” She tried taking them off me, so I bit her hand. In my defence, it was a genuine mistake. Mum told me to buy the crisps. Dad was a chief inspector when I was a kid. Because of that I was constantly rebelling against authority – which is no bad thing, really. It was a huge part of my psyche growing up; my dad’s since apologised for not understanding my character. At the peak of my rebellion, I did time in detention centres and borstals; my parents kicked me out, so I was living on the street and getting into all sorts of trouble. I lost my teeth at 16 in a motorbike crash. I wasn’t wearing a helmet and was spitting out crumbling bits of tooth for months afterwards. There was no damage to my brain, thankfully, but I still pretended I’d lost my memory when the police came, so I didn’t have to tell them where I was staying. Decades later, I lost my false teeth at Glastonbury. After not sleeping for days, I woke up in the tent, starving, saw a doughnut and took a huge bite. It had been there for ages and was hard as a brick. By the time I was about 19, I decided I didn’t want to get caught up in the sort of shit I was doing again, so thought the best thing I could do was to have a huge adventure and go travelling. I lived in Morocco for a bit and was shoplifting just to survive; pinching bars of chocolate. I got chased out of town and had to hide in a cave for three weeks until the money I’d been waiting for arrived. You create your own reality, and travelling created one that completely changed my whole outlook on life. I was mostly homeless and sofa-surfing when I joined Happy Mondays. It was the right place at the right time, and I’ll never forget going on stage with them for the first time. It was at the Haçienda in December 1985, and I had no time to prepare. Shaun Ryder wanted me up there – I said no at first, but there was a bit of banter between us and I ended up jumping on stage with him. I picked up a pair of maracas and shook them so hard I ended up with a blister the size of a 50p in the middle of my hand. Growing up, dancing was a massive part of our culture: you’d go out to these venues and see different types of dancing in every room – the northern soulers, the metal headbangers, the ska rudeboys, the punks and people who loved disco. I loved it. Even though I get up on stage and dance in front of loads of people, I wouldn’t say I’m a confident person. It’s probably hiding a multitude of insecurities. I’m more curious about the world than confident in it. I met my fiance, Firouzeh Razavi, nearly nine years ago. It was her 30th birthday and she was having a drink with her friends, while I was out with my mate. We walked into this bar, our eyes met across the table, and that was it. I’m not normally romantic, but I tried to make it special when I proposed to her. I set up a posh picnic basket and got her family and my family to wait on the top of this mountain near where we live. Me and Firouzeh walked up the mountain and she noticed a big letter D that I’d put out in tribute to her younger brother who’d died. Then she saw her dad. And her sisters and everyone else, and I proposed. It was great. And it’s easier if everyone is there so you don’t have to tell them all separately afterwards. Firouzeh got me at my best, because I’m 58 in April. I’m a grandad and my wild days are out of my system. I live a really good life. I open the curtains in the morning and say, “How fucking lucky are we?” It’s all for being in Happy Mondays. My favourite nights these days are in my own garden. I have a campfire and a bar that I’ve built, and get all my friends round. I started looking after myself about eight years ago when I thought I was going to start a revolution and set up a political party. I decided that the fight was everywhere in society, and one was with the food industry. Through diet, I realised you can change everything; that’s when I started looking at what I ate. Now I use ginger and turmeric instead of painkillers. I juice every day, using fruit and veg straight out of the garden. If I go for two days without having juice, I start panicking. I’m sure if the version of me pictured in 1996 could hear me say that, he’d tell me to shut up and rack up!Each year, British punters lose more than £11bn to the gambling industry, equivalent to nearly £164 for every man, woman and child in the UK. This money-spinning national love affair with betting owes much to the liberalisation of gambling laws under Tony Blair’s Labour government in 2005. The growth of the UK betting sector since then has created billionaires, such as Bet365’s Denise Coates and Betfred’s Done brothers. At the other end of the scale, what starts out as a harmless flutter has driven countless customers into financial ruin, family breakups, and worse. The betting industry promotes its wares predominantly through advertising on TV, social media or via wall-to-wall sponsorship of football clubs. But gambling has always been different from other consumer products. Coca-Cola advertises in the knowledge that you probably already know how it tastes. The occasional memory jog will remind you why you like it, and might lead you to buy more and to choose Coke over Pepsi when you do. Convincing a customer to choose your brand – and remain loyal – is only half the battle with gambling. Betting firms also need to persuade punters that they have a decent shot at winning some money, even though – in the long term at least – they don’t. The gambling industry could not exist unless the bookmaker or casino had a better grasp of the odds than the punter. That’s the foundation upon which the industry is built, and it’s a bargain that – unless they are completely delusional – the gambler enters into knowingly. They bet believing they might just be the one who can beat the bookie, if not by judgment then by luck. For six years, I’ve been reporting on the human damage caused by the gambling industry. I’ve heard the desperation in the voice of someone who has lost hundreds of thousands of pounds in a matter of weeks, and I’ve sat with the parents of young people who had their whole lives ahead of them, until a gambling addiction drove them to suicide. Those affected know the trauma all too well. What is less well widely understood is how gambling companies are able to influence otherwise happy, intelligent and sociable people, causing them to act irrationally, against their own interests. The techniques gambling products use to tap into our psyches are both artful and terrible, marrying simplicity of concept with ingenuity of execution to nudge us towards dark choices. *** The starting point is understanding cognitive bias. Humans are irrational – we misjudge reality based on our flawed perception of it. Our love of football or support of a team convinces us that our gut feeling about a game is more reliable than it is, while our optimism tells us that, even thought the chances of winning a slot machine jackpot are stacked against us, fate may have chosen to upset the odds this time. Kim Lund, founder of poker game firm Aftermath Interactive, has made a career out of game design and has seen at first-hand how cold, hard probability defeats the illogical human mind every time – and allows the gambling companies to cash in. “All gambling games are based on psychological triggers that mean they work,” he tells me. “The human brain is incapable of dealing with randomness. We’re obsessed with finding patterns in things because that prevents us from going insane. We want to make sense of things.” Unlike many forms of gambling, poker requires a high degree of skill; if your opponent is a bad player, they are unlikely to get the better of you with luck, at least not over time. Dr Philip Newall, a former poker player turned academic psychologist, has been studying dynamics like these for much of his professional life. At the poker table, he enjoyed a degree of success because he played just one type of game – fixed-limit hold ’em – where all bets and raises are fixed at a certain amount. Newall stuck to what he knew and, for the most part, only played against people he could be fairly sure, from telltale signs such as their patterns of play, weren’t professionals. That background, coupled with his in-depth study of psychology, makes him well placed to explain what the industry knows – and exploits – about how our minds work. Newall used to walk down Walworth Road in London, a high street replete with bookmakers’ shops. He would pass William Hill, Betfred and Ladbrokes, and notice they were all offering similar types of bet that went something like this: “Manchester United to win 3–1 v Burnley and Marcus Rashford to score first.” This very common type of bet is known in the trade as a scorecast. It requires a combination of events to occur at once, in this case the exact score, the winning team and the first goal scorer. As soon as you start combining probabilities of multiple events, the odds lengthen very quickly. This means that a scorecast outcome is pretty unlikely, so the bookmaker can offer what looks like a bargain 15–1, knowing the chances of it happening may be more like 50–1. To the average person in the street, the idea of Marcus Rashford scoring the first goal to help Manchester United to a 3–1 win over Burnley sounds like a pretty plausible scenario. When a gambler thinks about that scorecast bet, they are picturing in their mind’s eye an in-form striker opening the scoring in a routine victory over an inferior team. A standard Saturday afternoon. But bookmakers are sitting on a mine of information on their historical return from scorecasts, and will have a good idea of the difference between the odds they’re offering and the real odds. They don’t publicise this for obvious reasons. That, in Newall’s words, would be “killing their own action”, giving a disproportionate amount of information to the person on the other side of the bet. In poker, the saying is: “Don’t teach the fish” – fish being bad players you can easily take money from. Instead of teaching the fish, gambling companies try to ensure, through the types of bet they promote most heavily, that as many people opt to gamble their money on more complex probability scenarios, rather than sticking to simpler outcomes. José Perales is an associate professor in the Mind, Brain and Behaviour Research Centre at the University of Granada in Spain. He has studied the same phenomena as Newall and explains that this is the result of something called the “representativeness heuristic”. He said: “A heuristic is a rule of thumb, something you can use that works pretty well in your daily life, but can convince you to make quite serious mistakes, especially when they’re deliberately exploited, which is the case here.” The football match scenario in question is something gamblers can easily envisage happening and that they may even have seen before. It could happen. But the necessary confluence of multiple events means it is actually far less likely than it instinctively feels. There are many other possible outcomes that are just as likely. Gambling companies are getting better and better at targeting this sort of weakness in our mental defences. Newall tracked TV adverts over two World Cups in 2014 and 2018, drawing on data collected by the Guardian data journalist Pamela Duncan. He found that standard home win, draw, away win bets (on the winner of the match) simply disappeared from one tournament to the next. These straightforward, easier-to-understand wagers featured in nearly 8% of adverts at the 2014 tournament, but had dwindled to nothing at the next. By contrast, high odds, complex bets shot up from 4% to nearly 35%. The result? A very lucrative World Cup for the gambling companies. As the odds lengthen, the gambler’s ability to calculate them weakens. *** This is an example of how the betting industry benefits from “informational asymmetry”. Online casino operators know everything about you – particularly when they can track your online patterns of play and analyse the data in minute detail. The majority of punters, by contrast, know very little about the company on the other end of the bet. Philip Newall coined the phrase “dark nudges” to describe techniques used by the betting firms. The phrase is a nod to the 2008 book Nudge, by economists Richard Thaler and Cass Sunstein. A favourite of former UK prime minister David Cameron, the book draws on psychology and behavioural economics to examine how people in positions of authority can “nudge” others into making decisions that benefit them and society. The idea is that you can drive positive changes without needing to be openly coercive, which might make people resistant. Of course, you can nudge people towards poor choices, too. How gambling firms keeps you hooked 1. Making you think you’re in control Nobody will stake money on Liverpool losing 15–0 to Port Vale, because they know this is close to impossible. But in games that are entirely random, players exert no control at all over the success of their bet. Indeed, assuming that the game isn’t rigged, nobody has total authority over the outcome. Gamblers often behave as if they do not understand this. Sociologists have observed dice players throwing softly when they want a low number and hard when they want a high one, for instance. In her 1975 paper The Illusion of Control, Ellen J Langer conducted a series of experiments that showed that our expectations of success in a game of chance vary, depending on factors that do not actually affect the outcome. One of the variables that makes a big difference to how gamblers behave is the introduction of an element of choice. In one of Langer’s experiments, subjects were given lottery tickets with an American football player on them. Some subjects got to choose which player they wanted, others were allocated a ticket at random. On the morning of the draw, everyone was asked how much they would be prepared to sell their ticket for. Those who had chosen their ticket demanded an average of $8.67, while those who had been allocated one at random were prepared to give it up for $1.96. Even though the choice of a ticket had no influence on which one would be the winner, those who had made a conscious decision were significantly less willing to abandon it. Dr Steve Sharman, research fellow in the School of Psychology at the University of East London, is a specialist in gambling psychology. He explains what’s going on: “If you go into a casino and you’re playing roulette, they show the previous outcomes. They might show so-called ‘hot numbers’ or ‘cold numbers’. A hot number is one that has come up a lot recently, while a cold one hasn’t been seen for a while. By displaying them, the casino is inviting you to entertain the idea that previous spins of the roulette wheel have an effect on future spins.” This, explains Sharman, reinforces something called the gambler’s fallacy, or the failure to appreciate the “statistical independence of turns”. “If I’ve had 10 heads in a row, it doesn’t make it more likely that tails will come up next,” he says. “But gamblers don’t think like that.” Indeed, people in general don’t tend to think like that. I came across hot numbers while reporting on fixed-odds betting terminals too. Above the machines, staff would plaster a notice advertising which numbers had been coming up a lot lately on the machines’ digital roulette games. This, says Sharman, “reinforces the sense that you are basing your decision on something other than complete chance”. At that point, you’re labouring under an illusion that you have some kind of agency. José Perales points out that there are different kinds of illusion of control. One type is related to the notion that some person or force other than ourselves is pulling the strings, and that our behaviour might be able to affect that force. That’s something we can recognise in those who believe in the power of prayer, or simple superstition – don’t walk under that ladder or you’ll have bad luck. The other kind is a belief in our own abilities. That’s something at play in those complex football bets – the feeling that you know quite a lot about football so your instinct that Rashford will nab the first goal in a 3–1 win is a decent shout. The illusion of control is a psychological phenomenon that can be particularly effective among the cohort of people most likely to be problem gamblers: young men. Perales contends that young, educated men are particularly susceptible to the mostly illusory notion that they are using their intelligence to get ahead. “Their general reasoning abilities are pretty good. But that doesn’t protect them from developing cognitive biases related to how gambling works. You can feed their sense of confidence and self-worth by designing the product in such a way that you increase the sense of control or the sense that you are learning something.” This could work by displaying hot numbers or nudging betters towards complex markets where they believe they are well informed. It also works with something incredibly simple, like the mechanism of an online slots game. In some games you click on “spin” and the reels whiz round and stop of their own accord. In others, you can stop them at a moment of your choosing. “It’s very difficult to avoid the feeling that the physical process determines the outcome. But it’s just a random-number generator,” says Perales. In other words, whether you stop the spin or you let the computer do it, it doesn’t make a difference. But it somehow feels as if it does. 2. Disguising your losses as wins Make a simple bet on Tiger Roll to win the Grand National and you lose your stake if the thoroughbred throws his rider at the first fence. There’s no hiding the fact that you’ve lost. That isn’t always the case, though. One of the most common devices that gambling firms use to placate punters and keep them coming back for more are losses disguised as wins. On a slot machine, you might deposit some money on Egyptology-themed game Eye of Horus, set your bet to £1 and spin. Most of the time you lose the stake. A small percentage of the time you spin and get more than £1 back. But one of the other outcomes is that you lose a portion of your stake, say 50p. At that point, an animated box flashes up saying: “Winner paid 50p.” “Objectively, you’ve still lost,” says Sharman. But the slot machine frames it as a win. Gambling companies have an incentive to ensure you don’t twig that you’re steadily haemorrhaging cash, and that informs the way games are designed. Typically, a machine might flash up with the same music and lights for a win as it does for a loss disguised as a win. “The only feedback you might get is the lights and sounds,” says Sharman. “So, if there’s no difference between the feedback from a win and a disguised loss, that’s a clever way of tricking the neurological circuitry.” In 2020, the Gambling Commission set up a working group to look into ways of making slots and other products safer. One of the results of the process was that the misleading happy music, as well as visual effects that may disguise a loss as a win, were abolished. 3. Celebrating near misses The reels on the slot machine spin. The first strip lands on cherries, and the second lands on cherries too. The third briefly touches on cherries … and then slides on – perhaps in slow motion – to the lemon, or the gold bars. Behind this common image lies a strange phenomenon. “Near misses are very interesting,” Steve Sharman says. “They’re consistently rated as being more unpleasant. People feel worse when they have a near miss than when there’s a massive miss. At the same time, they make people want to continue gambling more.” Sharman and his fellow researchers decided to test how gamblers react to two different types of slot machine near miss: the ones where the reel spins one place too far, beyond the “payline” (the horizontal axis along which the crucial symbols appear); and the one where it doesn’t spin far enough. Interestingly, they found that when the reel doesn’t reach the payline, the gambler is more likely to keep playing, having apparently been on the brink of the jackpot. But if the reel moves one place too far, it seems to dissuade people from continuing, almost as if the chance of a win briefly materialised and must now have gone for good. Yet neither outcome actually has any bearing on the result of the next spin. Modern online slot machine games, with multiple lines of play, are more complex than the old-school one-armed bandits. They move much faster too, in order to increase the rate at which they take your money. This makes it harder to spot near misses during regular play. But most slots have bonus features, an occasional moment where the opportunity to win a bigger prize comes up and the gambler pays closer attention, including to near misses. This is when today’s slot machine gambler might be more likely to experience the emotional reaction to the perception that they almost won big. 4. Giving you free money The feeling that you’re getting a good deal is another motivating factor that makes you more likely to bet. But it’s worth it for the house if it brings you back for a second bet at riskier odds. One of the products that has emerged in recent years is “boosted odds”, where the bookmaker gives you much longer odds than you would usually get, say 15–1 that a good team such as Chelsea will beat a weaker side like Fulham. Sometimes this will be on offer to new customers only, as a means of driving new account sign-ups. The same phenomenon is at play with the “free” bets and bonus spins that companies hand out. “It’s called the house money effect,” explains Philip Newall. “People are much more risk-seeking with money they’ve won than with money they’ve paid in.” If the house gives you a free spin, you’ve got nothing to lose. Except that such free bets and bonuses usually come with strings attached. You get them, for the most part, only on the condition that you’ll “roll over” the bet into a second or third one. Sometimes the bet has to be rolled over many more times before it can be withdrawn. The house money effect makes that whole process feel like a free ride. Of course, all the while you are becoming habituated to gambling, and you’re more likely to return with your own money and to go on longer rides, this time at your own expense. “The more you bet, the more you’ll get free bets, and the more likely that you give it straight back,” says recovering addict Phil Worrall, from Nottingham. “You might think you’ve got no money left, but if you get an email saying you’ll get a £50 free bet if you bet £50 of your own money, you find a way to scrape it together. It’s a little hook back in.” *** There is a question mark over the extent to which gambling firms are deploying these techniques with precision. Some of these phenomena are so woven into the fabric of certain products that they aren’t so much being weaponised as a fundamental feature of gambling. If you’re at a casino and you put all your chips on 25, spin the roulette wheel and it lands on 26, the only person you can blame for that near miss is Lady Luck, whatever the detrimental effects on you may be. It’s a near miss, but not a manufactured one. It is self-evidently an intrinsic part of the game you’ve chosen. It would, of course, be different if a digital game were designed in such a way as to make this happen more than is statistically likely. I have spoken to many problem gamblers who are convinced this is the case – that the machines are rigged to push your buttons as much as you push theirs, to maximise near misses and capitalise on psychological weaknesses. I have never seen any evidence for this and such information would surely be closely guarded by any company unscrupulous enough to deploy it. The same goes for the “early win”. This is something that crops up again and again in my conversations with gambling addicts, and it is backed up by statistics. A 2019 report from the National Gambling Treatment Service, an umbrella term for several organisations offering help to addicts, found that 62% of those receiving treatment had experienced a big win at the start of their gambling career. It makes sense that hitting the jackpot soon after you start gambling – or even early within a session – creates a memory of that sweet feeling that might drive you to gamble more and more, hoping to recapture the same taste. It’s reminiscent of the horror stories parents tell their kids about drug dealers giving out free samples to get people hooked. In the course of my journalism, I occasionally experiment with various gambling products so that I can get a better idea of what I’m talking about. On my very first go with online slots, I had a couple of big wins. (Steady on, we’re only talking a tenner here.) I don’t know what would have happened if I’d carried on gambling, but the return to player on that game was 96.09% – spend £100, on average you get £96.09 back – so it’s a certainty that I’d have lost my winnings eventually. When it comes to online casino games and slots, Kim Lund feels that something less cunning is going on: that firms are simply watching what makes money and repeating it in a robotic process of trial and error. “My main gripe with the industry is that it has, to a large degree, been run by people who don’t love it, who treat gamblers as dumb sheep. They see gambling like petrol: ‘We have a commodity – how do we sell it? What else can we sell them while they’re at the gas station?’” The result is an evolutionary mechanism that rewards the development of addictive content while absolving anyone from the responsibility for its impact. Breaking this cycle can be done. In the course of writing about the gambling industry, I hear inspiring stories of people like Chris Murphy, who used to gamble online secretly at night as his girlfriend slept beside him, but now works for the Sporting Chance clinic, run by former England footballer Tony Adams, helping athletes with addiction issues. Or James Grimes, who lost everything betting on football and now works via his group The Big Step to disentangle gambling from the game he loves. But tales of recovery like these require superhuman effort – and a good deal of support from friends, family and treatment services. All too often these safety nets are lacking and there is nothing to fall back on; no recourse but another spin of the wheel. • This is an edited extract from Jackpot by Rob Davies (Guardian Faber, £14.99). To support The Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply. In the UK, anyone concerned about their gambling, or that of a loved one, can visit BeGambleAware.org for free, confidential advice and support. The National Gambling Helpline is available on 0808 8020 133 and operates 24 hours a day, seven days a week. In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. The charity Mind is available on 0300 123 3393. In the US, Mental Health America is available on 800-273-8255, and the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is at 800-273-8255. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.orgItalian rugby is surrounded by wolves. Not the nurturing sort, like the one that reared Rome’s mythological founders, Romulus and Remus, but sharp-toothed blood-drinkers in the guise of critical journalists and fans who have long lost patience with the Azzurri’s meagre contribution to Europe’s premier rugby union competition. The statistics support their howls to cut the straggler from the pack. Italy vindicated their inclusion in the Six Nations when they beat Scotland 34-20 in their inaugural outing in 2000, but have won just 11 of their subsequent 96 matches and in 21 seasons have finished last 16 times. They are on a 33-game losing streak stretching back to 2015 and last year broke records for most points conceded (239) and most tries conceded (34), finishing with the worst ever points difference of -184. They have never beaten England. All signs point to a regression. And though the clamour to include Georgia has quietened, there is mounting momentum behind a bid to make room for South Africa. Facing the wall of gnashing teeth is a man who understands that time is against him. “We know we have to start pulling our weight,” says Kieran Crowley, a World Cup winner with New Zealand in 1987 who took charge of Italy last May. “I’m not against promotion-relegation. It might be a good thing. That’s a decision for the boardrooms. What I will say is that we can silence that chat with our own performances.” After serving as an All Black selector and then under-19s coach, in 2008 Crowley was appointed coach of Canada, staying in post for eight years. He then signed with Benetton, where he took the Treviso franchise to a first ever Pro14 quarter-final, losing by two points to Munster in 2019. Last year he broke new ground by winning the Rainbow Cup, an admittedly diluted tournament but the first international silverware lifted by an Italian club. Can Crowley’s minor success at Benetton help to break the losing cycle with the national side? “Sometimes it’s felt like it’s never going to end,” admits Sebastian Negri, the 27-year-old loose forward who was part of Crowley’s Benetton team. “We take it personally. But there are a few of us who now know what it means to win something. That can only have a positive impact.” In team meetings, Crowley has emphasised two words: respect and credibility. He believes that too few players have respected the jersey and that this has led to a depletion in Italy’s credibility as a tier-one nation. “There are only two professional franchises in Italy,” Crowley offers as a cause for this complacency. “If you play for Benetton or Zebre there’s a good chance you’ll get the call. Players haven’t had to fight like they have to in France or England.” To rectify this, Crowley is encouraging his players to seek employment abroad. But he has also made contact with three England-based players: the Harlequins wing Louis Lynagh, who was born in Italy, the Wasps wing Paolo Odogwu, who has Italian parents, and Alex Lozowski of Saracens, who last played for England in 2018 but could take advantage of World Rugby’s new eligibility laws through his Italian grandmother. “I’ll work with any player who is available and is good enough,” Crowley says. But change is slow. Of his squad of 33, only six play outside Italy – four in France and two in England. One of them is the 20-year-old Gloucester scrum-half Stephen Varney. Born in Wales to an Italian mother, he has roots in Cesena and Parma, and his great-grandfather served in the Italian army in North Africa during the second world war before he was captured and placed in a prison camp in west Wales. “It’s in the blood,” Varney says with a Welsh accent. “We’re passionate people. We’re aware of what others are saying. Kieran has called us out and to be honest we needed that. We want to prove we belong. We all want to be the generation that turned things around.” With an average age of 23, Italy’s is the youngest squad in the competition. Two of them are teenagers, including the wing Tommaso Menoncello, who scored against France on debut. Several have graduated from impressive youth groups that now regularly beat the other five nations. Paolo Garbisi is a standout. The 21-year-old fly-half has helped drive Montpellier to second in France’s Top 14 table, occasionally nudging Handré Pollard to inside centre. Italy’s captain, Michele Lamaro, will be 24 in June, leading a group not stained by what has come before. There are drawbacks to youth, of course. All told there are only 440 Test caps throughout the squad – that’s 186 fewer than Wales, who have seven established players out through injury. And while Crowley stresses the need for patience, he recognises the urgency of his situation. “We’ve got to get the monkey off our back, but we’re up against five of the best eight teams in the world with an inexperienced group,” he says. “It’s a chicken and egg thing with results. We’ve shown we can play well in patches. We just need to do it across the 80 minutes.” Italy kept New Zealand scoreless for almost half an hour in November before shipping four tries in the final quarter. They led France twice in the first half last week but faded in the second, losing 37-10. Even an improved performance will probably not be enough against Eddie Jones and his wounded England on Sunday. The wolves will continue to howl. Only a win will make them go away.Bobbing across choppy black waters towards land, we reach a rocky shore, infertile but for a few sad palm trees. Only in the bewitchings of Handel’s sorceress-chatelaine does the island become a mirage of lush green whorls and juicy succulents. Opera North’s new Alcina, directed by Tim Albery, opens with this striking imagery on a film backdrop. Throughout, the visual device works hard to provide the magic in Handel’s fantasy tale of 1735. The company describes this as its “first sustainable mainstage production”, an important milestone, if not entirely successful in result. The main props are blue velvet club-style chairs and a lighting rig that rises and falls as required. Two sorceresses – Alcina and her sister Morgana – lure susceptible men into their domain. Quickly bored, Alcina wizards her rejected lovers into animals, stones and trees. (The programme note explains, lest any were unsure, that this is a metaphor.) In the opera’s twisting plot, nearly everyone is someone else or thinks they might be. Disguise and cross-dressing or undressing dominate the action. Deciding how to present Handel for today’s audiences is an endless directorial challenge. Two weeks ago, the fuss was about Katie Mitchell throwing a capacious feminist veil over Handel’s Theodora at the Royal Opera House. Last week in Leeds the intervention was, if anything, more extreme. Hackles haven’t risen in the same way. Opera North’s media campaigns are quieter, and tend to let a piece speak for itself, though I found the results more problematic. The story has been reworked, one character excised altogether, another – the bass role of Melisso – now given to a mezzo-soprano as Melissa (effectively sung by Claire Pascoe). Cuts to the music were sanctioned by the conductor Laurence Cummings. As musical director of the London Handel festival, having recently completed his stint as artistic director with the authoritative Internationale Händel-Festspiele Göttingen, he doesn’t take such decisions lightly. Directing from the keyboard, he kept speeds brisk. Collectively the orchestra sounded happier than the singers, who too often struggled with tuning and articulation, but these sounded like first night problems that should settle. The designs are by Hannah Clark, lighting by Matthew Richardson and video by Ian Galloway. Dressed in secondhand and vintage, hair variously crimped (Bradamante), hippy-long (Ruggiero) or swept up high (Alcina), the cast had a generic retro look. Máire Flavin, in the title role, with the glamour of a film star, handled her fall from regal witchy diva to broken woman affectingly. Fflur Wyn’s Morgana was flighty and charming and, against the odds of the plot, believable. Some of the best singing came from Nick Pritchard, in the smaller role of Morgana’s lover, Oronte. The American countertenor Patrick Terry, in his Opera North debut as the errant knight Ruggiero, not an easy role to flesh out dramatically, found his form in the poignant aria Verdi prati. The Norwegian mezzo-soprano Mari Askvik, also making her house debut as Bradamante, was outstanding vocally but could have been allowed greater girl-power independence. Why not remind us of this knight heroine’s cultural identity as expert in combat, intolerant of weaklings, with a magic lance and, you bet, a flying horse? The softened ending robs the piece of one of its most charged dramatic moments. Instead, in a reference to the cult writer Bruno Schulz’s short story Undula, Alcina crawls and thrashes under a bearskin, a Venus in furs to the last. (Streamed live on 17 February; available until 17 August 2022.) In this early spring feast of baroque opera, Vivaldi’s Bajazet – from 1735, the same year as Alcina – made a triumphant appearance at the Royal Opera House’s Linbury theatre in a compact staging by Adele Thomas, designed by Molly O’Cathain, for Irish National Opera. Blood and gore mixed, excitingly, with flair and effervescence. Vivaldi’s operas, here with borrowings from other composers of the era, are only now becoming available in modern editions and recordings. This is the well-plotted, racy story of the Ottoman emperor Bajazet and his fate at the hands of his Uzbek opponent Tamerlano. Peter Whelan, every inch of his body responding expressively to Vivaldi’s restless, vigorous score, directed from the harpsichord. The 10-strong Irish Baroque Orchestra matched his zest and variety. A brilliant cast led by Claire Booth, Niamh O’Sullivan and James Laing poured physical and vocal energy into each move, each note. It was simply done, stunningly achieved. Brief but spirited applause for a recital livestreamed from Wigmore Hall. The Russian pianist Pavel Kolesnikov, ever a poetic and daring player, constructed a tantalising homage to Proust with music by Schubert, Franck, Hahn and Fauré. It obeyed none of the conventions of an “ordinary recital” and was all the better for it. Still free to watch. Searching for Proust’s lost time instead of our own is a perfect distraction. Star ratings (out of five) Alcina ★★★ Bajazet ★★★★ Pavel Kolesnikov: In Memory of Marcel Proust ★★★★★ Alcina is at Leeds Grand until 17 February, then tours until 24 March Bajazet will be broadcast on Opera on 3 on Radio 3 on 26 February, 6.30pm/BBC Sounds Pavel Kolesnikov: In Memory of Marcel Proust is available online until 3 March• In returning to the intrinsic pleasures of physical objects, will we ever again covet the CD as miniature treasury? The Italian conductor Giovanni Antonini is working hard to make us. Now on Volume 11, Au goût parisien, of the Haydn2032 series (Alpha Classics) – shared between Il Giardino Armonico and the Basel Chamber Orchestra – he is recording all Haydn’s 107 symphonies in time for the composer’s 300th anniversary. This latest volume, with the Basel players sizzling and exuberant, includes two of the “Paris” symphonies, Nos 82 in C, “The Bear” – characterised by explosive “bagpipe” drones in the finale – and No 87 in A, as well as No 24 in D and No 2 in C. This epic project will form a vital legacy: brilliant performances, historically informed. The handsome and informative 50-page booklet provides a list of the make and date of all the instruments played. In collaboration with the Magnum agency, each themed volume features a different photographer. You can catch up with a newly available box set of Volumes 1 to 10. Haydn brings joy and variety as no other. • The Scottish composer Martin Suckling (b.1981) waits till his household is asleep, then starts work. The Tuning (Delphian) explores the hours of darkness, including a nocturne and a lullaby, expertly performed by principal players of Aurora Orchestra, the mezzo soprano Marta Fontanals-Simmons and the pianist Christopher Glynn. The songs of the title work move from a contemplation of death to the quietly lyrical Two Spells for Sleeping. A string quintet, Emily’s Electrical Absence, pays turbulent but tender homage to Schubert and Emily Dickinson, with the poet Frances Leviston speaking her own texts between movements. Suckling’s chamber music, unsettling and stirring, deftly captures night’s hauntings. • Time to reevaluate the composer Alan Bush (1900-95), long ostracised in British musical circles for his refusal to quell his pro-Soviet political beliefs that surfaced in choruses and songs for workers’ choirs, as well as four operas premiered in East Germany. In a double Composer of the Week, Donald Macleod is in conversation with Bush’s former pupil and fellow composer Edward Gregson, whose own roots in brass band music and the Salvation Army are also explored. Monday to Friday, noon to 1pm, BBC Radio 3.Whatever the outcome of Sunday morning’s giant slalom race, one record is sure to be set. Jamaica will be represented in Alpine skiing for the first time. Benjamin Alexander, a 38-year-old from Northampton, will be at the starting gate, becoming one of just 15 athletes to represent Jamaica at the Winter Olympics and following in the footsteps of the 1988 bobsleigh team immortalised in the movie Cool Runnings. Alexander recently told CNN that, when he started to learn to ski, “being the only Black representative in the group, but on top of that being of Jamaican heritage, people kept throwing sideways jokes about Cool Runnings”. Dudley ‘Tal’ Stokes from that famous bobsleigh team is now one of Alexander’s mentors. Having got the bug for skiing, he went on to attend the Pyeongchang 2018 Winter Olympics as a spectator and noted that, despite their strong summer Games presence, Jamaica sent three athletes to South Korea. He began to wonder if it was possible for him to qualify. “I thought the most likely outcome was death or at least a serious injury.” The actual outcome was that alongside Jazmine Fenlator-Victorian he carried Jamaica’s flag into the Bird’s Nest Stadium in Beijing for the opening ceremony of the 2022 Games. Alexander started skiing in 2015, when he was a DJ at the top of a Canadian mountain and gave it a go. Since deciding to attempt to reach the Olympics he has taken it much more seriously and trained with a number of coaches, including the American skiier Gordon Gray , who at one point told Alexander his technique was atrocious, “the worst I’ve ever seen”. The child of a Jamaican father and an English mother, Alexander had a working-class upbringing in Wellingborough outside Northampton, and says nobody in his immediate family had skied before. He secured qualification by finishing seventh in the giant slalom at the Cape Verde National Ski Championships in Liechtenstein in January. “I would never have embarked on this mission had I not thought that was possible,” he says. He is keen to take up a role as an ambassador for the sport – and for having fun on the slopes. In a recent interview with BBC Radio Northampton he said: “I hope to inspire people who have taken a bit of joy out of my story to go to Milton Keynes, to the Snozone or go on holiday to the Alps and give it a shot. There’s a place for everyone and, if I can get from zero to Olympian in six years, everyone can go from zero to having fun in a much shorter period of time. It’s going to be completely surreal.” “Sometimes you just have to keep going over the basics or you’ll get overwhelmed by the emotions of the competition.”The brilliant 15-year-old skater Kamila Valieva, who has been at the centre of a doping and media storm at these Winter Olympics, will learn her fate from the Court of Arbitration for Sport (Cas) on Monday. The Russian looked calm and focused at practice on Saturday, producing a flawless rendition of her short programme before coming off the ice to the soundtrack of Sia’s I’m Unstoppable. However, Valieva’s dreams of competing in the individual event on Tuesday will come to an abrupt halt if Cas decides to uphold her doping suspension, which followed a positive test when trimetazidine was found in a urine sample collected by Russian authorities on Christmas Day. It will meet via video conference on Sunday evening in Beijing before informing all parties of its decision on Monday afternoon. On Saturday Valieva’s controversial coach, Eteri Tutberidze, insisted that her skater was clean but accepted that the situation was “very controversial and difficult”. “I want to say that I am absolutely sure that Kamila is innocent and clean,” she said. “For us, this is not a theorem, but an axiom, it does not need to be proved. We are with our athletes, in trouble and in joy, to the end.” The latest development follows an extraordinary week that began on Monday when Valieva captured the hearts of the world when she became the first female skater to perform a quad at the Games as the Russian Olympic Committee (ROC) won a brilliant team gold. A day later, however, the Russian anti-doping agency imposed a provisional suspension on Valieva when a Swedish laboratory reported a positive test before lifting it on Wednesday on appeal. The International Olympic Committee (IOC), International Skating Union (ISU) and the World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA) have asked Cas to reinstate the suspension but Valieva has been able to train in the meantime. On Saturday she made a point of hugging Tutberidze during practice on Saturday before walking through the mixed zone, accompanied by two burly minders. There was even a smile when she received shouts of encouragement from the Russian media. However, in Russia the focus has intensified on Tutberidze, who is known for her uncompromising methods. After Valieva’s positive test for trimetazidine, a drug usually used to treat angina, the hashtag #позорТутберидзе – “shame on you, Tutberidze” – has been trending on Twitter. But speaking to Russian station Channel One, Tutberidze directed her focus on why it had taken so long for Valieva’s positive test to emerge, given it was conducted on Christmas Day but only reported by a Swedish laboratory on 8 February. An outbreak of Covid at the lab in January is said to be the cause, however Tutberidze didn’t sound convinced. “It is very unclear why an athlete with a dubious doping test on December 25 was admitted to the Olympic Games,” she said. “Either this is a fatal coincidence, or this is a very competent plan. I really hope that our leaders will not abandon us, defend our rights and prove our innocence.” Earlier the IOC said it would welcome an anti-doping investigation into Valieva’s “entourage” after the 15-year-old Russian’s positive drugs test. “Entourage has been overlooked in the past,” IOC spokesman Mark Adams told a news conference on Saturday. “The IOC, as ever, would welcome investigation into the entourage in all cases where it’s relevant. In this case, as in all cases, we would welcome a strong line from the World Anti-Doping Agency on that.” That approach was backed by double Olympic figure skating champion Katarina Witt, who said Valieva was not to blame for her positive drugs test. “This scandal is a dramatic cut to her young and promising career and I sincerely hope that enough people are by her side and protect her so that she doesn’t break,” she said. “Kamila has learned her quadruple jumps with infinite diligence and courage. No doping would have helped her to land these! And especially not with their artistic radiation! If anything, the adults responsible should be locked up for sports forever!” However, Dick Pound, a long-standing member of the IOC, said that Russia’s latest doping infraction - which follows on from state-sponsored doping at the 2014 Sochi Games and manipulating testing data at a Moscow lab - suggested it was time Russia took an Olympic ‘timeout’. “At a certain point if they are absolutely incorrigible you end up with the position of taking a country timeout,” said Pound. “We could say we can help you. You’ve got a problem. We can concentrate on it. Take a time out for one or two, or three Olympic Games until you get this under control.”Now this is a story … Eventually every classic TV show will get a reboot (what price Press Gang: The Substack Years?). Last year saw Don Cheadle narrate a reworking of The Wonder Years. A young Cheadle appeared in The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air back in 1990. Coming next week to Peacock/Now is a dramatic retelling of the sitcom myth: Bel-Air sees newcomer Jabari Banks arrive from west Philadelphia to sit on the Fresh throne previously occupied by Will Smith. Something Borowitz’d The pilot of the original show was written by then husband and wife duo Andy and Susan Borowitz. Andy has claimed that the Fresh Prince’s cousin Carlton (he of the dance) was named after his college friend, the writer Carlton Cuse. Cuse control Carlton Cuse is a prolific screenwriter, director and producer who created Nash Bridges (itself rebooted briefly last year), and Bates Motel (a Psycho reinterpretation). He was also one of the writers on supernatural survivor series Lost. Lost in the couch Lost co-creator JJ Abrams made his film directing debut with the third round of Tom Cruise’s Mission: Impossible series, itself a kind of reboot. Back in 2004, shortly before Cruise jumped on Oprah’s couch, he starred in Michael Mann’s excellent hitman thriller Collateral, alongside Jamie Foxx (who later dated Katie Holmes, subject of the couch incident) and Jada Pinkett Smith, underrated but excellent as (spoiler alert!) one of Cruise’s targets. King Will Matrix star Jada is married to Will Smith, although, as their compelling confessional chat on her web show Red Table Talk attests, there have been bumps along the way. Never not busy – and Oscar-tipped for King Richard – Will also helped to develop the new Bel-Air adventures. Whether the beloved, oft-parodied theme tune returns in some shape or form, remains to be seen. Pairing notes Watch The new Bel-Air began as a three-and-a-half-minute fan film made by Morgan Cooper in 2019, which picked up several million views on YouTube. Eat Uncle Phil (controversially slimmed down in the reboot) may have been on a health kick in season four, but his description of “pillowy mounds of mashed potatoes” will have you reaching for your masher.There’s a difficult balance in dance between being yourself on stage, making an impact with the weight of your presence (which is why people want to watch you in the first place) and presenting the choreography. Pina Bausch’s Kontakthof, about life, love and the ongoing need for contact, was made in 1978, when the choreographer was developing her unique ideas about Tanztheater. It was created with a group of fiercely individual dancers, who brought their own personalities to the piece, and then deepened by the performers she nurtured and treasured down the years. It has also been performed by non-dancers – old and young – who had a different authenticity. Now it’s back, in the hands and bodies of a new, young cast who are striving to burrow inside its sad, strange, troubling encounters between the sexes. The society depicted to a soundtrack of songs from the 1920s and 30s, with its formal dances and incongruous nature film show, belonged to Bausch’s parents’ world. At first, this different generation struggle to find their way inside its gestures, its tone – all those silk dresses being twitched by anxious hands, hair being smoothed, teeth being shown. As the three-hour piece progresses, though, the universality of its rituals, the pain and hope underlying the dances, pierces through. The dancers relax, letting their own lives illuminate Bausch’s steps. It isn’t quite as it was, but it is still utterly engrossing. The dancers are undoubtedly the best thing about 100% Cuban, Carlos Acosta’s latest mixed programme for his Cuban-based company Acosta Danza. They have talent, personality and enthusiasm that beams off the stage. It is a pleasure to spend a couple of hours in their company. The problem they face is that Acosta’s clear eye for potential in a performer is patchier when it comes to choosing works in which they can flourish. Hybrid (by Norge Cedeño and Thais Suárez) is a messy misunderstanding of the myth of Sisyphus, enlivened only by the energy of the dancers, and Impronta (by Maria Rovira) fails to make the most of the talent of Zeleidy Crespo, who can do anything asked of her but is here asked only dull questions. Liberto, a duet about a freed slave, in which Crespo stars alongside Mario Sergio Elias, pushes her into incredible shapes and poses, and company dancer Raúl Reinoso has some good ideas, but its hectic intensity never quite gets anywhere. De Punta a Cabo, choreographed by Alexis Fernández (Maca) and Yaday Ponce, which sets the dancers against a film of them on Havana’s Malecón, the sea wall where young people hang out and dream, makes a lively ending to an evening, but its mix of pointe shoes and trainers feels a little forced. Thank goodness, then, for Pontus Lidberg, whose sophisticated Paysage, Soudain, la nuit has a sumptuous score by Leo Brouwer and Stefan Levin and a glorious setting of a line of corn, courtesy of Elizabet Cerviño. It lets the dancers shine, their feet slipping and sliding, their arms a tapestry of gesture, the movement seemingly simple but always enticing. Star ratings (out of five) Kontakthof ★★★★ Acosta Danza: 100% Cuban ★★★Britain’s empty high street shops and derelict department stores should be transformed into artists’ studios and galleries to bring life back to city centres, according to the outgoing director of one of the country’s leading art spaces. With artists being pushed out of city centres by soaring rents and living costs, galleries under financial pressure and high streets struggling, Iwona Blazwick, who has led Whitechapel Gallery for more than 20 years, called on local authorities to offer the spaces at reduced rents to artists. This comes as the London gallery prepares to launch an exhibition dedicated to the subject of the artist’s studio – Blazwick’s last as director. “It’s an interesting moment because it’s a question of whether people will want to go back to working in the city; we’ve seen one high street shop after another not surviving. High streets are struggling, whole department stores have disappeared. So what is the future for those spaces?” she said. “And to me, there is an immediate tenancy standing right there, which is the artists’. They’re guaranteed, they’re going to bring with them a whole way of life, which brings a neighbourhood back into viability and into being a great place to live and work.” Department stores have taken a big hit in recent years, while the move to online shopping has left many high street stalwarts struggling. In 2016 British Home Stores closed all its UK branches; two years later, House of Fraser went into administration; Debenhams closed 118 stores after Covid hit, and John Lewis announced several closures too. Rather than turning empty buildings into luxury apartments, Blazwick said, there is an opportunity to take inspiration from Damien Hirst, who in 1988, along with 15 other art students, “seized the moment” of a recession to stage the exhibition Freeze by opening up unused spaces to artists. Freeze, in a Docklands warehouse, served as a launchpad for the Young British Artists (YBAs), and gave rise to a whole new art scene. Blazwick, who in 1992 mounted Hirst’s first major solo show at a public gallery and who has been credited with discovering the artist, said there was “huge scope” for empty shops and properties to fill the gaps by being turned into galleries as Hirst did with Freeze. “That’s exactly what they did. They seized that moment of a recession and took over empty shops and properties and an entire art scene was born. There is that potential now.” Such an initiative could harness and nurture creativity of people in rural and urban areas, she said. “We are in a post-industrial future and what we need is young people with ideas. To be creative is now the way of shaping the future and the economy.” In London, some former factories are protected by studio associations as artists’ spaces, but long-term leases make it “harder and harder” for young artists to find affordable spaces in the capital, she said, which is why so many are moving to seaside destinations such as Whitstable, Folkestone and Hastings. When artists get pushed out of a city, she said, “that’s when the energy leaves the city.” She added: “And as we suppress it and turn one space after another into so-called luxury flats, that is going to be destroyed. So we do have a mission here to try and persuade local authorities and developers that it has to be an intrinsic part of city planning.” With art institutions facing “a very challenging financial horizon”, Blazwick said that they were likely to mount fewer exhibitions and to keep those that they do put on running for longer. “Where then is the platform for emerging arts or new ideas or unestablished figures?” London, she said, was the “de facto centre of the art world”, but would lose that status if there were no studio spaces, galleries exhibiting emerging artists, or reduced art school funding: “All of that is a complex but fragile ecosystem and if we fail to invest in that, we do so at our peril. It will become a less liveable and less significant capital.” She praised the work of artist Tracey Emin who plans to create a “revolutionary” art school in her home town of Margate, along with 30 studios for art students as well as an artist’s residency programme. A Century of the Artist’s Studio 1920-2020, which opens at Whitechapel on 24 February, features more than 100 works by more than 80 artists and collectives including Francis Bacon, Louise Bourgeois, Barbara Hepworth, Pablo Picasso, Kerry James Marshall, Andy Warhol and Lisa Brice. Studios, Blazwick said, act as vital “test sites” for artists, as well as places to create, take refuge and to perform. Quoting Virginia Woolf’s A Room of One’s Own, she said the studio was a place “where you can think, research, refine, try out, fail, try again, succeed.” As well as paintings, sculptures and films documenting artists’ studios there will also be recreations of the three-dimensional surroundings of various artists’ spaces in a series of studio corners, including Warhol’s Silver Factory in New York and Kurt Schwitters’ living sculpture, the Merzbau in Hanover, which was destroyed in a British air raid in 1943. Antony Gormley, who features in the exhibition, said that affordable studios were “essential” for young and emerging artists, arguing that these spaces should be required as part of planning applications. “Local councils and developers should make it their duty to support creative people,” he said. “Artists are the ultimate doers and responders. They do things in their own way and recognise what has been done by others to make neighbourhoods lively, friendly and fun.”The US government used its first trip to Fiji by a secretary of state in almost 40 years to warn Russia to back off Ukraine. Antony Blinken told reporters in Fiji he would speak to his Russian counterpart, the foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, to advise that the US was prepared for either diplomacy or “aggression” and warned of economic sanctions in the event of an invasion. “If President [Vladimir] Putin decides to take military action, we will swiftly impose severe economic sanctions in coordination with allies and partners around the globe,” Blinken said. “We will bolster Ukraine’s ability to defend itself, we will reinforce our allies on the eastern flank of Nato.” Blinken also made an apparent swipe at China, whose influence has grown in the Pacific region in the past few decades and pushed for a “a free and open Indo-Pacific”. “Pacific Islanders are proud. They believe that no matter their size, they alone should be able to choose their path, whether that’s how they manage their natural resources, or who they partner with. We share that belief. And we think the world is a more secure and prosperous place when core international principles like that are respected.” Blinken touched down in Fiji on Saturday for a whirlwind trip, lasting just over eight hours, the first secretary of state to visit Fiji in 37 years. He was on his way back from Australia, where he attended the Quadrilateral Security Dialogue or Quad, a security partnership between the US, India, Japan and Australia. Blinken returns to the US via Hawaii which he will also visit for eight hours. Fiji, with a population of just under 1 million, is located at the centre of the Pacific, making it the hub of travel and economic activity. Home to the headquarters of the Pacific Islands Forum, Fiji holds close diplomatic relations with Australia and New Zealand, who are its major trading partners. Over the past 15 years, while under sanctions by its western allies, the Fijian government established closer relations with China. Blinken’s trip was widely seen as the US trying to bolster support in the contest for influence between the US and China in the Pacific. Chinese presence in the Pacific Islands has increased significantly since 2006 to make them the third largest donor to the region. According to Lowy Institute research, foreign aid from Beijing was worth US $1.5bn and 8% of all foreign aid to the Pacific between 2011 and 2017. However, Chinese concessional loans tend to be for the large infrastructure projects in the islands. Many Pacific islands now trade more with China than they do with Australia. Blinken announced the next US embassy in the region would open soon in Solomon Islands, whose trade with China accounts for almost half of all its trade. Promising more innovative engagement in the Pacific in climate Change and trade, Blinken said the US would deepen its relationship with Asean, Apec and the Pacific Islands Forum, alluding to bringing the strength of its partnerships in other regions of the world. “The United States is increasingly speaking with one voice with our Nato allies and our G7 partners, when it comes to Indo Pacific matters, you can see the strength of that commitment to the Indo Pacific throughout the past year.” Pushing that it was part of the Pacific, Blinken pointed to the US’s history in the region as a sign of its closeness to it. “It was here on these beaches that Americans shared some of the hardest fought battles in the second world war,” he said. Blinken, who met 18 Pacific Island leaders virtually in Nadi, announced the US government’s new Indo-Pacific engagement strategy, calling the region “vital to our own prosperity, our own progress”. A key way that the US is trying to establish itself as the diplomatic partner of choice for Fiji is through commitments on the climate crisis, which poses an existential threat for Pacific nations. Blinken announced increasing USAID climate change funding for the Pacific saying a substantial portion of its $150bn commitment announced at Cop26 would be for the islands. Further, the US government announced the Pacific Island countries were “prime candidates for the President’s Emergency Plan for Adaptation and Resilience or Pprepare initiative.” Blinken said USAID would help Pacific Island organisations get accredited to manage climate financing for regional projects. “The thread that runs through all of our engagements with Fiji is that we’re working together in a spirit of partnership in a spirit of respect, to tackle shared challenges, to build upon shared opportunities to deliver concrete results for people on the issues that actually affect their lives. And that’s the approach behind our Indo Pacific strategy as a whole.”Today’s political culture is “rancid and dangerous” and Boris Johnson should be ashamed of telling a lie that led to street violence, a senior Church of England bishop has said. Paul Bayes, the bishop of Liverpool, said the UK was facing a “struggle between those in whose interest it is to fragment society and those who want to sustain the common good”. Speaking on the eve of his retirement, Bayes also said church law should change to define marriage as between two people regardless of gender – a highly controversial move that would overturn centuries of traditional biblical teaching. Bayes said Johnson should take “serious stock of his position” after he told parliament that Keir Starmer had failed to prosecute the paedophile Jimmy Savile. Two days later, Starmer had to seek refuge from a mob accusing him of being a “paedophile protector”. Bayes said: “I do not believe that was an honest statement, and I think [Johnson] should be ashamed of it. And the folks who trotted out to say ‘it’s not really a problem, it’s all part of the rough and tumble of politics’ should share that shame … “The parallel in my mind is Donald Trump. [Johnson] is showing us who he is, and people seem to want that in politics. And I regret that. We need a politics that doesn’t have room for lies told in the House of Commons that might produce street violence two days afterwards.” However, if Johnson resigned, the political environment would still need to change, Bayes said. “It’s not about individual bad apples. It’s about the culture.” The culture of politics was “adversarial, scratchy, exhausted” and “rancid and dangerous”. This was the case “right across the west”, he said. “You see clear illiberalism in eastern Europe, you see the rise of the extreme right in France, and you see what you see in the United States … Basic decencies have been lost.” People who suggested that bishops should not express political views were mistaken, he said. The church has “a place in the public square” and “there are values that we can express clearly that will have political impact. As long as that platform is there, it behoves us to stand on it.” Within the C of E, Bayes has increasingly spoken out about the urgency of LGBTQ+ equality, an issue that has caused bitter divisions for many years. He said: “I want to see a church where, if a congregation and its ministers want to bless and marry same-sex people or trans people, then they should be free to do so without stigma. And those who don’t want to do so should be given freedom of conscience not to do so. I want to see gender-neutral marriage canons, that simply say marriage is between two people.” Bayes said he expected this to happen, “100%”. The church needs to listen “to God who never changes, and to society which is changing all the time. Over slavery, over abortion, contraception, women’s ministry, long and agonised debates have resulted in a church that has made room for these things. And I think, in the end, that will happen [with LGBTQ+ equality]. He didn’t expect such change imminently, but “I hope and pray it will happen in my lifetime”. Bayes, who has been bishop of Liverpool since 2014, was introduced as a member of the House of Lords in November, just three months before his retirement. “I would have been there for five or six years but there was a [C of E] rule that women bishops should take precedence. I support that rule, but it means I’m the shortest serving member of the House of Lords for decades. But that’s cool.” After his retirement, he will swap his eight-bedroom bishop’s house in Liverpool for a two-bedroom workman’s cottage in the West Country. He may write a book, but first “there’ll be a lot of snoring for about six months, and remembering how to be a grandfather”.One of the common anxieties of football’s age of billionaire owners and nation state PR projects is the fear that clubs will lose their long-standing identities, that they will become instead plasticised entertainment vehicles, anonymous machines for winning. Although not quite yet, it seems. Relax for a moment. Kick back. And take a long cool drink of the mixed and flowing substance that remains forever Spurs. There was at least something reassuringly familiar about the collapse at home to Southampton on Wednesday night. Tottenham may have the greatest new-build ground in Europe. They may have an A-list manager in his mid-career prime. They may have in Harry Kane – and bear with this – the outstanding Premier League attacker of the last eight years. But the ability to shift effortlessly between fluent attack and showing all the defensive resilience of a beaded curtain remains intact. The worst part of that home defeat wasn’t the fact Tottenham were 2-1 up with 10 minutes to play, then lost the game 3-2. The inept defending for both late goals wasn’t the worst part either. The worst part was Antonio Conte being nice afterwards. This is the same Conte who seems to generate his own ambient energy field with those fits of performative rage; for whom that gorgeously lush auburn hair transplant was probably written off as a necessary business expense, such is the importance to his professional wellbeing of the tousled and passionate mediaeval warrior king persona. The Italian was instead muted and conciliatory in defeat. He talked about the need to protect his players’ confidence. He said: “This is our life now.” And the reference to the present tense seems telling. Conte is being careful, in public at least. Southampton at home may have revealed the fragility of key parts of this team, but it was also the start of a run of five Premier League matches in 18 days that will decide the trajectory of Tottenham’s season. This is where they catch up on the fixture list. Four points off fourth with three games in hand is still a position of strength. The same run of games could also end up deciding the future of a player who looks increasingly like an unsustainable anomaly in this team. There has been a suggestion this week that Kane has warmed a little towards the idea of extending his contract at Spurs. Much will depend on how skewed that balance looks by the end of March, the gulf in quality between the squad’s base level and its outstanding player. To put this in context, Tottenham have signed just two first-team-ready central defenders since the summer of 2015 (both played – badly – in midweek). Their full-back stocks have declined from the heights of Kyle Walker and Kieran Trippier divvying up the right flank, to Emerson, Matt Doherty and Japhet Tanganga being rotated hopefully like a set of misaligned tyres. Kane hasn’t had a regular supplier of goalscoring passes since Christian Eriksen left. And somehow through that same period this declining team have managed to hang on to the best Premier League centre forward of his era. Kane has now scored more Premier League goals and more England goals without actually winning a single career trophy than any other player. He turns 29 in the summer. This is getting a little uncomfortable. At which point it is necessary to re-state just how good Kane is. It has become habit for those confused by team trophies, glitz, and a cinematic highlights reel, to say that Kane is an overrated footballer. If anything the opposite is true. Kane is underrated, his scoring feats taken for granted, his deeper gears, his supreme all-round game under-praised. He now has exactly 300 career goals: 236 for Spurs, 16 for Millwall, Orient and Leicester City and 48 for England, with 43 in his last 50 internationals. Scroll down the Premier League list and only Sergio Agüero and Thierry Henry have a better goals-per-game record among those to reach one hundred. The difference being, both played in sublime teams surrounded by brilliant footballers. Whereas Kane has only ever played regularly for those notorious flakes and flunkers England and Spurs, teams that are to some extent defined by their lack of success. His entire first-team career has been spent without an adequate back-up striker, so he has been out there twanging his ankle, rushing back, carrying that burden alone. His record swimming against that tide is extraordinary. Even this season, which has seen two brand new managers and Kane either distracted by the summer’s drama or roving weirdly around the pitch, he has still somehow crept up to 21 goals, most of them sneaky, box-ticking filler against tadpole opposition, but classic Numbers Man stuff for that. This is the other issue Kane must wrestle with. His own tactical development of the last few years is becoming a problem. The tendency to drop into the No 10 role, to roam as a 360-degree playmaker, has confirmed that he can also moonlight as Spurs’ best midfield passer. No great shakes in itself. But it is also a bit like using an artisan Japanese steak knife to grout the kitchen floor. Conte has tried to reposition his best goalscorer as a cutting edge. “At the moment with us he is playing much more like a No 9,” he said after the win at Leicester, where Kane did play further forward and racked up 10 shots, a goal and an assist. But it is a vice that returns in moments of doubt, something Kane does when nothing is coming through the midfield. So Kane drops back to create because he’s better at doing this than anyone behind him. It works at times. Against Brighton in the FA Cup he scored twice while still playing nine long forward passes from those deep pockets. But it has also become a sign of a clog in the works, as it was against Southampton where the midfield simply collapsed after half-time. Kane should be playing in front of midfielders who make him look good, save his legs and expand his own game, not twirling about in a space more authoritative teammates would insist he vacated. It is similar to what Lionel Messi ended up doing at Barcelona, filling holes, patching up his team on the go, delaying the necessary structural work. Conte has tried to rebalance this weakness by bringing in a greater depth of passing quality in the January window. The next six weeks will test how well he can finesse these adjustments on the hoof, and how successfully Kane can clarify his own role. For all the horrors of that defensive display in midweek, Spurs still have a manager who has won this league and a central striker with the chops to get them into the top four. “I am super happy,” Kane announced at the turn of the year. Wolves at home on Sunday is the next stage in a run that will test exactly how deep those feelings run.A “wonderful” three-year-old boy has died in hospital almost a week after a crash on a motorway in Wales that also killed a four-year-old girl. The boy, who cannot be named for legal reasons, had been travelling in a car on the M4 westbound carriageway, near Newport, when it was in a collision with a van on 5 February. There was a huge emergency services response and the road was closed for about seven hours last week. The boy’s family said he died on Friday at 4.30pm after almost a week of being treated in the intensive care unit at University Hospital of Wales, also known as the Heath hospital, in Cardiff. A family member told the PA news agency: “Unfortunately, after a week of fighting, he has passed away. He was wonderful, creative and a kind soul. Turned the grey skies blue.” Four-year-old Gracie-Ann Wheaton, from Tredegar, was also severely injured in the crash and died the following day. Gracie-Ann had been returning home from a birthday party, her cousin Jamie Lucas, said. Lucas, 19, paid tribute to Gracie-Ann, describing her as “just fantastic to be around”. He said: “I’m just trying to wrap my head around the fact that she’s gone; it’s hard to believe. “She was so young. She had a bright future ahead of her. She was such a wonderful child. I’m just lost for words really. How she was returning from a birthday party and all of a sudden she’s gone,” he said. “She was very smart, she was very creative. She had a really great imagination as well. She was just fantastic to be around.” The van driver, 41-year-old Martin Newman, of Croeserw, appeared at Newport magistrates court on Monday charged with causing death by dangerous driving and two offences of causing serious injury by dangerous driving in relation to the accident. Newman was remanded into custody until his hearing at Newport crown court on 21 February. Gwent police are urging anyone with dashcam footage of the collision, or any information that could help the investigation, to contact them on 101.On this year’s best new artist Grammy award shortlist (the ceremony is in April), Brit-winning pop revelation Olivia Rodrigo is battling it out with Billie Eilish’s brother, Finneas, and rapper Saweetie, among others; Arlo Parks is in the mix too. Gatecrashing this none-more-mainstream party, however, is a little-known electronic composer and jazz conservatoire graduate who sings songs of longing in her native Urdu. Arooj Aftab’s spellbinding music defies easy categorisation. Jazz, ambient and traditional forms such as the ghazal – a Persian/Pakistani form of poetry – are components, rather than complete accounts, of Aftab’s work, which is full of ancient sadness and modern compositional rigour. The point of her work is not to promote orientalist readings of traditional Pakistani music. Aftab’s is as much a New York state of mind (her current home) as it is a south Asian one. Singer Jeff Buckley is a relevant reference point; Aftab covered his cover of Hallelujah as a teenager and it went viral in Pakistan. Buckley, of course, admired the great qawwali singer Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan. Only one of Aftab’s mesmerising songs is in English: Last Night, a translation of a Rumi poem that meditates on a lover’s beauty. On her haunting third album, Vulture Prince (2021), it features a reggae rhythm. When she sings it starkly tonight, accompanied only by double bass and harp, Aftab repeats the song’s central melancholy phrase: “Last night, my beloved was like the moon, so beautiful,” eyes narrowed, hands fluttering. Each time, she imbues it with a different intonation in her velvety, reverb-laden voice. It all ends with a metaphorical mic drop as Aftab, gathering volume, declares her lover to be: “More beautiful than … the sun.” The crowd whoop their approval. You can see Aftab is slightly taken aback by this avid reception on a cold Monday night in Leeds. This gig was scheduled to be seated, but having sold most of the tickets and still fielding inquiries, she and the promoter agreed to ditch the seats to increase capacity. Some engrossing modular synth compositions by the support act, Jake Mehew, add to the feeling of a great, rather than a hushed, night out. Aftab is by now probably used to upending expectations. She arrives on stage wearing a sleeveless silver coat, like a Doctor Who villain, sipping whisky; Scottish harpist Maeve Gilchrist sports a similar iridescent dress. For an artist whose latest album is suffused with the sadness at the loss of her brother and a close friend, Aftab is also very funny. Her new label, she says, got her a stylist. “So that’s why I’m dressed like a can opener.” That high-profile Grammy nod is just the latest in a list of recent firsts for an artist who moved from Lahore to Boston aged 19 to study music and has since stationed herself in Brooklyn. Time magazine praised Aftab for releasing one of the best songs of 2021, Mohabbat, last spring; former US president Barack Obama put the track (also up for its own Grammy) on his influential summer playlist. Vulture Prince featured on a plethora of end-of-year charts. All of these events, she told an interviewer from Berklee College of Music (her alma mater), virtually melted her social media accounts when they happened, catapulting this previously niche artist into widespread renown. She’s now signed to jazz powerhouse label Verve, once home to names such as Nina Simone. So Billie Eilish has a fragrance? Aftab’s Bandcamp merchandise included (it has long since sold out) a Vulture Prince scent designed by an Egyptian Canadian perfumier to her specifications: “90s Lahore, huge oak trees, seasonal fruit, fire worship, empty space, [Prince’s] Purple Rain.” Tonight’s set – bar the encore – comes exclusively from Vulture Prince, a multilayered record replete with guitar, violin and flugelhorn that, despite the language barrier, seems to speak directly to anyone in any kind of pain. All the tracks have been reworked for Gilchrist’s harp and the double bass of Greek musician Petros Klampanis, a pared-down rendering that nonetheless packs an intoxicating punch. The most jazz thing about this setup is how Aftab encourages the players to extemporise – this is, in essence, a three-way conversation in which the sublime is summoned through multiple channels. On the extraordinary Suroor (Felicitation), Gilchrist plays what can only be described as a mean funk harp; at one point, both she and Klampanis percuss the bodies of their instruments. “It’s rude, how good they are,” notes Aftab of her musicians. “This will be the banger off the record,” she announces wryly as the set nears its end. The lighting tech turns some brights on to the spinning disco ball to howls of appreciation. This is, of course, Mohabbat (Love), the gateway drug for the album, and home to some of Aftab’s most elegiac intonations. The song concludes on a restrained shimmer of harp and the beat of one bass note, and Aftab’s voice – redolent of the cool of evening, but also of overwhelming emotion just kept at bay.My mother was Armenian, my father Jewish. My father died when I was seven and my mother never remarried. She lived the rest of her 50 years for me. It’s the greatest thing that happened to me – I had a mother who dedicated her entire life to her only son. I grew up in Baku, Azerbaijan, in the deep south of the USSR. Everybody spoke Russian because it was an imperial city. At 10, I was sent to the Young Pioneer Palace in Baku to learn how to play chess. It didn’t take long for me to see the gap between reality and propaganda. I was the first from my class to take a trip abroad, to France, when I was 13. Travelling was a big deal, even inside the Soviet Union. Travelling to other, capitalist countries was unheard of. Whether you spell Garry with a G or an H in Russian, you still pronounce it with a strong G. I was named after President Truman – Harry – whom my father admired for taking a strong stand against communism. It was a rare name in Russia, until Harry Potter came along. I stayed on top for 20 years because of my desire to be at the cutting edge – it was a never-ending process of exploration. This was my mother’s wisdom: as long as you challenge your own excellence, you’ll never be short of opponents. Was it painful to lose against [super-computer] Deep Blue? I’d never lost before, so I was furious. But 25 years later, I’d say it was a blessing. I became a pioneer. Though now more people know me as a consultant for The Queen’s Gambit than the man who lost to the IBM machine. The thing about jail that sticks in my memory is the sound when they lock the door. You understand you’re alone then, in a cage. I was lucky that I was arrested in what we now call the “vegetarian” times of Putin, when people ended up in jail for five or 10 days. For the same peaceful protest against Putin’s dictatorship, you might now end up in jail for five or 10 years. Running for president in 2007 was just a message. I was trying to demonstrate that the official Russian campaign was under the control of criminals. Putin is a dictator with blood on his hands. I’m retired, but I’m probably the strongest amateur chess player in the world. I still feel the responsibility. Chess gave me so much – global fame, publicity – and it helped me forge my character. Giving back to chess is somehow my duty. Chess still takes up about 25% of my time. I live in New York with my wife and two of my kids. For me, relaxation comes in shifting intellectual activities. My daughter, 15, has a great interest in literature – I help her with her debate topics. I’m doing a jigsaw with my six-year-old son: 600 pieces – a big one. When did I last cry? That’s easy: 25 December 2020, when my mother died. How Life Imitates Chess by Garry Kasparov is out now in paperback from Penguin. Buy it for £10.99 at guardianbookshop.com‘It’s still a panoptican, even if you’re dancing’ Being an Amazon delivery driver sure sounds like a blast: you get to see the world (well, part of it anyway) as you cruise the open road. Yes, the hours are gruelling. Yes, you sometimes have to pee in water bottles because there’s not enough time and no available facilities in which you can take a proper bathroom break. Yes, hauling heavy packages means you are at high risk of being injured on the job. Yes, creepy surveillance equipment tracks your every move. But you know what? You get the unparalleled satisfaction of knowing that your hard work is helping Jeff Bezos afford an obscenely large superyacht. And while the work may be difficult, there are also moments of joy: you get to jive on the job! According to Vice, TikTok users have started leaving notes in the Amazon app asking their delivery drivers to dance for their door cameras. Then these delightful people post the videos on social media. There are, I suppose, some delivery drivers who may enjoy being told to do a chicken dance as they drop off a package. But many of the drivers that Vice spoke to understandably found the dance requests demeaning and irritating. “I’ve only seen these requests in the app,” one driver from upstate New York said. “If they said it in person, I would probably smack the shit out of them.” And that driver would be justified: asking an Amazon worker to dance for your amusement is, to put it bluntly, deranged. It would appear that the PR suits at Amazon HQ would beg to differ. Amazon’s official TikTok account has been boosting the dystopic trend and sharing videos of delivery people dancing on command with cutesy little comments like “poppin’ and lockin’ while box droppin’”. It should be said, of course, that these drivers are not being forced to dance. It’s not as if Amazon is threatening anyone who ignores customers commands with 10 years of hard labour in Bezos’s space colonies. But there’s a thin line between officially requiring something of your workers and strongly incentivizing it. Amazon delivery drivers are tracked by AI-powered cameras and smartphone apps that monitor their behaviour and assign them a score at the end of the week. If you don’t behave exactly as Amazon dictates then you risk a low score and your livelihood is in jeopardy. Drivers are also rated by customers: too many bad reviews can get them fired. So it’s not exactly surprising that some drivers told Vice that they feel pressure to dance for the people who demand it. “Customer is king” is an age-old business mantra but thanks to new technology that king can very easily become a tyrant. Oklahoma Republicans want to put women considering abortions on a government database Continuing the dystopian theme: Republicans in Oklahoma have introduced a bill to the state legislature that would create a call center for pregnant women who want “pre-abortion” resources. What does this mean? It means a bunch of ghouls (“care agents”) at the end of the phone pressuring vulnerable women into not getting an abortion. People who contact the center are also given a “unique identifying number” to be registered and tracked in a database run by the state department of health. Per the bill, you would only be able to get an abortion if an abortion provider can confirm you’ve been given one of these numbers. Republicans excel at weaponizing bureaucracy to control women. Watch out for the Gazpacho! The extremist Republican congresswoman Marjorie Taylor Greene must have missed the memo about her party trying to control citizens through government databases because she went on a Twitter rant this week about “Nancy Pelosi’s gazpacho police”. Speaking to the Guardian, the Soup Nazi from Seinfeld said he found the whole thing soup-er disturbing. “How in the world can a grown person, who grew up in the 20th century, not know what the word Gestapo is?” he asked. “They say ‘You can’t write this shit.’ It’s beyond you can’t write this shit.” It certainly is. Anyway, if you’ve ever felt like you’re not qualified enough to forge a career in politics just remember that there are people like Greene in power. Adidas’s new sports bra advert is simply the breast More specifically it’s a picture of 25 pairs of bare breasts. The point of this? To highlight the diversity of women’s breasts, apparently. And, rather more obviously, to grab people’s attention. Everyone is talking about the advert now so job well done! Will it sell bras though? That is yet to be seen. Did Melania Trump spend $170,00 buying her own NFT? It looks suspiciously like she did. The gender divide in sports safety: female athletes are at higher risk for concussion It’s not clear why this is and experts are calling for more gender-specific research on the issue. One issue could be safety gear: Florida is the only state in the US, for example, which requires helmets for girls’ lacrosse even though they are standard for male players. This was a game-changer: a study found girls who played lacrosse in states that don’t require helmets had a 59% higher concussion rate. (As an aside, it’s funny to see Florida has no problem with certain safety mandates!) Australian men still twice as likely as women to earn more than $120,000 a year The overall gender pay gap has narrowed slightly however. Living in a woman’s body: a special series by the Guardian Do spend a bit of time with this brilliant collection of essays. I especially enjoyed this beautifully written piece by Dr Frances Ryan: “It is radical to love a body that the world says is wrong.” And Arifa Akbar has a brilliant essay on compulsory motherhood: “A capitalism of the body and mind that packaged up maternal instinct and sold it back to me.” Dua Lipa has launched a newsletter Yours truly has an article in the first edition, which just dropped. Subscribe here. The week in pawtriarchy A zoo in the UK hired a Marvin Gaye impersonator to serenade a group of endangered monkeys in the hopes that they’d “get it on” and keep their numbers up. “We thought it could be a creative way to encourage our females to show a little affection to males that might not have been so lucky in love,” park director Matt Lovatt said in a statement. Arwa Mahdawi’s new book, Strong Female Lead, is available for order.“So we beat on, boats against the current, borne back ceaselessly into the past.” It is one of the most memorable literary payoffs in history, the end of F Scott Fitzgerald’s defining novel of the 20th century, The Great Gatsby. Yet this famous ending will be lost to many readers thanks to the proliferation of substandard editions, one of which loses the last three pages and instead finishes tantalisingly halfway through a paragraph. Experts are warning that the freedom for anyone to reproduce or reimagine books once they are out of copyright is corrupting classic texts – all for the sake of making a quick buck. The Great Gatsby of 1925 is the quintessential novel of the hedonistic jazz age, the story of the mysteriously wealthy Jay Gatsby and his love for the beautiful Daisy Buchanan. It entered the public domain on 1 January 2021, after 95 years of copyright protection. Ernest Hemingway’s The Sun Also Rises, his 1926 novel about disillusioned expatriates in postwar France and Spain, came out of copyright protection last month. William Faulkner’s The Sound and the Fury and John Steinbeck’s The Grapes of Wrath are among classics that will follow soon. Alarm over the poor-quality editions of The Great Gatsby has inspired a study by James West, general editor of the Cambridge Edition of the Works of F Scott Fitzgerald and emeritus professor of English at Pennsylvania State University. He said that Fitzgerald would have been “appalled” by inferior editions: “The composition of The Great Gatsby was his finest hour. It’s a delicate work of literature and you hate to see it treated so roughly.” In his study, to be published next month in the F Scott Fitzgerald Review, West contrasts the focus on accuracy of Fitzgerald’s publisher, Scribner, with today’s “textual instability incarnate”. He pored over 34 new print editions released in the past year, from established and independent publishers and some that list neither the place nor publisher, although there are further digital ones: “Six are competently done, but the rest are rather careless, done just to pick up a slice of the yearly sales. While it was still in copyright, Scribner’s sold about half a million copies a year, which is remarkable for a backlist title.” To his dismay, 17 editions dropped Fitzgerald’s dedication to his wife, Zelda: “Her name has been erased – a serious problem … because she was Fitzgerald’s muse. She was partly the inspiration for Daisy Buchanan.” One edition is instead dedicated to individuals that only its publisher would recognise: “Dedicated to Logan and Olivia Barbrook/ May your lives be filled with wonderful stories, great adventures and happily-ever-afters, Love Mummy.” The first edition’s cover – artist Francis Cugat’s painting of a woman’s eyes hovering over an amusement park – is “probably the most famous jacket in all of American literature”, West said, with Fitzgerald particularly wanting it, saying that he had “written it into the book”. It may have inspired details such as Doctor TJ Eckleburg’s “blue and gigantic” eyes. It appeared on the novel’s numerous reprints, but not on the new editions. West despairs over one cover with “a languid-looking woman” whose dress style was probably meant to suggest the novel’s 1920s setting, but is instead reminiscent of Aubrey Beardsley, who died in 1898. Another depicts a couple next to what resembles “a Dodge Charger, the muscle car popular during the 1980s”. West writes that its text is also “bizarre”. “Fitzgerald’s words appear to have been translated into another language and then rendered back into English by an antic computer.” One passage begins: “Anyway, Miss Baker’s lips frizzed …” Fitzgerald’s original reads: “At any rate, Miss Baker’s lips fluttered.” Its final three pages are missing, even though the novel’s ending “drives home the meaning of the book”, West said. “Maybe they just ran out of pages.” Although The Great Gatsby went into the public domain in the UK in the early 1990s, the shoddy editions have emerged since the US copyright expired. Professor Kirk Curnutt, whose specialisms include Hemingway and Fitzgerald, said: “Any time a text goes into the public domain, there’s some anxiety about what’s going to happen. I don’t think the anxiety has been as intense as when The Great Gatsby went in. There are a lot of public domain editions of Gatsby that are just awful.” He believes that corrupt editions of The Beautiful and Damned, Fitzgerald’s 1922 novel about a couple awaiting an expected inheritance, have contributed to its “critical diminishment”. Several editions even got the title wrong, appearing as The Beautiful and the Damned, he despaired: “A pretty big mistake.” Asked how Hemingway would feel about such editions, Robert Trogdon, another scholar, said: “I don’t think he’d be pleased with new errors being introduced into his volumes. He was very upset with the changes that Jonathan Cape, his British publisher, made to his works for the sake of propriety.” Verna Kale, associate editor of the Hemingway Letters Project, said: “It can be good for a work to enter the public domain because it can actually give new life to a work that might have otherwise been lost. But works like Winnie-the-Pooh or The Sun Also Rises, works that are not at risk of obscurity, can actually be damaged by careless editing.”Dozens of mainly young “kill the bill” protesters have been charged with riot – the most serious public order offence – following clashes in Bristol last year. The decision by Avon and Somerset police and the Crown Prosecution Service appears to be the biggest use of riot charges against demonstrators since the 1980s. The force launched one of its largest investigations after a confrontation between riot police and protesters opposed to the police and crime bill – which will allow the police to curb protests – spiralled into violent clashes outside a police station in Bristol on 21 March last year. It has been accused of giving the impression of “revenge policing” and giving in to political influences. The police claimed mobs of people attacked officers, damaged police vans and a police station in a night of sustained violence. But MPs later heard evidence that the disorder was sparked by the police pepper-spraying and beating demonstrators taking part in a sit-down protest outside the station. The all-party parliamentary group (APPG) on democracy and the constitution also heard that the police’s use of force, including deploying dogs, batons, and shield strikes, known as “blading”, was often considered disproportionate in the days that followed. The report says it was not clear who struck first but that there was ‘“significant and serious” violence directed at police officers. At least 62 protesters reported injuries over the course of the week, including 22 with head wounds and seven who required hospital treatment, whereas 44 officers were hurt. The force withdrew widely reported claims that officers suffered broken bones and a punctured lung. Protesters charged with riot, which is rarely used and requires the sign-off of the director of public prosecutions, could face jail terms of up to 10 years. Analysis of Home Office figures shows only 22 people have been convicted of riot since 2011. Avon and Somerset police said it was still in the middle of one of its largest ever investigations after “police vehicles were damaged and set alight, officers were assaulted and our neighbourhood police station was vandalised during a riot in Bristol city centre on Sunday, 21 March 2021”. The charges against 38 protesters come amid growing concern from civil liberty groups that protesters are facing ever more serious public order charges, which could have an impact on the right to protest. Detectives are still seeking 34 people in connection with the Bristol clashes, so even more protesters could be charged with riot over the coming months. At least four of the people charged are homeless. Others have learning and mental health difficulties. Ryan Roberts – who attempted to set fire to occupied police vans in the most serious incidents of the night – has ADHD (attention deficit hyperactivity disorder) and was said to be living on the fringes of society. Roberts, of no fixed address, received a 14-year sentence in December. Many protesters face trials later this year but some have already gone to court. So far, 13 people have been sentenced to a total of more than 51 years in prison, including five charged with riot for kicking police shields, throwing items at police, kicking police station windows and hitting police vans. A woman was jailed for five months for urinating at the feet of an officer. Last week, Jasmine York, who was charged after she complained she was beaten by officers and mauled by a police dog at the protest, was cleared of riot by a jury. The court was shown footage of York, 26, being struck at least three times by batons and bitten by a police dog. She was convicted of a lesser charge of arson for pushing a wheelie bin towards a burning car and will be sentenced next month. Another woman, Mariella Gedge-Rogers, was found guilty of riot on Friday. Geraint Davies MP, the chair of the APPG on democracy and the constitution, which investigated the disturbances in Bristol, criticised the police. “They massively overreacted at the time and were found out after they misled the press and tried to mislead our inquiry,” he said. He questioned whether the riot charges appeared to be “seeking to punish peoplein an excessive and disproportionate way, not just for protesting but for challenging the police”. Davies added that the police should not be handed even more powers in the police and crime bill. “The police abuse the power they have but the government still want to give them all sorts of new powers to restrict protests. They need more accountability not less.” Avon and Somerset police added that the MPs’ report also recognised that officers faced real violence and hostility and put themselves on the line to keep people safe. The home secretary, Priti Patel, has taken an active interest in recent operational policing decisions in Bristol. She described the pulling down of the statue of slave trader Edward Colston in June 2020 as “utterly disgraceful” and demanded an explanation from the then-chief constable about why officers did not intervene. Patel and the prime minister, Boris Johnson, also backed the police’s version of events following the “kill the bill” protests in Bristol. Patel said the law-abiding majority would be appalled by the actions of a “criminal minority”, while Johnson gave the police his full support and branded the protest “a mob intent on violence”. Shami Chakrabarti, the former shadow attorney general, said she feared Avon and Somerset police had been influenced by the government’s increasingly harsh and authoritarian approach to public dissent. “Charging people with such serious public order offences is going to chill dissent and protest,” she said. “It is especially concerning when it comes after criticism of the force from the home secretary.” She added: “It is particularly worrying if people face serious charges after they have complained to the media about their treatment. Defensive and political policing only undermines public trust in the law.” Matt Foot, a criminal defence solicitor, who is co-writing a book on the policing of protests, said his research suggested the sheer number of demonstrators charged with riot in Bristol was almost unprecedented. “This is by far and away the biggest use of riot charges since the mid-1980s – and in all likelihood the most under the current public order act.”If Channel 4 were hoping for a game that had a bit of everything to mark the start of its Super League coverage, they will have been delighted with what they witnessed. For the first time in the competition’s history Super League was shown to the masses on free-to-air television and with an impressive build-up and fanfare from the broadcaster all week, when the hooter sounded at 12.30pm, the onus fell on the players to follow suit. They did not disappoint. You feared the worst after 16 minutes, when Leeds were reduced to 12 men after a tackle from James Bentley of the kind the sport’s authorities are determined to stamp out this year. With the quality Warrington possess it almost felt inevitable they would pull away and make the contest somewhat one-sided. But although Leeds ultimately fell short here, they should certainly be content with the effort they displayed and the role they played in what was a thrilling game for Channel 4 to showcase. “I’m incredibly proud of our boys,” their coach, Richard Agar, said. “We deserved to get something out of the game, but just energy-wise it got us. We dominated them for the best part of the game and were unfortunate not to get a result.” He certainly has a point, not least when you consider Leeds also played part of the first half with 11 men, after Brad Dwyer was sent to the sin-bin for a high tackle. They were 4-0 behind when Bentley was sent off after Gareth Widdop’s opening try, but the Rhinos rallied to incredible effect. Tries from Zane Tetevano and Matt Prior, both created by the industrious Dwyer, made it 12-4 in their favour. Warrington reduced that gap on the stroke of half-time when Josh Charnley finished a fine move in the right corner. There is little doubting that to that point, Daryl Powell’s first game as Warrington coach had not gone to plan. “We got rattled and we weren’t playing well,” he said of his side’s first-half display. This was as much about Leeds as it was Warrington, though. Any notion they would wilt after half-time failed to come to fruition and they went further ahead in the early stages of the second half. Their next try came when Ash Handley grounded a pinpoint kick from Aidan Sezer. Rhyse Martin converted and he would then add a penalty after Oliver Holmes became the third player to receive a card from Chris Kendall when he was sent to the sin-bin for a high tackle. Leeds were 20-10 ahead and were increasingly good value for that advantage. Warrington had to wake up and as the game edged towards the final 10 minutes they did. “Ultimately, we did some good things to win the game,” Powell said. : “You have to change your mentality with 10 minutes left and we started to do some of the things we should have done a bit earlier.” As Warrington chanced their arm, the openings in the exposed Leeds defence began to appear despite their magnificent effort. The Wolves reduced the gap to four when Charnley claimed his second try after Warrington kept the ball alive and you felt the pressure would prove decisive. Leeds fought valiantly but the winning try arrived with four minutes remaining, as Connor Wrench cut through. Stefan Ratchford still had to convert, but he did so from out wide expertly to make it 22-20. There were late chances for a Leeds try to snatch victory, but Warrington held on. The only people more satisfied than the Wolves, you suspect, were Channel 4. Their debut certainly delivered in terms of drama and entertainment. They will hope that continues all season long, as will any rugby league supporter.Ralf Rangnick branded this as unwanted deja vu for Manchester United. The interim manager drew comparison with the tales of two halves that were the draw at Burnley and the penalty shootout defeat by Middlesbrough. In those last outings United cruised before the interval and lost the plot after it. This time they again conceded after the tea and oranges though there was marginally more structure against a spirited Southampton. Rangnick said: “We were fully aware after the last couple of games that it was important to be as aggressive as we can. We told them we had to be aggressive, compact, not give them space,” he said of half-time. “After two minutes exactly that happened: we were in possession in their box and 10 seconds later conceded a goal. Very frustrating – not only for the coach but players as well. You saw their reaction with how disappointed they were after the goal. That’s one of our major problems: we have to be compact and able to defend.” Ralph Hasenhüttl, whose side lost 9-0 in last season’s corresponding fixture, offered a scathing assessment of United. “It’s not a big secret that when they lose the ball their reverse gear is not the best from everybody,” he said. Rangnick’s side began with a Marcus Rashford punt into the area that skipped past Cristiano Ronaldo and drew a thumbs-up from the Portuguese. When Jadon Sancho’s burst and pass did locate Ronaldo, he rounded the goalkeeper, Fraser Forster, but his weak shot was hacked clear by Romain Perraud. The goal-saving left-back act was soon mirrored at the other end by Luke Shaw. A breathless passage started when Kyle Walker-Peters turned a ball back towards an unmarked Ché Adams. At close range the striker could only shoulder it away from David de Gea and the net and when James Ward-Prowse blazed at the rebound in dived Shaw to block. Rangnick said beforehand that Ronaldo, restored to the team in place Edinson Cavani, and his fellow forwards had to score more – an exhortation seen by some as stating the obvious. Really, though, it was a stark message to Ronaldo, Sancho, Rashford and Bruno Fernandes that 16 goals in the German’s 12 matches was paltry for players whose salaries include a large chunk for scoring. Sancho was about to do just this and could thank Rashford, who provided his second league assist of the season. Fernandes was key, too, his raking ball allowing Rashford to race in along the right: on seeing Sancho at the far post, the cross was perfect, the England international scoring a fourth this term. So far, so good. Diogo Dalot and Shaw were sharp at the back, Scott McTominay proved muck or nettles from midfield – demonstrated by a dumping of Mohamed Elyounoussi that drew a booking – and Paul Pogba was a silken-skilled bully who bossed the danger area. Hasenhüttl’s unit, though, would not be dominated and handed United a scare when Mohammed Salisu’s throw-in was inadvertently flicked on by Pogba for Stuart Armstrong to take aim at De Gea, who saved. January’s Premier League player of the month did the same moments later when lunging left to stop a Perraud skimmer. United’s recent league record was draw, win, win, draw, defeat, win: in microcosm, the tale of a campaign to forget. And now came the second‑half-itis United are suffering from, their midfield and rearguard in slumberland as Elyounoussi received the ball and pinged it to Adams. The No 10’s finish, in off De Gea’s far post, was pinpoint. Hasenhüttl leaped on to the pitch in jubilation, Rangnick was stoney-faced. Next, Armando Broja skipped into position to fire at De Gea, who turned the ball away for a corner. From the delivery Fernandes went close to heading past his keeper in trying to clear. United did move upfield and Forster had to repel a Harry Maguire prod from Shaw’s free-kick, before the keeper beat away Ronaldo and Dalot attempts. Hasenhüttl’s histrionics were on show again when Armstrong blasted over: no one could blame the manager as here was a golden chance to win it. Broja, too, should have done so when the excellent Elyounoussi slipped him in but the striker’s radar was awry. Maguire’s late header from Shaw’s free-kick so nearly grabbed victory but Forster saved, once more Southampton’s hero. In a congested race for the top four the draw was not enough to lift United from fifth place in the continuing pattern of fits-and-starts progress under Rangnick. Hasenhüttl said: “We were not so bad.” This was an understatement.Jamie Jackson was at Old Trafford, and his verdict has landed. Off you click! Thanks one and all for reading this MBM. ... and now BT have a word with Ralf Rangnick. “Unfortunately, again, it is very similar to the last couple of games. A very good first half hour, we did all the things we intended to do with the counter attacks and deep runs, it’s the way we created and prepared a great goal. But we stopped doing that, and in the second half we lost a bit of shape. We struggled to defend them in transition. We had enough chances in the last 20 minutes to score again, the expected-goal ratio was clearly in our favour, but in the end we didn’t get the result we wanted to. On the one hand, we have to respect that Southampton played well, they are not easy to play against. But we lost composure, and took the wrong decisions, sometimes under pressure, sometimes not. This is where we have to get better. We told them to be aggressive and stay compact, not give them any space, this is exactly what we told them, but it is a different thing to play like that on the pitch. We are all disappointed but we must look forward to Brighton.” Ralph Hasenhuttl speaks to BT. “We had one day less to recover, we had heavy legs. It took a little bit to get into our rhythm, but we started playing football in the second half. They had a better first half, we had a better second half, so the draw, we take it. There were chances on both sides, but when we started playing football we dominated the game and it was good to watch. We definitely had chances to win. It is a fantastic time in this moment, we are good to watch, it’s the way we want to go.” Man-of-the-match Che Adams talks to BT. “We’ve had a great week this week, and it just keeps building and building. Everyone’s delighted with a big performance. Personally it’s nice to be amongst the goals, but more importantly it’s the points on the board, and we’ve done that with a huge display today. Everyone knows we’re a pressing team, that’s what we do well, and when we press teams, not many teams can handle it. When everyone’s at it, like they were today, we can beat anyone. It was a big performance today against a great team.” That’s another two points dropped by Manchester United in their chase for a top-four finish. A point isn’t enough to bust them into the top four, and they’re also now under serious pressure from Arsenal and Tottenham Hotspur, both looming large in the rear-view mirror with games in hand. Saints meanwhile consolidate their position in the top ten, where they’ll stay for 24 hours at the very least. Both teams could have won it, but this seems about right on balance. Once again, United fail to convert a half-time lead into a win. A smattering of boos as the whistle goes. 90 min +5: Nothing comes of the throw. Varane then launches a Hail Mary which is shepherded out of play by Stephens for a goal kick. 90 min +4: United are pressing hard here. They win a throw deep in Saints territory on the left flank. Before it can be taken, Diallo comes on for Romeu, and on BT Sport, Martin Keown names Che Adams as man of the match. 90 min +3: Maguire nearly scored from the last free kick coming in from the left, and he nearly scores from this one. He heads down marvellously, towards the bottom right. Forster scoops it out at the very last with the tips of his fingers! Then those fingers are brushed by the boot of Fernandes, as the keeper takes an age to claim the loose ball. Fernandes was within his rights to go for that, but Forster holds on. 90 min +2: Adams hangs out a leg to stop Lingard down the left. A free kick in a very dangerous position, and a chance to load the box. Fernandes to take. 90 min +1: Broja dribbles into the United box from the left. Again he hesitates when you’d expect a shot. United swarm and eventually clear. 90 min: Lingard is booked for impatiently clattering Adams from behind. There will be five extra minutes. Plenty of time for drama! 89 min: Saints want a penalty, because Maguire clanked straight into Broja, knocking him over like a skittle, and then accidentally stood on his leg for good measure. They’re not getting one, though. 88 min: A long rake down the Saints left. Maguire should clear, but is brushed aside with absurd ease by Broja, who breaks into the box. Broja hesitates when you’d expect him to shoot, allowing Maguire to get back and barge the player over, then shepherd the ball out for a goal kick. 87 min: United found a late winner here against West Ham three weeks ago. Can they dig themselves out of another hole? 85 min: Pogba and Livramento come together out on the Saints right. The United man clips his opponent. There’s nothing much in it, but such is his reaction to the award of a foul - he shoves Stephens - that he goes into the book. Some ranting and raving, also involving Fernandes, ensues, but the referee’s not for budging. Nothing comes of the resulting free kick. 83 min: Fernandes attempts to chip into the Saints box, but his pass is blocked. Saints counter at speed though Armstrong, who slips Walker-Peters into the box down the right. Walker-Peters has options in the middle, but goes for goal himself, and his shot is charged down. 82 min: The Old Trafford faithful chant “Attack! Attack! Attack!” and so Rangnick responds by replacing the quiet Rashford with Lingard. 80 min: Fernandes wedges a lovely ball down the right for Rashford, who strides into the box and sends a harmless bobble across the face of goal. United asking a few questions again, after that period of Saints supremacy. 78 min: ... United intercept and counter. Sancho rakes a glorious ball wide right for Dalot, who steams towards the Saints box. But the Saints defence once again holds firm. Dalot tries to dink Elanga clear into the box with a pass down the channel, but a combination of Foster and Stephens shuts the door. 77 min: Walker-Peters chases a long pass down the right. Shaw gets there first, but only sends a nervy backpass wide of the United box. De Gea does very well to stop the ball going out for a corner. Throw deep in United territory, from which ... 75 min: McTominay won’t get the chance to further test the referee’s patience. He’s replaced by Elanga, as United go for the winner that would boost their top-four hopes. 74 min: Both teams appear to be in the mood to search for a winner. Hold on to those titfers, folks. 72 min: Fernandes swings the free kick into the mixer. Saints bravely hold their line on the edge of the box. Ronaldo is clear and heads home from close range, but the flag correctly goes up for offside. United have had two goals disallowed now, though to be fair, both were blatantly off. 71 min: Elyounoussi hangs out a leg to bring down Pogba out on the United right. It’s his last act of the afternoon: before the free kick is taken, he’s replaced by Livramento. 69 min: Broja strides down the middle. He’s got Adams free to his left, but opts to shoot himself. Blocked. Saints are getting wasteful now. 68 min: McTominay comes crashing into the back of Broja. It’s just a free kick, but he’s already been booked, and may need to rein it in a bit, if he’s not to test the referee’s patience. 67 min: Elyounoussi bombs down the inside-right channel and slips Broja into the United box. Broja draws De Gea but gets his dink over the keeper all wrong. The ball squirts straight left instead of going forward, and United can hack clear. Saints have had their chances. They’re opening United up easily. 65 min: Saints paint some pretty triangles, Romeu, Adams and Broja combining from left to right. Romeu suddenly sprays a pass to Armstrong, in acres to the right of the D. Armstrong carelessly sends a hot-blooded effort miles over the bar, giving De Gea nothing to do when a goal looked more likely than not. Armstrong has snatched at a couple of very decent opportunities now. 63 min: Adams scampers into a bit of space down the left, then flicks a ball along the channel for Broja. Maguire, the subject of no little ire after his display at Turf Moor, shows admirable strength against the troublesome Broja to hold the striker off and clear. 61 min: Much better from United: Dalot has a whack from a tight angle on the right. Forster blocks out for a corner. From the set piece, the ball’s looped long for Pogba, who tries to Mark Hughes a bicycle kick into the net from six yards. He doesn’t connect properly and it’s a goal kick. 60 min: A long rake down the left finds Ronaldo free on the edge of the box. Ronaldo pelts straight at Forster, who parries. Better from United. 58 min: Ward-Prowse and Fernandes tussle in anticipation of a throw coming their way. They wrestle awhile, then the red mist descends on Fernandes, who throws a vicious right hander! Fortunately for everyone involved, he misses his target completely, connecting only with thin air. The referee comes across to tell everyone to simmer down. 57 min: Walker-Peters concedes a slightly unfortunate free kick out on the United left, the ball hitting his arm as it drops over his shoulder, the player looking the other way. The free kick is sent into the mixer, and from the middle of a hectic clump of people, Maguire prods goalwards, six yards out. The shot’s straight at Forster, who hacks off his line and away! 55 min: Nothing comes from the corner, but at the moment Saints are brimful with confidence. Old Trafford has fallen quiet as a result, with the exception of the away support, who are giving it plenty. 54 min: Broja barrels down the middle and sends a powerful riser towards the top right. De Gea does extremely well to tip around for a corner. Shaw meanwhile is fortunate to escape a booking for a desperate shirt tug earlier in the move. 52 min: Walker-Peters romps at pace down the inside-right channel. He’s got options on both sides. He opts for Armstrong, in a central position to his left. Armstrong takes a first-time swipe, and drags harmlessly wide right. Had he taken a second to think - and he had time - he would surely have slipped Adams completely clear down the inside left. United get away with one; they were caught very short at the back there. 51 min: Fernandes finds a little space down the right, reaching the byline and wedging into the middle. There’s nobody there, though, and Stephens can clear. 50 min: Ronaldo threatens to break into space down the right but the new boy Stephens slides in to whip the ball off his toe. Forster completes the tidying-up job. 49 min: United really need a response here, because this game-of-two-halves thing is becoming a habit. On the balance of play, though, it’s no more than Saints deserve. This is a wonderful goal. The move starts with Foster, who passes out to Perraud on the left. The ball’s shuttled up the flank to Elyounoussi, who slides Adams clear with a sliderule pass down the channel. Adams enters the box, opens his body, and sidefoots powerfully across De Gea, off the base of the right-hand post, and in! 47 min: McTominay’s blind backpass nearly lets in Adams, but De Gea has spotted the danger, and races out of his box to bash clear in plenty of time. United get the ball rolling again. Saints have made what appears to be an enforced change, replacing Bednarek with Stephens at the back. Half-time entertainment. A big derby coming up in the WSL. Suzanne Wrack sets the scene. Ronaldo is found in acres down the left by Shaw’s raking pass. He’s miles offside, but the flag stays down. Ronaldo rolls across for Pogba, who slams home. Then the flag goes up. Just the one for United at half time, then. Can they keep this up for two halves this time, something they couldn’t do against Middlesbrough or Burnley? Saints may have other plans. 45 min: There will be two added minutes. Shame there won’t be 22. This has been a highly entertaining half of football, both teams contributing to the fun. 44 min: BREAKING NEWS. It’s raining heavily in Manchester. 43 min: Perraud, dancing into the United box from the left, does his best to replicate the famous Ricky Villa dribble from the 1981 FA Cup final replay. He beats a couple of men with a dropped shoulder here, a shake of the hips there, but his attempt to sweep into the bottom right is easily snaffled by De Gea. 42 min: United go up the other end, Ronaldo probing down the inside right, Rashford having a look down the opposite channel. Neither can quite fashion the space for a strike on goal. 41 min: United fail to deal with Perraud’s long throw from the left. Pogba’s weak header drops to Armstrong, not particularly invitingly. Armstrong twists in mid air and improvises a volley, the ball slightly behind him. He sends a clever effort towards the top right from 12 yards, but can’t get enough purchase on it, and it’s a fancy-looking but fairly easy claim for De Gea. 39 min: The corner’s worked back to Romeu, who drags a tame long-distance drive harmlessly wide left. 38 min: Armstrong pings a pass through United’s press for Elyounoussi, who whips an instant ball down the right for Broja. The young on-loan Chelsea striker wins a corner. 37 min: Walker-Peters curls in low and hard from the right. Broja doesn’t attack the ball, six yards out, perhaps aware he was a yard offside. Old Trafford draws its collective breath. 36 min: Saints have worked their way back into the match after a shaky period following the goal. They’re currently winning most of the 50-50s in the middle of the park. 34 min: Armstrong and Romeu combine cutely down the inside-right channel. A one-two opens up a shooting opportunity for Armstrong, who fizzes a low drive wide right. Not miles away, but De Gea had it well covered had it been on target. 33 min: Elyounoussi limps to the sideline, then comes back on. Good news for Saints, as the Norway winger is on form at the minute. 32 min: Elyounoussi is still down, shaking his head. Maguire meanwhile isn’t happy with the booking, though he doesn’t have much of a case, and the referee tells him as much. 31 min: McTominay fouls Elyounoussi twice in the space of 60 seconds or so. The second is a saucy stamp on the Saints man’s heel, and the United midfielder goes into the book. 29 min: After a fairly even start, the goal has firmly tipped the balance in United’s favour. Southampton aren’t offering so much in attack now. 27 min: Perraud bowls Pogba to the floor and it’s a free kick out on the right. Fernandes wedges it down the channel, looking for Pogba. He nearly finds him clear, too, but the ball just evades the World Cup winner and sails through to Forster. 25 min: They also like a comeback, though. Tottenham Hotspur can testify. Walker-Peters has a look down the right, but his cross is hoicked clear by Maguire. 23 min: That was a rapier thrust of a counter. A classic old-school United goal. It’s only a wonder they took so long. Saints are very open at the back. Sancho scores his first Premier League goal at Old Trafford! Fernandes strokes a long pass down the right to release Rashford into acres. Saints are woefully open. Rashford could have a go himself, but rolls across to tee up Sancho instead. Sancho beats the sliding Walker-Peters and slots into the bottom left! 20 min: Adams and Elyounoussi take turns to probe down the left. Saints are getting some joy down this flank, perhaps a result of Dalot’s desire to attack. 18 min: Dalot glides in from the right and looks to release a couple of red shirts with a sliderule pass. It’s blocked by Romeu on the edge of the Southampton box. This match is very easy on the eye. 16 min: Rashford comes sliding in hysterically on Perraud, a pointless 101 mph leg-clearing tackle, and it’s a no-brainer of a booking. Lucky he kept his studs from view, or that would have been serious bother. 15 min: Elyounouissi and Armstrong attempt to pull off a cute combination from the corner, but mess it up. United go up the other end, and had Pogba’s cross from the right been more accurate, Ronaldo would have been found free in the middle, six yards out. Goal kick, though. 14 min: Elyounoussi, happy to roam, pops up on the right wing and wins the first corner of the afternoon. 12 min: Dalot rakes a long pass down the right, looking for Fernandes. For a second, it looks as though Bruno will trap and round the out-rushing Foster on the outside, but he can’t control. Goal kick. This game finished 9-0 last season. It could feasibly end 9-9 this time, the way these two teams are carrying on. 11 min: Incidentally, there was a warm embrace before kick-off between Rangnick and Hasenhuttl, the pair having worked together at RB Leipzig. Hasenhuttl for Old Trafford next season? Ralf’s got to pick someone. 9 min: This match is gloriously absurd. Elyounoussi crosses from the left. Walker-Peters hooks back across goal from the right. Adams slips, and instead of heading home from six yards, knocks the ball the wrong way with his shoulder. Armstrong’s drive is blocked, and United counter at warp speed, Sancho skittering down the left and having a dig that’s cleared. The aforementioned game in the multiverse is now 3-3 after nine minutes. 7 min: Sancho burns down the left and slips Ronaldo clear down the channel. Ronaldo rounds Forster on the left and looks to roll into the empty net ... only to be denied by the covering Perraud, who stops and clears. This is great fun! In a parallel universe, it’s 2-2 already. 6 min: Adams has a dig from the best part of 30 yards. It betrays his confidence but achieves little else. 5 min: It’s an open start all right, with Sancho working his way down the left and looking for Fernandes with a pass down the channel. Romeu gets a toe in to divert back to Forster. 4 min: Rashford swings one in from the right. Ronaldo can’t reach it at the far stick. Both teams now have one delicious ball to their name. 2 min: Broja skins Varane down the right and rolls a tasty ball across the face of the United goal. Elyounoussi couldn’t keep up. Had he been able to do so, he’d have had a tap in. Old Trafford collectively gasps then sighs in relief. Saints get the ball rolling ... but only after everyone takes the knee. Warm applause. There’s no room for racism. The teams are out! Manchester United’s red forces Southampton into second-choice yellow and blue. This is the one, according to Ian, John, Mani and Reni. We’ll be off in a couple of minutes. Ralph Hasenhuttl talks to BT Sport. “Hopefully we will do better than last time! This is always a tough place to go. We have had some good games here. We have not had a long time to prepare, Wednesday evening to Saturday lunchtime is not so long, so it’s hard for the players, but we are ready. The guys are full of self-confidence, so let’s keep on going.” Ralf Rangnick speaks to BT. “A consistent 90 minutes is exactly what we need against an in-form team like Southampton. We played extremely well in both first halves against Middlesbrough and Burnley but only being 1-0 up you are never on the safe side, and that’s why we need this level of performance today for 90, 94, 95 minutes. We have had 66 shots on goal in the last three games and just scored three, and that’s not enough.” Some pre-match reading. Specifically designed for your entertainment and edification. Cristiano Ronaldo is back for Manchester United. He’s the one and only change to the team that started Tuesday’s 1-1 draw at Burnley. Edinson Cavani makes way. Southampton are unchanged. No big surprise there, given Ralph Hasenhuttl’s delight at his side’s performance in the 3-2 win at Tottenham on Wednesday. Manchester United: de Gea, Dalot, Varane, Maguire, Shaw, Pogba, McTominay, Rashford, Bruno Fernandes, Sancho, Ronaldo. Subs: Jones, Mata, Lingard, Henderson, Alex Telles, Wan-Bissaka, Elanga, Mejbri, Lindelof. Southampton: Forster, Walker-Peters, Bednarek, Salisu, Perraud, S Armstrong, Ward-Prowse, Romeu, Elyounoussi, Broja, Adams. Subs: Stephens, Long, A Armstrong, Caballero, Djenepo, Smallbone, Livramento, Diallo, Valery. Referee: Stuart Attwell (Warwickshire). After dropping a couple of points at Burnley during the week, Manchester United really need all three this lunchtime as they continue fighting for a top-four finish. What sort of resistance Southampton put up depends very much on which way you look at it: they shipped nine goals here last February, albeit having been reduced to ten men after 79 seconds, but on the other hand won at Spurs three evenings ago with a performance full of - some positive italics this time - joie de vivre. There are usually goals when these two meet - 29 in the last seven meetings - so here’s to some more this afternoon. Kick off is at 12.30pm GMT. It’s on!A Trump-appointed federal judge has blocked the Biden administration’s attempt to put greater emphasis on potential damage from greenhouse gas emissions when creating rules for polluting industries. The move represents a blow to Joe Biden’s efforts to bring America more back in line with global efforts to fight the climate crisis after the Trump era, when the US largely turned its back on measures that might have helped limit emissions. It also shows the impact of Donald Trump’s judicial appointees, which were overwhelmingly conservative and will have impact far beyond Trump’s single term in office. US district judge James Cain of the western district of Louisiana sided with Republican attorneys general from energy producing states who said the administration’s action to raise the cost estimate of carbon emissions threatened to drive up energy costs while decreasing state revenues from energy production. The judge issued an injunction that bars the Biden administration from using the higher cost estimate, which puts a dollar value on damages caused by every additional ton of greenhouse gases emitted into the atmosphere. Biden on his first day in office restored the climate cost estimate to about $51 a ton of carbon dioxide emissions after the Trump administration had reduced the figure to about $7 or less a ton. Trump’s estimate included only damages felt in the US versus the global damages captured in higher estimates that were previously used under the Obama administration. The estimate would be used to shape future rules for oil and gas drilling, automobiles and other industries. Using a higher cost estimate would help justify reductions in planet-warming emissions, by making the benefits more likely to outweigh the expenses of complying with new rules. Known as the social cost of carbon, the damage figure uses economic models to capture impacts from rising sea levels, recurring droughts and other consequences of climate change. The carbon cost estimate had not yet been used very much under Biden, but is being considered in a pending environmental review of oil and gas lease sales in western states. Economist Michael Greenstone, who helped establish the social cost of carbon while working in the Obama administration, said if the ruling stands, it would signal the US is again unwilling to confront the climate crisis. “The social cost of carbon guides the stringency of climate policy,” said the University of Chicago professor. “Setting it to near-zero Trump administration levels effectively removes all the teeth from climate regulations.” Republican attorneys general led by Louisiana’s Jeff Landry said the Biden administration’s revival of the higher estimate was illegal and exceeded its authority by basing the figure on global considerations. The other states whose officials sued are Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, Mississippi, South Dakota, Texas, West Virginia and Wyoming. Landry’s office issued a statement calling Cain’s ruling “a major win for nearly every aspect of Louisiana’s economy and culture”. Friday’s ruling by Cain follows a ruling by another Louisiana judge last summer that struck down a separate Biden attempt to address greenhouse gas emissions by suspending new oil and gas leases on federal lands and water. The judge in that case, US district judge Terry Doughty, is also a Trump appointee.Thousands of lives could be saved if more people knew the early symptoms of a heart attack, NHS England has said as it launched a campaign urging people to call 999 earlier. Research by NHS England found three in four people confused a heart attack, which has symptoms that do not always feel severe, with a cardiac arrest. “Sadly, cardiovascular disease causes a quarter of all deaths across the country and we have identified this as the single biggest area where we can save lives over the next decade,” said Stephen Powis, NHS England’s medical director. The new Help Us Help You drive encourages people to call 999 earlier and educates people about symptoms such as sweating, uneasiness and chest tightness. Only 41% of 2,022 people polled knew sweating is a heart-attack symptom. That dropped to just 27% of people who knew feeling weak, lightheaded or generally uneasy are symptoms. Powis continued: “It can be easy to dismiss early symptoms as they don’t always feel severe, but it is never too early to dial 999 in this circumstance – and the faster you act, the better the chance of a full recovery.” England has more than 80,000 hospital admissions for heart attacks a year. The survival rate, of seven in 10 people, rises to nine in 10 for those who get early hospital treatment. The campaign is backed by celebrities including Sky Sports presenter Peter Dale and actor and director Richard Wilson, who have both experienced heart attacks. “I had no idea that I was experiencing symptoms of a heart attack,” said Dale, who was 36. “On the morning of the attack, I went home after playing football thinking I had indigestion – I just didn’t feel quite right and both of my arms started to feel numb.” Dale said he managed to text his mum, who called an ambulance, and paramedics told him it was a heart attack. “People need to be aware of the symptoms – it’s not a case of clutching your chest and falling to the ground. Early signs aren’t always severe but if you experience any symptoms, call 999,” Dale said. “Acting quickly saved my life.” In the 1960s, more than seven in 10 heart attacks in the UK were fatal. Now, at least 7 in 10 people survive, with 1.1 million survivors living in England. Wilson, 85, said his heart attack exerted a long-term toll. “I got more tired, I’m able to walk around less and my memory has suffered as well. The scariest part is that at the time I did not know enough about heart attacks or heart health,” he said. According to the NHS, a heart attack is when blood supply to the heart is blocked, dangerously starving the body of oxygen, but people are often conscious and breathing. A cardiac arrest – which can be provoked by a heart attack – is when the heart stops suddenly, with people losing consciousness and often dying in minutes without treatment. Wilson added: “I’d advise everyone, especially those aged 50 and over, to look up the symptoms of a heart attack and if you suspect you have any of these to call 999 immediately.”Philippa Perry: ‘Your partner is not responsible for your happiness, you are’ Him: “What are you doing?” Me: “I’ve got to write 500 words on ‘keeping love alive’, before I go out.” Him: “What? In case it all changes, when you go?” In other words, my husband even after more than 30 years of near-functioning togetherness is taking nothing for granted, or he is exercising his terrific sense of humour. Or maybe he’s got a point – perhaps I’ll have an epiphany in the Co-op and we’ll have to re-evaluate everything. But as for formulas for a happy union, one size will not fit all, what one couple may need to do more of, another couple should do less. For one couple, it might work if they believe you shouldn’t sweat the small stuff. For others, it might work better if niggles are brought into the open before they get too big. Some swear by openness, and others, the judicious use of deceit, or tactfulness as it’s often called. We are not equations, we are humans. We are formed by different genes, cultures and ongoing experiences. We don’t all need the same thing, or even stay still – so it is likely that what worked for a couple at the beginning of their relationship might need to come under review later on. I cannot give you a fail-safe recipe for lasting love, I’m doubtful about the universal applicability of the following tips, but if any of them resonate with you, they might be useful. 1. Aim for mutual understanding over gaining victories over each other. I don’t recommend entering a relationship believing love will conquer your personal demons and, then, when it doesn’t, blaming your partner for you not feeling happier. Remember your partner is not responsible for your happiness, you are. 2. Remember loving touch. Personally I’m fond of a bit of skin on skin, but one person’s skin on skin is another person’s being tied up in the broom cupboard – takes all sorts. Nobody, not even your partner, knows exactly what it is like to be you and you cannot ever know what it is like to be someone else. But to have someone who knows and sees most of you, stays interested about you as you evolve and you stay curious about them, then as years pass your mutual knowing deepens… That, I think, grows intimacy, although it could be the not-knowing part of this, that advantages physical intimacy. 3. Commit to each other. If you have one foot in Plan B, you won’t be giving everything to Plan A. You find out what you each want if either of you are not to go mad and you compromise, so you each get a bit of what you need. You find out what you can stand, they find out what they can stand, then you work together to see if you can stand it. Sometimes, you can more than stand it, it can make you both better people. Happy Valentine’s. PP Dr John Gottman: ‘It’s about always thinking for two’ The one core thing is having the motto: “When you’re upset, the world stops and I listen.” That’s what (the data shows) separates great relationships from bad ones. I carry a notebook and pen in my back pocket at all times. So, when my wife, Julie, says those four most terrifying words – “We need to talk” – I can whip out my pad and say, “I’m listening, what’s the matter?” Once, she spoke for two hours. I was jotting down what was being said the whole time. When we look at how couples have maintained loyalty, there’s something very simple that is always present. It’s about always thinking for two. Even when I’m alone, Julie is a constant presence in my mind. The decisions I make, even on my own, are about our benefit – not just mine. One time, Julie and my daughter were in a pottery shop. Not interested, I sat outside. And then this rare event happened: an attractive woman started flirting with me. I was flattered and could have enjoyed it. But, wanting to build trust and commitment, I said: “You’ll enjoy this pottery shop. My wife and daughter do.” That’s what commitment looks like. And, while it’s comforting to think that when you’re truly in love everything just works out, in truth that’s not everything. There’s actually much more to it, right from the start. The beginnings of relationships are all about building trust, scoping out whether we can rely on each other. Once that trust is established, we turn to the question of commitment: are you committed to both me and us? Feel empowered; be proactive. Whether or not a relationship works isn’t down to chance alone. MS gottman.com Dr Orna Guralnik: ‘Sit and listen; hear without interruption’ Whether based on the relationships we see depicted in popular culture, our own previous experiences, or those of the people we grew up with, we all have what I call an “inner object of couple”. We each come into relationships with expectations; templates of what we assume couplehood should be. That can become a struggle needing negotiation: your partner will come with their own visions. We don’t always need to be in sync: there’s nothing to fear in your partner growing and changing, it’s only natural and will contribute to your sense of aliveness. Don’t be scared, but see it as an opportunity: your partner can function as a thorn agitating for your development and growth, too. Counterintuitive as it may sound, communication probably isn’t the problem in your relationship, but the symptom. People often construct this theory – that they’re struggling to communicate – but this is usually just a manifestation of an underlying issue. We create communication problems when we don’t want to hear or say what’s actually going on. Finding ways to communicate better is fairly straightforward, it’s often superficial. So, I start by asking people to describe the difficulty they’re having communicating. It might be interruption or hyper-excitement; getting too angry or shutting down. Once that is identified and cleared up, you can turn to the task of listening: make a clear distinction between when you’re in listening and expressing mode. Take turns deciding when one of you is communicating, and then sit and listen, hear without interruption. When speaking, monitor your own emotional state, and make sure you’re not shut down or overwhelmed. There’s an “optimal zone of emotional engagement” beyond which conversation stops being of use. If you find you’re going too far in one way or another, just take a break, rather than keeping at it and hoping for the best. And then, pause. Don’t do anything for a while afterwards. If you can create that space, putting the different positions on the table, we are inclined to solve the problem in front of them, it’s in our genes. MS Couples Therapy is on Mondays at 10pm on BBC2; all episodes available on BBC iPlayer Nedra Glover Tawwab: ‘Be clear from the get go about what you want’ State your needs and ask questions early on. When dating, we’re often not asking the right things. I’ve spoken to many couples who are married and are only then talking about whether they want to have children or not. Why wait so long? These are conversations to have at the beginning. Are these big questions, or are we just treating them like they are? We overthink what we can talk about in regular conversation. If it feels a like struggle to bring these topics up, find a natural segue: did you see the news that… [some celebrity] is pregnant? That can open up a conversation about kids; do you have any friends’ weddings this summer? And then decide: should I be dating people who want very different things from me? In some cases the answer will be no. We’re inclined to compromise on things that really matter to us when we meet new folks because we want to keep them around, but that may very well present problems down the line. If you carry one, at least you’ll make an informed decision. Be clear from the get go about what you want. Yes, on all that big stuff, but on the little things, too. Often we do this in relation to physical attributes. You might want someone tall, with a moustache and a neat haircut. That’s not a bad thing, but we need to think beyond physical attributes. If dating someone who follows you on social media, laughs at corny jokes and takes a real interest in your career really matters, then also look for those details. They’ll impact your daily life for a lot longer as you age and looks fade. Be sure to tell your partner what you need, and repeat yourself regularly. It’s easy to feel as if you’ve told your partner something twice and end up feeling frustrated with them for not remembering, when in fact we need to ask four or five times for it to sink in. And, I’m biased, but do see a therapist. Certainly not just when you’ve hit a crisis point. The couples who do better use therapy as a preventative tool, rather than a last resort when (ultimately) minds have already been made up. It’s not a failure, admitting defeat, but allowing an expert set of eyes to guide and support you. Maybe start at home: I always recommend co-reading a relationship book. Both take a chapter, then sit and discuss how it’s relevant to you. MS nedratawwab.com Dr Julie Gottman: ‘Learn how to have healthy conflicts’ Couples really needn’t be compatible. Conflict? It’s not a bad thing. That’s a myth. In Northern Europe and North America, we tend to believe feelings should be damped down – particularly anger. But there’ll always be significant differences between two people. When you couple up, you’re picking a set of perpetual problems you’ll have with a partner. Instead of shying away, learn how to have healthy conflicts, and how to find resolutions or acceptance. When conflicts arise, always remember to describe yourself and not your partner. The biggest mistake couples make is to raise a complaint with criticism: “You’re so lazy, you never clean up the kitchen.” Our research shows there’s no such thing as constructive criticism in relationships. It will make anyone defensive. Instead, say how you feel about the situation and then state your positive needs: “I’m upset that the kitchen is still a mess, would you please clean it up?” Simply tell your partner how they can shine for you. On the bigger issues, don’t be too quick to try to rush to a resolution. When tension arises, sit together with it and explore it. Ask each other questions, like what’s your dream here? Why is this important to you? Seeing it as an opportunity to listen and learn about each will help soften the space between you, leading to more compassion. Stagnation isn’t insurmountable, there are ways to avoid it. First, it’s not uncommon to hear couples say, “Fun has come to die in our relationship.” But we know from research that our brains need fun in relationships. So make time for it. I knew of this couple who felt they were falling out of love, so they decided to go into their back yard and had a mud fight, rolling around in the dirt. It changed their dynamics completely; they had fun again. Make time for a conversation that involves open-ended questions with longer and winding answers. Ask each other about your dreams; what you’re longing for. Generally, we ask each other lots of big questions at the start of relationships, then we stop. But we’re always evolving. You’d be surprised at how profound the results can be when we just ask bigger questions to connect with each other: it helps us reprioritise and cleanse our relationships, refocusing from trivial tasks into something much more fulfilling. MS gottman.com Dan Savage: ‘You know someone is the one when you decide to treat them that way’ No person can ever meet all of another’s needs. Some people feel as if they should get everything from their partner – a best friend, a lover, an unfaltering emotional support system – and don’t have intimate friendships. But there is no such thing as The One; the person who will give you everything. I get letters from people who say, “I love this person, the sex is great, we’re emotionally connected, but I don’t know if they’re the one.” The myth of just “knowing” that our person is the person damages people.It ends good relationships. You know if someone is the one when you decide to treat them that way. We don’t talk enough about companionable, healthy, loving relationships that are sexless. If both partners are content with sexlessness, that relationship is fine. If sex is important to you to maintain connection, acknowledge that. I’ve been with my husband for 30 years and it’s really important for us to have that flood of oxytocin; to look at each other while we’re climaxing. But after 10 or 20 years with the same person, how do you bring back the terror and excitement of getting undressed with them all those years ago? You can’t. You have to engineer a sense of risk. We spend so much time sitting on our butts, looking at our screens. Physical passivity creates inertia. We can’t be shocked when nothing happens. So get off that bed. Get out of that room. Get out of the house! Fuck in public! Defining everything as “cheating” sets relationships up to fail. There may be emotional infidelity, there may be crushes, there may be desire for others, there may be getting off to porn or thinking of someone else during sex. But if you define cheating so rigidly, and position it as unforgivable, sustaining a relationship may be difficult. Your partner should not have to hide who they are as a price of admission to be with you, and vice versa. Even if you’re together for 60 years and wind up in the funeral home together, was it a success if you weren’t truly known to each other? Being in a relationship means meeting your partner where they’re at. That can be scary. When you start dating someone, it’s a slow process of peeling back the layers and working out if you can be together. Figuring out what you can tolerate (different kinks, non-monogamy, whatever) is great. Figuring out what you can celebrate is better. EM thestranger.com/savage-love Dr Ruth Westheimer: ‘Try a new sexual position’ How fortunate we are that we can finally see the light at the end of the tunnel of this terrible virus, which is why my first tip is to shout out, “Hallelujah!” Expressing thanks will put you in a much better mood that is conducive to good sex. Being in a bad mood, or feeling anxious or nervous, can make it more difficult to become aroused. Positive thinking is a turn on. Prolonging the sexual experience is one way to enhance it, so I suggest you take a bubble bath together first, washing and then drying each other. Have some cookies and champagne prepared ahead of time and after your bath, share these delicacies slowly. Only then hop into bed. Many couples use the same sexual positions for the simple reason that they work so they think, why bother experimenting? I suggest you try a new position, but in the back of your mind know that you can always end the session going back to your tried and true position if the new one doesn’t do the trick. There are plenty of resources for finding options: from the Kama Sutra to Sex For Dummies. Usually good sex means both of you have an orgasm as a result of your coupling and as a rule, I think that’s the right way to have sex. But as an experiment, try picking only one of you to have an orgasm with the promise that the other will be the chosen one the next day. See whether the anticipation doesn’t make for a stronger orgasm for the one going second. I know that many people like to talk “dirty” during sex, that for them it is very arousing. But why not try enveloping a sexual encounter with the warm words of loyalty and exclusivity? I think that the security of knowing that you are having sex with a trusted partner will also end up being very arousing. MS A new edition of Dr Ruth’s The Art of Arousal will be out on Abbeville Press soonThe writer and photographer Caleb Azumah Nelson was born to Ghanaian parents and raised in south-east London. He quit a job at the Apple Store on Regent Street to focus on writing and in 2020 was shortlisted for the BBC short story prize. In February 2021 he published his debut novel, Open Water, which revolves around a love affair between two young black Londoners, a photographer and a dancer. Azumah Nelson was named one of National Book Foundation’s “5 under 35” honorees, and last month Open Water won the Costa first novel award. It’s out now in paperback. 1. Theatre And Breathe… (Almeida, London) I went to see this one-man show, by the poet and playwright Yomi Ṣode, four times. It was perhaps the most accurate and heartrending piece of work I’ve seen about grief. David Jonsson played a multitude of characters, but the main voice is a man in his late 20s or early 30s whose aunt is about to die. He is dealing both with the impending passing but also with the guilt of not feeling as if he’s been present for his family. The show was short, not much over an hour, but it was so agile and full of feeling. 2. Gig Nala Sinephro (Earth, London) Nala Sinephro’s Space 1.8 was one of my favourite albums from last year, so I was really looking forward to her gig in Hackney last November. It ended up being a two-and-a-half-hour improv session that was beyond incredible – one of the most special things I’ve ever been a part of. It was a four-piece – a drummer, a bass player, a sax player, and Sinephro on harp and synths. She was so close to the music, there were times where she seemed to be prostrating towards the instruments. 3. Photography Roy DeCarava (David Zwirner gallery, London) Roy DeCarava is one of my favourite photographers but I’d never seen his work in person, always in monographs or online. So it was really special to go to the opening of his show in Mayfair. All the images are in black and white, showing Harlem in the 1950s and 60s, with a lot of jazz musicians and jazz concerts. He always shot with available light, which lends an ethereal quality to his work. Everyday moments become more significant through his lens. The image of Elvin Jones on the drums, taken in 1961, is probably my favourite. 4. Restaurant Tatale, London I’m really excited about this restaurant, opening this spring at the Africa Centre in London. The chef, Akwasi Brenya-Mensa, is of Ghanaian descent and I read him saying that Tatale is going to be a hub for conversations set over and around food, which for me is such an important thing. I grew up in quite a big family, and sitting around with lots of people eating food was a really standard thing at home. I’m big into restaurants, to the point where it’s becoming quite a bad habit. If there’s a new place I’m excited about and my partner can’t make it, I’ll end up going by myself. 5. Album We’re All Alone in This Together by Dave This is probably the album that I listened to the most in the past year. There’s something about the tone in which Dave expresses things, as well as the things he’s expressing, that really connects with me. We’re both from south London, so there’s a shared experience there. This album felt more vulnerable than his previous work and really personal – in one line he says that it has really been about the making of him, and you can really feel that. Heart Attack is the standout track. 6. Film Summer of Soul (dir Questlove, 2021) This is part concert film, part ode to black music. Questlove masterfully winds a narrative around a series of concerts that took place in Harlem in 1969. There’s real energy to all of the performances, but one that particularly stood out was a young Stevie Wonder. He had real flair, and even at that age you could see that he was already something special. I was really moved by these musicians and totally immersed in their world, which I guess is the power of cinema. 7. Novel Transcendent Kingdom by Yaa Gyasi I read this at the start of 2021, and again a few months ago, and I still can’t get the voice out of my head. It’s about a family across time and continents – they start off as a family of four, but when they move from Ghana to Alabama, four becomes two. What really intrigued me was this idea of the stories within families that don’t emerge until it’s too late. The book is quite slow and meditative, but it’s so beautiful and well told – and more daring than her first book, Homegoing.When photographs appeared last week of a faux fur-clad Liz Truss in Moscow’s Red Square, it was impossible not to draw a comparison to an almost identical picture of Margaret Thatcher in Soviet Russia 35 years ago. Yet the arresting image was only the latest in a torrent of official pictures of the foreign secretary’s exploits. There are, in fact, very few moments in Truss’s five-month stint at the Foreign Office that have not been caught for posterity by publicly funded official photographers. A review of the government’s official account on the photo-sharing platform Flickr reveals that since the day she took up the post, more than 700 pictures have been uploaded featuring Truss – an average of more than four-and-a-half a day, or about one photograph for every five hours in the job. While there are brief interludes depicting Steve Barclay at Ikea, Priti Patel visiting Boots or Rishi Sunak stroking a parrot, the official stream of photographs is dominated by Truss, now seen by many Tories as the frontrunner to replace Johnson should he be forced from office before the next election. Sydney, Moscow, Mexico City and Mumbai are just some of the locations forming the backdrops for Truss, with each visit documented in detail. Some of the most notable shots include fist-bumping with Nato secretary general Jens Stoltenberg, driving a tank in military gear in Estonia, chatting with Henry Kissinger in New York (her run across the Brooklyn Bridge was also captured), sitting in a F35B fighter jet on the HMS Queen Elizabeth aircraft carrier, and staring down her formidable Russian counterpart, Sergei Lavrov. Worryingly for potential leadership rival Sunak, she was also photographed on the chancellor’s home turf – opening the London Stock Exchange. When at home, she is captured in the grandeur of Chevening, her grace-and-favour country mansion. Zoom calls are also included. There is even a picture of Truss meeting one of her own ministers. The foreign secretary’s new-found life through a lens has not gone unnoticed by her ministerial colleagues. It has also raised criticisms about the prolific use of official government photographers. Critics say their skills are now helping Tory leadership hopefuls show their best sides. While Truss dominates the government’s official photostream, Sunak actually has his own Treasury Flickr account, though it has only managed about 340 photographs of the chancellor since the September reshuffle that saw Truss arrive at the Foreign Office. It is not unusual for foreign secretaries to find themselves in front of the camera. Yet some Tories regard her very public outings as a straight-forward attempt to curry favour with party members before a possible leadership election. One minister put it bluntly: “It is an ignorant way to behave.” Her odyssey also contrasts strongly with some of her more photo-shy colleagues. Environment secretary George Eustice, for example, appears to have featured in just three photographs on the official Flickr account since September – and one of those is his official cabinet portrait. The other two were taken as he entered Downing Street for a cabinet meeting in November. The prime minister has also been making use of his own official photographer, Andrew Parsons, and has made visits to hospitals and vaccine centres as pressure has grown over alleged lockdown parties in Downing Street. Twelve such trips have appeared on No 10’s Flickr account since the start of November. Alan Sparrow, chair of the UK Picture Editors’ Guild, said that while independent photographers were still invited on ministerial trips, the increasing use of the government’s own snappers raised potential pitfalls. “My initial reaction to the staff photographers was that I feared that the other pool positions would be shut down and that we would be obliged to use just the handouts,” he said. “So far that has not happened. However, there are no guarantees – it just needs a change of staff or attitudes and we would find ourselves in a position where the only images available are those given out by No 10.” Political opponents are more scathing about the official portraits, given that they are a potentially powerful element of a party leadership campaign. “At a moment when Europe faces its biggest security crisis in decades, Liz Truss seems more interested in Instagram diplomacy than working with our allies,” said Layla Moran, the Liberal Democrat foreign affairs spokesperson. “These serious times deserve serious leaders. We need a foreign secretary focused on the task at hand, not using a taxpayer-funded photographer to further her leadership ambitions.” The Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office said: “It is vital that the government and its ministers communicate to the public and other audiences what they are doing for the UK. Pictures help tell that story. Social media and digital engagement are critical communications tools, and our photographers play a leading role in supporting the government’s digital communications activity.”A resolution to the problems with the Northern Ireland protocol is unlikely to be reached before the Stormont assembly elections in May, the leader of the Democratic Unionist party (DUP) has said. Sir Jeffrey Donaldson said that “very little progress” was being made in negotiations between the UK government and the EU, describing the likelihood of a swift resolution as “quite small”. Liz Truss, the foreign secretary, and Maroš Šefčovič, the European Commission vice-president, met in London on Friday to begin a series of intensive talks to try to end the impasse over the protocol. Despite both sides declaring they wanted a deal before March, hopes for success have remained low, with Boris Johnson privately putting the chances of a new deal for Northern Ireland being achieved this month at below 30%. The DUP leader told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: “There is very little progress in the talks, as we saw yesterday. I think that the likelihood at the moment of agreement being reached is actually quite small. That was confirmed to me by the prime minister. “He doesn’t expect, unless something changes dramatically, that agreement will be reached this side of an election, to remove the Irish Sea border.” Donaldson said he “wish[ed] it were otherwise”. The DUP leader added: “I want to see the political institutions restored and operating fully restored – we’re committed to that. But we want to see Northern Ireland’s place within the UK internal market fully restored.” His remarks follow the resignation last week of Northern Ireland’s first minister, the DUP’s Paul Givan, in protest over the protocol. The party say the protocol, designed to avoid a border on the island of Ireland, has eroded a cornerstone of power-sharing in the region – governance by both nationalists and unionists. The UK is pursuing an interim deal that would scrap most of the checks on food and farm products followed by a wider solution on government after the May elections. Assembly elections are scheduled for 5 May, but there will be no functioning executive during the interim period, meaning some political decisions cannot be made. Donaldson said that even while the assembly continues to pass legislation and departmental ministers are able to take decisions, “obviously without an executive being able to meet, without the north-south ministerial council being in place, there are certain decisions that can’t be taken”. He accused the UK government of “dishonouring” its commitment to protect Northern Ireland’s place in the UK internal market. “We entered government back at the beginning of 2020 following an agreement called New Decade, New Approach, and in that agreement the UK government gave a solemn commitment that it would protect Northern Ireland’s place within the UK internal market, that it would introduce measures to afford that protection. “Over two years later it has not done so and we believe the UK government has dishonoured the agreement that was the basis upon which the devolved institutions were restored in Northern Ireland,” he said, adding that the DUP felt that it was “now time for the government to follow through and honour that commitment”.Jaclyn Narracott broke the track record in the women’s skeleton in Beijing on the way to taking the silver medal, Australia’s first in the skeleton at the Winter Olympics. Hannah Neise maintained Germany’s perfect record at the Yanqing National Sliding Centre with the gold medal, ultimately sliding 0.62sec faster than Narracott, with a total time of 4min 07.62sec. Kimberley Bos of the Netherlands won bronze. Narracott went in to the event’s final day in the lead, and was the first athlete to slide in the third heat. She immediately posted a new track-record time. But Neise bettered it with her next run, and despite a scorching final run, the Australian could not stop Neise making it a skeleton one-two for Germany after they won the men’s event on Friday. Great Britain’s Laura Deas finished 19th after a disappointing Olympic campaign. Skeleton sees athletes race head-first down a frozen track in a tiny sled at speeds of up to 140km/h, and Deas saved her fastest run til last, but the 2018 bronze medallist was well off the pace. Her teammate Brogan Crowley finished 22nd out of 25. “Indescribable, unbelievable, surreal,” Narracott said in an interview with Channel Seven. “It’s just everything that I’ve dreamt of. And to actually realise it ... it’s going to take a while to sink in. [At the top of the final run] I was just trying to remember to go smooth and be flow-ey, and have some fun, and it was all going to be OK no matter what happened.” The 31-year-old, whose skeleton career was nearly ended by concussion in 2019, added: “I can’t believe it ... I would love this to be the catalyst to get more girls back into our sport [in Australia] ... There’s no reason why we can’t be competitive at every Olympics and every World Cup.” Narracott’s uncle Paul Narracott was the first Australian to compete at both a Summer and Winter Olympic Games. He competed as a track sprinter at the 1984 Los Angeles Games before joining the two-man bobsleigh team at Albertville in 1992. Growing up in Bracken Ridge in Brisbane’s north, Jaclyn Narracott was a talented sprinter. Then she took her first ride on a skeleton in 2012. A decade later, in January 2022 at St Moritz, she become the first Australian to win a World Cup gold medal in skeleton. The sport of skeleton has its roots in sleighing. In 1884, the famed Cresta Run - a natural ice skeleton racing toboggan track - was built in St Moritz, Switzerland, and in 1892 a new sledge made entirely of steel was introduced. Its bony appearance gave the sledge – and ultimately the sport itself – a new name: skeleton. Men’s skeleton appeared at the 1928 and 1948 Games (both in St Moritz) but due to the sport only being available at the Cresta Run at the time, it was replaced at the Olympics by the more popular luge and bobsleigh. Not until the 2002 Salt Lake City Games was the skeleton reintroduced as a men’s and women’s event. After finishing 16th on her Olympic debut four years ago, Narracott arrived at her second Games in career-best form, after breaking the track record and topping the podium in Switzerland last month. Her husband and coach, Dom Parsons – who won a bronze for Britain at the 2018 Pyeongchang Games – is with her in Beijing for the first time since October, and it’s working wonders. “All year, we were doing it via FaceTime and with video,” Narracott said. “To have him by my side, seeing the ice as I’m seeing it ... it’s huge.”Federal prosecutors have charged an “alt-right” podcaster who espoused strong anti-government views with assembling an arsenal of weapons, including machine guns, in the locked basement at a home in Bethlehem, Pennsylvania. They also charged his father, the Daily Beast reported. The pair, Joseph Raymond Berger, 67, and Joseph Paul Berger, 32, were arrested last week and charged with multiple firearms offenses including possessing machine guns, possessing non-registered firearms and possessing non-registered silencers. Both men have pleaded not guilty. According to a detention memo filed by prosecutors, the cache included eight AK-style rifles, two C308 .308 Winchester caliber rifles, two MP5K submachine guns, and one RPK-style machine gun. Prosecutors claimed in opposition to a bail request that the younger man, a navy veteran, “regularly espouses anti-government and anti-law enforcement views”. “To be sure, the defendant’s views do not form the basis for these charges, but they provide strong evidence of his anti-government ethos,” they argued. “Based on these views, it is highly unlikely that the defendant will respect or abide by conditions of release set by this court, thereby making him a danger to the community and a risk of flight.” Their lawyer, Eric Winter, argued in response that Joseph Berger had never incited real-life violence, carried no criminal record, and his views represented political expression. The government cited a podcast episode of Alt-Right Armory in which Berger, the host, said that a “white man with a rifle can be very dangerous to the system indeed if he has the right motivation”. Prosecutors also claimed that Berger “extolls the values of police murderer Eric Frein and fantasizes about the cost that could be incurred by a group of people like Frein”, referring to the 2014 murder of a Pennsylvania state trooper in an ambush. Frein was later captured, convicted and sentenced to death. The defendant, prosecutors said, encouraged listeners to target “not only police, but “legislators, lobbyists and leftwing billionaires” for assassination with explosives. Berger goes by the moniker “GlockDoctor1488” – 1488 being a popular coded signal among neo-Nazis, with “14” referencing the slogan “We must secure the existence of our people and a future for white children” and “88” standing in for “Heil Hitler”. In 2019, Berger reportedly disrupted an event at a public library in Philadelphia where the former Virginia governor Terry McAuliffe, a Democrat, was speaking. At the event, Berger reportedly shouted: “Fuck you, you anti-white piece of shit! You will not replace us!” The indictment alleges that the Bergers illegally possessed 13 fully-automatic machine guns and 12 silencers. They were arrested after agents with Customs and Border Protection intercepted three firearms silencers which had been illegally imported and addressed to them at their home. Investigators then obtained a search warrant for the home and recovered from the basement the 12 firearms suppressors/silencers and 13 fully-automatic machine guns, according to court documents. Agents also discovered a 3D printer on a table, with the components needed to build so-called ghost guns – guns with no serial number identification. The weapons, the indictment said, had originally been purchased as semi-automatic firearms, and then converted into unregistered, fully automatic machine guns that could fire hundreds of rounds a minute. “The defendants allegedly possessed a stockpile of unregistered fully-automatic machine guns and silencers in violation of the National Firearms Act,” said US attorney Jennifer Arbittier Williams. “These weapons are extremely dangerous, which is why there are laws regulating their possession.” “As the indictment alleges, possession of illegal firearms like these, threatens the safety of the general public, especially when in the wrong hands,” added Matthew Varisco, special agent in charge of ATF’s Philadelphia field division. If convicted, the defendants face a maximum possible sentence of 30 years in prison, three years of supervised release, a $270,000 fine and a $300 special assessment. • This article was corrected on 13 February 2022. Terry McAuliffe was no longer the governor of Virginia when the library incident occurred in 2019.And that is a wrap for the live sport today, as the final two men’s matches in Group B of the ice hockey come to an end. Denmark have beaten Switzerland 5-3. The Czech Republic faced a late comeback from the ROC to tie up the game at 5-5, but the Czech team scored an overtime winner with thirty seconds to go to edge it 6-5. The Russians hadn’t let in a single goal before today. That concludes the group. Russia are top and go straight through to the quarter-finals. The Czech Republic and Switzerland finished third and fourth, and go through to the play-off round. Denmark have to wait. Six points and a goal difference of +1 is unlikely to be the best second-placed record and put them straight through to the quarters, with Canada set to face China in their last game where they will expect to score heavily, but you never, never know. That is the end of the action today. I will see you here tomorrow, we’ll be back with you when Sunday’s action starts in Beijing. Here is what we have to look forward to … What to look out for next Times are all in local Beijing time. For Sydney it is +3 hours, for London it is -8 hours, for New York it is -13 hours and San Francisco is -16 hours. Tomorrow – Sunday 13 February 9.05am and 2.05pm and 8.05pm Curling – various men’s and women’s round robin matches, with Team GB and the US involved in every session 🥌 9.30am and 11am Bobsleigh – heats one and two of the women’s monobob 10.15am and 1.45pm Alpine skiing – it is the men’s giant slalom. Benjamin Alexander will take part – Jamaica’s first ever Alpine skier 🥇 12.10pm and 4.40pm and 9.10pm Ice hockey – the US face Germany in the final game of the day 🏒 3pm Cross-country skiing – the men’s 4x10km which would last approximately 1,057 hours if they were doing it at the pace I could cover 10km on skis 🥇 5pm and 6.45pm Biathlon – they are absolutely spoiling us with the biathlon on Sunday. The women do their 10km pursuit first and then the men do their 12.5km pursuit 🥇 7pm-8.14pm Short track speed skating – the women’s 3,000m relay and the men’s 500m race 🥇 9.56pm Speed skating – the women’s 500m 🥇 Until then, take care, stay safe. The rhythm dance component of the ice dance figure skating finished with Gabriella Papadakis and Guillaume Cizeron on top with 90.83 for France. The Russian Olympic Committee’s Victoria Sinitsina and Nikita Katsalapov are placed second with 88.85, and US pair Madison Hubbell and Zachary Donohue are in third place. The British pair of Lilah Fear and Lewis Gibson qualified in tenth place. They skate again in the free dance element on Monday when the medals will be distributed. Jaclyn Narracott took Australia’s first ever medal in skeleton, finishing second behind Hannah Neise of Germany. Lindsey Jacobellis captured her second gold in four days after pairing with Nick Baumgartner to win the inaugural mixed team snowboard cross event for the US. Kamila Valieva’s controversial coach, Eteri Tutberidze, insisted that her skater was clean but accepted that the situation was “very controversial and difficult”. “I want to say that I am absolutely sure that Kamila is innocent and clean,” she said. “For us, this is not a theorem, but an axiom, it does not need to be proved. We are with our athletes, in trouble and in joy, to the end.” Johannes Thingnes Boe took gold for Norway in the 10km sprint biathlon. His elder brother Tarjel won bronze. Marius Lindvik won a thrilling massive enormous gigantic hill ski jumping competition for Norway, stopping Japan’s Ryoyu Kobayashi making it a double gold. The Russian Olympic Committee won the 4 x 5km cross-country skiing women’s relay. Great Britain’s women won their curling match 10-5 against the US to rekindle their campaign. The US beat Canada 4-2 in Group A of the men’s ice hockey. In the women’s competition, Finland and Switzerland advanced to the semi-final. There was a home victory in the men’s 500m speed skating for Gao Tingyu of China. There are no more medals going anywhere today, so here’s how the medal table stands at the moment: Germany top it with eight gold, five silver and one bronze. Norway are second with eight gold, three silver and six bronze. The US are third with five gold, five silver and one bronze. There’s still a couple of ice hockey matches going on. Denmark now lead Switzerland 4-2. The Czech Republic have extended their leads against the Russian athletes, and the score there is also 4-2. There have been a couple of very emotional interviews with the British skeleton sliders after their disappointing results today. Laura Deas finished 19th, and Brogan Crowley finished 22nd, failing to qualify for the final. A tearful Crowley told the BBC: I’ve come a long way in the last four years. It’s been a hard four years, and I’m so proud of where I’ve got to because a few years ago, I didn’t even think I’d be here. And without the support of my family and friends at home, I honestly, I wouldn’t be here right now. So I’m proud of where I am, and I hope that I can come back in the future and achieve a lot more. Of the poor performance from Team GB, her teammate Deas said: It’s been a tough two years for everyone. And I think it’s really important for me to be proud of the fact that I came here and I put in a great performance. The fact that the outcome is nowhere near what I wanted, I think shouldn’t take away from the fact that I think I put down some pretty good runs. I mean, clearly, we’re lacking speed. It’s something that we’re going to go away and review pretty pretty closely and hopefully come back stronger. What is going on in the men’s ice hockey? Well, it is the end of the second period in both Group B preliminary matches. ROC are slightly surprisingly behind the Czech Republic 3-2. Denmark have come back strongly against Switzerland and now lead 3-1. And a Pokémon Go update? No word of a lie, after I posted about my struggles earlier I immediately caught three rare shiny Hoppip in quick succession, after several fruitless hours looking for them. The sadness of an eight-year-old has been averted. Good, good times. Hannah Neise takes the gold for Germany on the final run! It is Germany’s first gold in the event. Jaclyn Narracott of Australia is second. That is Australia’s first ever skeleton medal! Neise went more than half-a-second faster than the Australian in the end. Kimberley Bos of the Netherlands takes bronze. It is a first for them too! Australia’s Jaclyn Narracott was in the lead halfway through the event. She does the penultimate run. Can she do it? Could it be Australia’s first ever medal in the skeleton? SHE CAN! SHE CAN! Silver at worst! Her total time is 4:08.24. Hannah Neise from Germany will now go for gold! Germany’s Tina Hermann doesn’t go faster than Kimberley Bos, and so the Dutch athlete is guaranteed a bronze medal at worst, and Hermann misses out! We are right at the sharp end of the women’s skeleton now. Kimberley Bos of the Netherlands goes into the lead with an error-strewn run. The three fastest women are now set to slide. Tina Hermann of Germany, currently third, goes next. Just to spite me, I got the number of ends wrong in the women’s curling again. They only played nine because Great Britain have beaten the US 10-5 with an end to spare. The British women’s team really needed that. They are now 2 for 2. The US had been unbeaten up to that point. I got over-excited earlier when I thought we were close to the last end of the women’s curling match between Team GB and the US. I forgot that it is eight ends in the mixed doubles, but ten ends in the full-scale team event. D’oh! I blame the fact that I am also watching the figure skating and the ice hockey and the skeleton and also it is community day on Pokémon Go and I’m under strict instructions from my eight-year-old that I have to catch three shiny Hoppip for him today. The curling is 7-5 to Team GB in the ninth end. Which really is the last-but-one. The other matches stand ROC 5-6 Japan, Denmark 4-6 Switzerland and Sweden 6-8 China. We are halfway through the final heat of the women’s skeleton. They go in reverse order, so we still haven’t seen the fastest sliders yet. Yulia Kanakina of the Russian Olympic Committee leads at this point, but it isn’t going to stay that way. A brilliant two on the seventh end for Team GB means that the pressure is all on the US to retain their unbeaten women’s curling record at this Olympics so far. The two go into the 8th and final end with the British side leading 7-4. Laura Deas finishes her final skeleton run with a 1:02.70. It is the fastest of the four she has made in this competition, but she’ll be hugely disappointed with the performance in Beijing where they were hopes she would win a medal. The next run is Endija Terauda of Latvia. She goes 0.02 seconds slower than Deas overall, so at least the British athlete has the consolation that she didn’t finish last in the final. Stay tuned because we have got the climax of that extremely close and vital curling match, and the two ice hockey games going on. But most importantly, we are about to have the fourth heat of the women’s skeleton. As the slowest placed woman, Laura Deas of Team GB is just sliding for pride, but there’s a real chance Jaclyn Narracott could earn Australia’s first ever Olympic medal in the sport. She’s currently placed second. Lilah Fear and Lewis Gibson have just ice danced their way to fourth place for Team GB. They are targeting a top eight finish overall. They are safely qualified through to the free dance stage. Ice hockey scores latest: the ROC are tied 1-1 with the Czech Republic. Switzerland have a 1-0 lead over Denmark, exactly the opposite of the kind of result Denmark needed if they are to secure an automatic quarter-final spot. Both matches are at the end of the first period. Three of the games in the women’s curling have teams posting strong leads. ROC are beating Japan 5-2, China are up 6-2 against Sweden, and Switzerland lead Denmark 3-1. The match between Team GB and the US has turned into a nail-biter. After six ends it is poised 5-4 to the British team. *Eric_Morecambe_sucks_teeth_and_looks_to_camera.gif* The Canadian pair of Laurence Fournier Beaudry and Nikolaj Soerensen have just done their ice dance to a medley of Careless Whisper, I Want Your Sex and Freedom 90, and I must say at my age it is always lovely to have a bit of unexpected George Michael on a Saturday afternoon. The judges obviously like a bit of ol’ Geroge too, as they’ve gone into the lead. Spain’s Olivia Smart and Adrian Diaz are second, with Kaitlin Hawayek and Jean-Luc Baker in third. The British pair of Lilah Fear and Lewis Gibson skate soon. Our picture desk have put together a gallery of today’s greatest images from the Beijing Winter Olympics for you. Nice one. The third heat of the women’s skeleton is over, and Laura Deas of Team GB just held on to a top twenty position, and will slide again. Her team-mate Brogan Crowley will not. The top three going into the last heat are Hannah Neise of Germany in the lead, Jaclyn Narracott of Australia second and Neise’s teammate Tina Hermann in third. The US Virgin Islands only sent one athlete to these games – skeleton slider Katie Tannenbaum. She finished last, over twelve-and-a-half seconds off the pace, and nearly five seconds behind the next fastest woman. She’s had a right old time of it in Beijing. She missed being the flag-bearer at the opening ceremony because she was in isolation with Covid, and that also meant she couldn’t do any test runs on the track. But she’s still an Olympian. She posted on her social media that her team actually video-called her from the middle of the opening ceremony so she would feel like she was there. The last two men’s ice hockey matches for the day have got underway. It is the simultaneous final matches in Group B. ROC v Czech Republic, and Switzerland v Denmark. If you remember how the tournament works, there are three groups of four. The top team in each group goes straight through to the quarter-finals, as does the second placed team with the best record. Everybody else then goes into a play-off round for the final four quarter-final births. ROC have won their first two games, and so are already guaranteed top spot in Group B. Neither the Czech Republic or Switzerland can finish higher than third. So the only thing really at stake today is whether Denmark can win and score a lot of goals and put themselves in a position to maybe get that automatic spot. Britain’s Brogan Crowley has followed Laura Deas down the track in the women’s skeleton, and she is out. She ended up 22nd fastest of the 22nd women to slide so far today. Laura Deas from Team GB has just gone in the women’s skeleton, and has positioned herself 20th overall. Only twenty women go through, so if any of the final four women go faster than her, her individual skeleton campaign is over. Here’s confirmation of those results in the men’s enormous hill ski jumping. Norway’s Marius Lindvik delivered a monster 151.3-point second jump to snatch the gold medal, denying Japan’s Ryoyu Kobayashi a golden double. Kobayashi, fresh from winning the normal hill title last weekend, set the standard again in the first round with a 142-metre jump for 147 points. Lindvik, who led the way in Friday’s qualifying session, also continued the hot streak of form that brought him three World Cup wins in January, posting 144.8 points to sit in second place. The Norwegian then delivered a superlative last effort to reach a tally of 296.1 and though Kobayashi produced the next-best jump of the round, he fell just short on 292.8. Reuters note that Germany’s World Cup leader Karl Geiger, who finished a disappointing 15th in the normal hill, was sitting back in sixth place, more than 10 points off the pace at halfway, but his 144.6 effort earned him the bronze medal. The way heat three of the women’s skeleton is organised, with the fastest having gone first, means it doesn’t actually make for that gripping viewing. Essentially it is just watching people go slightly slower each time. Ice dancing update. We’ve had eleven couples so far, of which the top eight are already now guaranteed to progress. Leading the pack is the Chinese pairing of Wang Shiyue and Liu Xinyu. They danced a routine soundtracked by Elvis Presley, and they’ve scored 73.41. I can also tell you that they scored 8.71 for their execution of the sequential twizzles, which makes me sound more knowledgable than I am – I just read that off the data feed. To be honest, I’m not entirely sure what a twizzle is, or how to make it sequential. You were wondering what the latest curling scores were, weren’t you? I can help with that. Currently in the women’s round robin there are four matches happening, and the scores are: ROC 2-1 Japan Denmark 1-1 Switzerland Sweden 0-3 China Great Britain 4-0 China Phew! That was great. Now back over to the women’s skeleton. Eleven of the women have gone so far in the third heat, and the top three remains: 1. Hannah Neise (Ger) 3:05.99 2. Jaclyn Narracott (Aus) +0.14 3. Tina Hermann (Ger) +0.48 Ryoyu Kobayashi of Japan jumps for double gold! And he doesn’t get it!!! He misses out by a smidge. Marius Lindvik of Norway is Olympic champion. What drama at the last. He out-scored the Japanese athlete 296.1 to 292.8. The big hill ski jumping has been intense. The penultimate jump leaves Marius Lindvik on Norway on the podium, it is a huge score and he goes into the lead. There are two men left to jump. Geiger, Stoch and Eisenbichler are in the medal positions. Timi Zajc’s jump placed him fourth. Karl Geiger has a medal for sure. Over at the women’s skeleton, nobody has been able to touch those times of Neise and Narracott yet, they still sit one and two. Germany’s Tina Hermann is third. Cene Prevc’s jump meant that briefly Slovenia had one-two-three in the ski jumping, but pretty much everybody jumping is now going straight into the lead as we run through the top ten jumpers from the first round. As a reminder, Ryoyu Kobayashi scored an incredible 147.0 points in the first round, and lead by 2.2 points. You feel like he pretty much just needs to land in one piece on his second jump to win gold. Germany’s Karl Geiger leads with five to jump. The lead has changed hands in the men’s giant hill ski jumping, with Peter Prevc and Lovro Kos, both of Slovenia, in the gold and silver medal positions. The ten jumpers who scored the most points in the first round are still to jump. Team GB have won the first end in the women’s curling 2-0 against the US. That is exactly the kind of start they would have wanted. Jaclyn Narracott has made a fantastic start to heat three of the women’s skeleton. She’s only gone and set a new track record at 1:01.79 after being the first woman to go in this session. You would think it is going to be a tough mark to beat – but then Hannah Neise of Germany immediately beats her time by 0.14. It is the first time the women have raced in the night session – and the track is fast! Ten of the thirty men in the men’s big hill ski jumping final have done their thing. Finland’s Antti Aalto holds the lead at the moment. His second jump was 134m, so he has finished with 257.2 points. At this moment in the contest, in order to haul themselves into medal contention, the guys have got to pull something really special out of the bag. The final round of the men’s ski jumping on the big hill has started, and we are also about to get some more of the women’s skeleton. Team GB have had a torrid time in that, with expected medal hopes dashed by some shocking performance. Pyeongchang bronze medallist Laura Deas and newbie Brogan Crowley go into heat three lying 21st and 22nd. Here’s what 33-year-old Deas said after yesterday’s runs: It’s certainly not the outcome I wanted. I came to the start block in a great frame of mind, I put together two good runs that I think I can be proud of. I can’t tell you now why the speed wasn’t there, I don’t know. I think I did myself proud. I’ve worked incredibly hard for the last four years to get to the start block today. We’re going to have to go back and look at all of it. Review, and try and come back stronger tomorrow. I need to go back to the hotel, recover as best I can and make sure I’m in good physical shape tomorrow as well as mental shape. Review everything, and put down two good runs and show everyone what I can do on the sled. I know I’m a good slider. There are four preliminary round matches just starting in the women’s curling. The match-ups are Russian Olympic Committee v Japan, Denmark v Switzerland, Sweden v China, and Great Britain v USA. It is match you feel the British team really need to win, as they have two defeats in their three games so far. After this morning’s fourth session, the US and Switzerland both remained unbeaten after three matches. The Lithuania couple of Paulina Ramanauskaite and Deividas Kizala have just danced themselves into fifth place out of the five to go so far in the ice dancing with a soundtrack of Rihanna. They scored 58.35, which I am reliably informed is their season’s best – but probably won’t be enough to see them through to the next stage. The top twenty couples dancing today progress. Hello, it is Martin Belam here to bring you all the latest Winter Olympics developments from *checks notes* sunny Walthamstow. I’m glued to the telly and the data feeds, so I’ll bring you everything that happens between now and the close of play today. On my watch we’ve got some ski jumping, a couple of ice hockey matches, the business end of the women’s skeleton competition, there’s ice dancing going on and there’s always, always curling preliminary round matches happening. I’ve been very much enjoying the sport at these Games. The geopolitics and the doping controversies, maybe not quite so much. With the men’s large hill ski jumping nicely poised after an excellent first round, and the ice-dancing ongoing, I will hand you over to my colleague Martin Belam to guide you through the afternoon. Bye! Finland, Czech Republic and Ukraine currently top the charts in the ice-dancing but there is a long, long way to go. Ukraine’s duo of Oleksandra Nazarova and Maksym Nikitin look utterly depressed at the way they performed: The top five in the large hill men’s ski jump, before the final and decisive round: Ryoyu Kobayashi (Japan) Marius Lindvik (Norway) Timi Zajc (Slovenia) Kamil Stoch (Poland) Manuel Fettner (Austria) Whaaaaat! Absolute scenes in the men’s ski jumping. Ryoyu Kobayashi of Japan jumps 142m on the nose and amasses 147pts. The new leader. “One of the best, if not the best first rounds of the whole season,” observes the man on the mic for Eurosport. Only a handful of athletes still to jump in the first round of the men’s individual large hill ski jumping. Zajc, Stoch, Fettner the top three ... but no! Marius Lindvik of Norway nails his jump, and goes top, with 140.5m distance and 144.8pts on the board. Timi Zajc (Slovenia) fires off a 138.5m jump and hits the top of the ski-jumping charts. Stoch (Poland) second, Fettner (Austria) third. No sign of this guy yet: Early days in the ice-dancing, but Iceland lead the way as it stands with a score of 68.23. Lilah Fear and Lewis Gibson will be up for Great Britain before too long. Kamil Stoch of Poland hits the top with a jump of 137.5m! And here comes Prevc ... and he jumps 137m on the nose, scores 131.3 points, and goes second. Gregor Deschwanden (Switzerland) breaks up the ROC party and goes third with a jump of 132m – a metre shorter than Klimov, but garnering 127.8pts. Ski jumping: men’s individual – large hill first round: It’s all happening. ROC have gone one-two-three early doors, with Sadreev (134m), Trofimov (133m) and Klimov (133m) leaving the rest in their wake ... for now. Plenty of jumpers to come, including Prevc of Slovenia and Stoch of Poland. Regarding the controversy over the judging in the snowboarding slopestyle final – here’s an interesting report here from Jenna Zucker of Reuters which dropped on the newswires a little earlier today: The men’s snowboarding slopestyle final at the Beijing Olympics seemed to have a perfect ending when Max Parrot took gold following a comeback from cancer. Parrot, who completed his last round of chemotherapy treatments for Hodgkin lymphoma in 2019, came out in front of China’s Su Yiming, who took silver, and fellow Canadian Mark McMorris bronze. However, as new video angles of the competition appeared, fans’ attitudes shifted. Those shots showed that during Parrot’s winning run the Canadian grabbed his knee during a trick, not the board, and should have lost points. Supporters of Su and McMorris were outraged and berated the judges on social media. McMorris said it was a shame the knee grab was not caught earlier. “Any other contest, if they would have seen it, that would have been a complete write-off of a run, like a 75-80,” said McMorris. “The fact the angle the judges had just was not that easy to make out if he touched his board or not, and by the time they went to slo mo it became super apparent that he didn’t grab and he grabbed his knees and no board purchase,” said McMorris. A media representative for Parrot did not reply to an email request for a comment. Comments on McMorris’s social media were a mixture of congratulations and anger about getting “robbed”. On China’s Weibo, Su’s coach Yasuhiro Sato posted a message asking fans to refrain from criticising the judges and that he and Su respect the outcome. In an interview with snowboarding publication Whitelines, Iztok Sumatic, the Beijing Olympics head judge for snowboarding, admitted that judges missed the error. Sumatic said the trick looked clean from the camera angle they were given, the report said. Japan’s Ayumu Hirano, who won gold in the men’s halfpipe on Friday, also questioned the judging process for snowboarding. In a news conference on Saturday, Hirano said there needed to be a “more robust system” to accurately assess the tricks. “We want to have sound standards and I think we should look into exactly what the judges were looking at,” Hirano added. “For the athletes, they’re putting their lives on the line, they’re giving it their all. So for the riders, I think some steps need to be taken to address this issue regarding the judges,” he said. The International Ski Federation did not respond to a request for comment. Now, the men’s individual – large hill ski jumping first round has begun. Updates to follow. The figure skating, mixed ice dance, rhythm dance is also under way. Who do you like for that one? You can email me or send me a message on Twitter Martin Belam’s unsurpassed daily Winter Olympics briefing has just landed: Jaclyn Narracott of Australia will be going for gold in the skeleton later today. Run three is set for 12.20pm, and run four for 1.55pm, UK time. Run three is scheduled to start in a little over an hour, in other words. Men’s hockey: Germany hold off that late fightback from China and take the Group A match 3-2. Women’s hockey: Finland round off that convincing 7-1 victory against Japan and advance into the semi-finals. Let’s just call it hockey, taking it as read that’s it’s ice hockey rather than field hockey. Germany now lead China 3-2 in Group A of the men’s ice hockey with a minute or so to play! Wang Taile’s goal has ensured an exciting finish. Earlier on in Group A: The United States men’s hockey team beat Canada, its biggest rival, 4-2 in a preliminary round game at the Beijing Olympics. Andy Miele responded to Canada’s early goal by equalising 70 seconds later and Brendan Brisson scored his second of the Olympics. The Americans are now in the driver’s seat to earn a spot in the quarter-finals of the men’s hockey tournament. Sean Farrell also set up Ben Meyers to give him three assists and six points and goaltender Strauss Mann made 35 saves to help the US improve to make it two wins from two in the preliminary round. Beating Germany on Sunday would put the US first in the group, and could made it the top seed in the knockout round. The boom or bust potential of the youngest team in the tournament was on full display against Canada, a bigger, stronger and more experienced opponent. The US — with 12 college players on the ice — went hit for hit with Canada and used a combination of attacking skill and bad opposing goaltending to take control of the game. (AP) Finland now lead Japan 7-1 in the women’s ice hockey quarter-final, clearly a subtle tribute to Nottingham Forest’s crushing win over Sheffield Wednesday in the 1994-95 Premier League. That was the first time I saw the replay of the mixed team snowboard cross. What a race! Brilliant from Lindsey Jacobellis, who was trailing Michela Moioli of Italy, but executed a superb overtaking move down the inside on one of the final corners, carrying plenty of speed past her opponent ... and then she grabbed over the final jump! The ghosts of 2006 officially exorcised. Wonderful stuff. Congratulations to Jacobellis and her 40-year-old partner, Nick Baumgartner, who becomes the oldest USA gold medalist at a Winter Games. The Beeb are now replaying the final of the team snowboard cross event. If you don’t want to know the result, don’t click this link! An email arrives from Kurt Perleberg, entitled: ‘Question’. “Do you think that Mikaela Shiffrin could win the gold medal in the women’s downhill?” Shiffrin was ninth-fastest in the first training. So I’m going to say yes, in theory she could. What do you think? HOCKEY UPDATE! Germany lead China 3-1 in Group A of the men’s contest. Finland are cruising into the women’s semi-finals, leading Japan 5-1. The ROC cross-country skiing team started strong and finished strong in the women’s four-person relay, winning another Olympic gold medal. Yulia Stupak broke away early with nine women chasing and on the next leg, Natalia Nepryaeva was chased down by Katharina Hennig of Germany. The Germans briefly took the lead on the last lap, with the ROC skier Veronika Stepanova just behind Sofie Krehl. But Stepanova pulled away on the final climb and won in 53min 41sec. Germany took silver, 18.2sec behind. Sweden edged Finland for bronze in a sprint to the finish line. “Of course, it is a special day,” Stepanova said. “It was really tough because we have a win in the World Cup, and a lot of people know we can win, so they say, You must win. You must win.’ So I am like, OK, we need a good result,’ and I do what I can do.” (AP) Gao Tingyu thrilled the home crowd in Beijing by becoming the first Chinese man to claim an Olympic gold medal in speed skating, winning the 500m. Gao added to the bronze medal he took in the 500m at the 2018 Pyeongchang Games. He skated in the seventh of 15 pairs, setting an Olympic record of 34.32sec. The silver went to Korea’s Cha Min Kyu, whose time of 34.39sec gave him a matching medal to the silver he won four years ago in Pyeongchang. Wataru Morishige of Japan took the bronze in 34.49sec. (AP) Coming up later today: Figure skating: Mixed ice dance, rhythm dance Ski jumping: men’s individual – large hill, first round + final round Women round robin curling: Denmark v Swizterland, Sweden v China, Great Britain v USA, ROC v Japan Skeleton: Women’s individual, runs three and four Men’s ice hockey: Group B – ROC v Czech Republic and Switzerland v Denmark It’s a busy day and no mistake. Ideally I’d bring you a bit more detail on these events but there isn’t much time to really focus on any of them, such is the volume of stuff happening. Germany top the medal table with Norway second and USA third. No medal for Great Britain just yet. Belgium, Latvia and Poland are the nations that have mustered a solitary bronze medal, while Hungary have nabbed two. USA v Switzerland and Canada v Finland is the likely semi-final lineup in the women’s ice hockey. Finland now lead Japan 4-1 at the end of the second period. Canada destroyed Sweden 11-0 and USA defeated Czech Republic 4-1 yesterday ... Switzerland beat ROC 4-2 earlier. It’s that man again ... Norway mop up another gold medal with another accomplished performance by Boe. Quentin Fillon Maillet wins silver, 25.5sec behind, and Tarjei Boe, Johannes’s older brother grabs bronze. He is 38.9sec back. Maxim Tsvetkov (ROC), in fourth and 40.6sec back, is the only competitor to hit 10/10 at the range so far. It’s over! A first gold medal for China in the long track speed skating events. Gao Tingyu and his team celebrate wildly. Gao leans back and roars, holding his arms aloft, and then embarks on a lap of honour holding China’s flag, lapping up the adulation of the home crowd. Cha Min Kyu of Korea finishes in silver medal position, +0.07sec behind, with Wataru Morishige taking bronze, +0.17sec down. Laurent Dubreuil of Canada – who skated in the final pairing – misses out on a medal by just 0.03sec. Men’s 500m speed skating: Wataru Morishige (Japan) clocks 34.49sec and bumps Michalski, of Poland, off the podium ... Gao is edging to gold with his Olympic record of time of 34.32sec. There is one more pairing to go. Men’s ice hockey: Germany lead China 3-0 in the second period. Women’s ice hockey: Finland now lead Japan 4-1 in their quarter-final, thanks in part to a Petra Nieminen double. The Chinese skater completes his 500m race in 34.32sec and shaves 0.9sec off the Olympic record! There are still several skaters to compete ... but can anyone beat that? Min Kyu Cha (Korea) is in silver-medal position, +0.07sec, with Piotr Michalski (Poland) third, +0.20sec. Men’s 10km Sprint Biathlon: Johannes Thingnes Boe of Norway cruises home in gold-medal position, 40 seconds up on Maxim Tsvetkov (ROC)! I say he cruises ... naturally he collapses to the floor with the sheer effort he’s just expended. That looks to be an unbeatable time, 24min 004sec. Let’s see. Now Quentin Fillon Maillet finishes and bumps Tsvetkov down to bronze position. Fillon Maillet of France is 25sec down. The Russian coach of the brilliant 15-year-old skater at the eye of a doping storm in Beijing has broken her silence to insist that Kamila Valieva is “clean and innocent”. Eteri Tutberidze admitted that the situation surrounding her skater was “very controversial and difficult”, with the Court of Arbitration for Sport expected to rule within 24 hours whether Valieva can compete in the individual event on Tuesday after she tested positive for a banned heart drug. Stolz (USA) goes fastest in the 500m skating final in 34.85sec. Johannes Thingnes Boe (Norway) has assumed the lead in the men’s 10km sprint biathlon. Maxim Tsvetkov (ROC) second. Germany lead China 2-0 in the men’s ice hockey (Group A). Japan have pulled a goal back in the women’s ice hockey quarter-final and trail Finland 2-1. Simon Desthieux, the Frenchman, has forged an early lead in the men’s 10km sprint biathlon. Over in the speed skating, Cornelius Kersten of Great Britain edges into an early lead in the 500m final. He comes around on the inside of his opponent from Kazakhstan, Ivan Arzhanikov, and clocks 35.36sec. Nice work. The men’s 10km sprint biathlon has just started. That’ll be fun. Philipp Nawrath of Germany leads the way but only four athletes have begun. Speed skating-wise, they’re trying to sort the ice rink out, apparently. There is damage in the outside lane which they are having to resurface before the racing can begin. It’s the men’s 500m final, by the way. Women’s ice hockey: Finland lead Japan 2-0 in their quarter-final, towards the end of the first period. Petra Nieminen and Viivi Vainikka with the goals. Men’s ice hockey: In Group A, Germany and China locked at 0-0 in the first period. Journalists receiving death threats from those angered by the suspicion surrounding Kamila Valieva after she failed a doping test. The Olympic spirit! Sweden did of course beat Canada 7-4, not the other way around, so they top the standings in the men’s curling round robin with four wins out of four. Switzerland second: played four, won three, and Great Britain third as it stands with two wins out of three. Great Britain have two matches coming up tomorrow, against China and Denmark. Men’s round robin curling results: China 12-9 Italy, Sweden 7-4 Canada, Switzerland 8-6 Denmark, Norway 7-6 USA ... let me have a look at what that does to the table. Women’s team pursuit speed skating quarter-final: Japan seal the win and with an Olympic record of 2min 53.61sec! Canada, Netherlands and ROC all progress to the quarter-finals – Canada were just 0.36sec off Japan’s pace. The BBC commentators reckon the Netherlands’ time was disappointing (3.65sec down in third), and that they are not working together well enough as a team given their prodigious talents. A famous theme when it comes to Dutch sport, also often applied to the football team. They are safely through, anyway, with China, Norway, Poland and Belarus failing to progress to the semi-final. For those of you waking up and checking the overnight news: Lindsay Jacobellis has won another gold medal for the USA! She was considered the nearly-woman of Olympic snowboarding, but any such demons have been officially banished in Beijing. Bryan Armen Graham has the story: Stepanova roars over the finish line and is mobbed by her teammates ... what a performance from her on that fourth leg. She blew the competition away. Germany take a tremendous silver medal, +18.2sec, Sweden edge to the bronze medal, +20.7 sec. Women’s 4 x 5km relay skiing: Stepanova has stormed away at the front of the race for ROC! She has overturned the lead of Germany and ROC are set for gold! She is flying to the finish! Latest men’s round robin curling scores: Sweden 5-4 Canada, Norway 7-5 USA, Switzerland 7-4 Denmark. Women’s team pursuit speed skating: Canada fractionally fail to overhaul the leaders Japan: they clock 2min 53.97sec v the previous mark of 2min 53.61 Norway and Belarus are now fifth and sixth respectively. Poland and ROC still to go. Victoria Carl, the German, storms home at the end of the third leg, having overtaken the ROC athlete who was previously ahead! So Germany lead the way into the fourth leg ... ROC +5sec, Norway +14.7sec, Finland +18.1sec. Sophie Krehl is tasked with bringing this home for Germany after a phenomenal third let by her teammate Carl. Veronika Stepanova is giving chase for the ROC team. Thanks Geoff and hello everyone. Right, what’s occurring? Cross-country skiing, as you know, plus women’s team pursuit speed skating: Japan lead their quarter-final there, beating Netherlands, China and Norway into second, third and fourth respectively as it stands ... Cross-county: Henning comes in to finish the second leg fastest, Nepryaeva second by 4.3 seconds, and Johaug hauls Norway into third by 22.8 seconds. For the third and fourth legs, I’ll leave you with Luke McLaughlin. Cross-county: Hennig attacks Nepryaeva up the main hill on the course, their second time around this 2.5km loop. She passes on the outside and goes to the front. Johaug is still attacking in third, leading a chasing group. Cross-county: Therese Johaug, the Norwegian double-gold winner at these Games, is burning up the course. Chasing the front pair with intensity. She won over 10km and in the 7.5km skiathlon, so 5km is nothing for her. Cross-county: Nepryaeva for the ROC and Hennig for Germany are with each other, but well in front of everyone else. Their advantage 11 seconds at the moment. Cross-country: There’s no baton in this relay, obviously, as cross-country skiers use both their hands to hold poles. There’s an approach lane, and the next skier can start moving as long as they don’t pass a certain point, and the approaching skier has to touch them in the back to constitute a handover. ROC handover first, Germany and Japan next. Cross-country: The women’s 5km relay has begun. We’re on the first leg, with the leaders approaching the handover. Curling: Shuster again has the final stone and a chance to make a save, but his shot slides just a bit too long, and that leaves Norway two scoring stones. They lead the USA 6-3 now as we start the seventh end. Curling: China leading 5-4 over Italy, Sweden 2-0 over Canada, Switzerland 4-3 over Denmark, Norway 4-3 over the USA. Curling: One stone in the rings for Norway with three to play, sitting behind the button, and they’ve assembled a big defensive wall in front of that. Hoping to save that one in place, then drift their last stone in for a second score? Not sure. They send down another that sits in front of the button. Not sure if the US could use that top stone to knock the other one out. They attempt something else though, and it doesn’t work, striking one of the guards. But Norway botch their last stone, looking to set one more guard in place but not landing it right. It allows John Shuster to set up a series of ricochets that knocks out the middle Norway stone and lands his own stone a tiny margin closer to the button. Instead of two points for Norway, it’s one point for USA. They lead 3-2. Curling: The Norwegians level it up, 2-2 and playing the fourth end now. Curling: The USA men leading Norway 2-1 in the third end. Lots of curling starting now for the men’s round robin. China v Italy, Canada v Sweden, Denmark v Switzerland, USA v Norway. As for the men’s Group A match, same score, USA beating Canada 4-2. The ROC take off their tender and throw an extra skater on in a desperate bid for an equaliser, and as so often happens the other team scores an empty net goal instead, Muller firing almost the full length of the rink and right into the middle of the target. Switzerland win 4-2. One! Two! The Russians equalise through Luchnikova, but 30 seconds later Muller comes flying down the length of the rink, passes a couple of defenders, passes right to Stalder, skates left herself, and is there on the left side of goal when Stalder flicks a pass across for Muller to send home. It’s 3-2 to the Swiss. A couple of minutes to play. Now the Swiss have a penalty against them for a cross-check, which is when a player uses the handle of the stick between both hands to check an opponent. Nicole Bullo is off, so the Russians have a chance with five on four on the ice. The Swiss go ahead! Dominque Ruegg scores to make it 2-1, and then seconds later the Russians have Polina Luchnikova sent off for two minutes to rob them of a chance at a quick counter. Ice hockey: We’re at the start of the third period in both matches now. It’s 1-1 in the women’s quarters between the Swiss and the Russians. USA still leading Canada 3-2 in the men’s group match. The Mikaela Shiffrin story has been one of the most compelling at these Games, and Bryan Graham wrote on it from Beijing. Also, apparently people are mad about results in the skeleton? Each to their own I guess. Ice hockey: Approaching the end of the second period, the USA lead Canada 3-2. And here’s a bit more on the silver in that event for Scotty James. Meanwhile, Sean Ingle wrote really nicely on the snowboarding. Barney Ronay responded to the Valieva case. And the intensely parochial response to it. Here is the report about the positive doping test recorded by Kamila Valieva. Given we mentioned national human rights failures, let’s start with the looming possibility of another one. I’ll give you the events in GMT, given most of our readers are in the UK. Add eight hours for China, eleven hours for Australia. Subtract five hours for the USA’s east coast, eight hours for the west coast. Currently the only event happening is the ice-hockey: a women’s quarter-final between the ROC and the Swiss, and a men’s pool match between Canada and the USA. The mixed team snowboard cross final has already been... boarded? USA took gold, Italy and Canada next in. 6am: Men’s round robin curling matches, including USA v Norway. 7:30am: Women’s 5km cross-country ski relay final. 8:40am: Women’s ice hockey quarter-final, Japan v Finland. Men’s pool match, Germany v China. 8:53am precisely: Men’s 500m speed skating final 9am: Men’s biathlon 10 kilometre sprint final. 11am: Couples ice dance - rhythm dance. Midday: Women’s curling round robin, including GB v USA. Men’s large hill individual ski jumping. 1pm: Men’s ice hockey pool matches, ROC v Czechia and Switzerland v Denmark. 1:50pm: Women’s skeleton final. Hello all, the weekend has begun at the Olympics, and it’s time to start off another day in the fake snow of Beijing. We have plenty of action ahead with medals up for grabs in a number of sports, and we also have a lot of news out of an increasingly controversial Games. Not that there was a lack of controversy going into it, with China’s human rights landscape under the microscope. I’ll tell you everything that’s coming up shortly.Fully vaccinated Britons will no longer be required to undergo Covid tests in order to travel to France, opening up travel between the countries as the half-term holidays get under way. Children under 12 are exempt from testing and vaccination requirements. Guillaume Bazard, the French consul-general in London, announced the change to the rules on Twitter. He wrote: “As of 12 February, tests will no longer be necessary for travellers with a complete vaccination schedule traveling from the UK to France. Our website will be updated as soon as further details are published.” The relaxation of travel rules had been hinted at earlier in the week, with France’s Europe minister, Clément Beaune, suggesting that the requirement was likely to be dropped soon. Before the announcement, people travelling to France from outside the EU, including from the UK, were required to present a negative Covid test result from the previous 48 hours, regardless of vaccination status. The change means jabbed holidaymakers travelling between the UK and France do not need to test on either end of their journey, after Britain ended its testing requirement for fully vaccinated arrivals at 4am on Friday. At present, passengers are not required to have had a booster dose to count as fully vaccinated, the transport secretary, Grant Shapps, has previously said. Under-18s will continue to be treated as eligible double vaccinated passengers but Shapps has said that 12- to 15-year-olds would be able to prove their vaccination status via the digital NHS pass for international outbound travel. France, where people are asked show a Covid passe sanitaire to enter most public spaces in the country, requires vaccinated travellers to have received their last dose within the past nine months. The move follows Spain easing its travel rules for British passengers aged 12 to 17. Teenagers who have not received two jabs are not presently allowed to enter the country, but will be allowed in from 14 February with a negative PCR testIn his long career, Louis Hayes has been the drummer of choice for Oscar Peterson, Cannonball Adderley and Horace Silver, to name but three, and has led many of his own bands. Although not one of your flashy, upfront drummers, he has an unmistakable style: excitement tempered by poise. His latest band is a quintet, its members drawn from the current New York jazz scene. The slightly gruff sound of Abraham Burton’s tenor saxophone and the ringing tones of Steve Nelson’s vibraphone make a nice tonal contrast, and they’re both fresh and engaging soloists. Pianist David Hazeltine is best known for his own trio albums (some with Hayes on drums), but he plays his supporting role in the rhythm section immaculately, emerging for the occasional, elegant solo. Bassist Dezron Douglas and Hayes seem to have worked up one of those bass-and-drums partnerships that become pure intuition. That’s why the whole thing swings so effortlessly. As if all this weren’t enough, there’s a very good guest singer, Camille Thurman, in two numbers. I tried to pick out the best from these 10 tracks but, believe me, they’re all equally good.The number of older workers leaving their jobs has risen during the pandemic, reversing decades of steady gains for the over-50s in Britain’s workforce. With a record number of job vacancies, employment experts and campaigners say government and businesses could do more to support older people who would like to work. We ask four people about their experiences. Bob Pemberton, 71, Aviva customer service adviser After a 50-year career, most people could think of better things to do with their days than start work at 6.15am. For Bob Pemberton, however, getting up for his job as a customer service adviser with insurance company Aviva puts a spring in his step. The 71-year-old from Sheffield joined the firm in 2015 after deciding retirement wasn’t for him. He had worked since the early 1970s for the Department of Health and Social Security and later for a trade union. “I was bored rigid,” he said. “I enjoy working. It keeps me active and my brain going. You start to stagnate if you’re not careful.” Pemberton says he is fortunate in that he doesn’t need to work. He and his wife, Liz, both have final salary pensions, and they’ve paid off their mortgage. “But my job is rewarding: I work with a great team.” Aviva lets him work flexibly, doing a few long days to allow a shorter working week. The insurer says investing in older workers creates a diverse workforce and helps pass experience on to younger employees. Pemberton can work from home, but has been glad to return to the office as restrictions ease: “I thoroughly enjoy being back. It’s great being with a crowd of people.” He plans to keep working for the social life and stimulation as long as he feels like it. “I certainly don’t feel 71. I’ll probably keep on working for some time yet.” Tim Folan, 61, retired procurement manager Having lost his job in 2019, Tim Folan gave up looking for work during the pandemic after reassessing his priorities. Now the 61-year-old plans to sell his home in Walthamstow, east London, and retire to a cheaper city in the north of England, such as Liverpool or Bradford. “I thought to myself last year that the only reason I came to London was to get work. So why stay? Why not cash in the money in my property and move farther north where people are nicer?” The former librarian, originally from Coventry, handled procurement for a large accounting firm, and said he was concerned early in the pandemic that he might elbow out younger adults if he went up against them for jobs. “I had a view – I think lot of people did at the time – that there would be massive recession and loads of unemployment. I didn’t need to work, so why not give up and just take my pension?” Adam Ranson, 65, retired media teacher A former film and media studies teacher from Gloucestershire, Adam Ranson found his work as an examiner dried up during the pandemic. In semi-retirement since 2018, he has changed his mind about looking for work. “I am beginning to be offered some invigilation work, but am disinclined to re-engage,” he said. “The portcullis has come down on my former 40-year vocation and I’m living the life I expected to lead in my 70s.” Ranson used to be a fan of foreign-language and arthouse films and kept up with cultural trends, but says he has lost any sense of film being his vocation. “I started watching The Power of the Dog recently, and thought, ‘Great acting, great cinematography, but do I want to watch a misery narrative? Nah, Jack Reacher is preferable’.” Nichola Richings, 66, retired salesperson Having been furloughed by the energy company she worked for, Nichola Richings, 66, was made redundant in autumn 2020. “It damaged my self-esteem and confidence,” she said. “But I am a resilient person, so when I reached 66 I decided to think of myself not as an old woman on the scrap heap but a young retiree.” Richings doesn’t have the financial safety net some retired people enjoy, having moved to her council home in Wiltshire from a women’s refuge eight years ago. She has no workplace pension, no mortgage-free property, and relies on her state pension and top-up credits, worth £177.10 a week. Although she’s happy in retirement, and enjoys walking her dog, Rosa, in fields near her home, she believes that even if she did want to work, employers would dismiss her application. “A woman of my age is unemployable,” she said. “Who’s going to take someone on who needs to be trained up, when they’re approaching retirement age?”The clouds are lifting for travel and aviation as it looks forward to the first half-term for two years free of most Covid shackles. Bookings have boomed since the decision that travel testing would end – and easyJet, the airline that carries the most UK passengers, has just welcomed staff who were working remotely back to the Luton hangar that serves as head office. If optimism is growing that business could return to pre-pandemic levels by summer, easyJet’s chief executive, Johan Lundgren, is clear that the crisis is not yet done. Short-haul and leisure travel, easyJet’s market, will come back quickest, he says – but this is only the recovery phase of the pandemic after a long time in survival mode. “You have to remind yourself that we were grounded for 11 weeks and didn’t know when we would restart operations.” Asked whether we will see more variants, he says: “I’m sure we will. I don’t think we can call it over.” But he certainly believes that testing should be a thing of the past. Having had to track diverging Covid policy across Europe over two years, he says: “It’s been extraordinary sometimes.” Between the EU’s introduction of digital Covid passports last May and the onset of the Omicron variant, for example, he says, most European countries were open to vaccinated travellers: “No testing, no quarantine. The UK was the only country that had these restrictions – and the scientists and experts are [all] looking at the same data. And the UK had some of the highest rates of infections and cases. “So one has to be clear that testing on travel is an extraordinarily inefficient measure to combat the virus. That experiment has now been done. It doesn’t work.” * * * CV Age 55 Family Married with twins, a boy and girl, now at university: “They came together, and they left together.” Education Left school in Sweden at 16 to study classical trombone; business development courses in Stockholm and Lausanne; and a series of mentors – “getting people I can learn a lot from to share thoughts and experiences”. Pay £740,000 including bonuses; no bonus taken since 2019. Last holiday Skiing in France’s Les Trois Vallées over Christmas. Best advice he’s been given “Surround yourself with quality people.” Biggest career mistake “As president of a company in Canada, I made a big change to its distribution strategy, implementing it overnight despite people telling me not to. That failed spectacularly. You learn to listen to people.” Word he overuses “My wife would say, ‘Have you done…?’” How he relaxes “With my wife, reading books” (currently essays by Christopher Hitchens). * * * As a Swede, he says he finds the UK’s confrontational politics “fascinating”, and a factor in what he sees as misguided policy: “I think the government thought that people liked the idea of controlling strong borders. But there was no evidence that it was effective. I don’t know why the government has been so keen in going against what almost all other countries were doing in Europe – I think most of Europe got it right.” Lundgren first came to live in the UK aged 16, following a very different flight path. From the age of 11, the young Johan had only one goal in mind: to become a trombone soloist. “My mother was one of those people who would have said ‘absolutely’ if I’d told her I wanted to be an astronaut,” Lundgren says, “so it probably sounded reasonable.” After leaving school in Stockholm to train for three years with the leading lights of symphony orchestras in London and then the US, he realised he wasn’t going to hit the level he wanted – a “traumatic” realisation, he confesses. “I was so determined to be successful. I wanted to do it so badly.” He sold his trombones and didn’t touch the instrument again for many years. Instead, he took stock, decided he liked people and holidays, and headed off to join the travel business: starting as a guide for coach tours to the old Soviet Union, drawing on his knowledge of Rimsky-Korsakov and Rachmaninoff. After the Russian chill, he leapt at a posting to Cyprus. This was the start of a career in sunshine holidays for European firms: he became second-in-command at Tui before landing at easyJet at the end of 2017. Lundgren set about boosting easyJet’s holiday arm and planning to make it a more data-focused airline. Two years later, the pandemic hit – and for a while Lundgren’s only focus was on how to stop haemorrhaging cash and keep going. The fleet was grounded at first, and then schedules were upended by changing rules and uncertain demand. Many staff were let go, although agreements with unions minimised compulsory redundancies, he says. The airline has been rehiring those who took voluntary severance, prioritising former pilots and crew as jobs return, if only seasonally. Many staff were also furloughed, while those who remained “worked harder than they have ever worked in their entire life,” he says. While aviation was battered by Covid, the industry has even more intractable issues to face. After the pandemic, the biggest change will be the focus on decarbonisation, Lundgren says. “People will pay much more attention to products and services, and companies they buy from. They’ll choose those that reduce their impact on the environment. That’s a conscious choice.” For that reason, easyJet became the first airline to say it would offset emissions from all its flights – about 8m tonnes – at a price Lundgren refuses to divulge, but insists, in the face of some scepticism, that it is the highest standard. “We have had many people trying to work out if the project has flaws in it – and that’s not the case.” He admits offsetting is not a solution, but argues that electric and hydrogen planes for short-haul airlines are coming sooner than we think: “The change is exponential, not linear. Airbus have said they will have a large-scale hydrogen plane out by 2035. On the electric side, our partner [US startup Wright Electric] said it will have a 100-plus seater electric plane out by 2030. “It’s not a question this will happen; it’s when, and how do you then transition? We have a fleet today of 322 aircraft – we need a plan and a roadmap.” That needs government help across Europe to support the transition, and incentivise greener practices, he argues: “It should be easier and cheaper for you to move into new technology. We’re getting no tax credits today, for example, for our high-quality offsetting programme, while we know there’s not going to be a country by 2050 which won’t rely on offsetting in terms of reaching net zero themselves.” Wouldn’t it be better for people to take trains rather than planes? “The high-speed rail network in Europe isn’t as developed as some people might think it is. Massive investment in rail infrastructure would mean you would take the carbon hit now – these things have huge carbon emissions – and by the time they’d be ready you’d see new technology in aviation. The focus should be on how you decarbonise the industry; the question should not be if you should stop flying.” Well, why not? Lundgren’s imposing frame stiffens slightly, his voice rises and the blue eyes stare a little harder as he says: “Because of the millions and millions and millions of people who benefit – economies that benefit, that have an impact in real people’s life.” Climate change will surely have a bigger impact, though? “You shouldn’t reduce those benefits: you should reduce the impact on the environment. I get extraordinarily upset when people are intellectually lazy, and say we should just stop flying. You keep the benefits and reduce the impacts – just like many other industries.” More than 200 well-funded projects are looking at electric flight, and easyJet has been involved since 2015, he says: “This is an industry in itself, and one that’s going to be very profitable – we need to raise our voice to accelerate it as soon as possible. “I feel very strongly – we’ve done our job at easyJet on this whole thing. We see the challenge, but also a way out of it.”I studied engineering at university and, like most of my contemporaries, found that I sometimes needed to write computer programs to do certain kinds of calculations. These pieces of utilitarian software were written in languages now regarded as the programming equivalent of Latin – Fortran, Algol and Pascal – and what I learned from the experience was that I was not a born hacker. The software I wrote was clumsy and inefficient and more talented programmers would look at it and roll their eyes, much as Rory McIlroy might do if required to play a round with an 18-handicap golfer. But it did the job and in that sense was, in the laconic phrase sometimes used by the great computer scientist Roger Needham, “good enough for government work”. And what I took away from the experience was a lifelong respect for programmers who can write elegant, efficient code. Anyone who thinks programming is easy has never done it. All of which goes to explain why I sat up when, last year, someone realised that Codex, an offspring of GPT-3, a large neural network trained on vast troves of text gathered from the web that could generate plausible English text, could write apps, ie, short computer programs including buttons, text input fields and colours, by remixing snippets of code it had been fed. So you could ask the program to write code to do a simple task – “make a snowstorm on a black background”, for example – and it would write and run the necessary code in Javascript. In no time at all, there were tech startups such as SourceAI aimed at harnessing this new programming tool. This was impressive, quirky and perhaps useful in some contexts, but really it was just picking low-hanging fruit. Apps are small programs and the kinds of tasks Codex can do are ones that can be described succinctly in ordinary language. All the software has to do is to search through the huge repository of computer code that exists in its database and find a match that will do the job. No real inference or reasoning is required. At this point, DeepMind, the London-based AI company, became interested in the problem. DeepMind is famous for developing the Go-playing world champion AlphaGo and AlphaFold, the machine-learning system that seems better at predicting protein structures than any human. Recently, it announced that it had developed AlphaCode, a new programming engine potentially capable of outperforming many human developers. In classic DeepMind style, the company decided to see how its system would perform on 10 challenges on Codeforces, a platform that hosts worldwide competitive programming contests. Although these challenges are not typical of the average day-to-day workload of programmers, the ability to solve the problems it sets in a creative manner is a good indicator of programming ability. AlphaCode is the first ever AI system capable of competing with humans in this context. Here’s what’s involved: competitors are given five to 10 problems expressed in natural language and allowed three hours to write programs to creatively solve as many problems as possible. This is a much more demanding task than merely specifying an app. For each problem, participants have to read and understand: a natural language description (spanning numerous paragraphs) that contains a narrative background to the problem; a description of the desired solution that competitors need to understand and parse carefully; a specification of the required input and output format; and one or more example input/output pairs. Then they have to write an efficient program that solves the problem. And finally, they have to run the program. The key step – going from problem statement to coming up with a solution – is what makes the competition such a stiff test for a machine, because it requires understanding and reasoning about the problem, plus a deep comprehension of a wide range of algorithms and data structures. The impressive thing about the design of the Codeforces competitions is that it’s not possible to solve problems through shortcuts, such as duplicating solutions seen before or trying out every potentially related algorithm. To do well, you have to be creative. So how did AlphaCode do? Quite well, is the answer. “Overall”, DeepMind reports, it came out “at the level of the median competitor. Although far from winning competitions, this result represents a substantial leap in AI problem-solving capabilities and we hope that our results will inspire the competitive programming community”. Translation: “We’ll be back.” They will. This is beginning to look like the story of Go-playing and protein folding; in both cases, the DeepMind machine starts at the median level and then rapidly outpaces human competition. It will be a quick learner. Does that mean that programmers will become obsolete? No, because software engineering is about building systems, not just about solving discrete puzzles. But if I had to write software now, it would be reassuring to have such a machine as an assistant. What I’ve been reading Eat your words Cooking with Virginia Woolf is a lovely essay by Valerie Stivers in the Paris Review on how the author of To the Lighthouse didn’t know much about boeuf en daube. Keeping on rollin’ John Seabrook reflects on Ford’s decision to electrify its much-loved F-150 truck in a long New Yorker piece, America’s Favorite Pickup Truck Goes Electric. Spotify’s true colours A neat blogpost by Damon Krukowski, The Big Short of Streaming, dissects Spotify’s attempt to defuse the Joe Rogan controversy. TL;DR summary: Spotify is a tech company, not a music one.Dr Julie Smith, 37, is a clinical psychologist who has a private practice in Hampshire and has spent 10 years working for the NHS. In November 2019, she started making TikToks containing clear, engaging advice about various mental health issues. She has more than 3 million followers and in January published her first book, Why Has Nobody Told Me This Before?, which has spent four weeks at the top of bestseller lists. There are a lot of self-help books published; why do you think yours has struck a chord? I think people like the fact that it’s evidence-based. I’m a clinical psychologist, so the things I’ve put in there have been scrutinised with the latest research and they are things that are taught to people in therapy, depending on what they’re going to therapy for. They are also life skills that we can all use. Everyone’s had days when their mood is lower than they would like it to be or days when they’re dealing with more stress, grief, or anxiety – all those normal human feelings that can hold us back or be a struggle to cope with if we don’t have the right skills. Also we’ve just come through a pandemic and I think lots of people are thinking: “How can I pull myself through this?” How did you segue into social media and TikTok? When I was offering psychological therapies, I found a lot of people didn’t realise that a part of therapy is educational. You do a lot of talking and working out your problems, but you also learn a little bit about how your mind works, how you can influence your mood and your emotional state and how then you can affect your day-to-day mental health. People found that educational aspect so empowering that there was a shift in their ability to manage their mental health day to day. So I would come home and harp on to my husband about how this stuff should be more available, that people shouldn’t have to come to me to find out the basics, and he said: “Well, go on then, make it available. Put it on YouTube or something.” Giving people tools – that’s cognitive behavioural therapy isn’t it? There’s a mix in there. I’ve tried to keep it to everyday tools. I’ve been very careful about that distinction: “This is the educational element of therapy, it’s not therapy.” These are tools that you can put into use today and tomorrow, but the book’s not a therapist. Social media is often blamed for young people’s mental health problems, especially self-esteem and anxiety… A portion of my videos have been about trying to remind people that what they see on social media isn’t always real. To be mindful when they’re spending time with certain content of how it makes them feel and to use social media to enhance their life rather than take away from it. Social media behaviour such as ghosting, trolling or blocking can be distressing. What advice do you give people who find being online quite brutal? It’s about recognising that you have the power of choice. You have a choice how long you spend online, you have a choice about who you follow and who you don’t and the content you engage in. When you get into mindless scrolling, it can feel like you don’t have a choice. So my videos have really been about reminding people and helping them to build that awareness – that if this is impacting you in a negative way, you are one decision away from something different. There’s a line that often circulates that gen Z and millennials are more prone to mental health problems, that they’re snowflakes basically. What would you say about that? It’s not something I would engage with at all. Mental health is, for me, no different to physical health. No one is immune. If you take anyone and you start messing around with their core defences, things such as sleep, routine, social connection, nutrition and exercise, then that person will become vulnerable to both physical and mental health problems. I think more people are starting to realise that now and that’s helping to tackle the stigma around mental health. It’s a much healthier way to view things. So people are just better at naming things nowadays, rather than actually being more fragile? You are not more physically fragile for talking about your physical injuries. There aren’t more broken legs just because we plaster them up now. It’s moving in the right direction, but you’ll always get some kickback, that’s how change happens. “Metacognition” is key concept in your book; why is it important? It is kind of thoughts about your thoughts. It’s one of the main tools that we utilise in therapy – being able to step back from your thought processes and observe them. By doing that, you get to see them for what they are. People often think therapy is about changing your thoughts. Actually, you can’t decide what thoughts are going to pop into your head – it just happens. The bit you get to choose is how much air time you give each thought. You seem to be quite down on positive thinking. Is positive thinking a bad thing? Positive thoughts are great, they’re not bad. But there is this sort of movement online around only positive vibes; don’t allow the negative thoughts to be there. If you have that standard for yourself, as soon as negative thoughts start to appear that you can’t control, you start to feel like you’re failing or that you’re not positive enough. That you’re not enough in general. It sets you up to feel worse. So therapy is often about accepting thoughts as they arrive and then making choices about what you do with them. If I spend time with these thoughts, is that going to help me move forward where I want to go? Or if I spend time with these, what impact is that having that’s different? It’s allowing your brain to come up with whatever it comes up with and then choosing what to do next. There’s a chapter in your book titled “How do you make yourself do something when you don’t feel like it?”. We’ve all been there. What’s the answer? There are always things that we don’t feel like doing. There’s something that’s taught in a therapy called dialectical behaviour therapy, DBT for short, which is opposite action. Mindfulness is a really helpful element of this, where you become aware of the urges to act. So each feeling will give you an urge to do or not do something. And often you’ll feel the feeling and you’ll go and do the thing and you haven’t really separated out the urge and the action – you just do it all in one go. But what you can do is begin to build awareness of an urge and start to recognise that you don’t have to act on it: you can act opposite to it. This becomes a tool that you can use in those little moments that seem insignificant, but actually add up. How do you think your content might change as we (hopefully) leave the pandemic behind? I don’t imagine for a minute that because the lockdowns have ended the psychological fallout will. People are dealing with huge amounts of loss. Not only where people have lost family members and friends, but also where they’ve lost livelihoods, jobs, financial security, homes, a sense of safety going out. There are huge amounts of changes that will continue for people. The cost of therapy puts it beyond the reach of most people and there’s limited availability on the NHS. How do you square this with the increased number of people who are coming forward? That’s partly why the book felt such a timely thing to do. I can’t give everybody one-to-one therapy, but I can do something. I can share some basic education as widely as I can. I had no interest in being a public person or being on social media – it was really about sharing that information. And it was difficult to do. I’ve got three children and a job and the thing that kept me going was the feedback. It’s just been overwhelming. Every day, people message saying: “Thank you so much. This is making a difference.” It’s not an ideal world and I don’t have all the answers, but I can put my bit in. Why Has Nobody Told Me This Before? by Dr Julie Smith is published by Michael Joseph (£14.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyA deadly virus arrives from the east and sweeps through western Europe for two years. The pandemic devastates the country’s economy and drastically reduces the number of available workers. Those who survive find they are in a strong position to secure a higher price for their labour. That was the England of the 1350s in the aftermath of the Black Death, when emergency measures were brought in to cope with labour shortages. And, while the death toll from Covid-19 is nowhere near as severe as the drop – of at least a third – in England’s population between 1348 and 1350, the outcome for today’s economy is in some ways similar. This week’s UK labour market figures are expected to show job vacancies running hot. Vacancies have scaled record highs in recent months and fears that the end of the furlough scheme would lead to a sharp increase in unemployment have proved unfounded. The story behind the official data is of employers struggling to attract or retain staff, and of workers seeking to make the most of it. Those who want to continue working from home part of the time or cut down to a four-day week have found employers more receptive than in the past. “Employers are working hard to keep staff happy,” says Jon Boys, labour market economist at the Chartered Institute of Personnel and Development. “They are trying to look after their staff and do more for them. A year ago we were worried there would be not enough jobs and too many candidates for them. Now we are worried that there are too many jobs and not enough candidates.” During the early part of the pandemic, in 2020, there were four unemployed people for every vacancy in the UK. Now the ratio is one for one. “There aren’t many candidates out there”, Boys says. Economists say the explanation for the current strength of the labour market is simple: demand for workers has been going up at a time when their supply has been limited. On the demand side, the reopening of the economy as the pandemic loosens its grip has meant stronger competition for staff. On the supply side, a combination of factors means the labour force is smaller than it was expected to be pre-Covid. Stephen Evans, chief executive of thinktank the Learning and Work Institute, says there are 1.1 million fewer people in the workforce than there would have been had pre-pandemic trends continued. A third of that is because the population is smaller, as more people have left the UK and fewer people are coming in. This has exacerbated employment pinch points in sectors such as hospitality. Another reason for the drop is that young people are spending longer in education. The biggest cause of the drop, however, is older workers – those aged 50 and over – leaving the workforce altogether. Support for this group – to encourage them to continue looking for work – has not been good enough, Evans says. “The end of the furlough is agreed to have been a triumph,” he says. “The soft landing is great news for those in employment. But there was no attempt to talk to people who were dropping out of the workforce altogether, and no retraining.” Evans argues that more needs to be done to tackle Britain’s chronic skills deficit, noting that while the government is increasing spending on adult skills, it will still be investing less in 2025 than it was in 2010. Over that period, the number of adults improving their skills has dropped by 800,000: against that backdrop, he says, the target set out in the recently published levelling up white paper – to increase that number by 200,000 by 2030 – is not nearly ambitious enough. About 9 million adults in the UK have low literacy or numeracy skills – they aren’t able to understand the dosage levels on a packet of painkillers, for example – and the total has barely shifted over the past 20 years. Andy Briggs, chief executive of Phoenix Group, is the government’s business champion for older workers. “I would say the government has a strong focus on this and is doing a lot of the right things,” he says, though he admits that more could be done. However, employers must also take responsibility for doing more to attract and retain older staff. “It’s absolutely critical. There are massive benefits to this,” says Briggs. As the head of Britain’s biggest long-term savings and retirement firm, which has assets of more than £300bn, he says it makes business sense to employ an age-diverse workforce. “Some older workers have chosen not to work. But we estimate that between 750,000 and a million over-50s who aren’t working actually want to. On the other side there are significant workforce shortages in many sectors. So the solution is for more employers to think about their approach to recruitment and training, and to think differently about attracting over-50s, who have an awful lot of transferable skills.” According to official figures, the employment rate for 50-64-year-olds has dropped by almost 2 percentage points to 70.8% since Covid-19 hit, reversing a global megatrend for more older people to join or stay in the workforce. Even the 2008 financial crisis barely affected this trend. Kirstie Donnelly, chief executive of City &amp; Guilds, the body that has worked on skills delivery for 143 years, says vacancies are spread across most sectors of the economy: 42,000 in construction, 60,000 in transport, 170,000 in food and accommodation, and 200,000 in care. “There are jobs without people and people who don’t want the jobs”, she says. So what happens next? Boys at the CIPD doesn’t believe in the Great Resignation – the idea that the pandemic made people more likely to leave their job and start a completely new career. Although it is counterintuitive, he says, people tend to look to move when unemployment is high rather than when it is low. Boys says this is because when jobs are hard to come by, people can find themselves doing work that doesn’t match their skills or aspirations. In periods of low unemployment, people are more likely people to have found jobs that suit them. The Bank of England expects unemployment to continue falling in the very short term, to 3.8% in the first quarter of 2022. After that, though, it is forecasting a rise in the jobless rate, to a peak of 5%, as the cost of living crisis bites. Tony Wilson, director of thinktank the Institute of Employment Studies, agrees that the labour market will eventually cool. “Firms are under big pressure to raise wages, and most will want to do so, but it will be at the expense of jobs unless they can get some gains through productivity. National insurance is going up, wages are going up, and so firms will increase working hours and won’t replace workers who leave as quickly.” But long-term problems are likely to persist. Research by City &amp; Guilds suggests there will be 3.1 million key worker openings in the next five years, but only around a quarter of UK citizens would consider taking up jobs in sectors such as food production or logistics. Low pay is one factor deterring them; lack of relevant skills, experience or qualifications is another. “In the face of a growing labour crisis impacting these vital industries and wider society, we need to collectively take a long, hard look at how we can make these jobs more attractive”, Donnelly says. “We need to do more than simply clap for carers. We desperately need to re-evaluate the way we as a nation recognise these roles.” In the 14th century, coercion was used in an attempt to increase the supply of labour. In 1351, the Statute of Labourers decreed that all able-bodied men had to work at pre-Black Death wage rates. Such meddling with market forces proved a flop. Today’s experts say a different approach is needed this time.Sue Fish Former chief of Nottinghamshire police, who called out the “toxic culture of sexism” in UK policing “The home secretary needs to announce a proper public inquiry into policing, as opposed to a localised look at the Metropolitan police that has no statutory obligations. Second, policing needs to decide what it wants from its officers in the 21st century. At the moment, the recruitment, selection and promotion processes confirm all the traits that we don’t want to see in policing. One of the key characteristics for not being corrupt is conscientiousness, or diligence, along with high levels of empathy. Those traits correlate to what might be described as decent people. Yet those virtues are never even considered or measured at any point in an officer’s career. Currently professional competence trumps everything else, particularly on technical skills such as firearms. We need to look at what’s rewarded and recognised. At the moment, those who might have had the courage or the desperateness to actually complain about other people are the ones who get sidelined, victimised and penalised. Not the perpetrators. We also need to totally change the code of conduct. It needs to be modern and needs to be absolutely explicit when people flagrantly abuse their positions of power. And we almost need a cull of people from policing whose values don’t fit. To find them you could carry out a cultural audit, identify what are good and what are negative behaviours and then start to call them out. The result is that as soon as you join a shift as a man, you’re not automatically enrolled in the WhatsApp group that shows pornography. I think it would move us much more to a service rather than a force position. And, finally, it’s not just the Met – the issues are much wider than that.” Unmesh Desai Member of the London assembly’s police and crime committee “First, the Met needs to accept it has a problem. Then it needs to set up a detailed action plan with firm timescales of when to deliver. We cannot wait for a review [announced by Cressida Dick less than a week before her resignation] that will take a year, maybe two years. Fundamentally, the Met also needs the will to undergo root and branch reform. It is a shame because Cressida had the potential to be one of the all-time great reforming commissioners. But she needed to stop being defensive, to take a step back. Instead of immediately dismissing there was a problem, to accept it. Look at the history of corruption and failures and surely the starting point should have been to accept the evidence. You cannot address an issue if you don’t accept there’s a problem. We also need to look at recruitment in the context of recruitment not being enough if you don’t retain people. The Met has a terrible history of not retaining new officers, women officers – we’re losing all that experience. And we need to look at training for operational practices and the continuous review of section 50 procedures [the right of officers to obtain a person’s name and address], training, along with creating genuine engagement community. Also, the messaging from the Met is a mess. I’ve said this to Cress [Cressida] myself, told her that the use of social media is not good. In short, the way forward for the Met is to accept it has issues, to stop being defensive, be bold and go out and take people with it, policing with consent.” Shabnam Chaudhri One of the first Asian women to climb the ranks of the Met, becoming detective superintendent. She left in 2019 “The Met needs to immediately focus on providing safe spaces for women and people of colour so they can speak out. It needs to introduce ‘speak out’ groups, creating a platform for people to feel secure when they say what’s on their mind, what’s bothering them. It also needs to make sure that when people do call out bad behaviour, instead of their line manager reporting the complaint to a senior officer – who tend to accept on face value whatever they are told without talking to the complainant – that the person who has complained gives their own account. That’s where the breakdown is. It’s about making sure that you provide opportunities for people to complain. People might not necessarily want to speak out, but if you’ve got a group of people saying these are the issues, then they know it’s a problem. And just because a lot of these [toxic] groups will get disbanded or get deleted doesn’t mean to say that those people are going to stop behaving in a bad way. They’ll do it in a more covert way, which is exactly what happened with the race issues and promotion opportunities – development opportunities. Women and minorities were disregarded and isolated. I’ve had so many people approach me to say they’re not being supported, they’ve been stopped at the first hurdle when going for a job. For instance, they were going to publish a race review last year, but they still haven’t done it. As for Cressida, it shows the importance of leadership. Defending your cops is brilliant but you cannot defend the indefensible.” Dal Babu Former chief superintendent in the Met “The first thing the Met needs to do is acknowledge its shortcomings, something Dick refused to do. Then it must start the process of beginning to listen to advisory groups, viewing feedback as a gift and not as a personal attack. The problem became such that it was not just my Asian and Black friends who expressed concern in the Metropolitan police, but middle- aged white women and men who joined the chorus for a fundamental rethink in how the force reconnects with Londoners and the most diverse capital in the world. The litany of failings, the cases of racism and bullying, took me back to my first day in policing. I remember walking into Tottenham police station in 1983 and the hostility towards me from my colleagues. I could count on one hand the officers who did not use the P and N racial slurs. Fast-forward to 2022 and ask: what change has happened ? Back then, I was told it would take a few decades for the Met to change. Yet four decades on and change hasn’t happened. Cressida Dick has been at the helm for five years – that’s plenty of time to make changes, but she has failed at so many levels. I have no idea what her vision even was and allied to the extensive list of failures on her watch, including the optics of corruption that infected the investigation into the death of the private investigator Daniel Morgan, where Dick was personally cited. I think the removal of Cressida Dick was right and I hope the successor will have a vision and introduce change.” Loretta Trickett Criminologist who has worked with police forces to tackle misogyny “We would do well to remember the Peelian principle from the founder of the Met, namely: ‘The police are the public and the public are the police.’ While effective leadership, including drives to recruit and promote women and ethnic minorities, is essential, it is difficult to achieve when trust is eroded, and these things in themselves are not a panacea for change. There must be a real commitment to finally root out institutional racism and misogyny and publicly acknowledge the role of police culture in sustaining it. To achieve this, an urgent priority is to upscale public input, including reframing of what ‘policing success’ looks like, reshaping priorities, evaluating investigation and prosecution practices and, most importantly, holding the police to account. A new code of policing should be drawn up with independent oversight of disciplinary procedures and swift removal of those who flagrantly breach it. The accountability of MPs to the public must also be strengthened. The public should not have to wait for resignations and votes of no confidence from those within the policing and political parties. Accountability to the public they supposedly serve is long overdue. The public deserve more than police officers and MPs who abuse their office by holding them in contempt. ‘Why did it take so long?’ was one of the news headlines after the resignation of Cressida Dick. Why indeed?”The serious money on Saturday was at Newbury, where the 20-1 shot Glory And Fortune picked up £87,000 for his connections in the Betfair Handicap Hurdle, the most valuable race of its type all year. The most serious candidate for Cheltenham, though, was 80 miles away at Warwick, where Edwardstone confirmed himself as that rarest of creatures: a British-trained favourite for a Grade One race at the Festival. Edwardstone, at 9-4, is only narrowly in front of Blue Lord (3-1) and Riviere D’Etel (9-2), from the powerhouse Irish yards of Willie Mullins and Gordon Elliott respectively, in the betting for the Arkle Trophy, the second race of the Festival meeting on 15 March. After last year’s near-annihilation by the visitors, however, it is something for the home team to cling to. It is a rare treat too for Alan King, Edwardstone’s trainer, whose last winner at the Festival was 86 runners ago in 2015. Edwardstone features twice in that long losing run, having finished sixth in the Supreme Novice Hurdle in 2020 and fifth in the County Hurdle last season. But as Tom Cannon, his jockey, said after a comfortable success in the Grade Two Kingmaker Chase, “everything he has done all his career has built up to this season for him as a chaser and to improve.” Cannon eased into the lead on the run to the third-last and was always in command from that point, eventually crossing the line four and a half lengths in front of Third Time Lucki. “His jumping was electric and he saw it out nicely,” Cannon said. “It’s testament to Kingy and everyone that deals with him on a daily basis that he’s performing the way he is today. There’s no fluke about it. “He’s the horse of a lifetime. Horses like him don’t come along very often for the things he has done for me this year, two Grade Twos and a Grade One. I’m on a high tide.” Stan Sheppard, whose record prize money total for a season before the current campaign was £211,000 in 2016-17, took his haul from 2021-22 past half a million pounds as Glory And Fortune held off the late challenge of I Like To Move It in the Betfair Hurdle. Sheppard picked up £85,000 for connections, nearly three times more than for any other winner in his career, when Iwilldoit took the Welsh National in December and Glory And Honour’s success increased the figure for his richest win by another £2,000. There were still nearly a dozen runners within a couple of lengths of the lead as the field went over the second last, but Glory And Fortune had carved out a length advantage by the final flight and stayed on to win by a short head, as I Like To Move It inched ever closer on the run to the line. Earlier on the card, Eldorado Allen stayed on well on his first attempt at three miles to win the Grade Two Denman Chase, beating Royale Pagaille and Clan Des Obeaux by two-and-a-quarter lengths and 10 after making most of the running. The grey is currently entered for only the Ryanair Chase, over two-and-a-half miles, at the Festival but Colin Tizzard, his trainer, will discuss the possibility of a supplementary entry for the Gold Cup with his owners. “We were pretty convinced he was a three-miler,” Tizzard said. “Whether he is a three-mile-and-two horse [the Gold Cup trip] is something else. Any race at Cheltenham is worth winning and he has got to go where he has his best chance. It looks pretty obvious it is the Ryanair, but who knows what the owners will want to do.” Bravemansgame, who lugged top weight to victory in the opening novice handicap chase, and Funambule Sivola, a comfortable winner of the Game Spirit Chase, will also head to the Festival though with very different prospects according to the betting. Bravemansgame is unchanged at 100-30 second-favourite for the meeting’s three-mile novice chase, while Funambule Sivola is 20-1 to lower the colours of Shishkin and Energumene, among others, in the Champion Chase.Election supervisors in Texas have warned that new stricter voter ID requirements ahead of next month’s state governor’s primary have already resulted in an uncharacteristically high number of ballot rejections. Voting rights activists have expressed fears that new laws making access to the vote more difficult – that have been passed in many states across the US by Republicans – will impact Democrat-leaning voters of color. According to officials in media reports, as many as 40% of roughly 3,600 returned ballots in Harris county, Texas’ most populous county that incorporates Houston, have lacked the identification number required under Senate Bill 1, a Republican-sponsored bill designed to tie voters to valid IDs. In Williamson county, a northern suburb of Austin with a fast-growing population of non-white residents, the rejection rate has been about 25% of early mail-in votes ahead of the 1 March primary which will determine which of the five Democratic challengers, including former US congressman Beto O’Rourke, will likely take on the Republican governor, Greg Abbott. Many of the rejected ballots, election officials said, fail a new requirement to provide an identification number inside the return envelope. Election officials in Harris county alone have said 1,360, or 40%, of mail-in ballots were sent back to voters as of Wednesday because they lacked an ID number. “We’ll see how many we get back,” Isabel Longoria, the Harris county elections administrator, told the Texas Tribune. “That’s our big question mark right now: are voters going to go through the extra step to correct it?” But officials have also said they hope the rate of rejected ballots will fall as more arrive. In Hays county, south-west of Austin, elections chief Jennifer Anderson, said and initial 25% rejection rate had dropped to 4% in recent days. “It seems like our outreach is working,” Anderson told the Washington Post. But the rejection rate has alarmed voting rights advocates attempting to gauge the impact of SB1, one of many voting laws enacted last year after false claims that the 2020 presidential race was colored by voter fraud. “Texans deserve to have confidence in the electoral system,” said state congressman Briscoe Cain, a leading Republican promoter of the Texas initiative that instituted uniform voting hours, expanded access for those who need assistance and enhanced access of party-affiliated poll watchers. SB1 requires Texas voters to provide either a state identification number, typically from a driver’s license, or the last four digits of their social security number, that match the ID number on their voter registration record. The bill also imposes new penalties for anyone who registers to vote or casts a ballot but is not eligible to do so. In addition, mail-in voting is available to those over 65, those who will be away from home on election day or can show they have a disability that prevents them from in-person voting. “I’m confident that local election officials will prioritize assisting voters through the process instead of gaslighting to gin up fear and confusion,” Cain said. The measures appear to potentially disqualify newcomers, often minority groups, from voting effectively in the typically white, conservative state. Jo Nell Yarbrough, a 76-year-old retired educator from the town of Katy, west of Houston, told the Post she’d received a letter informing her that she had failed to include an ID number on her ballot. “It feels like people were just sitting up late at night thinking up ways to discourage people from voting,” she said.Saskia Aukema knew little about her great-aunt Annie, who was murdered during the Holocaust. All she knew was that Annie had declined to go into hiding like her siblings, and continued working as a hospital nurse, even after the Nazi occupation of the Netherlands began in May 1940. “That was the family story: this was the woman who didn’t hide and chose to be with her patients. That was all I knew… this line, this one sentence,” she told the Observer. When Aukema, a photographer and editor, was told by her father a few years ago that Annie had married in Westerbork, the Nazi transit camp in the north Netherlands, she was stunned. Westerbork was the last staging post for nearly 107,000 Dutch Jews before they were put on trains to Auschwitz, Bergen-Belsen and other Nazi camps in central and eastern Europe. Only 5,000 returned. Aukema was left wondering: “How is it possible that you can marry in such a grim place as a transit camp?” Unsatisfied with an internet search, she began to explore the archives and found dozens of Westerbork weddings. Between 4 September 1940 and 17 September 1944, 261 couples married there. Some of their stories are told in Aukema’s book, Until Death Do Us Part, which was published in Dutch last month. “First I wanted to honour the couples,” Aukema said. She also hopes to help people feel the enormity of the loss and suffering of the Holocaust, in a more personal way than the formal ceremonies of Remembrance Day. “I thought I could touch a new generation, people who had perhaps forgotten about the history, or hadn’t forgotten but don’t feel it every day, so they could feel it again.” The camp authorities, under SS commander Albert Konrad Gemmeker, allowed marriages as well as entertainment such as theatre and sport because they added to the illusion that the worst could be avoided. “Westerbork was a ‘make-believe’ world, the Nazis and especially Gemmeker created an illusion,” Gerdien Verschoor, director of the Camp Westerbork Memorial Centre told the Observer. “Marriages were allowed and facilitated, so as not to arouse suspicion. To keep people calm and to give them something to look forward to.” Before the Nazi occupation, Westerbork was a refugee camp for German Jews, so it had facilities, such as schools, kindergartens and a hospital. “The camp had to look as normal as possible,” Verschoor said. The commander, Gemmeker “wanted to create the illusion of normal village life,” she added. “And I think he succeeded very well. People didn’t believe and couldn’t believe that they could be sent to extermination camps; they didn’t have any idea about what was happening in Auschwitz, they really thought they were going to work, and it was very important for Gemmeker to keep that illusion to the end.” As part of this make-believe world, men, women and children were treated in the Westerbork hospital to make them fit enough to be sent to the death camps; couples were allowed to marry and dream of a future. Not all marriages were love matches. The “right” marriage was thought to offer some protection, from being sent east. “People, especially women who married a man with a job in the camp, thought they were not going to be deported,” Verschoor said. Staff at the memorial centre knew about the marriages, but the book brought home the jarring contrast between the hopes of the people in photos that survive and the harrowing reality. “If you don’t see the stars [that Jews were obliged to wear], you see happy couples, and that is what is so upsetting,” Verschoor said. Most of the Westerbork weddings were civil ceremonies. Some were Jewish religious ceremonies that took place in the “synagogue barracks”, which was also the venue for bar mitzvahs. Brides wore white veils and flowers in their hair. There was one white wedding dress shared among several women. And there were wedding “meals” – some extra vegetables, a potato saved up from rations for the celebration. Residents sent homemade cards to the newlyweds: “congratulations from the residents of barracks 42-3”. Kaatje de Wijze married Leo Emile Kok on 13 September 1943. Leo was a talented artist, who was friends with Rudolf Breslauer, a German Jewish photographer, who arrived in Westerbork after fleeing Nazi persecution. As a gift to the couple, Breslauer photographed them on their wedding day. Few traces survive of the wedding of Aukema’s great-aunt. Annie Preger married Hans van Witsen on 28 January 1943. They had met a few months earlier at the Apeldoornsche Bosch, a Jewish psychiatric hospital, where Annie was a nurse and Hans was a gardener. It must have been love at first sight. Within two months, they were engaged. But the hospital was no longer the safe haven from Nazi persecution many had hoped. Like many staff, Annie and Hans were sent to Westerbork. They married soon after arriving, in a ceremony witnessed by two colleagues in the hospital. Soon after, Annie went to the camp hospital, where she was treated for a stomach complaint. Hans missed his new bride, describing himself as a widower, because they were separated so soon. When she was discharged, he wrote to his father: “I am mesjogge [crazy] with happiness.” The couple hoped Annie could get a job at the hospital. But it never happened. They were selected for “labour deployment” and sent on a train to Sobibor extermination camp in German-occupied Poland. From the train, they succeeded in throwing out some letters: they had “good places” in the carriage and were well, Hans wrote to his father. “We will see you very soon.” Annie and Hans were murdered soon after arriving. They had been married for 36 days. Kaatje de Wijze and Leo Emiel Kok did not escape the transports either. Although Gemmeker, an enthusiast for art, theatre and beautiful women, admired Kok’s drawings, it was not enough to save them. Every week the camp had to meet quotas to put Jews on eastbound trains, to be murdered or sent into forced labour. Kaatje and Leo were on the last train to Theresienstadt in September 1944. At that camp they were separated and Leo was sent to Auschwitz. Kaatje broke through a cordon to say goodbye; they vowed to reunite. Leo was later sent to the Ebensee concentration camp, where he did hard labour in the freezing cold, ruining his health. He died days after the liberation aged 22. Kaatje de Wijze survived the war and lived until 2018. Their marriage had lasted 607 days. Many marriages were very short. Some lasted just four days, meaning the couple were transported east on their wedding day and murdered on arrival. Maurits van Thijn, who survived the war, with his wife Catharina Blitz, joked bleakly they had been sent on “honeymoon to Auschwitz”, because they had been deported on their wedding day. After the war, Westerbork was an internment camp for Dutch collaborators, (briefly) a military barracks and later refashioned as housing for immigrants from the Moluccas, an Indonesian former Dutch colony known as the Spice Islands. The final barracks were demolished in 1971 and a memorial centre opened in 1983. There is almost nothing left of the original camp. To research her book, Aukema visited several times, and photographed the countryside, experiencing the scorching summer heat and mosquitos, and the biting winter cold. “It’s so strange that things like that happened in such a beautiful place,” she said. “You have to make a lot of effort to see it.”So Wales are not quite as bad as we thought, Scotland not nearly as consistent as they would like. After opening weekends of contrasting fortunes, the two played out a thriller, the sort of edgy, imperfect, dramatic event on which this championship prides itself. Dan Biggar, on his 100th cap, stepped up – insofar as his injured knee would allow – to land a drop goal with 10 minutes to go which proved the winner. He did it while his opposite number, Finn Russell, every bit as much a talisman for Scotland as Biggar is for Wales, was in the sin bin after a knock-on that was judged to be deliberate. Scotland, having played most of the match with their usual combination of brio and class, fell away sharply thereafter. The final 10 minutes saw them haunted and error-prone while Wales grew all the larger. Alas, there had to be a loser. Scotland feel those familiar pangs again, seemingly all the more familiar after the giddy heights of victory. But regardless of the highs and lows of individual fortunes, this was a testament to the competitive vigour of the Six Nations. The bookies had rated the match closer than opinion at large seemed to. Form-wise there ought to have been only one team in it – and it was not the team in red, so used to prevailing here over the one in blue. Scotland won on their last visit to Wales but that was in an empty stadium in Llanelli on account of Covid. In Cardiff, though, Wales tend to play like a different beast, whatever the personnel. Hence the ranking for Scotland of only narrow favourites. The virus had not quite finished with proceedings. The roof had to remain open for cleaner air, giving the rain more chance to affect the match. That might have suited Scotland still further, with their muscular pack and efficient lineout but, if the opening passage was anything to go by, neither side was fazed by the elements. Matt Fagerson and Stuart McInally sparked an early period of attack for Scotland. Deep in Wales’s 22 Liam Williams managed to pilfer the ball and away Wales went, Owen Watkin dummying and stepping his way deep into Scottish territory. Stuart Hogg was quite lucky not to be penalised for a deliberate knock-on himself but from the scrum Wales were rewarded with a penalty anyway and Biggar opened the scoring in the fifth minute. A few minutes later he kicked another after Sam Skinner was caught on the wrong side of a tackle. But Scotland’s class these days is not fragile, as it used to be. They responded with the game’s first try with one winger, Duhan van der Merwe, breaking down the left and the other, 18 phases later, scoring down the right. Russell’s cut-out pass to Darcy Graham was sublime and Graham’s finish was brilliant past a much bigger man. Russell missed the conversion but two penalties from his boot moved Scotland five points clear at the end of the first quarter. One of Wales’s more capped players is Tomas Francis. The tighthead anchored a scrum that more than held its own and threw himself about with gusto in defence. What is more, he built his part up further with a rare try. A brilliant 50-22 kick from another player of much experience, Liam Williams, set up the Welsh for a spell in Scotland’s 22. When Biggar sent a penalty to the corner in the middle of it, Francis rolled off the side of the driven lineout to bring Wales level at half-time. Just before that Scotland had lost Fagerson to injury to disrupt further a back row that had lost Jamie Ritchie the week before. Wales, too, had their disruptions with the experienced trio of Wyn Jones, Biggar and Williams repeatedly requiring treatment. Russell and Biggar exchanged penalties in the third quarter to maintain the tension before the game turned as the last 10 minutes approached. A long-range penalty by Biggar hit the bar and bounced back into the arms of Alex Cuthbert. Wales hammered away in the Scotland 22 until Russell knocked the ball on as Wales whipped it across him. Cuthbert gathered and was away to the corner for what looked like a try. Closer inspection revealed a foot in touch, which meant closer inspection for Russell’s knock-on. If Hogg’s in the first half had been deemed just a scrum, it is difficult to see why this one was not. Russell looked as if he could have caught it but such attempts are always a gamble in one’s own 22. This was not the first of Russell’s to backfire. He saw yellow and Wales set up camp in the corner. Two lineouts followed. Having sent those two penalties to the corner, Biggar decided three points might be useful after all. His drop goal proved the decisive act. The parallels with Scotland’s game the previous Saturday were uncanny. Same score, a tight game that could have gone either way, an influential yellow card and the underdog prevailing at home. Never mind the euphoria and agony of a result. These speak of a championship more vibrant than ever.North Sea oil producers are ripe for a windfall tax. Without moving a muscle, they have benefited from a doubling in the oil price and a quintupling of the gas price over little more than a year. There are big names in the frame, like BP and Shell, and some minnows that are now making hundreds of millions of pounds from wells offloaded a few years ago by these two lumbering giants of the industry. If a law could be passed without too much fuss, the trading mega-companies registered in the UK or listed on the London Stock Exchange – Glencore, Trafigura and Vitol among them – would pay a slice of their multimillion-pound profits from rocketing international energy prices. A separate windfall tax on the profits from BP and Shell’s global operations – expected to be almost £40bn between them this year – could supplement the small sums they would pay for their part digging up the North Sea. It is clear from recent polling that the public likes the idea of taxing the energy industry’s lottery win. And knowing it is working with the grain of public opinion, Labour has rightly highlighted comments by BP boss Bernard Looney that his company is “a cash machine”. So far the industry fightback has secured only a handful of supporters, though critically Rishi Sunak is among them. The chancellor has made plain his opposition, citing the well-worn excuses of an industry that, just like the banking sector in the 00s, says higher taxes will prevent future investment. The most recent example was George Osborne’s North Sea tax in 2012, which was followed by a decline in drilling. Osborne’s levy was wrongly dubbed a windfall tax – it was not a one-off, but a permanent increase to the toll on profits above the usual corporation tax rate. In 2015, by which time the price of oil had collapsed, Osborne began backpedalling. In 2016, with panic in his eyes, he offered the industry climate-crisis-defying tax breaks on new exploration. Company filings revealed by the Observer last year show that between 2018 and 2020, Shell and BP, which together produce more than 1.7bn tonnes of greenhouse gases a year, avoided paying any corporation tax on oil and gas production in the North Sea. In this context, a one-year windfall tax might disturb oil and gas industry shareholders, but is unlikely to alter the investment outlook of drilling companies that judged how much to spend long before the market went into overdrive. Sunak worries a deal struck with North Sea companies to reduce the carbon footprint of their operations will be in jeopardy. So they might demand a longer timescale? Well, they might. But the Treasury’s response should be the same: tough. Then there are the Conservative MPs who believe it is un-Tory to consider taxing businesses this way. Yet in 1981, Geoffrey Howe came knocking on the doors of UK banks, asking them to accept a share of the pain felt by everyone else during the worst recession since the second world war. Howe imposed a levy that creamed off 2.5% of the banks’ non-interest-bearing current account deposits, harvesting £400m, which was about a fifth of their profits. A year later, in a move that should be given more prominence in the current debate, Margaret Thatcher’s government announced a special tax on North Sea oil and gas, which raised £2.4bn, or about £9bn in today’s money. Amid rising unemployment and falling living standards, and concerned about her re-election, Thatcher found widespread public support. Living standards are about to be hit again, though this time by the longest period (13 years) of decline in two centuries. It should be the case that windfall taxes are more common, not less. Property is a particular example of a windfall that is unearned and unjustified. It is widely acknowledged that house prices have constantly outstripped general inflation since the 1980s when Britain became reliant on private housebuilders to construct 90% of homes. Property has become the world’s biggest investment, sidelining stock markets by soaking up 80% of all investment cash globally, in large part due to the absence of any meaningful tax on rising values. Like the energy companies, all homeowners should be prepared to give up some of their lottery win, especially when the rising cost of health and pensions over the longer term will impoverish the government without extra funds from somewhere. Labour is sticking to a simple tax on oil and gas extractors in the North Sea that will only raise £1.2bn when – and Sunak should be mindful of this – a broader windfall tax is more than justified. Ed Miliband and Rachel Reeves are fronting Labour’s campaign. Maybe, as Covid and Partygate give way to the cost of living crisis as the nation’s most pressing problem, it is time for Keir Starmer to add his voice.Limelight: Siege (Radio 4) | BBC Sounds Archive on 4: Wonderlands (Radio 4) | BBC Sounds Backlisted | backlisted.fm Headwaters (Radio 4) | BBC Sounds Absolute Radio Natalie (Bauer Media) | planetradio.co.uk Well, shake up my prejudices and slap on my headphones, there was such a great drama series on Radio 4 last week. Modern, real, exciting; great acting, careful sound design, gripping plot. I know! No surprise, though, when you see the writers. Siege is co-written by Katherine Jakeways, who gave us the station’s meet-cute-then-what series Where This Service Will…; Darragh Mortell, who wrote the Prix Europa-winning I Am Kanye West, also for Radio 4; and Eno Mfon, whose one-woman stage play about skin bleaching, Check the Label, was turned into a Channel 4 short. Their considerable forces created a five x 30-minute thriller, produced by BBC Cymru Wales, that zoomed straight on to my best of the year list. Bet you it’s still there in 10 months’ time too. The plot is essentially a remix of the 1973 Norrmalmstorg bank robbery and hostage-taking crisis in Sweden that gave the world the concept of Stockholm syndrome. Siege moves the action to a contemporary London mini-market, where five very different people are doing a lunchtime shop when an armed robber strikes. From there, the drama doesn’t cleave too closely to the real event, but there are certain elements that chime: surprised hostages, rolling TV coverage, money demands, the hint of a gas attack. Oh, and sympathy for the bad guy. That sympathy isn’t just from the hostages either; as the tension mounts, we too start to feel for the captor’s plight. It’s not the hostage-taker that we hear from, however, but the six people captured (the shoppers and a security guard). From the start, their characters shine; just the way they speak makes them realistic. You’re gripped by them, during the twists and turns, the jokes (there’s a great one about paper bags), the arresting imagery… right up to the end, which doesn’t do what you expect. Siege is a character study, a state-of-the-nation commentary and a white-knuckle edge of your seater, all in one. It’s part of Radio 4’s newish Limelight podcast strand, which has certainly pepped up the station’s drama, so hooray to the commissioners for that. Great writing is, of course, where all drama begins, and the writer Frank Cottrell-Boyce made a case for children’s books in Wonderlands, last Saturday’s Archive on 4. His contentions – that children’s books are as good, if not better than many adult novels, and that Britain is a world leader at writing for kids – were strongly made, and there were some lovely moments. Publisher Barry Cunningham started his career dressed up as a puffin, for the Puffin Club, from the children’s book imprint: “Actually, it’s a remarkably intimate activity,” he said. “Children tend to tell you their secrets.” While we’re on book tips, Cottrell-Boyce has been a guest on Backlisted, the immensely popular podcast that discusses old books. I haven’t listened for a while, but revisited, to check how it’s doing. Fine, is the answer: hosts John Mitchinson and Andy Miller are as jovial and clever as ever, the conversation informed and flowing. Cottrell-Boyce (yes, I’m a FCB fan: listen to his Desert Island Discs to become one, too) was part of a moving discussion of E Nesbit’s The Railway Children. The other guest was Katherine Rundell, author of Rooftoppers, another children’s book that wipes the floor with most adult novels. She was moved to tears, more than once, during the chat. That’s what great writing can do. The BBC has always revered writing (over, say, art or music), and Radio 4 has long been peppered with literary programmes. A glance at last week’s schedule gives us Bookclub, A Good Read, Poetry Please, Lemn Sissay’s Poetry Rebels, as well as the actual reading-out-loud of books at 9.45am and midday every day. More literature, too, in Headwaters, a one-off R4 programme about stream-of-consciousness writing, hosted by Rebecca Watson, author of the everything-in-one-day novel Little Scratch. Nice use of music and some excellent archive material, including Virginia Woolf, TS Eliot and James Joyce, made this an easy listen. While we’re on books, BBC Arts has a chatty new book offering, Turn Up for the Books, with some good guests such as Skin and the Rev Richard Coles. But the show isn’t quite there yet. Hosts Irenosen Okojie, Dan Smith and Simon Savidge need to perk up their presentation a little and be more specific in their opinions. At the moment, there are too many platitudes for this show to be useful. Enough bookery. Let’s talk straightforward radio, shall we? A few days ago, Absolute brought a brilliant idea to reality: Absolute Radio Natalie, where they gave an Absolute listener, Natalie Cole, her own station for a day. What a sweet concept, and Natalie was an excellent choice. Obsessed by singalong tunes, helped by the regular presenters, she proved a radio natural, especially great with guest Liam Gallagher: “I kind of want to have a swear-off.” There are some interesting radio ideas out there at the moment. Ex-talkRadio host Iain Lee has a phone-in show on Radio Anywhere, an online station he’s started; and Shaun Keaveny, previously of 6 Music, has booted up his own, one-day-a-week station too, Community Garden Radio. Talented radio people creating not only the programmes they want to hear but the stations too: more power to them.Last week’s We Are Bristol History Commission report into the toppling of Edward Colston’s statue made fascinating reading, not least because it put a credible number on the strength of feeling on either side of the most heated “culture war” – among those who wanted the statue toppled and those outraged by the act. Nearly 14,000 people, more than half from Bristol, responded to the commission’s invitation to complete a detailed survey on their feelings about the events of June 2020. Three-quarters agreed with the idea that the slave trader’s statue should remain on permanent display in a Bristol museum, while only 12% thought it should be restored to its plinth. Those who believed it should be seen horizontally and graffitied, in the state it was recovered from the harbour, outnumbered those who believed it should be cleaned and upstanding by five to one. Some of the best reactions, however, came from those respondents who offered compromise solutions, novel ways of keeping both statue-dunkers and pearl-clutchers happy. One of these suggested that the statue be split in two, “with one half of it returned to the plinth and the other half thrown back in the river”. Best of all, perhaps, was the proposition that “(after updating the plinth with an accurate plaque) we put Colston back up. Then once every year on the anniversary of his toppling we have a festival where we pull him down again and ceremonially throw him in the river.” What’s not to like? You do the maths In 1980, Stephen Hawking was confident that a “final unified theory” of “life, the universe and everything” would be found in the next two decades. At a conference that year he assembled the theoretical physicists who seemed closest to establishing the idea of “supersymmetry”, linking the very smallest particles in the universe with the very largest forces. A blackboard from that conference, which preserves the doodlings of some of the world’s greatest minds, went on display last week in a new Hawking exhibit at the Science Museum in London. That it contains not killer equations but a series of crap in-jokes about the participants at the conference confirms my own unified theory: that Douglas Adams’s Hitchhiker books had nearly as much to say about our ultimate place in the cosmos as those of his more illustrious contemporary. Get down on it Having started and abandoned a doomed series of “must get fit” regimes – couch to 5k and quickly back to couch – I thought I had stumbled on an inspired solution to my horribly sedentary work habits a month or two ago. My plan was this: every time I felt I was losing concentration in staring at my working-from-home screen – about every 17 minutes – I’d activate a favourite (alarmingly 1980s) playlist and dance around the kitchen island like nobody was watching for a couple of tracks, before returning to my desk. The tactic seemed, and still seems, so promising on several levels – quick burst of endorphins, no Lycra or Peloton required, embarrassing only to immediate family – that I believed I might have discovered a unique health breakthrough. Inevitably, however, there’s a book that shows I’m far from a pioneer. Dr Peter Lovatt’s The Dance Cure promises to provide “the surprising secret to being smarter, stronger, happier”. He assembles all sorts of disciples – from Captain Cook to Virginia Woolf to Debbie Harry – to evangelise versions of my intermittent boogie wonderland. “Let us read and let us dance,” Voltaire insisted. “These two amusements will never do any harm to the world!” • Tim Adams in an Observer columnistWell done Wales. That’s it for this blog today. Enjoy the rest of your weekend and keep up with France v Ireland here – It’s all kicking off in Paris. France scored a very early try through Antoine Dupont ... and Mack Hansen has just hit back with a lovely piece of opportunism for Ireland. It’s 10-7 right now. Join Lee Calvert: So Wales not quite as bad as we thought; Scotland still not nearly as consistent as they would like. After opening weekends of contrasting fortunes the two played out a thriller, the sort of edgy, imperfect, dramatic event on which this championship prides itself. Ryan Elias has a chat with the BBC: “We needed a big reaction from last week. We just didn’t turn up last week, physically, or in a lot of aspects of the game. We didn’t fire enough shots. That’s something we spoke about in the week and we really needed to see a reaction, especially for the crowd here today.” What made the difference today? “Just being physical, connecting as a team ... that spirit, that never-say-die attitude, just keep on coming, keep getting up, and as I say keep getting them shots in ... We had a long hard look at ourselves during the week.” The losing captain, Stuart Hogg, has a chat with the BBC: “We’re bitterly disappointed ... there was stuff we were in control of, we were on the front foot ... when we get ourselves into good positions, we’re really dangerous, but at times we weren’t allowed to do that. And it’s really quite frustrating for us because we know we’re a lot better than what we showed at times. But look, that’s test match rugby. You have to take your opportunities and if you don’t you’re on the wrong end of the scoreline like we are today. “That’s us in a nutshell, like for us, we want to be in a position to score tries, get ourselves in good positions. We were carrying with intent, we were carrying to score, and we got the outcomes we were looking for ... just at times we didn’t back it up, at times we didn’t get into the right positions. Look, credit to Wales, they were fairly good at times. “When you compound error on error, that’s when it gets a bit frustrating. That gave Wales field position and easy avenues into the game. That’s the frustrating part because we know we’re better than that. For us, we didn’t get too carried away with ourselves [after the win against England] ... it’s bitterly disappointing at the moment ... we’ll look to get better. It’s a horrible feeling right now but that’s test match rugby.” “For me, this is one of my best victories in a Welsh shirt,” Dan Biggar tells Sonja McLaughlan of the BBC. There is a huge roar from the jubilant crowd in Cardiff. “I think that says it all, Sonja. It’s been a really difficult week. We’ve had to put up with a lot of flak and rightly so. But to come back here, with this crowd, and just grind a result out, just roll our sleeves up ... it’s one of my best victories in my 100 [caps]. McLaughlan points out that perhaps Liam Williams, during the match, thought the winning drop goal was the wrong option with space out wide: “Quite possibly, but I couldn’t care less at the minute ... just so glad to have scored more points than them. We put a huge shift in defensively, our forwards fronted up ... The maul was excellent, and it laid a really solid foundation for us. Absolutely thrilled ... really pleased for the team, for myself, and for Jon Davies who was on the 100 as well.” Biggar’s assessment of the forwards’ display? “Immense. The rolling maul was a huge thing for us all day. Got us out of trouble, allowed us to gain territory and gain easy yards ... this team, if it’s anything, it’s resilient and it knows how to hit back.” Cheers Lee. Enjoy France v Ireland, which should be an absolute cracker ... Dan Biggar has just said that is one of the best wins in his 100 caps for Wales. Full quotes to follow ... I’m off to cover France vs Ireland. I leave you in Luke McLaughlin’s capable hands. PEEEEP! The twenty year drought continues for Scotland 83 mins. And still Scotland cannot get into the Wales half. The ball goes left and right but it’s laboured and lateral that allows Wales onto the ball in the ruck to win a penalty and end the match! 82 mins. Ten phases for Scotland but they remain in their own half as Wales spread across the field and tackle for their lives. 81 mins. Gilchrist wins the lineout, but Scotland are still in their own half as Ben White gets them moving forward. Cameron Redpath is on for Duhan Van Der Merwe. 80 mins. Somehow, Sam Skinner got amongst the maul to nick the ball for Scotland and they will have a penalty to gain better field position to attack from with the clock in the red. 79 mins. Wales have a solid catch and drive from the lineout. 78 mins. The ball is back in blue hands on halfway after a wonderful open pasture carry from Schoeman, but Wales are again tenacious in defence and Dillon Lewis clamps on the ball to win what looks like the decisive penalty on halfway. Finn Russell has rejoined us. Callum Sheedy replaces a limping Dan Biggar after the Wales captain finds touch deep in Scotland territory. 76 mins. A horrible period of play from Scotland here. The lineout possession was scrappy, then from a scrum the ball is lost in the next possession allowing Wales to clear. On the next attack Van Der Merwe fumbles it forward then a penalty is given away for offside at the breakdown. The upshot of all this is that Wales have the ball in the Scotland half, three points up, with four minutes left. 72 mins. Blair Kinghorn is on for Tuipolotu. He will play stand-off in Russell’s absence. 71 mins. How important a decision will that be from Biggar? Scotland’s defence was pretty ragged and Wales looked well set for a try, but he’s gone the bird in hand approach. Scotland have a lineout just outside the Wales 22 to attempt a strike back. 69 mins. It’s a catch and drive which Dewi Lake carries from the back of the maul but he’s stopped inches short. After a couple of frantic phases Dan Biggar decides all this agitation is not for him, demands the ball and slots the three-pointer. 68 mins. It was deliberate and the Scotland 10 is off for ten. Dan Biggar puts the ball in the corner and the next few minutes will be very important indeed for both teams 67 mins. A couple of phases later, Russell runs out of the line and knocks he ball on. On the advantage Cuthbert goes for the corner and the crowd go wild as he grounds it, but he’s in touch! The TMO and ref and now deciding whether Russell’s knock-on was deliberate. 66 mins. Scotland again infringe when Wales put it through phases and Biggar bangs in goalward from the edge of his range. It’s looking in line but bounces back off the crossbar, Cuthbert gathers it and Wales are on the ball in the Scottish 22! 65 mins. Subs for Wales Dewi Lake and Gareth Thomas replace Ryan Elias and Wyn Jones in the front row. 64 mins. Another Wales attack is repelled on the Scotland 22 so Dan Biggar decides to mix it up and floats a cross-kick to a wing-lurking Jac Morgan. However, Darcy Graham is pergfectly positioned and drives the Wales back-row into touch. undefined 62 mins. The replacements for Wales appear to have put a spring in the defensive line-speed and this leads to Chris Harris having the ball bounced out of his grip in the tackle of halfway. Subs for Scotland: Rory Sutherland is injured and so Schoeman is back on Ben White replaces Ali Price Rory Darge is on for Johnny Gray, Sam Skinner moves to lock. 59 mins. Scotland are back in the Wales half, but a combination of Ali Price labouring a bit when getting the ball away and Russell being too keen on the miss-pass means that the Welsh defence can shut it down easily and also win a breakdown penalty. Biggar clears to touch. Dillon Lewis replaces Tomas Francis for Wales. 57 mins. Some solid carries that make some metres from Wales, firstly Ross Moriarty goes before Tomos Williams snipes up the short side. The ball comes right to Jac Morgan who strikes into the Scotland 22 and on a penalty advantage Cuthbert chases a grubber into the corner, but is held up as he gathers it. Biggar levels from the tee. Aaron Wainwright replaces Ross Moriarty. 53 mins. Much of this half thus far has involved lateral possession on halfway before kicking it away. This continues and Dan Biggar’s latest kick has him grimacing and limping at the same time as Liam Williams has sat himself down in some pain also. They are both back on their feet and running it off. 49 mins. Graham has a muscular carry from the base of the ruck after a pervious huge Tuipulotu run as the Scotland attack gathers mass in the wales 22. But it’s a bit scruffy afterwards and breaks down and Ref Berry brings us back to an Adam Beard hands in the ruck penalty. Russell tees it up and slots it. 46 mins. Clearly the instructions at half time from both coaches was, “kick everything, please” as the opening minutes of this half have been boot leather on ball leather from all concerned. The latest of which sees Owen Watkin slice one out on the full and into the middle of next week. He kicked that so hard that if he’d caught it with his laces it would’ve landed in Kidwelly. 44 mins. Liam Williams claims a towering Russell kick, but again the attack goes nowhere and Biggar kicks it away. Hogg fields it, spots an open pasture of space on the right of Wales 22, booms a wonderful spiral towards it and... puts it out on the full. Scotland replace their front row: George Turner, Rory Sutherland and Zander Fagerson are on for Pierre Schoeman, Stuart McInally and WP Nel. 42 mins. Wales can do nothing of note and some kicking back and forth commences, ultimately ending with a Scotland lineout on the Wales 10m line. 40 mins. Dan Biggar chips the ball into the damp Cardiff air to restart the match and Rees-Zammit is first to it, slapping it back to put his team on the attack. Half-time musings Wales much improved from Dublin, particularly around the breakdown. To give Pivac his due, he did pick more of ruck focused backrow and it’s paying off thus far. Owen Watkin is also showing up well in the 13 shirt. That said, it’s difficult to shake the feeling that if Scotland can just secure possession more consistently this is their game. The visitors’ attacks, like against England last week, are more incisive, particularly on first phase. Finn Russell needs to kick for territory and bit more and let the Scottish defence contain Wales in their own half, if that happens Townsend’s men should end the 20-year Cardiff hoodoo. 40+2 mins. After a couple of resets, the ball is out of the scrum and off the field to end the half. 39 mins. Some phases for Scotland in the Wales half with Russell throwing a few long passes, but it’s slippy out there and Harris fumbles an attempted offload forward. Wales will have a scrum that should take us to half-time. 37 mins. The Welsh breakdown is approximately a million times better than last week and once again they disrupt Scotland possession and turn it over, this time it’s Basham with the good work. Anything Wales can do, Scotland to do and two phases later Bradbury is into the breakdown to rip it back. Scotland were penalised in the maul in the build up to the try, but the ref has not taken any card action after the advantage resulted in a try despite his previous warning about persistent infringement. Wales have a reasonable argument that they should be playing against 14 men. How important will this be in the whole complexion of the game? 34 mins. Biggar makes the big call of going to the corner and from the lineout it’s a solid catch, drive, score for Tomas Francis forcing and flopping over at the back of the maul. Biggar misses the conversation. 32 mins. Wales are up to ten phases, moving left and right and left again in the Scotland 22, but once again the blue defence contains it before they are again penalised for being on the wrong side in the ruck. Ref Berry has told Stuart Hogg that the next penalty like this will be a card. Magnus Bradbury replaces Matt Fagerson. 30 mins. It’s a 50:22! Liam Williams booms a cracker of a kick from inside his own half, one bounce and into touch in the Scotland 22. Wales have the attacking lineout, which they successfully catch and drive before sending the ball out to the backs. 28 mins. Tuipolotu has his first bump and carry of the match and this allows Russell to drive an angled kick into the Wales corner. The lineout possession is scrappy from the home forwards and Scotland win a penalty near the posts for Wales holding on. Finn Russell makes no mistake. 25 mins. Wales are in the Scotland 22, but the attack is very lateral and allows the blue tackle line to drift left and right to cover. But, in the midst of the Scotland tackling there’s a penalty given away when Gilchrist falls the wrong side of the ruck. Dan Biggar calls for the tee again and reduces the Scotland lead. 22 mins. They may be down, but Wales will be taking some heart that when they have the ball they look 127% better than last week and are getting over the gainline with regularity. They are also winning their fair share of breakdown penalties, the latest of which gives them a lineout in the Scotland half. 20 mins. It’s a catch and drive from the Scotland pack and the maul is sucking in the Wales defence like a navy blue singularity. In the end Will Rowlands creeps around the side and is penalised. It’s very kickable and Russell gobbles it up. 18 mins. Wales win their first lineout of the game cleanly and with little nonsense content. Although it’s notable that Scotland put no-one up against Will Rowlands’ jump. However, Schoeman gets hands on the ball at a subsequent ruck to win a penalty and Scotland have a lineout of their own on the Wales 22. 16 mins. And just like that, Scotland are in front. 15 mins. Russell makes his second mistake of the game from the boot under no pressure. This time he misses touch with a penalty punt, but Jac Morgan lets him off the hook by moving forward from an offside position on the kick return. 13 mins. After some forwards drives under the posts, Finn Russell loops around Tuipulotu and fires a long pass to Graham who drives through Rees-Zammit to touch down in the corner. Great, strong finish from the Scottish winger. Russell misses the conversion from way out left 10 mins. Ali Price fizzes a miss pass to Van Der Merwe who gets around the outside of the Wales defence and bears down on Liam Williams. The Wales fullback is up to stopping the big winger, but the ball is recycled and Scotland are working phases on the Welsh 5m line. 8 mins. On a penalty advantage for not rolling away, Wales are once again attacking in the Scotland half. After a few phases the ball is fumbled on the 22, but the ref takes us back for the original infringement and Biggar wastes not time in converting it to three points. 6 mins. Finn Russell compounds Scotland’s poor couple of minutes by booting the restart out on the full. Wales run from possession won on the resulting scrum on half way 4 mins. Wyn Jones went to work on WP Nel and the Scotland prop couldn’t hold his side up in the scrum. Penalty Wales which Dan Biggar slots from 35 metres. 3 mins. Scotland look lively straight away, with a big Matt Fagerson carry setting up some phased play that has the visitors up in the Wales 22. Darcy Graham comes off his wing but Liam Williams snaffles the ball at the ruck and immediately Wales go wide in their own territory to Owen Watkin who steps and runs forty metres. A few passes later in the Scotland half it breaks down but it looks like it was caused by a deliberate knock-on by Hogg. The ref doesn’t agree and Wales have a scrum on the Scotland 10m line. 1 min. Finn Russell drop-punts us underway and Owen Watking fields the ball early allowing Tomos Williams to box kick it clear. AnthemWatch Scotland look calm and collected during Flower of Scotland before Wales give it the full pasty for Mae Hen Wlad Fy Nhadau, as per. Here come the teams. Grant Gilchrist is out first on the day of his 50th Scotland camp, followed by his cantering team-mate. Wales are held in the tunnel while loads of dry-ice, flame throwers and Metallica are pumped into the stadium. “Off to never-never land” might a lyric the WRU and their team are far too familiar with come the final whistle. John Barclay pre-match is chatting about Wales’s potential lineout issues stating that the new backrow of Morgan, Basham &amp; Moriarty doesn’t give them a back-row jumping option. This is in comparison to Scotland who have brought in Sam Skinner, who most definitely is a back-row lineout option. As always with Barclay, this is a good point. However, I think Moriarty can be used as an option, we’ll see. Pre-match reading Scotland captain, Stuart Hogg, has much to trouble him regarding trips to Cardiff with his team. Read all about how he’s dealing with it here... So much for Wales fans to worry about today, and perhaps for Scotland as well as they must comfortably wear the heavy crown of favourites. You can let me know your view on these matters and others by email or on Twitter Wayne Pivac is shorn of (deep breath) Alun Wyn Jones, Taulupe Faletau, Justin Tipuric, Josh Navidi, Ken Owens, Josh Adams, Uilisi Halaholo and Leigh Halfpenny to name a non-exhaustive list of those injured at present. In the backs, Owen Watkin and Alex Cuthbert return, while the pack sees a debut for Osprey Jac Morgan at 6 and Ross Moriarty replaces Aaron Wainwright at No 8. Centurion-cap man Jonathan Davies returns on the bench. Gregor Townsend surprisingly makes five changes to the team that beat England. Sam Johnson is jettisoned out of the 12 shirt and the squad entire, replaced by fellow Glasgow Warrior, Sione Tuipulotu. In the pack, there’s an entirely new front row with Pierre Schoeman, Stuart McInally and WP Nel swapping places from the bench with Rory Sutherland, George Turner and Zander Fagerson. Sam Skinner replaces the injured Jamie Ritchie in the back row. It says much for Scotland’s forwards depth that such changes register a barely negligible drop in quality. Wales: Liam Williams; Alex Cuthbert, Owen Watkin, Nick Tompkins, Louis Rees-Zammit; Dan Biggar (captain), Tomos Williams; Wyn Jones, Ryan Elias, Tomas Francis, Will Rowlands, Adam Beard, Taine Basham, Jac Morgan, Ross Moriarty. Replacements: Dewi Lake, Gareth Thomas, Dillon Lewis, Seb Davies, Aaron Wainwright, Gareth Davies, Callum Sheedy, Jonathan Davies. Scotland: Stuart Hogg (captain); Darcy Graham, Chris Harris, Sione Tuipulotu, Duhan van der Merwe; Finn Russell, Ali Price; Pierre Schoeman, Stuart McInally, WP Nel, Jonny Gray, Grant Gilchrist, Sam Skinner, Hamish Watson, Matt Fagerson. Replacements: George Turner, Rory Sutherland, Zander Fagerson, Magnus Bradbury, Rory Darge, Ben White, Blair Kinghorn, Cameron Redpath. Welcome to Cardiff, everyone. Let’s get the good news for Wales in early: Scotland have not won in Cardiff since 2002. Moreover, since 2000 Wales have outscored today’s visitors by 36 tries to 14 in matches in the Welsh capital for a very comfortable average winning margin of 14 points. Even in Edinburgh the picture is not much better for Scotland, with the only win since 2007 for the boys is blue coming at Murrayfield in 2017 - the year Rob Howley was interim Wales coach with Warren Gatland on Lions duty. Given this, why do so many Wales fans have sad trombone music playing in their heads when they cogitate on today’s match? Probably because instead of reading historical stats, they are using their eyes and their minds to consider the evidence of the previous week and recent months on the pitch. Unlike in the numbers, there is little succour to be found there. Scotland arrive after a far more comfortable win against England than the scoreboard suggested with a settled and quality squad, while Wales were absolutely battered by Ireland in Dublin and have huge absences. Sure, Ireland look in very decent order at present, but leaving that aside there wasn’t much for Wales to focus in terms of positives as they looked lightweight and disorganised. But, Wayne Pivac has defied expectations before - his Scarlets team made the Pro14 final, and don’t forget he currently holds the Six Nations and Triple Crown trophies. This, plus whatever it is that Cardiff does to Scotland’s collective mentality maybe, maybe, enough to see an against form victory.This was a meeting of two sides who look like they are fearing the worst. While Thomas Frank and Patrick Vieira will not complain about picking up another point towards their survival fund, neither could be left satisfied after a scrappy encounter that failed to ever really get started. For Brentford, there was at least the encouragement of ending a worrying sequence of defeats, not to mention seeing Christian Eriksen given a hero’s welcome at his new home. An emotional appearance on the pitch from the Denmark midfielder – billed by his new manager as potentially Brentford’s “greatest signing ever” – before kick-off proved to be the highlight of the afternoon. The 29-year-old is expected to take part in a friendly on Monday as he begins his comeback, although Frank has said he will not be rushed back after suffering a cardiac arrest on the pitch at Euro 2020. A player with such top-level experience would be a welcome addition to any squad but for a team that had lost their previous six matches in all competitions before this, Eriksen’s arrival could yet prove to be crucial. After the blistering start to their first top-flight campaign since 1947, Brentford have picked up just eight points since beating Everton here at the end of November and are looking somewhat shaky even with their current cushion. “The big positive is we got the clean sheet,” said Frank of a run that had also stretched back until then. “With Christian here as well now there are a lot of positives to look forward to.” Palace’s draw against Norwich in midweek meant they started this match in 13th – the same as at this stage last season under Roy Hodgson – but with three points fewer. Vieira will have been encouraged to see his side make a better start than conceding inside the opening 40 seconds like at Carrow Road, although they could not create an early test for David Raya in the Brentford goal. It was not until the 25th minute that either goalkeeper had a save of significance to make. Vicente Guaita was at his best to deny Bryan Mbeumo following a delightful through ball from Sergi Canós before a last-ditch tackle from Joel Ward rescued Palace again. They should have gone ahead soon afterwards when Jordan Ayew suddenly found himself bearing down on goal but his shot went embarrassingly wide after he took an age to let fly. Vieira switched things around at half-time and pushed Wilfried Zaha up front to offer a more direct problem to the Brentford defence. But it failed to produce the required impact as the visitors continued to struggle to create any meaningful openings in a scrappy start to the second half. Frank turned to Jay Dasilva after the midfielder made his first appearance for almost a year against Manchester City and the former Arsenal man should provide Brentford with an extra boost over the coming weeks. Palace supporters will also be delighted to see James McArthur’s return from injury after three months out and the Scotsman could at least claim to have registered a shot on target, albeit one that was comfortably gathered by Raya. Guaita had to work harder to reach a goal-bound header from Pontus Jansson with 15 minutes remaining and the Spaniard did well to divert it away to safety. Zaha saw his appeals for a penalty waved away by the referee, Simon Hooper, in stoppage time before another Denmark international almost stole the show with the last kick of the match, although Joachim Andersen’s shot was watched all the way by Raya. “We kept our organisation and we were very disciplined,” said Vieira. “But if we want to score more goals we have to get into the opponents’ box.”Why is Russia threatening to invade Ukraine? Russian spokespeople daily deny any intention to invade. So, too, did Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin, when he met the French leader, Emmanuel Macron, last week, and when he spoke to US president Joe Biden on the phone. There are two problems with this. First, given Putin’s Johnsonian relationship with truth, few western governments believe the denials. Second, Putin has not explained why, if his intentions are peaceful, more than half of Russia’s armed forces, including 130,000 troops, are massed on Ukraine’s borders. It could all be a bluff. But who would bet the house on that? So what drives Putin? There are numerous theories. Putin is said to want to rebuild a Russian sphere of influence in eastern Europe, principally embracing former Soviet republics such as now independent Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Belarus, Georgia and Ukraine. He has frequently bemoaned their “loss” after the Soviet Union collapsed. Putin may also hope to demonstrate to the west (and Russians) that the country is still a superpower, even though by most measures (nuclear weapon stockpiles and geography apart) it is a failing medium-sized power. Why Ukraine? Putin fears strategically important Ukraine, commanding Russia’s south-western flank, is assimilating into the west. He objects to its growing closeness to Nato. He also opposes Kyiv’s developing links with the EU. Worse still, from his point of view, Ukraine is a democracy, with free speech and free media, which freely elects its leaders. In practice, Russians enjoy no such freedoms – if they followed Ukraine’s example, Putin would not last long. More broadly, Putin is a nostalgic revisionist who regards Ukraine as an integral part of historical Russia and its loss as a symbol of Russia’s cold war defeat. Why now? Putin may sense western weakness. Nato was humiliated last year in Afghanistan and Joe Biden, who campaigned to end wars, not engage in new ones, has refocused American foreign policy and military resources on China, not Europe. It’s also suggested Putin needs a big victory to shore up his domestic support, vindicate his anti-western policies, excuse rampant regime corruption and kleptomania, and justify the hardships Russians endure as a result of western sanctions imposed after his first attack on Ukraine, in 2014. That was when he annexed Crimea and took de facto control of the eastern Donbas region. What are Putin’s demands? To end the standoff (maybe), Putin wants Nato to promise never to accept Ukraine (or Georgia and Moldova) as members. He wants the alliance to pull back from “frontline” countries such as Poland, Romania and Bulgaria, former members of the defunct Warsaw Pact. He wants Kyiv to accept autonomous status for the Donbas region and relinquish its claim to Crimea (as part of the so-called Minsk accords). He wants to limit or halt deployments in eastern and southern Europe of new US medium-range missiles. More ambitious still, he wants to redesign Europe’s “security architecture”, to re-establish Russia’s influence and extend its geopolitical reach. To most of this, the US says “no”. Hence the current crisis.A match that started with the stands reverberating to cheers as Roy Hodgson was introduced as Watford’s latest manager ended with a sixth successive home defeat and to the sound of away fans singing about him getting sacked in the morning. Three games into his tenure Watford are yet to score a goal and there is no sign of them emerging from their downward spiral. Not since 20 November have they won a game, the same day Brighton suffered their only away defeat in the league, and neither run looked likely to end once Neal Maupay had put the visitors in front shortly before the break. Watford’s new manager bounce, such as it was, lasted about 15 minutes, came at the start of the second half with the side already a goal down and their danger had long since been defused by the time Adam Webster ended the contest from close range in the 82nd minute. “We weren’t good enough to win it,” Hodgson said. “Our first- half performance was much worse than I was expecting it to be. Having analysed the last two games and seen the players in training we had high hopes, and in the first half we did a lot to dash those hopes.” As at West Ham in midweek Hodgson started with four specialist central midfielders at the expense of effective width, a defensive set-up that might have been designed to frustrate his side’s opponents but instead encouraged them. Despite the crowd of central players Brighton seemed able to find pockets of space and because of it their two wing-backs enjoyed plenty of it in wide areas. Danny Welbeck started on his return to the club he represented with little success two seasons ago, playing slightly ahead of Maupay in attack, and the former Arsenal forward’s movement, sucking defenders towards the goal, at least partially explains the amount of space Maupay enjoyed when picked out by Tariq Lamptey’s cross shortly before half-time. He did not seem to strike his half-volley cleanly, but that only helped the ball to spin and dip perfectly into the far corner. Ben Foster had by then saved from Maupay and Jakub Moder, Pascal Gross had sent a free header wide, and at the interval Brighton had enjoyed 72% of possession and all three shots on target. Watford took quarter of an hour to provide any kind of threat but the most significant action Robert Sanchez had been forced into was watching Josh King’s half-volley sail well over the bar. The arrival at half-time of Ismaila Sarr, who had returned from Senegal’s extended Afcon victory celebrations on Friday, and Imran Louza had an instant, positive effect on the home side. Within two minutes Louza had lifted the ball down the right for Sarr to run on to, cut inside and discomfort the defence, if not in the end their goalkeeper. In the following minutes Louza beat two men with a drop of the shoulder, Sarr prodded the ball through a defender’s legs and Watford looked, if not genuinely convincing, at least quite fun. This period culminated in the 63rd minute when the ball dropped to Emmanuel Dennis outside the left-hand corner of the penalty area and he brought it down, beat three men, cut inside Lewis Dunk and lashed a shot into the meat of the crossbar. Within a minute Graham Potter had made two changes of his own, and with the arrivals of Yves Bissouma and Alexis Mac Allister the game swung again. Watford were once again looking ragged when, at the end of the finest move of the half, Joel Veltman crossed and Moder’s half-volley was deflected wide. From the resulting corner the ball dropped to Webster, rebounded back to him off Femenia, and was emphatically shinned in from three yards. “It was a really good performance and a really good result,” said Potter. “We had good reactions when we lost the ball, good patience when we had the ball and always tried to attack. There was a little bit of an adjustment period at the start of the second half when we didn’t have the same control, but the subs helped wrestle it back.” Midway through the second half Watford brought on another forward in Joáo Pedro and, having once had too many central midfielders, suddenly they didn’t have enough. His team might have stuttered, but Hodgson certainly knew how to attack when he was asked after the game if his initial selection had been too conservative. “If anything I would expect you to criticise us for being too gung-ho, and putting four attackers on the field and only two central midfielders,” he said. “I think that would be a more valid criticism than being conservative. We can’t do much more than put the attackers on the field. If they are as good as everyone seems to think they are, when they get the ball at their feet they have to do something with it.”Returning to their birthplace after decades of enforced exile, five Chagossians leapt from a motor launch on to the palm-shaded beach of Peros Banhos atoll on Saturday afternoon, kissed the sand and stood – hands joined together – in prayer. For Olivier Bancoult, Lisbey Elyse, Marie Suzelle Baptiste, Rosemonde Bertin and Marcel Humbert, it was the moment they had long anticipated – the first time they could step ashore without close close monitoring by British officials. It is 50 years since they were forcibly deported to Mauritius by the UK, which cleared the archipelago of its entire population to make way for a US military base on the island of Diego Garcia. All five wore T-shirts with the motto: “Chagos My Home” and “Everyone has a right to live in his birthplace” . “We are not coming as tourists,” said Bancoult, “we are coming as pilgrims to pay tribute to this abandoned place. “The importance of this trip is that we can send a message to the world – about the kind of injustice the UK government, with the help of the US government, inflicted on our people. If we were white people with blue eyes, maybe we would have had better treatment?” This is the first visit organised by the Mauritian government, which is determined to regain control of the Chagos archipelago. International court rulings and a majority vote in the UN general assembly have confirmed that the UK “unlawfully” detached the islands from Mauritius before independence and must return them. The UK insists that it retains sovereignty and that the landmark ruling at the International Court of Justice in 2019 was only advisory. On Saturday, the Chagossians’ first task was to move a monument, recording a return visit under British supervision in 2006, further up the beach to avoid erosion from encroaching waves. In the sultry heat, they manoeuvred the heavy stone with sticks. The island’s jetty, which once received commercial ships, has disintegrated; its railroad track, that carried goods to the island’s shop and transported copra oil, has rusted away. Even in this remote site, plastic water bottles littered the tideline and there was glass on the beach. A sign placed beside a concrete box declared: “This is a BIOT (British Indian Ocean Territory) fire pit.” While native Chagossians are denied permission to return permanently, BIOT officials grant licences for yachts to visit their deserted homes. Moving inland, trees have grown over homes and warehouses have fallen into decay since the island was evacuated in 1972. The ground is littered with rotting coconut shells. Hermit crabs swarm across the floor and the occasional giant robber crab – capable of splitting coconuts in two with their claws – appeared in the undergrowth. What was, in the 1960s, the administrator’s bleached white house in a broad clearing is derelict and overshadowed by palms. A giant banyan tree has taken root in the stone steps to the first floor, its roots gripping the stone. A vast water tank stands rusting beside the building. Nearby is the chapel of Saint Sacrement, the island’s chapel. “This is where I was christened,” said Bancoult. The roof had collapsed, the walls were covered in yellow and ochre mould. With his fellow Chagossians, he set to work clearing the floor. Sprouting coconuts were hurled out through the empty windows. Humbert hacked at palm fronds with a machete, trying to push back the jungle from their former existence. “I was baptised here, too,” said Elyse. “This is my church.” Bancoult added: “My grandfather had his funeral here in 1969. My mother made her first communion here. Can’t I have the right to live in my birthplace? It’s racism. They should give everyone in overseas territories the same treatment.” As the ship approached Peros Banhos on Friday evening, the prime minister of Mauritius, Pravind Jugnauth, told the Observer by phone that his country’s first expedition to the Chagos Islands was “not in any way a hostile act” and not meant to embarrass the UK. “It is merely an exercise of our sovereignty over part of our territory and that is in accordance with international law.” He said: “The UK has acted in violation of human rights and international law when it forcibly removed the Chagossians. Uprooting people from their place of birth and where they were living without any warning and putting them on a ship and just leaving them at the quay in Mauritius. And preventing them going back … That’s clearly a crime against humanity and it’s extraordinary serious.” The Foreign Office said: “Successive UK governments have expressed sincere regret about the manner in which Chagossians were removed from BIOT in the late 1960s and early 1970s … and we are currently delivering a £40m support package to Chagossians over a 10-year period.”Frank Lampard has galvanised Goodison Park. For the second Saturday in succession the club’s new manager celebrated a resounding home win with a clenched-fist salute in front of a jubilant Gwladys Street end. For only the second time in five punishing months, Everton savoured the release of victory in the Premier League. Three games into his reign and Lampard has already witnessed the extremes of this Everton team. Error-prone in defeat at Newcastle on Tuesday, here their intensity, discipline and creativity could not be faulted as Leeds were handed a comprehensive beating. Séamus Coleman and Michael Keane polished a superb first-half display with headed goals. Anthony Gordon, steering Richarlison’s shot into the bottom corner late on, capped another impressive individual performance to seal Lampard’s first league win as Everton manager. His team had 21 attempts on goal and 10 on target – the first time Everton have hit those figures in a Premier League game since 2013. Marcelo Bielsa’s side were dominated throughout and, despite flashes of inspiration from Rodrigo, rarely threatened to repeat their stirring recovery at Aston Villa in midweek. “From minute one against a fantastic team we never allowed them anything,” said a delighted Lampard. “Our effort, workrate, compact shape, the quality of our play and the chances we created was excellent. I really enjoyed seeing my team playing like that. It was everything I wanted.” Lampard’s commitment to attack was evident from the outset but this was an impressive demonstration of his wider managerial skills. He was without seven first-team players, including two leading central defenders and the club’s only recognised left-back in Vitalii Mykolenko. He responded by abandoning his early 3-4-3 system and handing Dominic Calvert-Lewin, Donny van de Beek, Jonjoe Kenny and Alex Iwobi their first starts of his reign. All four shone in a fine collective performance. Kenny provided an attacking threat as a makeshift left-back and nullified Raphinha to such an extent that the Leeds forward was withdrawn at half-time. The fit-again Calvert-Lewin led the line with power, aggression and a graceful touch. The on-loan signing Van de Beek brought vision and calm authority to central midfield, igniting a much-improved display from Allan alongside him in the process, while the often-maligned Iwobi was a potent threat on the right wing. Bielsa’s more defensive approach, reverting to a five-man rearguard, brought little protection as Everton hunted in packs, chased lost causes and played with relentless intensity. Leeds were not helped by the early loss of Stuart Dallas to injury but Bielsa’s decision to make two further substitutions at half-time reflected the paucity of his team’s contribution. “We found it very difficult to defend against them and it was a fair result,” he said. “I put [Mateusz] Klich in front of a back three but his position was an error on my part.” Gordon had a great chance to open the scoring after 65 seconds when Allan seized on a poor clearance and Calvert-Lewin released the young winger inside the area. Luke Ayling just did enough to take the sting out of Gordon’s shot with only Illan Meslier to beat. The home side remained on the front foot and a flowing move involving Coleman, Gordon and Van de Beek brought a merited early lead. The Netherlands midfielder swept an inviting cross along the face of goal towards Calvert-Lewin and, though Pascal Struijk did well to deny him a certain tap-in, his challenge sent the ball looping towards the far post. Having continued his run into the area and reacted quicker than Klich to the opportunity, Coleman converted with a diving header. Everton’s second epitomised their considerable effort. Richarlison won a corner out of nothing when charging down Robin Koch near the byline. Gordon curled a delightful ball to the far post where Keane emerged from a well-worked routine to thump an unstoppable header beyond the Leeds goalkeeper. Despite being second best in every department and frequently over-run, Leeds had chances to prey on Everton’s brittle confidence with Rodrigo twice smacking the crossbar from distance. The changes sparked necessary improvement in the second half without seriously threatening to spoil Jordan Pickford’s first clean sheet since November. A bottle thrown from the away end towards Coleman, thankfully missing its intended target, was another sour note on Leeds’ afternoon. Gordon wrapped up victory when steering Richarlison’s fine effort into the bottom corner before Meslier produced a superb save to prevent Salomón Rondón from volleying home an immaculate cross from fellow substitute Dele Alli. Everton were transformed. Now they must maintain this standard.That’s it from me. The Premier League table doesn’t look very different, but it will feel a lot better now for Frank Lampard, and even worse for Roy Hodgson. Thanks for your company, your correspondence and your deep-seated Evertonian angst. Next up is Norwich v Man City, with Pep Guardiola keeping a fair amount of his powder dry for the trip to Lisbon on Tuesday. Do join Scott Murray for the details. A big moment for Barnsley. Barnsley 1-0 QPR Birmingham 3-0 Luton Blackpool 1-2 Bournemouth Hull 0-1 Fulham Middlesbrough 4-1 Derby Millwall 2-1 Cardiff Forest 2-2 Stoke Peterborough 0-1 Preston Reading 2-3 Coventry A total bore, by all accounts, but a vital point for Brentford after five defeats in a row. Bielsa’s wacky subs don’t do the business; Lampard’s attacking line-up does. Forest have drawn level! Ryan Yates scores for ten-man Forest against Stoke and it’s now 2-2. All down to James Garner, apparently. Man United do have the midfielders, they just prefer to loan them out. All over at Vicarage Road, and no joy for Roy. Not so funny for the Forest fans. The ref gave a penalty as well as a red card, so AN Outfield Player had his work cut out the minute he went in goal. Forest 1-2 Stoke. Some last-minute comedy at Forest. Brice Samba has been sent off and Steve Cooper has used all his subs, so I really hope he can be heard saying, “Hands up who’s ever played in goal before.” Everton are doing so well that even their own fans think it’s in the bag. “Done and dusted,” yells Mary Waltz. “Massive exhale.” Brighton have been much the better side at Vicarage Road and now they have the scoreline to show it. A corner leads to a melee and Adam Webster pokes the ball home. There’s a pattern already to Frank Lampard’s Everton: they’re very good on Saturdays. After battering Brentford this time last week, they’re now three up against Leeds. And although they lost at St James’ Park in between, they have eight goals under Frank. “I’ve been watching Real Madrid’s visit to El Madrigal,” says Kári Tulinius, “and they’re so blunt in attack. Bale is okay, though he missed one good chance and the Villareal keeper pushed away his shot from the edge of the box, but Vinicius and Asensio have no idea how to play without Benzema up front, the quintessential player whose quality is most apparent when missing. Villarreal have been good, Chukwueze especially tearing through the defence on the right. It remains 0-0.” That settles it, surely. Selected highlights from the Championship. Barnsley, who never take the lead, have done just that against QPR. Coventry are 3-2 up at Reading, Derby still 3-1 down at Boro, Birmingham 3-0 up against Luton. Brentford 0-0 Palace: Whisper it, but there appears to have been some action here. A header from close range by Brentford’s Jansson, a strong save by Palace’s Guaita, and at last, a reason for this game to take up more than two minutes on Match Of The Day, Watford 0-1 Brighton: Ben Foster keeps his team in it with a fine save from a fine shot by Marc Cucurella. At the other end, though, Watford haven’t had a shot on target. James Alexander Gordon, thou shouldst be living at this hour. “Vfl Bochum 1948 [dramatic pause] 4, Bayern Munich [even more dramatic pause] 2.” It’s high time we heard more from Mary Waltz, and here she is. “Tell me Donnie VDB isn’t winning the heart of every Scouser at Goodison,” she says, “running down every ball with cotton stuffed up his nose to stop the bleeding.” Watford 0-1 Brighton: Watford have been getting better and now they come close as Emmanuel Dennis hits the bar. You may be wondering what’s happening at Brentford. Nothing, alas: it’s still 0-0. But at least Josh Dasilva is coming on. Poor old Kelty Hearts are now 3-0 down at St Mirren. And to add insult to insult, I called them Kelpy Hearts just now (thanks to Pickles for pointing this out). Can I blame The Guardian’s spellcheck? Your name is Marcelo Bielsa and your team is 2-0 down to a close rival. What do you do at half-time? Bring off your best player, obviously! Raphinha gives way to Tyler Roberts, and Mateusz Klich is off too, replaced by Adam Forshaw. And it seems to be working – Leeds are now getting more of the ball. What’s the German for “the comeback is on, lads”? Robert Lewandowski scores his second for Bayern, so it’s now only 4-2 to Bochum. A good spot from Opta Joe. “With @michaelkeane04 scoring for @Everton and twin brother Will scoring for @LaticsOfficial, today is the first time that both have scored in English league football on the same day. Telepathy.” A Derby fan writes. “Yes, our fighting spirit is going to be tested this afternoon,” says Charlie Robinson, “but we’ve shown plenty of it so far this season. I’ll just be thrilled to have a club to support at all next season, whether that be in the Championship or League One. The half time score might not be too promising, but yesterday’s news about Mel Morris and Steve Gibson striking a deal gives us a lot of optimism going forward. And Reading conceding an equaliser just before half time ain’t too bad either.” Small mercies. The three PL games have resumed and there’s been something for Watford fans to cheer: Ismaila Sarr has come on. After 70 minutes, Vfl Bochum 1948 are still 4-1 up against the mighty Bayern. According to ESPN, it’s the first time Bayern have let in four by half-time in the Bundesliga since November, 1975, when they trooped off 5-0 down to Eintracht Frankfurt. (That one ended 6-0.) And today, Bayern were 1-0 up! Half-times in the Scottish Cup, thanks to the tireless Simon McMahon. It seems two Hearts are no better than one. Hearts 0-0 Livingston Motherwell 2-1 Aberdeen Partick Thistle 0-0 Dundee United St Mirren 1-0 Kelty Hearts That 2-0 lead is not necessarily what Everton fans want to see. “Dave Hagan might be going back to ‘92 for examples of Everton throwing away two goal leads late,” says Robin Cannon, “but it’s not like we didn’t go from 2-0 to 2-2 in injury time against Newcastle, under Ancelotti, far more recently.” Is this an example of competitive worrying? Derby’s fighting spirit is going to be sorely tested. Barnsley 0-0 QPR Birmingham 1-0 Luton Blackpool 1-0 Bournemouth Hull 0-0 Fulham Middlesbrough 3-1 Derby Millwall 0-0 Cardiff Forest 0-0 Stoke Peterborough 0-0 Preston Reading 1-1 Coventry It’s half-time in our three Premier League games. Brentford 0-0 Palace Everton 2-0 Leeds Watford 0-1 Brighton “Never mind Lampard,” says Zach Neeley, “(who I think was in over his head at Chelsea but not that bad), the real secret to Everton’s fresh energy and excitement is Not-Rafa.” You may well be right. In the Championship, Boro have regained the lead. Aaron Connolly makes it Middlesbrough 2-1 Derby. A screamer from Neal Maupay, set up by Tariq Lamptey. A few other goals in the Championship. Birmingham, Blackpool and Reading are all 1-0 up at home, against Luton, Bournemouth and Coventry respectively. Bournemouth, what’s more, had a penalty missed by Dominic Solanke. Never mind Lampard, what about Rooney? His Derby team are nothing if not fighters, and they’ve now drawn level at the Riverside with a volley from Max Bird. Everybody’s talking about Mary. “I love Mary Waltz’s comments,” says David Hagan, “but you can tell she hasn’t been an Evertonian for long if she feels relaxed with a 2-0 lead. I remember watching us against Oldham at Goodison in, I think, ’92, 2-0 up with three minutes to go and ended up drawing…” Here’s Richard Harris again, with big news from the Bundesliga. “Runaway leaders Bayern are being thrashed 4-1 away by lowly Bochum at half-time,” he reports. “With City due to play at Norwich later could be see an incredible double?” We can but hope. He adds: “I didn’t know Mary ‘my squad’ Waltz had been called in by Lampard but I guess it makes sense.” Everton 2-0 Leeds: Everton have had five shots on target already, to Leeds’ none, although they’ve only had 45pc of the possession. Has Lampard brought them some efficiency? Brentford 0-0 Palace: if you were surprised to see Jordan Ayew get a game today, so was I, and maybe he was too. He’s just greeted a big chance with a bad miss. “I don’t know what to do,” wails Mary Waltz. “I am watching an Everton fixture and the regular feelings of dread are not there. This is fun.” Say what you like about Frank Lampard – and I’ve saved one correspondent from what would now be some deep blushes – he has bucked a trend today. Everton under Benitez were awful at facing their fellow strugglers: they had lost their last nine games against teams outside the Big Six. Of course, Leeds being Leeds, and Everton being Everton, they could still extend that run today. But it doesn’t seem very likely. The quote of the day so far comes from Ralph Hasenhuttl, talking about Manchester United. “It is not a big secret,” he says, “that when they lose the ball, the reverse gears are not the best from everybody.” A case of Ralph’s inhumanity to Ralf. And another! It’s a second header as Michael Keane finds himself unmarked at a set piece. A goal in the Championship: Middlesbrough, in such good form lately, take the lead through an own goal from Derby’s Lee Buchanan. Brentford 0-0 Palace: It’s a free kick to Palace instead, as Guehi’s handball was preceded, and perhaps prompted, by a shove from Norgaard. Sounds like a soft one, and the VAR is taking a look.... Watford 0-0 Brighton: A worry for Brighton, in fact two, as Robert Sanchez and Lewis Dunk collide with each other. Sanchez was punching the ball, but seems to have taken out his team-mate too. They’re well enough to continue. The goal was set up by, you’ve guessed it, Donny van de Beek, though he won’t get an assist as his cross led to a shot from Dominic Calvert-Lewin. Coleman was there to follow up with a diving header. Everton’s dominance pays off as Seamus Coleman heads home from close range. Everton 0-0 Leeds: One thing both these teams could do without is another injury, and Leeds have one: Stuart Dallas goes off with a wounded knee. Leo Hjelde replaces him. Everton 0-0 Leeds: Another chance for Everton, and it’s Anthony Gordon again – from a distance this time, still nothing doing. If it’s Saturday, it must be Mary Waltz. “The opening siren call of the Z-Cars theme,” she says, “has a different feel now that my Everton squad is facing relegation.” Everton 0-0 Leeds: An early chance for Everton, but Anthony Gordon can only manage a tame finish after being teed up by – who else – Donny van de Beek. The three games in the Premier League are just getting under way. And so are nine more in the Championship, including Hull-Fulham, Middlesbrough-Deeby and Forest-Stoke. “Where is Eriksen?” asks Jazi Zilber. “Don’t we deserve at least some gossip to compensate for his no show?” Ha. He was never going to be involved today, though he has been seeing waving to the Brentford crowd. And we do know he has made a speech to his new colleagues, saying “Don’t go easy on me.” The anti-Adele. “Disunited,” says Richard Harris. “I think I would say Man United drew a game they should have lost today so it is a point gained not two points dropped. Southampton were excellent and it is disrespectful of people to make out United should have beaten them. Saints have held City twice this season, don’t forget, and beaten West Ham and Spurs away. More intriguing is the idea that Hasenhuttl could be the guy United go for in the summer.” True! A game of two Ralves. One tweet brings another. “Afternoon, @TimdeLisle,” says Bill Hargreaves. “Thanks in advance for enthralling commentary. Still plenty to play for in the PL.” Bill, I’m honoured by your first point, but more inclined to agree with your second. And here is the news from our Scots correspondent, Simon McMahon. “It’s the (consults official UEFA modern football jargon directory) round of 16 in the Scottish Cup this weekend, with four 3 o’clock kick offs today, the pick of which is two-time cup winners Dundee United’s trip to Partick Thistle. Hearts welcome Livingston and Aberdeen go to Motherwell in the two all SPL ties, while Kelty Hearts, of Scottish League Two, who knocked out the holders St. Johnstone in the previous round, travel to Paisley to take on St. Mirren.” Go Kelty. A tweet! “It’s going to be 5-5 at Goodison isn’t it @TimdeLisle?” says Gary Naylor. “Frank is the anti-Rafa picking that XI. It’ll be great - if it works.” Ha, it will. Not sure Frank brings all that much experience of relegation scraps. For the third game running, Manchester United dominate early on ... and finish 1-1. No Ivan Toney, sadly. Again, there’s a lot of talent on the bench: Josh Dasilva for Brentford, Ebereche Eze and Michael Olise for Palace. Brentford Raya; Ajer, Jansson, Pinnock; Canos, Norgaard, Janelt, Jensen, Henry; Mbeumo, Wissa. Subs: Fernández, Lössl, Roerslev, Ghoddos, Onyeka, Baptiste, Stevens, Dasilva, Sorensen. Crystal Palace Guaita; Ward, Andersen, Guehi, Mitchell; Gallagher, Hughes, Schlupp; Ayew, Edouard, Zaha. Subs: Butland, Tomkins, Clyne, McArthur, Milivojevic, Mateta, Olise, Eze, Benteke. Has Roy Hodgson already settled on an XI he can trust? He names an unchanged team. The best player on either side may well be on the bench: Sarr returning for Watford, Bissouma getting a breather for Brighton. Watford Foster; Femenia, Cathcart, Samir, Kamara; Kucka, Sissoko, Cleverley, Kayembe; King, Dennis. Subs: Ngakia, Bachmann, Semas, Masina, Louza, Kabasele, Pedro, Hernandez, Sarr. Brighton Sanchez; Veltman, Dunk, Webster; Lamptey, Gross, Lallana, Cucurella; Moder; Maupay, Welbeck. Subs from Steele, Alzate, Duffy, Ferguson, Bissouma, March, Mac Allister, Trossard, Caicedo. A big moment for the Donny van de Beek Fan Club. Everton Pickford; Coleman, Holgate, Keane, Kenny; Gordon, Allan, van de Beek, Iwobi; Richarlison, Calvert-Lewin. Subs: Begovic, Patterson, Branthwaite, El Ghazi, Dele, Gomez, Townsend, Tosun, Rondon. Leeds Meslier; Ayling, Llorente, Struijk, Dallas; Koch, Klich; Raphinha, Rodrigo, Harrison; James. Subs: Forshaw, Bate, Klaesson, Roberts, Bate, Shackleton, Kenneh, Gelhardt, Hjelde, Summerville. Once upon a time, Everton v Leeds was a clash of the titans. In 1969-70 Don Revie’s Leeds started the season as league champions and finished it by coming a distant second to Everton. These days, it’s 15th v 16th, with both clubs looking anxiously over their shoulders. In the recent-form table (last three games), the apple cart has been thoroughly upset: Norwich are second in the Premier League and Newcastle fourth, both level on points with Man City. Leeds are a solid ninth, while Everton are an alarming 19th. The new-manager bounce was there for all to see last Saturday as they greeted Frank Lampard by battering Brentford in the cup. But by Tuesday, when they went to St James’s Park, it had already gone missing. And now they entertain Leeds, who, as my colleague Paul Doyle points out here, have knocked in six goals in their past two away games. Hell, they’ve even got Dan James scoring. They are so much fun to watch, though the Goodison faithful may not see it that way. The desperate need to stay up will be coasting its shadow on the other 3pm games. Roy Hodgson’s Watford, deep in trouble, will have to show off their new-found defensive organisation against Brighton, who are sitting pretty in mid-table and would be even higher if they remembered that the point of stringing passes together is to end up with a goal. Never mind 15th v 16th, we’ve also got 13th v 14th as Crystal Palace go round the South Circular to the Brentford Community Stadium. Both sides have had a good spell this season – Brentford flying at the start, Palace respectable before Christmas – but they’re now getting sucked into the mire. Brentford have lost their last five in the league while Palace are winless in four. It could get gritty. See you soon with the team news. In the meantime, do join Scott Murray for the remainder of a riveting encounter at Old Trafford.Protesters demonstrated in dozens of towns and cities across the UK on Saturday to highlight how the spiralling cost of living crisis is affecting the public. The demonstrations, co-organised by anti-austerity organisation People’s Assembly and supported by trade unions, were held in at least 25 towns and cities, from London to Glasgow to Bangor. The protests come as UK inflation jumped to 5.4% in December, the highest rate in almost 30 years. The Bank of England warned CPI will hit 6% by April, with governor Andrew Bailey coming under fire for suggesting workers should not ask for big pay rises to control it. “Working people could not be working harder and yet life is getting so much more difficult,” said Laura Pidcock, national secretary of the People’s Assembly and a former Labour MP. She said there was “real anger” over the cost of living crisis and the government’s failure to act. “Older people will be cold in their homes, people will be struggling to feed their children, when none of this is a crisis of their making,” Pidcock said. The events follow fears rising living costs will be experienced by the UK’s poorest the hardest. The chancellor, Rishi Sunak, has come under pressure to rethink April’s national insurance (NI) rise, after a thinktank warned UK households classed “destitute” could climb by almost a third – to more than 1 million – this spring. Placards in Parliament Square in London read “tax the rich” and objected to surging energy prices. In Newcastle, one sign held near a baby said: “I can do a better job than Boris.” In autumn, the government withdrew a £1,040-a-year uplift to universal credit (UC) – opposed by several leading Conservatives including Iain Duncan Smith, UC’s architect – despite warnings it could plunge 800,000 people into poverty. The protests were sparked because “people are fed up of rich men telling them that they have to pay for boardroom greed and colossal market failure,” said Sharon Graham, the general secretary of Unite. “This crisis was not caused by working people and we are not going to take wage cuts to pay for it,” Graham added. Andy Simmons, a 24-year-old from Leeds who works in merchandising in London, attended the Parliament Square demo to protest rising living costs after his rent was recently hiked. “When I moved in I was paying £780 rent a month,” he said, for a room in a flat with three housemates. “Now I’m paying £845 – it could have even been worse, the landlord wanted to raise it to £950.” “Quality of life is progressively getting worse under a Tory government,” Simmons said. “But they can obviously afford to spend millions giving Big Ben a makeover.” Sunak insisted it was “simply not right” that the “poorest will bear the burden” of NI rises in an interview with Sky News. But opposition MPs at Saturday’s events blamed the Conservatives. “The cost of living crisis is a Tory political choice: they hand bankers a £1bn-a-year tax cut while scrapping the £20-a-week universal credit uplift,” Labour MP Zarah Sultana, who attended the Coventry demonstration, said on Twitter. “Low-paid workers cannot and will not pay for the government’s problems,” said Fran Heathcote, president of the Public and Commercial Services union. “The hike in heating bills, fuel, transport costs and national insurance contributions, at the same time as pay is held down and pensions are being attacked, leaves most workers with a real cost of living crisis.”Returning to their birthplace after decades of enforced exile, five Chagossians leapt from a motor launch on to the palm-shaded beach of Peros Banhos atoll on Saturday afternoon, kissed the pale sand and stood – hands joined together – in thanksgiving prayers. For Olivier Bancoult, Lisbey Elyse, Marie Suzelle Baptiste, Rosemonde Bertin and Marcel Humbert, it was the moment they had long anticipated – the first time they could step ashore without close monitoring by British officials. It is 50 years since they were deported to Mauritius by UK officials who cleared the archipelago of its entire population to make way for a US military base on the island of Diego Garcia. All five wore T-shirts emblazoned with the motto: ‘Chagos My Home’ and ‘Everyone has a right to live in his birthplace’. “We are not coming as tourists,” declared Bancoult, “we are coming as pilgrims to pay tribute to this abandoned place. “The importance of this trip is that we can send a message to the world – about the kind of injustice the UK government, with the help of the US government, inflicted on our people. If we were white people with blue eyes, maybe we would have had better treatment like the Falkland Islanders?” This the first visit organised by the Mauritian government, which is determined to regain control of the Chagos Archipelago. Successive international court rulings and a majority vote in the UN general assembly have confirmed that the UK ‘unlawfully’ detached the islands from Mauritius before independence and must return them. The UK insists its retains sovereignty and that the landmark ruling at the international court of justice in 2019 was only advisory. On Saturday, the Chagossians’ first task was to move a monument, recording a return visit under British supervision in 2006, further up the beach to avoid erosion from encroaching waves. In the sultry heat, they manoeuvred the heavy stone with sticks and sweated labour. The island’s jetty, which once received commercial ships, has disintegrated; its railway track, that carried goods to the island’s shop and transported copra oil, has rusted away. Even in this remote site, plastic water bottles littered the tideline and there was glass on the beach. A sign placed beside a concrete box declared: ‘This is a BIOT (British Indian Ocean Territory) fire pit. Outer Island 2018 regulations. Fires are only permitted in this area.’ While native Chagossians are denied permission to return permanently, BIOT officials grant licences for yachts to visit their deserted homes. Moving inland, trees have overgrown homes and warehouses fallen into decay since the island was forcibly evacuated in 1972. The ground is littered with rotting coconut shells, many sprouting fresh growth. Hermit crabs swarm across the ground and the occasional giant robber crab – capable of splitting coconuts in two with their claws – appeared in the undergrowth. What was, in the 1960s, the administrator’s bleached white house in a broad clearing is now derelict and overshadowed by palms. A giant banyan tree has taken root in the stone steps to the first floor, its roots gripping the stone. A vast water tank stands rusting beside the building. Nearby is the island’s chapel, Saint Sacrement. “This is where I was christened,” gestured Bancoult. The roof had collapsed, the walls were covered in yellow and ochre mould. With his fellow Chagossians, he set to work clearing the floor. Sprouting coconuts were hurled out through the empty windows. Marcel Humbert hacked at palm fronds with a machete, trying to push back the jungle from their former existence. “I was baptised here, too,” said Lisbey. “This is my church.” Bancoult added: “My grandfather had his funeral here in 1969. My mother made her first communion here. Can’t I have the right to live in my birthplace? It’s racism. They should give everyone in overseas territories the same treatment.” As the ship approached Peros Banhos on Friday evening, the prime minister of Mauritius, Pravind Jugnauth, told the Guardian in a telephone call that his country’s first expedition to the Chagos Island was “not in any way a hostile act” and not meant to embarrass the UK. “It is merely an exercise of our sovereignty over part of our territory and that is in accordance with international law.” In terms of the way the Chagossians had been treated, he added: “The UK has acted in violation of human rights and international law when it forcibly removed the Chagossians. Uprooting people from their place of birth and where they were living without any warning and putting them on a ship and just leaving them at the quay in Mauritius. And preventing them going back … That’s clearly a crime against humanity and it’s extraordinarily serious.” Responding to the criticism on Saturday, the Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office in London said: “Successive UK governments have expressed sincere regret about the manner in which Chagossians were removed from BIOT in the late 1960s and early 1970s and we are currently delivering a £40m support package to Chagossians over a 10-year period.”Passengers arriving in the UK on one of the first flights from Kyiv since the call for Britons to immediately leave Ukraine have described growing alarm in the country. The Foreign Office on Friday warned British nationals to leave Ukraine immediately while commercial flights are still available and the land border with Poland remains open. The number of British nationals in Ukraine is believed to be in the low thousands. Haider Ali, a student at the Dnipro Medical Institute in central Ukraine, was among those arriving at Gatwick shortly after midday on Saturday. Ali, from Birmingham, told the PA news agency that he had been unsure about leaving the country. “I’d been in two minds about coming back because of the advice coming out by the British embassy, about the amber alert, red alert,” he said. “A lot of people, a lot of students were waiting for the red alert, and it happened yesterday. “Once that happened, everybody booked their tickets and left as soon as possible,” Ali said. He said his one-way flight ticket cost £210, adding that he thought prices would jump in coming days as people flee the country. The 21-year-old said his university, where around half of the students are British, had advised students to “get out as soon as you can”. The US on Friday warned of the “very distinct possibility” of a Russian invasion of Ukraine in the next few days and told all remaining Americans to leave the country in the next 48 hours. James Heappey, the UK armed forces minister, said that there are no plans for an emergency airlift by western air forces from Kyiv, unlike in Afghanistan last summer. “The Royal Air Force will not be in a position to go in and to fly people out,” he said on Saturday. Ali said public opinion in Ukraine remained divided over the likelihood of a Russian invasion, but that the view that the western media were exaggerating the severity of the crisis was changing. He said: “The Ukrainians are generally very laissez-faire as in terms of people, but the last couple of days they’ve started to get worried. “And when that happens, alarm bells should be ringing.” The divergent perspectives on the situation were exemplified in the views expressed by two passengers on the flight from the capital. Ukrainian Pasha Honcharuk, 24, from Kyiv, said he was “not too worried” and was just travelling for work. He said: “All news channels tell that there will be war but I don’t think so.” In contrast, a Ukrainian business analyst, who did not want to be named, said “of course everybody’s worried” about the possibility of an invasion. However, she said the threat had not been behind her decision to move to London for work. Amid calls for Britons to leave Ukraine immediately, the former British ambassador to the US Kim Darroch described the challenge remaining embassy staff would have to undertake to help Britons leave the country, saying it would “overwhelm the embassy’s resources”. “With lots of foreign nationals trying to get out, there will be chaos, there may need to be extra flights laid on so this will occupy everyone’s time for 24 hours a day for the next few days and you won’t get everyone out – some people will choose to stay,” Lord Darroch said.Francis Spufford, born in 1964, is an uncommonly gifted, adventurous and versatile writer. He began with nonfiction that included a powerful apologia for Christianity, Unapologetic, in 2012. He published Golden Hill in 2016 and it was golden: an outstanding debut, set in 18th-century New York, it won the Costa prize for a first novel. Light Perpetual, his second novel, was longlisted for the Booker prize and is a bold departure in fiction that imagines how it might have been if people who died when a German V2 rocket fell on south London had been able to live their lives. Tell me about the starting point for Light Perpetual. I’ve been walking to Goldsmiths [where he teaches writing] every Wednesday for the last 14 years and there’s a small, round memorial plaque on the branch of Iceland on the corner of the New Cross Road. There’s no reason to look at it, it’s part of the south London landscape. The plaque says 168 people were killed on that spot, one November lunchtime, in 1944, when a V2 fell on Woolworths and destroyed it. As well as beginning a fascination with that story, it began a train of thought about the extraordinary things cities ordinarily contain, then lose. I wanted to find a way of remembering the event that was faithful but not literal, so had to invent a London borough and drop a V2 of my own on to it, not to trample on anybody’s real grief. To what extent, as a novelist, do you play God? The idea of a novelist being omnipotent is straightforwardly impossible. The best novelists can come up with, even at their most megalomaniac, is a cheap substitute. I wanted to come up with a viewpoint wrenched enough out of the human normal to keep us looking at our lives in time in a way we usually don’t do. You’re a prodigious reader – what were you like as a little boy? I was a solitary child, with a pudding-bowl haircut and a selection of acrylic polo necks, who got on more easily with adults – who enjoyed me being precocious and having the world’s largest vocabulary – than with children my own age. It wasn’t emotional precocity, it was verbal precocity – I had elaborate ways of saying simple things. I was frightened, almost permanently, of my younger sister’s serious illness, of which she would die in her early 20s, and it had the effect of keeping me turned away from feeling too much, too directly, about things in front of me. I lived in books for a long time. There was definitely some flight going on. I was a compulsive reader but it did not make me want to be a writer. I read for escape and did not want to do any of the hard work of providing that escape. I wanted to be a reader when I grew up and actually worked as a reader at Chatto &amp; Windus [from 1987 to 1990], which was an education. Why and how? Carmen Callil [Chatto’s managing director] was a feminist icon but [Chatto] was also, weirdly, the last act of gentlemanly British publishing. It took place in a Georgian house, full of shabby, grand furniture. They had me in the attic reading and typing reports on an enormous manual typewriter. It’s a lost world now but felt like modernity at the time. You started writing in 1989, the year your sister died. Was that significant? I think that is too tidy. There must be some connection between an old sorrow reaching its end and becoming grief and being freer to start writing, but being ready to write also had its own independent timetable. It was about becoming less paralysed by perfectionism. It took me a long time to decide I wanted to be a writer. And then I felt that to call myself a writer, let alone a novelist, would be a kind of boast. I accepted it gradually, once I could see the objects I’d made. Your wife, Jessica Martin, a former Cambridge academic, is canon of Ely Cathedral. Are you still a lay representative of the diocese? I’m no longer a representative of the General Synod because I was really bad at it. Being a good talker as a writer does not translate into being any kind of successful church politician. Yet reading Unapologetic, I kept thinking: “Come on, Francis, you have to get into the pulpit.” No! I haven’t – I have the freedom of being a layperson, I don’t have to speak for an institution. I’ve preached the odd sermon by invitation and found it very nerve-racking. Performing something usefully devotional – it’s not my thing. And my wife is really, really good at it. How successful are you at practising what Light Perpetual almost preaches: living your life with mortality in mind? Mortality is easier to be on easy terms with when your death is further away. I have moments in the middle of the night when timor mortis takes me by the throat and I’m profoundly glad when morning comes. I’m not unafraid of death. I’m not reconciled to how temporary all this is. In Unapologetic, I was interested in what you say about guilt as a necessary emotion. As a culture, we’re unkind to ourselves by eliminating guilt because it forces us into an unstable oscillation between an impossibly perfect self-image and a dark, despairing self-image. It is as if we were constantly being taken by surprise by news of our own fallibility whereas we should accept we are hopelessly fallible, that our intentions are not always good. I am not that nice – and can live on easier terms with that. You have a 16-year-old daughter. How worried are you about the future of this planet? Deeply worried. I became a parent late – I’ve been a stepfather for longer. Not long after I became a father, I read Cormac McCarthy’s The Road – a horror-stained version of a universal parental emotion: the fear of having to leave your child somewhere unsafe. That, writ very, very large, is the situation of the planet in the 21st century. What books are on your bedside table? I’m going to count those on the floor as well… Virginia Woolf’s first novel, The Voyage Out, a strange experience because I didn’t know Mrs Dalloway turns up as a walk-on character in it. I’m rereading Thomas Pynchon’s Inherent Vice and there’s more… What’s the last great book you read? Sarah Hall’s Burntcoat was astonishing about pandemic times. It’s a short novel about a virus – not Covid – and an artist who hides with a man she does not know well. Which classic novel are you most ashamed not to have read? I’m ashamed only to have read one novel by Thomas Hardy: The Return of the Native… I understand he’s quite good. What book might people be surprised to see on your bookshelves? Daniel Abraham’s The Long Price Quartet – four fantasy novels from which I partly lifted the time structure for Light Perpetual. Which author do you always return to? Penelope Fitzgerald. Are you working on a new novel? I’m two-thirds of the way through a strange noir crime novel, set in 1922, in a different version of American history where there’s a city on the Mississippi largely populated by Native Americans. Gore, Jesuits and jazz – it will (probably) be called Cahokia Jazz and (probably) be out in 2023. • Light Perpetual by Francis Spufford is published by Faber (£8.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyFive minutes before the half-time break, Scotland had the put-in to a scrum inside Welsh territory. After three phases Wales turned the ball over and began a charge upfield through the relentless Taine Basham. Liam Williams soon had it and exchanged several innocuous kicks with Stuart Hogg. Wales kept possession but coughed it up a minute later as it was Scotland’s turn to win the breakdown battle and regain control. Not that they did much with it. Several phases down the road and very little had changed. This brief segment encapsulated so much of the contest. Neither group was terrible. There were some exciting moments from men wearing red and blue alike. Wales’s forwards made massive strides from their defeat to Ireland last week, carrying with intensity and testing Scotland’s defence around the tighter channels. They also surprised with their proficiency in the lineout, matching Scotland’s better-resourced set piece and mauling with technical efficiency. For their part, Scotland won the kicking battle and competed well on the ground. But there was little cohesion, sustained pressure or dominance outside of a small window following a yellow card to Finn Russell. This left Wales hammering at Scotland’s try line with a man advantage but Dan Biggar opted to end the sequence with a drop goal. This match was akin to watching 12 rounds of a flyweight boxing bout that contained few hooks and only the occasional uppercut. They could have played in the Cardiff rain for a week before a blow of any real substance was landed. Wales won on points – both on the scoreboard and in this stretched boxing metaphor. Wayne Pivac won’t care about the length of the highlights reel, only that his team emerged from the scrap with four points. Scotland’s quest for a first win at the Principality since 2002 continues. Credit must go to the Wales back row. Basham, Ross Moriarty and the impressive Jac Morgan on debut are all smaller than their opposite numbers at the back of the Scottish pack. But they fought with palpable pride and an understanding that many had written their side off before the anthems were sung. They ran straight and hard and offered Tomos Williams and Biggar, a winner in his 100th Test, front-foot ball that they occasionally used to string creative moves out wide. When they did give the ball air they looked threatening in patches, though their inability to bust through Scotland’s line will need to be addressed in the coming weeks. It will stand Wales in good stead that their try was scored from a rumbling set-piece move. Much of the talk has focused on the lack of heft in the tight five. Their former captain Sam Warburton had expressed concern about Wales’s ability to hang with opponents that possessed more grunt up front. That is not to say that a corner has been turned. In fact, both Pivac and Gregor Townsend will have concerns about their respective packs’ inability to boss the gain line. Ireland and France await both teams and as much as the romantics love to see the ball flung about with abandon, cold logic dictates that championships are most often won by the team with the meanest baddies in the scrum. Without that forward dominance so much is left for the magicians in the backline and Scotland’s wizard at 10 barely cast a spell all day. Russell’s long pass set up Darcy Graham for his try in the opening quarter of an hour, but the fly-half was mostly quiet. His most telling contribution was a deliberate knock-on that kicked off a chain of events whicyh ended with Biggar’s winner. This match was not too dissimilar from Wales’s defeat here against South Africa in the autumn. Back then a close affair was turned by the Springboks’ power from the bench, which saw the world champions claim a tight victory. Townsend said on Thursday that he was ripping a page out of Rassie Erasmus’s playbook by unleashing two sets of front rows in order to keep his scrum motoring at full capacity through the 80 minutes. It is worth mentioning South Africa because, like them or not, they have laid down a blueprint on how to win these arm wrestles. Wales and Scotland have shown they can win big games. Wales are Six Nations champions by right and the Scots have an impressive list of recent scalps both home and away. But a year out from the World Cup, and in the midst of a competitive Six Nations, some questions persist around their title credentials. The most pertinent one concerns the raw strength in each team. Tougher examinations will be needed before a definitive answer is reached.Joe Biden and Vladimir Putin talked by phone for over an hour on Saturday in what is widely seen as a last-ditch effort to fend off a Russian invasion of Ukraine which the US has warned could start as early as Wednesday. The call brought “no fundamental change” to the worsening crisis according to a senior US official, briefing reporters. The official said two leaders agreed to stay engaged in the coming days “but Russia may decide to proceed with military action anyway,” adding there was no evidence of “meaningful” de-escalation on the Ukrainian border. In Moscow, Yury Ushakov, a senior foreign policy adviser, called the conversation between the leaders “balanced and businesslike” and confirmed “the presidents have agreed to continue contacts at all levels”. But he rejected US claims that a Russian attack was imminent. “Hysteria has reached its peak,” Ushakov said. A White House statement said that during the call Biden made clear if Russia undertakes a further invasion of Ukraine the US and allies “will respond decisively and impose swift and severe costs on Russia”. It added that the US was “prepared to engage in diplomacy” but “are equally prepared for other scenarios”. “Whatever Russia decides, our assessment is that their efforts to improve their strategic position are already failing and that this will only be exacerbated should they decide to take military action,” the senior US official added. Earlier in the day, Emmanuel Macron held a separate conversation with the Russian leader, which was reported to have lasted one hour and 40 minutes, in which the French president said a “sincere dialogue” was incompatible with the escalating tensions, as Russia continued to move troops from staging areas to positions closer to the border. Moscow did not immediately publish its version of the call. The US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, also talked to his counterpart, Sergei Lavrov, earlier on Saturday to call for “a diplomatic resolution to Russia’s unprovoked military buildup around Ukraine”. “I reiterated that further Russian aggression would be met with a resolute, massive, and united transatlantic response,” Blinken said. The US has said there was a high risk of a Russian attack on Ukraine before the end of Winter Olympics in China on 20 February, and the CIA was reported to have briefed allies that Russian troops have been ordered to be ready by Wednesday. Lavrov accused the US of ignoring its security proposals, which include a guarantee that Ukraine would not join Nato and a withdrawal of Nato forces from eastern Europe, and he denied there were any plans for an attack, saying US warnings were part of a propaganda campaign. “After Russian troops finish drills and return to barracks, the west will declare ‘diplomatic victory’ by having ‘secured’ Russian ‘de-escalation’,” the Russian foreign ministry quoted him as saying, describing it as a “predictable scenario and cheap domestic political points”. Both the US and Russia began rapid evacuations of their embassies. The US state department said a small number of diplomats would stay in Kyiv to keep channels of communication open with the Ukrainian government, some will pull back to Lviv in the west to provide emergency consular services, while most will be posted in neighbouring countries. The US also withdrew about 160 national guard soldiers who had been serving in Ukraine as military advisers. “I think prudence requires us to assume to plan for, and prepare for, a worst-case scenario and the worst-case scenario would obviously involve substantial Russian attacks on the Ukrainian capital,” a senior state department official said. “These developments mean for private American citizens that it isn’t just time to leave Ukraine – it is past time for private citizens to leave Ukraine,” the official added, stressing that the consular staff were no longer in a position to help private citizens leave. Western intelligence agencies have predicted that a Russian attack would be immediately preceded by a fabricated pretext, such a “false-flag” attack on Russia or the Donetsk and Luhansk regions run by Moscow-backed separatists. Michael Kofman, the director of Russia Studies at the Center for Naval Analyses, said the Russia Duma was due to consider recognition of Donetsk and Luhansk as independent republics on Monday. “14 February looks like it may offer a basis for Russia to extend security guarantees, and militarily protect those considered to be Russian citizens living in the separatist regions,” Kofman said on Twitter. “This may be interpreted as a clause which formally authorises the Russian state to use force in Ukraine.”A man landing an upper-cut on the ceiling fan, a woman slamming into furniture, a guy smashing through a lighting fixture: gamers are learning, virtual reality headsets can often cause havoc at home. The trend of crashing into furniture while in the metaverse provoked a 31% jump in home contents claims involving VR headsets last year, insurer Aviva said, marking a 68% overall increase since 2016. “As new games and gadgets become popular, we often see this playing through in the claims made by our customers,” said Kelly Whittington, Aviva’s UK property claims director. “In the past we’ve seen similar trends involving consoles with handsets, fitness games and even the likes of rogue fidget spinners.” Aviva said the average VR-related claim for accidental damage in 2021 was about £650, often from broken TVs smashed by overenthusiastic gamers. Claims to Aviva involving virtual reality headsets can get wacky. One customer launched a controller at his TV when a zombie jumped out during the game. Multiple people reported cracking TV screens. One child smashed two designer figurines – perched on the mantelpiece – when his game demanded a “swipe” move. All three claims were accepted and settled, an Aviva spokesperson told the Guardian. “These devices can be a great source of fun, but we’d encourage people to be mindful of their surroundings and take a look at their home insurance to make sure it suits their needs,” Whittington added, urging people to add accidental damage cover to their home insurance plan. Aviva said that, with many people in the UK receiving VR headsets over Christmas, claims in 2022 are already coming in and the company expects more. The Reddit forum “VR to ER” features of videos of people using VR headsets falling over, bumping into furniture or accidentally punching loved ones. While those with damaged homes may not see the funny side, commenters are finding humour in the trend. Commenting on the upper-cut video, one person said: “Looks like the guy knocked its lights out.” Another person, writing under a video of a woman body-slamming furniture, commented: “Never heard a house scream like that before.”Here is Andy Bull’s report rom Paris. Andy Farrell is speaking to ITV. “We came here to win, but France are a class side and had a big say in that. The character to come back from 22-7 down says a lot about our team. We expected Carberry to play well and he did, but the forward pack also did well, it was tit-for-tat in terms of who was on top up front. All in all it comes down to it was one hell of a Test match.” Looking ahead to Italy.. “We’re a squad and some boys need some game time, so we’ll be looking to that for the Italy game.” Man of the Match, Gregory Alldritt is offering his take. “Great moment to play in a full stadium. It was a really physical game, but the win was made by 22 players. We have a huge away game in Scotland in two weeks, and we are not thinking about anything more than that.” A fascinating, pulverising match ends with a deserved winner. Ireland’s comeback in the second half gave hope, but it was never realistic that they could stop this France team scoring and Ireland were never once ahead in the game. 80 mins. On the next phase, Ntamack boots the ball out and Les Bleus are ecstatic. 79 mins. Jack Carty is on for Carbery and his first contribution is to throw a forward pass and on the advantage France boom it away to eat up territory and seconds. 78 mins. NO TRY! It’s not given! But an advantage was being played and Jaminet takes all the time in the world before slotting and easy three from in front of the posts. 77 mins. In the Ireland 22 France are working through carries from the base of the ruck, Ireland have bodies flying into tackles and rucks, one of which is illegal. On the advantage Fickou chips forward, the ball comes left after a blue shirt gathers it and Jaminet is over the line as Sheehan tackles him. The ref and TMO are taking a long look, but it looks like Sheehan has made an incredible effort to hold it up. It’s been given as no try on the field, so clear evidence is needed to award it. 74 mins. Tactical kicking has become the battle in recent minutes, and the latest bout is won by France as Hansen pulls a clearing kick horribly and gives possession to the home team in the Ireland half. 72 mins. Ireland look like they are getting stronger in the phases and France’s physicality has dropped off noticeably. F,ament loses his footing at the ruck, it’s pretty much in front and Carbery hammers it over. No issue with his nerves. Cian Healy and Finlay Bealham replace Furlong and Porter. 70 mins. Some exchanges of kicks, the penultimate one from Keenan is a great territorial effort that forces Ntamack to find touch and Ireland will have the ball in the France half. Maxime Lucu replace Antoine Dupont. 67 mins. Tadhg Furlong yoinks possession in midfield, the ball comes left and breaks to Beirne who snap-kicks at 50:22 with his left peg. What a kick that is! This is then immediately ruined by Ireland losing their resulting lineout. GAH! 63 mins. Ireland subs. Conor Murray for Gibson-Park Robbie Henshaw replaces Bundee Aki. 62 mins. France break up the right and as the ball is kicked forward by Dupont he collides with Beirne. The TMO is looking at obstruction but there’s very little in it. Ireland clear possession upfield from the lineout on their own 22. 60 mins. Ireland get some offloads going from Ringrose, Henderson and Gibson-Park who kciks the ball on to force Dupont to tidy up. The France captain steps out of his own in-goal with ease, like the obscene talent he is. 57 mins. Dupont shovels some poor possession on to Ntamack who does the same to Fickou. With no-one tidying it up Doris is this close to grabbing it but just fumbles it forward. Iain Henderson is on for Caelan Doris 54 mins. Lots of subs for France. Uini Atonio and Baille replaced by Demba Bamba and Jean-Baptiste Gros Thibault Flament for Willemse Cameron Woki gives way to Romain Taofifénua 53 mins. The Irish pack do a good job of holding the France scrum stationary and Les Bleus go left through Ntamack and Moefana to Penaud but the Irish defence scramble. France are back on the ball in the 22 via a huge counter-ruck and an Atonio carry that his front row pal Baille finishes from a strong carry of his own. Jaminet finally misses a kick. 50 mins. Dan Sheehan steps enough in the carry that just gets himover the gainline in the 22, that’s enough to get France scrambling and Gibson-Park dummies and steps around Willemse to score next to the right post. Carbery adds two and it’s a one point game. Well I never! 47 mins. Suddenly Ireland spring to life with Keenan rushing forty metres with the ball. As the ball is recycled the French defence is finally disjointed and they are offside. Again the penalty is kickable, but it’s rejected as Ireland go for the lineout. 45 mins. OK, so they nearly scored first! Carbery goes to the corner on a kickable penalty, his forwards catch and drive before the Leinster flanker drives over to score. Joey Carbery hits a wonderful conversion from out wide. 43 mins. Andrew Conway does his side no favours after they work some ohases around halfway. The Munster winger is offside in front of the kicker after France contained every bit of running attack Ireland attempted. Jaminet calls for the tee and hammers it through from nearly 50 metres on the angle. Ireland had to score first this hald and they haven’t 40 mins. Joey Carbery kicks us back underway. Cros claims it and Dupont clears with the boot Half-time musings. Let’s be honest, Ireland are clinging on. Their only score has come through a freak restart play and each time they try to build something they are being bludgeoned into submission. Added to this, the France scrum walked them ten metres back for the penalty on the stroke of half-time. Farrell’s men are second best everywhere and twelve points behind away from home. The key to clawing their way back into this game is holding the ball longer and hoping France infringe, but the problem with this plan lies in what I said above regarding French bludgeoning. This France team are petrifying. PEEEP! That’s the end of an absorbing first half. 39 mins. The fullback adds three more. 37 mins. France hold then malevolently creep forward a scrum in the middle of the Ireland half. The ref is playing advantage for the Ireland front row standing up and as the next phase of France attack halts, play will come all the way back for another Jaminet penalty kick. 35 mins. Dupont flings a long pass to Penaud who cuts inside on the angle and backhand offloads to Moefana. The centre drives in the 22 and on the next phase Ireland are scrambling and give away a penalty that Jaminet wastes no time in converting to points. 33 mins. After Ntamack puts the ball into the corner, France let Ireland off the hook by closing the gap at the lineout which allows Carbery to clear upfield. 30 mins. Aki slams into Ntamack at full tilt, bouncing the French 10 off before Fickou stops him. On the next phase Willemse times his strike for the ball perfectly at the breakdown and wins a penalty, this allows Woki to fly high in the subsequent lineout to put his side on the ball in the Ireland half. 28 mins. France seize on a lost Ireland lineout but Cyrille Baille knocks on around the Ireland 22. Ireland clear away and another French handling error gives the men in green a scrum on the France 10m line. 25 mins. Ronan Kelleher is injured and Dan Sheehan replaces him 23 mins. Furlong pops up in the 12 channel as the pivot for the Carbery runaround loop and it nearly gets Ireland away down the left but Kelleher’s final pass was just behind Hansen, forcing him to check his run. As possession is given away, Ntamack’s kick leaves Keenan with no choice but to take a tackle into touch. The French line-speed and ferocious tackling is incredible. Surely they can’t do this all game? Ireland need to ride this period out without conceding any more points. 20 mins. Penalty infringements are traded in the middle third, the latest of which has Carbery putting the ball into touch for an Ireland lineout just outside the France 22. The ball is won by James Ryan but again there is imprecision in possession forced by France’s sheer physicality in the tackle. 16 mins. Ireland win their own lineout, but France are through and harrassing the attempted maul and Ref Gardiner penalises the team in green. Jaminet maintains his 100% record thus far. 13 mins. Carbery looks confident with the touches he’s had so far, his latest is an angled driven kick into touch to make France play from their own 22. The home side tidy it up and clear after Kelleher is caught offside. 11 mins. I’m disappointed to report that no-one has scored in the previous three minutes. Ireland have a scrum on halfway. 10 mins. Fickou is pinged for a deliberate knock-on as Ireland get the passes going around halfway. Ireland have a lineout in the France half that runs a little loose and Penaud clear the French lines. 8 mins. Direct form the Carbery kick-off, Hansen races from deep and takes the ball above his head a full tilt and simply runs in to score! Carbery adds the two and we have one ridiculous game on here. 6 mins. It’s Ireland’s turn to go immediately onto the attack from a restart as Aki drives into the 22, but it breaks down as the ball doesn’t stick in Doris’s hands after a high pass from Gibson-Park. Villiere hoofs it downfield, and the France chase does enough at the breakdown to win a penalty that Jaminet slots. 2 mins. Gibson-Park puts the ball out and France take a quick throw in. The ball is out to Moefana who steps and offloads before it’s recycled for a big Atonio carry into the 22. It’s worked right and Ntamack pops it inside to Dupont who runs in from twenty metres. Jaminet converts. Well, that’s how you start a game. 1 min. Romain Ntamack takes the ball off a little remote controlled car, runs his fingers through his immaculate and voluminous hair, and kick is us into action. The teams are on the pitch and lining up for the anthems. Not long now... Pre match reading Much will ride on Joey Carbery’s performance, have a read of what our Andy Bull has to say about it. Tell me everything, ask me anything, send the lyrics to My Ding-a-Ling* to me by email or on Twitter *Don’t Speaking as I was of victories over New Zealand, today’s starting line-ups have France with fourteen of their side that beat the All Blacks, while Ireland have twelve. For France, last week’s starting centre Jonathan Danty has been ruled out and so Yoram Moefana, who impressed off the bench versus Italy comes into the 12 shirt. Up front, back row François Cros starts in place of Dylan Cretin who drops to the bench. Andy Farrell has lost his captain, Johnny Sexton, and is forced to start Joey Carbery and bring Jack Carty onto the bench where he is joined by the fit again Robbie Henshaw. In the absence of Sexton, captaincy novice James Ryan will take the role in perhaps the most high-profile situation imaginable. Not ideal. France: Melvyn Jaminet; Damian Penaud, Gael Fickou, Yoram Moefana, Gabin Villière; Romain Ntamack, Antoine Dupont (captain); Cyril Baille, Julien Marchand, Uini Atonio, Cameron Woki, Paul Willemse, François Cros, Anthony Jelonch, Gregory Alldritt. Replacements: Peato Mauvaka, Jean-Baptiste Gros, Demba Bamba, Romain Taofifénua, Thibaud Flament, Dylan Cretin, Maxime Lucu, Thomas Ramos. Ireland: Hugo Keenan; Andrew Conway, Garry Ringrose, Bundee Aki, Mack Hansen; Joey Carbery, Jamison Gibson-Park; Andrew Porter, Ronan Kelleher, Tadhg Furlong, Tadhg Beirne, James Ryan (captain) Caelan Doris, Josh van der Flier, Jack Conan. Replacements: Dan Sheehan, Cian Healy, Finlay Bealham, Iain Henderson, Peter O’Mahony, Conor Murray, Jack Carty, Robbie Henshaw. Welcome to not-quite-Paris in the not-quite-springtime for this monster of a tie in the 2022 Six Nations. France vs Ireland, once more with feeling. Not so long ago these two sides were handily beating the All Blacks, and comfortable victories in round one of the tournament have shined up their credentials as pretty much joint-favourites for the title. Ireland were irresistible last week as Andy Farrell’s brand of multi-phase, multi-pattern, fast and furious rugby dished out a whomping to Wales in Dublin. Even with the loss of Johnny Sexton more of the same will be expected here as Ireland seem to be a perfect blend of well-drilled with flexibility - a structure that should survive any personnel changes. Although, Sexton’s absence is definitely the change that will test that theory closest to its breaking point. France were more circumspect in a rain-sodden victory over an improved Italy in this stadium. However, this performance of such physically dominant pragmatism should also be admired alongside their much-touted capacity for magic from the Dupont and Ntamack. It’s impossible to call and I for one cannot wait to get going.Like almost every other institution in this country, Australian sport has been captured by carbon; succumbing to the interests of multinational corporations at the centre of the climate crises. Gina Rinehart’s Hancock Prospecting completed the coup by announcing a multi-year sponsorship deal with the Australian Olympic Committee. It’s quite spectacular for the AOC, a United Nations’ Sports for Climate Action Framework signatory and Reconciliation Action Plan holder, to partner with an industry whose material wealth appears both founded and reliant on the destruction of First Nations communities and cultures. It’s even more galling considering Rinehart is the beneficiary of her father, Lang Hancock, who famously proposed “herding Aboriginal people into one area before doping up the water so they were sterile and eventually breed themselves out”. Of course, none of this matters to institutions whose sustainability and reconciliation action plans are created to be wielded as nothing more than a marketing tool; the default position for corporate Australia. But there was a sliver of light in Australian sport when Tennis Australia confirmed the axing of Santos from the 2021 Australian Open sponsors list. Although the AFL dropped Rio Tinto in 2020 for destroying the 46,000-year-old Juukan caves, this is the first time that a peak sporting body has presumably dumped a partner on the specific grounds of climate – clearing the path for others to follow suit; and herein lies the opportunity for the first follower. The power of the first follower is notoriously understated. An unsung hero that is routinely overlooked, the first follower exhibits arguably more courage than the leader whose initial step took the tally from zero to one. It’s the first follower who normalises and validates the actions of those they are following, providing safe passage for the fence sitters whose strength depends on the quantity of those around them and the direction they are moving. Without the forward momentum that the first follower brings, moments don’t evolve into movements; and that’s the tantalising opportunity that Tennis Australia has provided for athletes, fans and administrators. By rectifying their initial failure and parting ways with Santos, Tennis Australia is the flint and the first follower – whether that be the Australian Olympic Committee, AFL, Cricket Australia, Netball Australia, Swimming Australia, Rugby Australia or the plethora of clubs under their codes banners that have been captured by carbon – to be the spark. In a transitional and overlapping phase of the sporting calendar, it’s an opportune moment for athletes to reject the generations of Australian pacifism that has enabled the governing bodies to commodify them. It’s a chance to pull back the curtains and dismantle the stage that has seen athletes blindly championing the vested interests of corporations and wealthy individuals like mannequins in a shop window. The recent Cool Down campaign, led by Emma and David Pocock from FrontRunners, has signalled that athletes are starting to rise from their slumber. The campaign acknowledges the threat that climate change poses to the future of sport and impressively garnered signatures from more than 300 athletes, calling upon governments to be more ambitious with their climate commitments. But the legitimacy, agency and integrity of these pledges will be undermined for as long as the athletes and their employers champion the causes of companies such as Santos, Hancock Prospecting, BHP, Woodside, Origin Energy and the like. As much as the general public want to rally behind athletes such as Pat Cummins, a signatory of the Cool Down campaign, it’s hard to unsee the fact that he and his peers have spent another summer promoting Alinta Energy; a convenient yarn that almost makes you forget that they pump around 11.7M tonnes of carbon into the atmosphere per year. Tennis Australia has begun squiggling “the line” that major institutions are so afraid to draw. In doing so, they have begun laying down safeguards for the sports future, setting a precedent for others to follow and excitingly exposed themselves to a whole new market of potential investors. Now we await with anticipation to see who, if anyone, will courageously be the first to follow. Ben Abbatangelo is a Gunaikurnai and Wotjobaluk virtuoso executive leader, freelance writer and storyteller. He is a former Melbourne Stars cricketer and the former deputy CEO of AIME This piece was amended on 16 February 2022 to say that Gina Rinehart is the beneficiary of Lang Hancock. The original version incorrectly said she was Hancock’s benefactorThe federal government faces a potential high court challenge to its plans to forcibly send an Afghan Hazara asylum seeker back to Afghanistan, despite the fall of the country to the Taliban and the systematic persecution of the Hazara ethnic minority. Late on Friday, the full bench of the federal court allowed an appeal from the government, which is seeking to remove the man from Australia and return him to Afghanistan. The decision is likely to be appealed to the high court, which may or may not choose to hear it. The decision made by the Immigration Assessment Authority (IAA) in 2017 that the man, while he faced risk of harm in his home country, could safely be sent back to live in the capital, Kabul, was successfully appealed last year. The man, given the pseudonym EGZ17 before the court, is an ethnic Hazara and a Shia Muslim, and sought protection in Australia claiming he faces harm in Afghanistan. Barrister Jay Williams, appearing for EGZ17, argued the IAA’s decision was now “legally unreasonable” given that when the Taliban seized control of Kabul and the functions of government, the Republic of Afghanistan was replaced by the self-proclaimed Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan. He argued that the IAA assessment had been made against a country that no longer exists, and therefore “suffered from an absence of jurisdictional fact and fell into jurisdictional error”. Judge Alexander Street agreed, and the appeal was successful. But the minister for immigration, Alex Hawke, appealed to the full bench of the court, arguing the initial decision by the IAA should be upheld, regardless of the changed circumstances in Afghanistan and the illegality of the Taliban coup. Lawyers for the government argued “a change in governance of a country, even if secured through activity which does not conform to the laws of the country, does not inexorably lead to a conclusion that the country has ceased to exist”. Late on Friday, the government’s appeal was allowed by the full bench of the federal court. The federal court heard EGZ17 “faces a real risk of serious and significant harm … including death, torture, cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment at the hands of the Taliban and other extremist groups on the basis of his religion, ethnicity, political opinion and membership of a social group, as a Hazara, a Shia Muslim and as a returnee asylum seeker from Australia”. Australia has previously forcibly removed a number of Hazara Afghans prior to the fall of Kabul, including some who faced serious hostilities, with one reportedly kidnapped and tortured by the Taliban before escaping. But this is the first time the government has indicated it would remove a Hazara since the fall of Kabul. The Guardian understands the man’s removal is not imminent, but the government is keen to press its right to send Afghans back to the country if, in its judgment, the security situation has improved. Immediately after the fall of the Kabul, the immigration minister said “no Afghan visa holder currently in Australia will be asked to return to Afghanistan while the security situation there remains dire”. But that moratorium is only temporary, and it does not apply to Afghans in Australia who do not hold a visa. The Guardian is aware of dozens of Afghan nationals whose place in Australia remains uncertain, making EGZ17’s case a critical test. The Taliban has a history of violently repressing the Hazara ethnic minority, with that danger exacerbated by the fall of Kabul and their rise to power. The Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade outlined the dangers the Hazara ethnic minority face in its Thematic Report on the Political and Security Developments in Afghanistan, released in January. “Dfat assesses that Hazaras in Afghanistan face a high risk of harassment and violence from both the Taliban and [terrorist group the] Islamic State in Khorasan Province, on the basis of their ethnicity and sectarian affiliation,” the report said. After the fall of Kabul, the Action for Afghanistan advocacy group published an open letter urging the government, among other actions, to “grant amnesty to all nationals of Afghanistan currently in Australia who fear returning to Afghanistan”. The return of Taliban rule had “instilled fear and insecurity”, the group said. “Afghanistan’s historically persecuted Hazara ethnic group, who faced widespread killings and genocide the last time the Taliban were in power, are now more acutely at risk. The Hazara community has never known safety while the Taliban have reigned.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Afghan-Australian Arif Hussein, a senior lawyer at the Refugee Advice and Casework Service, told the Guardian he believed it was “unconscionable for the Australian government to return people to Afghanistan, especially the long-persecuted Hazara”. “In recent months, one million people have fled Afghanistan, fleeing insecurity, famine and Taliban violence specifically targeting ethnic minorities,” Hussein said. “The UN has described it as the world’s largest humanitarian crisis. It is not safe in Afghanistan for anybody, but it is especially not safe for Hazaras.” Hussein said Australia had a moral obligation to the people of Afghanistan, after its long-running involvement in the war there and withdrawal last year. A Senate inquiry has described Australia’s withdrawal as “dishonourable”, saying the country had left Afghan allies “standing in harm’s way”. Australia has committed 15,000 places within its existing humanitarian intake for Afghan nationals over the next four years, but no additional places. “Australia can do more to bring people to safety from Afghanistan, to grant permanent visas to Afghans who are living in Australia on temporary visas, and, at the very least, not return anybody or attempt to return anybody to Afghanistan,” Hussein said. “It’s unconscionable to send people back.”This is a government that lies. It lies because it is led by a prime minister who long ago forgot the difference between truth and falsehood, assuming he ever knew it to begin with. It lies because the prime minister has always said whatever he needs to say to get a laugh, a vote, a cheque or a reprieve. It lies because the prime minister found that lying was easy – when he lost one job on the Times for lying he got a new job on the Telegraph, where he lied some more. This is a government that lies. It lies because lying never harmed its leader’s political career and, when he was fired from a shadow junior ministerial position for lying on a small scale in 2004, he went on to win the Brexit referendum in 2016 by lying on a grand scale and then became prime minister in 2019 to lie on an epic scale. This is a government that lies. It lies because it is a lame-duck administration of charlatans and clowns, an echoing void where the government of the country ought to be. It lies to make it from one scandal to the next, from the scandal about wallpaper to the scandal about lobbying to the scandal about the partying to the scandal about Jimmy Savile to the scandal that will break this week and every week after that. This is a government that lies. It lies because none of the stories it tells itself make sense. It lies because Brexit has not made Britain great again, but brought nothing but trade barriers and clinging bureaucracy. It lies because austerity was a blunder and levelling up will be a chimera. It lies because it says it is the party of tax cutters but is raising taxes, and says it is the party of sound money but is allowing inflation to soar, and says it is the party of home ownership but is letting landlordism rip, and says it is the party of enterprise but is crushing productivity. It lies because it is easier to lie than accept the truth that its hopes have turned to ashes. This is a government that lies. It lies because it knows it can never admit that the prime minister, his wife, aides and civil servants giggled and guzzled as millions suffered isolation and loss. It lies because it did not listen when the prime minister’s own adviser warned that attacking the leader of the opposition with lies about “a horrendous case of child sex abuse” would be seen as the scurrilous act of a scoundrel leader. This is a government that lies. It lies because it knows liars can game a quaint system whose rules mandate that the Speaker of the House of Commons will allow a liar to lie but will expel MPs who point out that the liar is indeed lying. It lies because broadcasters place balance above truth and if one guest says the world is round, they must rush to find another who will say it is flat. It lies because the prime minister is the creation of the Tory press and its editors can no more bear to tell the truth about him than Caliban could bear the sight of his face in the mirror. It lies because thoughtful people think twice before condemning a liar for lying and provide cover for the prime minister whenever they wonder if he is just confused, or ill-informed or so lost in delusion he believes his lies as he tells them – as the best liars always do. It lies because respectable society fears that throwing accusations of lying around will create a vicious, foul-mouthed country – without realising that they already live in the future they fear. This is a government that lies. It lies because it knows that most people pay next to no attention to politics and will let it get away with lying. It lies because it knows many people think “all politicians are liars” and expect to be lied to. It lies because too few have learned the difference between politicians who stonewall, twist, brag and fall into groupthink and the Putin and Trump wannabes, who think that if leaders destroy trust in everyone and everything voters may stop believing that change for the better is possible and stick with the liars they know. It lies because it is gambling that a society where trust has evaporated will be easier to govern than a confident country that insists on high standards. This is a government that lies. It lies because, despite all it says to the contrary, it quietly despises Conservative voters and thinks they are either such fools that they believe their leaders’ lies or such cynics that they admire the rat-like cunning their leaders display when they lay their false trails. It lies because a generation of amoral commentators assured it that the truth no longer mattered as the electorate had “baked in” the prime minister’s willingness to lie. This is a government that lies. It lies because it instinctively understands what sociologists call “strategic lying” and the rest of us call “shit sticking”, shifts the news agenda on to its preferred territory. It lies because it knows Dominic Cummings was right to agree that when he told the lie that Brexit would deliver £350m a week to the NHS in 2016, or the prime minister told the lie this year that Keir Starmer failed to prosecute Jimmy Savile, they “trapped” their opponents into spreading the lies as they refuted them. It lies because it cannot admit the existence of the world in front of its eyes. It ignored a fraud epidemic last week, so it could pretend that crime is falling. It went on to ignore the sharpest collapse in living standards in 30 years so it could pretend the economy was booming. It lied last week as it lies every week. It lies to the Queen. It lies to parliament. It lies to the electorate. It lies to itself. It lies as a matter of policy. It lies as a matter of course. It lies when it doesn’t need to lie. It lies because it doesn’t know what else to do. It lies because it is all it can do. This is a government that lies. • This article was amended on 13 February 2022. The picture of the Speaker, Sir Lindsay Hoyle, was replaced to remove any suggestion that he is part of the government. • Nick Cohen is an Observer columnistThe Great Barrier Reef – the world’s largest coral reef system, covering an area about the size of Germany – always comes with big numbers. Last month the Australian government pledged another seemingly large figure, $1bn, for conservation and science to be spent over the next nine years and spread along the 2,300km reef. That comes on top of state and federal government commitments in the region of $3bn since 2014. So where is all the money going, and will it be enough to keep one of the world’s most complex natural wonders from collapsing under the mounting pressure of global heating? Without rapid global cuts to greenhouse gas emissions, many experts fear the $1bn will do little except delay the inevitable. More urgent for the Morrison government is whether the funding – contingent on the Coalition winning the next election – will convince the 21-country world heritage committee not to dump the reef onto its list of sites in danger when it meets in July. The $1bn pledge came just days before a 1 February deadline to deliver a report to the world heritage centre in Paris outlining the health of the reef and what was being done to build its resilience. An economic analysis of the value of the reef – released in 2017 but still referred to by the government – said the reef added $6.4bn to the nation’s economy in just one year, mostly through tourism, commercial fishing, recreation and scientific research. Water quality Some $579.9m of the $1bn pledge would go to water quality projects, with the next largest slice – $252.9m – for reef management and conservation. Another $92.7m is for research and adaptation and $74.4m would go to community- and traditional-owner led projects, such as habitat restoration and species protection. The reef’s major threat is from climate change – specifically, rising ocean temperatures that have caused corals to bleach en masse five times since the first recognised outbreak in 1998. Unesco’s science advisers want management plans to account for the effects of climate change, to have greenhouse gas emissions targets consistent with 1.5C of global warming (analysts say Australia’s approach is aligned with heating closer to 3C) and to do more to cut pollution running into the reef from the land. Sediments, nutrients and pesticides running into the marine park can harm inshore corals, as well as marine habitats such as seagrass meadows and mangroves. One key source for these pollutants is agriculture, both directly when on-farm pollutants get washed into waterways and indirectly when exposed soils and eroded riverbanks are washed away by rain. According to the Queensland government, in the five years from 2017 to 2022, commitments focused on improving water quality stood at $270m from the state government and $396m from the commonwealth. A spokesman for the environment minister, Sussan Ley, said under the $1bn plan, funding for water quality would rise from $60m a year now to $85m a year from 2026-27 through to the end of the decade. The state and federal governments have set targets for water quality up to 2025, and release an annual report card. The most recent results with data up to 2019 show slow progress from previous years, even though three of the four key measures indicate the target is at least halfway to being met. “Overall inshore marine condition remained poor in 2018-2019, with coral and seagrass in poor condition and water quality rated moderate,” the report said. A spokesman for Ley said: “We are confident that the additional programs generated through this funding will significantly accelerate these outcomes.” Queensland’s minister for the Great Barrier Reef, Meaghan Scanlon, says the $270m in recent years does not include a $2bn renewable energy fund, or $500m for land restoration. “Since 2015, we’ve banned the dumping of dredge spoil, passed tree clearing laws, committed to bring in reef regulations, brought in net free zones and invested billions of dollars to help protect the Great Barrier Reef,” Scanlon says. Direct intervention Funding for direct interventions to improve water quality is spread across multiple projects. Between 2018 and 2023 some $200m of federal cash is routed through the Great Barrier Reef Foundation (GBRF) – a small not-for-profit that was given a $443m grant by the Turnbull government in 2018, to be spent over six years. Theresa Fyffe, executive director of projects and partnerships at the foundation, said the bulk of the money had gone to 10 regional programs. Fyffe said the foundation is working with more than 1,000 farmers across 15,000 sq km. There are two approaches, she said. One is to improve the way farmers use fertilisers and pesticides so that less washes away during rain. Field officers work with farmers to map out their land and soil types and document how they use fertilisers and chemicals before drawing up management and monitoring plans. The other identifies projects such as earthworks that will directly tackle problems such as erosion of creek-banks or damage to wetlands. “You’re trying to drive enduring change,” she said. “Working with a grower for five years gives you a change that is there forever. That’s when farmers can become advocates.” The grant to the foundation remains controversial. Labor said last month it would terminate the agreement and reallocate any unspent funds if it won the next election. But there is unlikely to be much uncommitted cash left. The foundation’s managing director, Anna Marsden, said by the end of this financial year, only $80m will be uncommitted and “every dollar is allocated for a program” with much of the uncommitted funds earmarked for traditional owner-led projects. “We’re halfway through a job. And it’s a big job,” Marsden said. “The reef is an extreme sport because there’s opposing views all over the place and everyone is passionate. “But we can’t give up on the reef. The reef won’t give up and the public aren’t giving up and neither are the scientists. But this is the critical decade. It’s crunch time.” The crown-of-thorns ‘plague’ In a landmark 2012 scientific paper, scientists at the Australian Institute of Marine Science found coral cover over the reef had dropped by half between 1985 and 2012. About 42% of that loss was down to the voracious coral-eating crown-of-thorns starfish (Cots). “They are just so exquisitely evolved to take advantage of the conditions and they can get to plague proportions,” said Dr Roger Beeden, responsible for co-ordinating the Cots control program and director of reef interventions at the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority. Beedon said Cots are part of the reef’s ecosystem, but they have become a pest that are able to eat their own bodyweight in coral in a matter of days. “They can cause very rapid decline in coral cover. There can be carpets of them.” The bulk of the funding for the Cots program goes to running five dedicated boats with teams of up to eight divers that select locations based on new methods of modelling outbreaks. Beeden says since the 2018 funding expanded the program, 268 reefs have been actively managed and 320,000 starfish have been killed in 43,000 diver-hours. Divers use spear-like injection guns to pump the starfish – which can grow to the size of a dinner plate – with either ox bile or household vinegar. A new “one shot” method has replaced an older approach that used acid salt that needed to be injected into every arm of the starfish (miss one arm, and the starfish could survive). Beeden said many tourism operators like to carry out their own culling operations as they visit reefs “so we provide them the materials to do that”. The aim for the dive teams, Beeden said, is not to eradicate the starfish, but to get them down to sustainable levels. Divers have become highly skilled, he said, and can spot juvenile starfish the size of a thumbnail. The reef is in the middle of the fourth major outbreak of the starfish since the first in the 1960s. Through the grant to the GBRF, $57m went to controlling Cots, and Beeden said about $41m was spent on the direct control program. Under the latest federal government funding pledge, Beeden said $162m is identified for Cots control. “Every adult coral we keep alive matters,” he said. ‘Shuffling the deck chairs’ Some $100m of the GBRF’s grant has gone to research and development projects, adding to funding of reef-related research at other institutions including CSIRO and the Australian Institute of Marine Science. These R&amp;D projects include the development of more heat-tolerant corals, methods to help the dispersal of coral larvae and more controversial approaches such as brightening clouds to shade corals undergoing heat stress. A study released last year suggested if these mostly unproven methods could be deployed at scale, they could slow down the loss of corals by as much as two decades. But scientists agree that any benefits the reef could gain from improving water quality or making corals more resilient will be swamped by rising ocean heat – an inevitable consequence of increasing levels of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. Two academic experts on reef management and science said the $1bn funding was “nonsensical” because it failed to address the direct cause of the majority of the reef’s problems. “Unless we deal with climate change, everything else is just shuffling the deck chairs,” says Prof Terry Hughes, a prominent coral and reef scientist at James Cook University. “Even if we had pristine water quality and we could find a magical bullet to control crown of thorns, we still have the overwhelming problem of global warming. “These other Band-Aids will only make a difference if we deal with climate change. They’re all contingent on water temperatures being tolerable for corals.”Although claiming a wild place as your favourite could be a masked attempt to tame it, the land either side of State Highway 67, between Big Ditch and Jones Creek just north of Waimangaroa, is my favourite. This stretch of highway which, if you’re heading north, has a row of houses to your left and a railway and the great Papahaua mountain range to your right, is called Birchfield. There are no off-streets or gas stations. Not a single corner, nor corner store. Just some houses, several paddocks and, as of recently, one radio astronomy observatory. Perhaps it sounds a tame place, and to an extent – on a quick drive through the settlement – that’s fair. Birchfield is on the land of the Ngāti Waewae people. The settlement is about 120 kilometres north of Mawhera where Ngāti Waewae’s chief Tūhuru and his people established a pā (fortified village) after moving south from Karamea, defeating the Ngāti Wairangi people. Birchfield became an industrial settlement in the 1880s. A recently erected monument in the settlement says a Griffiths family arrived there from Lisvane, Wales. They tore away dense, wild coastal vegetation to set up a sawmill and flaxmill, then, by the late 1890s, a foundry and a butter and cheese factory. About a century later, the sawmill, flaxmill, foundry and factory long buried, my mum and dad moved us (me, my brother and two sisters) to a wooden bungalow in Birchfield. Children lived in almost every second home. Together, we would cross the railway and trek into bush to pick from damp, pillowy beds of cold sphagnum moss, cross paddocks to climb into the huge broadleaf trees slumped over a dark, effervescent swamp, wade barefoot in creeks to search for precious stones, and throw handlines from bridges for herring. I found a dying owl once, fallen from a macrocarpa tree. My mum took a ball of mince and rolled the raw meat in my cat’s snipped fur to trick the owl that we were offering it a mouse. The ruru was dead within 24 hours, not fooled by the faux-fur meatball. I’ve never forgotten how magic it felt to hold the kaitiaki in my hands, and have it look into my eyes. Once, my friends and I were going camping on a nearby farm at the foot of the mountain range. We were only about three kilometres from home when we set our backpacks and sleeping bags in the grass and climbed a big tree. I was up fairly high – as I recall – when I put my foot on a rotten branch and fell. I was knocked out cold, maybe just for a few seconds. I opened my eyes, and my friends were gathered around me. My head was cut. My friends helped me walk home. Dazed and with blood running down my face quick and hot, three kilometres felt a distance. My mum took me to the hospital where someone stitched up my head. Driving home, we passed the farm below the mountains. Sure, I felt kind of cool with the stitches in my head. I hadn’t minded all the fuss over me. But I was now going home to sleep in my plain old clean-sheeted bed, when I’d meant to be sleeping at the foot of the mountains; we had meant to stay up all night watching for stars and scaring the crap out of each other with horror stories. I should have got into a sleeping bag smelling of smoke from the campfire, dirt on my face and knees, under my nails, in my hair. The mountains the only thing watching over us. The scar on my head is faint now. The fascination with the ranges remains glossy, thick, and warm. As I understood it, every beautiful thing came from the mountain range, all the energy and water and promise. They were covered by dense rainforest. Trees in every shade of green and every possible texture. The mountains seemed to not only watch us but stimulate an indescribable hunger to see up close what we could not reach on our small feet: a desire to decipher codes stamped in lichen on trees, collect bones and teeth and line them on shelves, scour the needled forest floors for birds to save or old glass bottles to clean. The maunga (mountain) could not be colonised. Maybe its trees grew too thick and out of reach for milling; their mauri (life force) could not be cast in any foundry. They were the pou (supporting pillar) and the lifeblood of my favourite wild place. Becky Manawatu (Ngāi Tahu) is a former journalist for the Westport News. Her first novel, Auē, won New Zealand’s 2020 Jann Medlicott Prize for FictionAnna Clark took seven years to write her latest book, Making Australian History, but it seems a wonder it didn’t take her twice as long. During her many years of research, the 43-year-old celebrated author and historian wasn’t at all sure what her opening chapter ought to be. Perhaps that’s not surprising when you consider the almost limitless scope of the ambitious challenge she set herself: to write what is, effectively, a history of Australian history. A chronological approach common to so much academic and popular history wasn’t going to cut it. The Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander experience – those thousands of generations, those 60-plus millennia (and counting) of human experiences that span time, place and cosmology in a way that challenges non-Indigenous sensibility and intellect – is, of course, omnipresent. But how to explain that in any “traditional” chronological history that aimed to examine what we call “Australian history”, with all its vagaries and ongoing cultural skirmishes, political captivations, blind spots and deliberate omissions? “For example, the term ‘Deep Time’ – history that’s tens of thousands of years old – has only come into use relatively recently,” Clark ponders in her early pages. “Does that mean it goes at the beginning or the end of a history of Australian History?” Clark, whose previous work has won major history awards and who holds an Australian Research Council Future Fellowship at the Australian Centre for Public History at UTS, Sydney, says she “just didn’t know how to do it”. “And then I thought, ‘What if I did chapter 1 as a history of chapter ones which shows how the idea of chapter ones change over time?’” she says. This, in turn, helped her to devise a structure whereby each chapter – among them “Nation”, “Memory”, “Contact”, “Colour”, “Family” (about which, more, shortly) and “Gender” – is propelled by the interrogation of a text or image. So, for example, “Chapter 0, Making histories” contemplates the Dyarubbin (Aboriginal) rock engraving Woman in a crinoline dress, while “Chapter 1, Beginnings” launches off from The History of New Holland, From Its First Discovery in 1616 to the Present Time – published in London in the pre-invasion year, 1787. Chapter 1 begins: “How’s this for a beginning?” Not bad, you’d have to say, given the inherent provocation of The History of New Holland, this country’s first “history”, published before the cataclysmic clash of civilisations that gathered pace with the First Fleet’s arrival a year later. It works. Clark is a wonderful historian, one of her generation’s best. As a writer she is also an admirable stylist. Possessed of a novelist’s eye for detail, her tone is distinctively, laconically, Australian, her elegant prose marked by clarity and an absence of old-school academic pomposity and verbosity. This won’t surprise any who know of Clark’s commitment to democratising what she does in the name of “public history” and of her other work including Private Lives, Public History and her wonderful story of Australian fishing, The Catch. Clark will tell you that she is an obsessive “fisho” and is most comfortable about – or under – the sea. Once she’d nailed the structure of Making Australian History, Clark spent precious, memorable months writing at a secluded south coast New South Wales family property, Ness, near Wapengo. Her family lived there during her long service leave in 2019, then through the Covid lockdown in 2020. “I wrote according to the tides so that I could go fishing. And I thought about place a lot. And particularly, you know, Country. And changing conceptions of Country,” she says. “I was really struck by living in the bush for that long and how much it affected how I thought about the past. You know, walking down to the beach you would be walking through middens every day – so someone had obviously been there thinking about this place and eating from it and even making histories on it for a really long time – several thousand generations. “And it definitely made me think about the timelines and that question that I brought up earlier – you know, when does Australian history begin? And if it begins in deep time, how do we register those histories of Australia from back then?” Making Australian History is replete with that pervasive tension between the stories of the past that early colonial historians – and many of the 20th century – chose to record as having happened on the continent and those they thought a “proud” new nation shouldn’t remind itself of. The violence of Indigenous dispossession – the land grabs, massacres and attempted genocide – and the unsavoury convict experience wouldn’t do. And federation in 1901, she says, did not feel like a relatable human experience. Gallipoli filled the breach. “They [early 20th-century historians] were really looking for an origin story … They had a nation and it clearly had a history but it wasn’t really up to scratch … with the convict legend and frontier violence. Those two profound origin stories weren’t the uplifting national narratives that a proud Australia should have,” Clark says. “It [Anzac] shows that even though that history is confected and highly curated, obviously for it to have that endurance it does hang on many threads of genuine connectedness to many people, as opposed to the federation narrative, for example, which is not really about the people.” Sign up for the fun stuff with our rundown of must-reads, pop culture and tips for the weekend, every Saturday morning Another tension Clark had to wrestle was how her history of Australian history would deal with the work of Manning Clark, this country’s pre-eminent 20th-century historian – and her paternal grandfather. It was not an easy emotional hurdle for Clark who, as an undergraduate Arts student, avoided doing history until a timetable clash made it unavoidable. How did she reckon with the titanic legacy of Manning when she began, finally, studying – and loving – Australian history? “I pretended I wasn’t connected to him. I just sort of didn’t talk about him. Ever. I’ve tried to totally separate my professional life from my family life and he died when I was 12 so to me he really was just my granddad … it was almost like I had just managed to separate it somehow,” she says. “And even when I conceived of this project – and I can’t believe I’m saying this now – I sort of didn’t really think that I would have to mention him, or that if I did, that I would have to mention him in a particular way.” It is a mark of Clark’s modesty – well known to friends and colleagues – that she was concerned detailing her grandfather’s legacy (on her and the nation) might be misinterpreted as “self-indulgent”. Ultimately, she dealt squarely with Manning Clark’s contribution to the nation’s understanding of itself throughout the book – not least in a chapter on family histories. She says, “I don’t have any misgivings about my love for him. You know, I really did love him very much. But in order just to feel like I was making my own mark, I suppose, I didn’t always want to be known as Manning’s granddaughter.” Making Australian History by Anna Clark is out now through Vintage AustraliaCathy Beaufort knows she should be touring nursing homes to find an appropriate facility for her 95-year-old mother but “there’s absolutely no way on the planet that I want her to go to aged care”. “How could I put her into care?” Beaufort says from her mother’s home, which she travels an hour to from her Brisbane home multiple times a week to provide care. The 14 hours of care provided by two home care workers is not enough, but is all she is eligible for under a home care package. Beaufort’s mother is mentally healthy; her heart and lungs are strong. But a catastrophic complication during back surgery means her mobility is extremely limited and worsening, placing her at risk of falls. “I’m 64 [and] I’ve been caring for her for 10 years. Her needs have increased and I am so tired,” Beaufort says. “But even though she is triple-vaccinated, what will it mean for her if she goes into aged care and Covid gets into the home? They might put her in isolation, which means I can’t visit.” Beaufort says she has been reading stories about the atrocious conditions and staff shortages ravaging aged care homes. “I can’t send my mother off to an aged care facility and potentially not even be able to visit her, or leave her there to get Covid.” Georgia Downes, the chief operating officer of Home Instead Australia and New Zealand, says home care demand skyrocketed throughout the pandemic as people were desperate to avoid aged care facilities. “Between the combination of Covid and the aged care royal commission, we’ve seen a 65% increase in inquiries for our services since April 2020,” Downes says. Demand spiked again with Omicron, she says, but staff shortages across the sector combined with international border closures meant meeting the need has been challenging. Unlike the aged care sector, the home care industry does not have access to the national personal protective equipment stockpile or the surge workforce. Home Instead has developed its own education program for carers and is a registered training organisation. It encourages people who are compassionate and caring to apply. “We’ve decided that we’re not going to wait for the government to fund more training for more caregivers.” In Victoria, the CEO of Australian Multicultural Community Services (AMCS), Elizabeth Drozd, wrote to the minister for aged care services, Richard Colbeck, on 20 January to ask what the government’s plan was to support the growing demand for home care. She is yet to receive a reply. AMCS provides home support services to Victorian seniors from diverse backgrounds. “It has been demanding to meet vulnerable clients’ needs without enough employees to provide and facilitate services,” she wrote to the minister. Guardian Australia has contacted Colbeck’s office for comment. Drozd told Guardian Australia that in October the provider lost 15% of its direct care staff due to vaccine mandates, though she encouraged as many as possible to get vaccinated. She also lost staff who were afraid of contracting Covid. “We could employ 50 people today, at least,” Drozd said. “But where are we going to get the people? Migration and students’ intake has reduced in the last two years. “And yet there’s no plan from the commonwealth government, despite the royal commission and Productivity Commission preparing reports saying more workforce shortages in aged care are coming.” Adding to pressures is a rise in inquiries from the community from people wanting to leave aged care facilities for home care, Drozd said. “We have been growing 40% in terms of the number of clients wanting us to assist every year, and it’s absolutely because of the confronting issues from the royal commission and images coming from aged care. I had such a distressed woman call me before Christmas because we did not have the resources to support her mother who was palliative and was set to go into a facility. We just couldn’t do it. “One of the worst days was when we had 73 of our own clients on the 3rd of December who we could not support, we had no capacity. “Because of homes locking down due to Covid, once people go into palliative care in a facility, their family members worry they may never see them again in their last days of their lives.” Palliative Care South East in Victoria provides care to people in nursing homes but also in their own homes. CEO of the service, Kelly Rogerson, says in the first three weeks after Christmas, as Omicron spread, she thought: “Oh my goodness, how are we going to survive?” “We had 50% of our staff furloughed on one day, and then to 25% on most days during that first couple of weeks of spread. But everyone from administration to senior management worked so hard to keep everyone supported.” Rogerson says aged care facilities restricting visitors to the elderly in the last days of their life to avoid Covid spread was leading to thousands of people traumatised by a feeling they were unable to give their loved ones a proper goodbye. This was creating unprecedented demand for home care palliative services. In 2018, the service admitted 762 clients, and in 2020 this rose to 1,241 people, much of that driven by home care requests. Beaufort says trying to decide what the best thing to do for her mother is harrowing. She is angry that families have been left to struggle as they try to manage the risks posed to their elderly loved ones by Covid, while trying to ensure appropriate care for them in their final years or days of life. “The politicians have decided to open up before aged care was equipped, and as a result, they’ve shifted the risk on to the most vulnerable,” she said.Shoes, women’s fashion and stationery are just some of the goods Australian shoppers face difficulty finding on shelves as an international shipping crisis sparked by the Covid-19 pandemic shows little sign of abating. While Covid cases are dropping, Australian retailers have warned supply chain issues are expected to continue for up to 18 months. “This is due to the sheer volume of products and supplies within the global supply chain and the profound shortage of freight space on ships, shipping containers and pallets exacerbated by the limited flights into the country,” the chief executive of the Australian Retail Association, Paul Zahra, said. The continued high price of shipping, together with ongoing uncertainty about when goods ordered from overseas will arrive, has forced Australian importers to order further ahead. That is putting pressure on their businesses at a time when many are already reeling from the direct impact of lockdowns over the past year as well as January’s “shadow lockdown”, caused by people staying home in a bid to avoid the highly contagious Omicron strain. Zahra said retailers were reporting a sevenfold increase in supply chain costs and ordering times from overseas that have doubled or tripled. “The other cash flow impact is retailers having to order and pay much earlier for stock – often as a leap of faith, given the uncertainty in the current market when it comes to customer sentiment and expectations,” he said. ARA members report that they are ending up with either not enough stock or stock arriving at the wrong time – a particular problem in highly seasonal sectors like footwear and frocks, which depend on the weather, and stationery, where sales are given a large bump by the back-to-school rush at the beginning of the year. The organisation has called on the Morrison government for help. In a submission ahead of next month’s federal budget, the ARA urged the government to bring back cash grants for at-risk businesses, reintroduce rent reductions that applied during lockdowns, and give out free rapid antigen tests so that companies can test their employees. Carlos Villazon, the managing director of Stelno Logistics, said transporting a 40ft (12.2m) long shipping container – the most common size – to Australia used to cost between US$1,000 and US$1,500, but over the last year the price had blown out tenfold. He blamed shipping companies for the surge. While price-fixing cartels are illegal in Australia, international shipping companies are allowed to set prices collectively using an exemption that the chair of the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission, Rod Sims, has repeatedly called on the government to repeal. “All these shipping lines are registered to countries such as Panama, Mexico, the Dominican Republic and things like that, so they’re not really regulated,” Villazon said. “So essentially, they’re modern day pirates at the moment because the prices are not really controlled or regulated by any government.” He said Australian importers also suffered because global ship operators consider Australia a “very small piece of the pie”. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “The amount of vessels they have allocated to Australia is quite minimal compared to other trade links like China to Europe and China to America,” he said. “Think about it logically – why would you assign all your fleet to our trade lane when you can make double the amount of revenue in other trade lanes?” Adding to the bottleneck caused by shipping’s slowdown, Omicron has wreaked havoc in onshore warehousing and distribution. Villazon said up to half the staff in Stelno’s three distribution centres were off work at any one time. “The people that we’re seeing ordering ahead – because they’re realising if you’ve got stock, you’re in a really good position … they’re established brands and businesses, we really see them thriving,” he said. However, he said the longer delivery pipeline also meant businesses need “to have positive cash flow to be able to purchase ahead and have larger inventory holdings”. As a result, companies – including his – are turning to invoice financing, a form of borrowing which has been unpopular for about a decade. Also known as factoring, invoice financing involves cashing in orders from your customers at a discount – typically, about 80% of face value – in return for immediate money from a bank or other financial institution. It is the mirror image of the cash flow financing, or “reverse factoring”, offered by Greensill Capital, the once high-flying finance group run by Bundaberg sugar farmer Lex Greensill, which collapsed messily last year. Invoice financing also has risks. Australia’s biggest bank, the Commonwealth Bank of Australia, shut down its invoice financing division after it loaned more than $40m to Viking Group, a trucking company linked to the Comanchero motorbike gang. Viking collapsed in 2011 and two of its executives, Steve Iliopoulos and Vasilis “Bill” Bariamis, together with Bariamis’s wife, Loukia, were sent to jail after being found guilty of fraud against the CBA in 2016. But, lured by the boom in demand, the CBA is now back in the factoring business, and financiers say the use of technology that enables them to keep a close (and automated) eye on their customers’ financial performance has made their systems far less vulnerable to fraud than the largely paper-based system used a decade ago. Daniel Riley, the chief executive of Earlypay, which Stelno uses, said the demand for invoice financing came from businesses who can’t find suppliers. “And when they do, suppliers are changing their credit terms to earlier payment, so there is a cash crunch we have with businesses that would otherwise be growing,” he said. The result has been that clients are borrowing more as sales boom. Riley said sales among Earlypay clients were up 19% in December compared with the previous year. “But just to illustrate the restraint on cash, in December 2020 clients were on average drawing 53% of their total receivables, and in December 2021 that increased to 61%,” he said. “That’s about as high as it can get.” CBA’s head of small business banking, Clare Morgan, said the bank was expanding its invoice finance product, Stream, which it started rolling out last year, as customers grappled with cash flow issues caused by the supply chain crisis. “I heard a lot of customers say to me, you know, I used to develop deep and narrow relationships with my suppliers and I would source inventory and stock on a just-in-time basis,” she said. “But guess what, now I’m diversifying my relationships and I’m making sure that I’ve got lots of suppliers because I don’t know if they’re going to be reliable. “And I’m also moving to a ‘just-in-case’ inventory management system, which means I’m holding more stock, which is tying up my working capital.”It is raining outside the Pitt Street Uniting Church. The sparse city streets in central Sydney have turned greyer in the morning downpour and the sandstone church sits squat between buildings many times its size. Beneath a banner calling for climate change action hanging between its columns, the Rev Josephine Inkpin creaks open the heavy timber door. It is a busy morning for the minister. Morning prayer service has just wrapped up, and in an hour she has a Zoom call with her local MP. Next month will mark a year for her at the church, and she has a lot of plans for it – ministering to communities online and in person, social justice work, climate change action, opening the church up to secular recitals – but her attention has been drawn elsewhere. Inkpin is the first transgender priest to be inducted into a mainstream church in Australia. And, as she speaks to Guardian Australia in a small, neat office to the side the church entrance, elsewhere in the country politicians and pundits are debating the religious discrimination bill and the point of whether and when religious people and institutions may be able to exclude or ridicule people like her. “The religious discrimination thing has been quite …” she pauses a moment and sighs. “It’s always in the background.” Later, after the proposed legislation was shelved, she will say: “It has been a gruesome week. It’s like you’re in a war, really, and there’s a little ceasefire at the moment, but there’s a promise of a new battle to come.” ‘I know the shame’ The religious discrimination bill has loomed large over Inkpin’s rookie year in the church, a year in which she also dealt with the disruption of Covid and death of her parents. Aside from the traditional work of a priest, it has meant, says Inkpin, a lot of extra work. She has been writing submissions, lobbying politicians, forming coalitions, and all the while taking calls from transgender and gay individuals and their families looking for advice, solace and recognition. While she believes there is a gap in the law in recognising religious identity, which is important to address and fix, the bill is “giving people powers to oppress other people, that’s just not right”. She laughs, as though the statement is so obvious it’s absurd. “And it makes our lives more difficult. “It’s damaging, I think, for maybe religion as a whole but certainly for a lot of Christian churches because people start to doubt whether or not places which actually are very gentle and kind aren’t, actually, interested in discrimination.” Much of the general debate around the religious discrimination bill, and amendments to the sex discrimination act, has centred on “statements of belief” – that statements that would otherwise be considered discriminatory are not so when made in line with an honestly held moderate belief – and the rights of religious organisations, specifically schools, to exclude or discriminate against LGBTQ+ staff and students. “The people who are most threatened by this legislation, or aspects of it, are LGBTQ+ children in religious families,” Inkpin says. Those children do not get to choose what schools they go to and what messages are debated in the public domain. If they go to a religious school where their very being is the subject of condemnation, she says, “not only will they be battling their community, but the government will actually be backing these people to make their lives more difficult”. Her laugh has become incredulous. “I can’t get this: why would a secular government support particular people within churches or other bodies and choose sides on something that needs to be worked through in the religious community?” Inkpin says schools need more education about transgender issues and identities, not less, and that transgender staff, too, need protection. “Because I’m a minister and a priest who happens to be transgender, transgender people can identify with me and feel better, even if they don’t come near me or anything – just because I’m visible.” Transgender teachers can offer that to students and others – the sense that another way of being is possible and acceptable. “If you feel like you’re OK, you get on, don’t you? Because I know the shame,” she says. “It’s so destroying.” ‘An awful thing to carry’ When Inkpin was growing up in an Anglican family in England, she knew she different. There were nearly no transgender people in her world, and no language to understand what she was feeling. “You knew you loved, when you got the chance, dressing in garments that weren’t supposed to be for you, and a whole lot of other things – a sensibility about life.” But she could see no pathway for herself. Sometimes people are surprised, she says, when she and other gay and transgender religious people say “that the thing that still partly oppresses us actually kept us alive”. Because while the whole world was telling her that she was something she felt she was not, “there’s this space, this reality, called God that says you are loved just as you are”. As she grew older, she studied theology and joined the Anglican church as a priest in 1987. She found it a space where she could exist outside the confines of male behaviour. “There’s a bit more female sensibility, you might say. At the same time it was sort of trapping.” That different role, or space, changed as life became more complex. She fell in love, “and it’s hard to unwind that”. Penny Jones sits with Inkpin in the Pitt Street church office, and they butt into each other’s sentences in furious agreement or to finesse details. Come July, they will have been married for 37 years. Jones had been called to the church also. In England, where they lived, Jones was one of the first women ordained into the Church of England. This too complicated things for Inkpin. The pair have had different iterations as a clergy couple over the years, says Jones; for many of them “Penny was my boss” Inkpin interjects. It was unclear whether, if Inkpin came out, Jones would lose her job. “It became a trap because if I came out then I would lose everything, apart from our relationship.” Some 20 years ago, the pair emigrated from the North Dales to Australia. As they prepared to emigrate, the first transgender priest came out in England. “It was hard to hold it together,” says Inkpin. She would have had more support had they stayed in England. But as they moved to Australia they had to start a new life in a church that is generally more conservative. “So I sort of shut that away, literally pushed those things away.” Shame, she says, “it’s an awful thing to carry around”. Even though she knew that she was loved, believed that she was perfect as she was in the eyes of the god she had dedicated her life to, “there’s still this little lurking doubt that’s been put into your mind.” Shaking off the shame and doubt took time. “I realised I had to let go of what it was. I had to fall into the hands of the living god, as they put it. In doing that I realised it was fine. That was when, as I put it, female energy rose, and I was able to rise with that.” When Inkpin came out in 2017, it was within their “little church” in Brisbane. One woman in the congregation (“just turning 90, I think”, says Jones) was ecstatic. Her grandson and two great-grandsons were gay. “It validated her experience,” says Inkpin. Both Inkpin and Jones continued to serve as priests in Brisbane, but when Inkpin was invited by the Uniting Church to lead Pitt Street, it was the first time a transgender person had been appointed and given a licence to lead as a minister in a mainstream church. Jones had an awareness of Josephine from very early in their relationship. “It’s the old truism: I love the person, not the gender,” she says. Still, she had to embark on a process of self-education. “From my perspective it’s seeing Josephine being able to be herself, most fully and most joyfully. If you love someone, then that gives you joy.” ‘It’s quite wearying’ The religious discrimination bill debate arrived on the back of “five, six, seven years” of the trans and broader LGBTQ+ community being called on to defend itself, Inkpin says. That has meant years of writing submissions, forming campaigns and lobbying in defence of their existence as equals. “For things that just seem to be – ought to be – straightforward issues of human rights.” It is as though, having lost the marriage equality issue, she says, some in the religious community “almost want to push us out, out of the way”. All the while, “all sorts of people” have been contacting her as they grappled with their own gender or sexual identity or that of loved ones. “Sometimes it’s lovely, because sometimes they tell you wonderful things they’re doing, and you can encourage them, but it’s this sort of experience that’s below the surface,” Inkpin says. “A lot of that is buried, and that’s quite wearying, really.” “It can be wearying,” says Jones. “But what keeps you going, you know, aside from the call of God, I think is that if who we are, and how we can live out our spirituality, can give encouragement and confidence to a queer person who is struggling, then that makes it all worthwhile. If one life is saved, that makes it worthwhile.” Because those are the stakes, they agree. Young LGBTQ+ people are twice as likely as their peers to contemplate suicide. Jones is confident change will come, that “love will win out”. She remembers when she was made a deaconess in England in the 1980s, she was ordained alongside women who had been wanting to join the clergy for 40 years. “We fear what we don’t understand. It will change.” Says Inkpin: “I think we can deal with this as a society much better, but if people are going to play politics with trans kids’ lives, it’s horrific really and the impact is felt on all sorts of people. We’ve got to deal with the vulnerable first, and I would have thought that’s a basic Christian principle.” Nevertheless, she says: “I see it like a sea change happening. The waves are coming in. You can try to be like the old kingpin who is telling them to go back and you can build a wall, but eventually – you can’t resist it. “Sometimes the wave comes in and goes out again, sometimes it looks as if it’s getting worse, but I think eventually it comes back in again.” However much the religious discrimination bill tries to push back that tide, she says, it will come in again. “In the meantime it hurts people quite a lot, doesn’t it?”The expansion of McDonald’s over the next two years will see a big push into regional Australia, which experts say bodes well for local economies but not their population’s health. Of 100 new McDonald’s Australia restaurants set to open in the next two years, about a third will be opening in regional and remote areas. Cameron Newlands, a senior director of the restaurant group, said growth in population as well as investment from government and business in regional areas was driving where they would open. “Anywhere north of 5,000 [people] is something we’d consider,” Newlands said. “But other characteristics like traffic flow, tourism and growth potential are just as important.” But the move could be controversial in towns that have battled to keep the fast-food giant out of their backyards. Tecoma, on the edge of Melbourne, fought unsuccessfully to stop a McDonald’s development and Tamworth council faced controversy when it approved its fourth Mcdonald’s outlet in a town that suffers high rates of obesity. Megan Belot, the president of the Rural Doctors Association of Australia, said the expansion was not a positive outcome for rural patients who already have an increased risk of obesity. “It’s nice to think that there’s going to be more jobs and opportunities for our younger people to work in a place like McDonald’s, but realistically we don’t need fast food in our smaller rural communities,” Belot said. She believes the focus for regional communities should be on better access to more fresh food and vegetables and meat. “Because half the time that actually can be quite a struggle, especially for remote communities.” Belot said the move could create “food deserts”, where fast-food restaurants are closer than access to fresh fruit and vegetables. Dr Kim Houghton, the chief economist at the Regional Australia Institute, said McDonald’s may be increasingly drawn to the regions because of the growth that came during the Covid pandemic. “Regions really weren’t as affected by those capital city lockdowns in 2020 and bounced back much faster than the city,” Houghton said. “And couple that with a very good agricultural season on the east coast and there’s a lot of optimism in our inland places. I think that would play well into the business planning for McDonald’s expansion.” Serrin Dewar moved last year from Melbourne to Roma, a town considered the gateway to outback Queensland, to become the licensee for McDonald’s in Roma. Dewar said the need to be open to moving to a regional, rural or remote location to become a McDonald’s licensee was part of her reason for applying. “You really have to want to reconnect and commit to regional,” Dewar said. Despite being a quick service brand, Dewar said she and her fiance try and incorporate the country ethos and a local flavour in their service. “That is 100% the most rewarding part of it, that all of these kids, whether they stay on with us for life or it’s just a stepping stone, they’ve got amazing access to training, they make friends, it looks great on their CV if they want to use it as a stepping stone before heading off to the big smoke,” Dewar said. Newlands said the average McDonald’s restaurant fills about 120 fulltime, part-time and casual jobs in each town so is “really substantial in terms of employment opportunity across different roles from kitchen, service and management roles”. Erica Spry is a Bardi Jawi traditional owner, Aboriginal research officer for the Kimberley Aboriginal Medical Services and research fellow with the rural clinical school of the University of Western Australia. Spry said she was very concerned about the effect of fast-food restaurants such as McDonald’s on the Indigenous population, who are seeing increasing rates of diabetes across multiple generations. Research by Spry and Julia Marley, professor of health research at the rural clinical school of the University of Western Australia, shows Indigenous populations in rural and remote populations can have three times the average rate of diabetes as the general population. They also generally develop type 2 diabetes 20 years earlier than non-Indigenous Australians. Spry said before fast-food restaurants came to the Kimberley, people cooked more meals but now “everyone loves Maccas here because that’s just how it is”. She said even though the brand had made changes such as adding options like substituting fries with sliced apples, “it’s still a worry” with high sugar items such as soft serve ice cream available for under $2. “Their marketing is their selling tool and people give in,” Spry said. Marley said remote communities “need access to cheap fresh food … not junk food” if they are to help prevent high incidences of diabetes and obesity. Marley said remote areas like the Kimberleys often experience food deserts as trucks only come in once a week or once a fortnight. And, in the dry season, tourists buy up fresh stock in supermarkets. She said picking up prepared food was often the easier option not only because it was cheaper but because of a other factors that act as drivers of obesity. “It could be that your cooker doesn’t work, you don’t have a working fridge or freezer, the electricity gets cut off,” Marley said. “You’ve got 10 people living in a three-bedroom house and you’ve got people visiting so they can end up eating the food you’ve got.”Australia’s sliding mathematics ranking and disagreements around how the subject should be taught remain key sticking points preventing a consensus on the proposed national curriculum. The nation’s eduction ministers met earlier this month to discuss the proposed curriculum and almost reached a consensus, but while most of the state and territories were happy with the latest revisions, the federal and Western Australian education ministers held out. “The standards in mathematics and humanities and social sciences – they aren’t there yet,” said the acting minister for education and youth, Stuart Robert, last Friday. “We’d like to see mastery of mathematics for students to understand maths … not just an inquiry approach.” Days later, Robert reiterated that an up-to-standard national curriculum would play a “key part” in arresting Australia’s falling rankings in the OECD’s Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA). The latest PISA results – which assess 15-year-olds’ maths, science and reading skills every three years – were released in 2019. “Twenty years ago we were 11th in the world in mathematics, now we’re 29th,” Roberts said. “There’s only 38 countries in the OECD – so in terms of our performance, we have slipped substantially.” Compared to Australia’s average scores from previous assessments, the country’s PISA performance in maths has been declining since 2003. “You are, on average, 12 months behind now as an Australian student than where you were 20 years ago,” Robert said. “No one can consider that acceptable.” How maths should be taught has been one of the key sticking points of the national curriculum, which is set to be finalised in April, and the first draft of which was released in 2010. Last June, dozens of mathematicians, maths educators and educational psychologists took issue with revisions to the proposed curriculum. In an open letter to the Australian Curriculum, Assessment and Reporting Authority, they criticised the draft curriculum as having “little practical value as a guiding structure”, and took issue with “a push toward a central role for ‘problem-solving’ and inquiry-based learning”. “We do not believe that a curriculum document should mandate a specific method of mathematics teaching, and it is especially concerning that the draft curriculum is extensively mandating learning through ‘exploring’ and ‘problem-solving’,” the letter said. Two schools of thought When it comes to maths pedagogy, experts disagree on what works best for student outcomes. Opinions are divided into one of two approaches: explicit teaching, in which teachers explicitly introduce and instruct on new concepts, and inquiry-led learning. Inquiry-led learning – which is also referred to as structured inquiry, discovery learning, constructivist learning or problem-based learning – focuses more on students discovering information for themselves, without having it presented directly to them. “With inquiry learning, from the outset, you withhold some information,” says Greg Ashman, who is a deputy principal at Ballarat Clarendon college in Victoria and a PhD candidate at the University of New South Wales. Ashman, who played a key role in the open letter, is a proponent of explicit teaching, an approach he says is backed by educational psychology and cognitive science research. In his classroom, he takes a teacher-led, “I do, we do, you do,” approach to introducing new mathematical concepts. “We don’t expect students to be able to do things that they don’t know how to do,” he says. Peter Sullivan, an emeritus professor of STEM education at Monash University, favours structured inquiry. “The mainstream view among mathematics educators is that student-centred structured inquiry helps to develop in students their agency, in terms of thinking for themselves rather than following recipes,” he says. “If, for example, we wanted the students to know how to add 132 to 99, there’s at least four different ways you can do it. The students will choose whichever way suits their knowledge and … where they happen to be in their development. “So why would we say: ‘Here’s the one way in which you should add 99 to 132’,” Sullivan says. “Telling the students what to do isn’t going to be the optimal way to engage them in thinking.” Sullivan cites 2012 research that surveyed students on whether their maths teachers used inquiry-based approaches that PISA termed “cognitive activation” strategies. PISA participants were asked whether their teacher “presents problems for which there is no immediately obvious method of solution”, “asks us to decide on our own procedures for solving complex problems” and “helps us to learn from mistakes we have made”. “The more often that the teacher used those sorts of strategies … the more mathematics the students learned,” Sullivan says. “The results of the 2012 study were so clear that they haven’t bothered asking the questions again. Ashman concedes that cognitive activation is “mildly associated … with some better outcomes”, but points out that so was teacher-directed learning. The 2012 analysis found that across OECD countries, students whose teachers used cognitive-activation strategies and also those who experienced teacher-directed instruction had “particularly high levels of perseverance and openness to problem solving”, and were more likely to favour maths over other subjects. “The more teacher-directed learning, the better the maths outcomes, until you get to very high levels of teacher-direction at which point it becomes a negative,” Ashman says. Some, like educational psychologist John Sweller, who is an emeritus professor at UNSW, have argued that Australia’s falling PISA scores have been “concurrent with an increased emphasis on inquiry learning … and critical thinking in Australian curricula”. “Inquiry learning was conceived six decades ago based on assumptions that flowed from our understanding of human cognition at that time,” Sweller has written. “Subsequently, it became increasingly popular despite very limited empirical evidence for its efficacy.” A November analysis paper from the Centre for Independent Studies found that Australian maths classrooms were much more likely to use an inquiry-led approach compared to PISA high-performers such as Singapore, Hong Kong, Shanghai, and Taiwan. The analysis found that “a lack of teacher-led instruction in Australia has contributed to declining student achievement”. “It’s estimated that the average 15-year-old would be about 10 months ahead of where they currently are if they received mostly teacher-led instruction, with only occasional student-led practice,” the report said. “Effective teaching doesn’t employ explicit instruction alone, but a great deal of explicit instruction is often necessary before students have sufficient expertise for constructivist approaches to be introduced.” The director of the Australian Mathematical Sciences Institute (AMSI) at the University of Melbourne, Prof Timothy Marchant, says both approaches are useful – explicit teaching to build up mastery and fluency of basic concepts, as well as student-centred complex problem solving. “Having a balance there between those two different approaches is important in the classroom,” he says. “I think well-trained teachers can find that right balance.” Marchant cites supply shortages of secondary maths teachers, as well as high rates of “out-of-field” teaching as other potential factors for Australia’s declining PISA performance. A fresh start It hasn’t been all bad news – results from the 2019 Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS) found a rise in the performance of Australian students in year 8 mathematics. TIMSS has been conducted every four years since 1995, making it the longest running large-scale international assessment of maths and science. More than 580,000 students from 64 countries – including 14,950 Australian students – took part in the 2019 study, in which Australia ranked seventh in year eight maths and science. There was, however, no improvement in mean scores for year four maths, in which Australia ranked 23rd in the world, with no changes in achievement since 2007. Last year, AMSI expressed “considerable concern” that the draft curriculum’s stronger emphasis on problem solving and inquiry would come “at the expense of mastery and fluency”. The institute welcomes changes in the latest iteration that reverse proposed delays in introducing new concepts – times tables will be introduced in year three, instead of being pushed back to year four and linear equations will remain as a year seven topic instead of year eight. However, Marchant says: “Our position is still that we would still like a fresh start, really, and that the new curriculum be prepared with consultation from all parties in the sector.” “The curriculum should be pedagogically neutral – it shouldn’t force us to use a particular teaching style,” says Ashman. “It should tell us what it is we want the students to know and let us teach us the way we do.”We have a longstanding tradition in this country of policing by consent. At the heart of this approach is the recognition that, for policing to be effective, public approval, respect and confidence in the service is paramount. When this trust is eroded, our model of policing, and therefore public safety, is put at risk. This was at the forefront of my mind when I read the shocking Operation Hotton report by the Independent Office for Police Conduct, which exposed sickening overt evidence of racism, sexism, homophobia, bullying, discrimination and misogyny among police officers serving at Charing Cross station. Nine of these police officers are still serving with two promoted. Damningly, it concluded that these issues were not isolated or historic. Reading this report made me disgusted and extremely angry. It reminded me of the bad old days of the Met from my childhood. Growing up in the 1970s and 80s on a council estate in south London, it was commonplace to hear stories of racist, misogynistic and abusive conduct by police officers. Trust in the police was at rock bottom in some communities and one of the things I remember being told as a teenager by my dad was: “Don’t make eye contact with the police, don’t give them an excuse”. My brothers and I would routinely cross the road when we saw officers on the beat, simply due to the fear of being unjustly targeted. I’ve seen and felt the damage that this kind of breakdown in trust can cause. It makes it harder to tackle crime, with victims failing to report crime and witnesses discouraged from coming forward when they see criminal activity. It stops many women reporting rape and sexual harassment. And it leads to community groups becoming less likely to work with the police when they are worried about young people getting involved in gangs. During my time as mayor, crime has fallen in the capital. We have managed to buck the national trend, with burglary, gun crime and knife crime involving under 25s all down by around a quarter since 2016. But we still have a long way to go and – if we are to continue making progress – then ensuring communities across London have trust and confidence in the police is going to be critical. This is particularly the case with tackling the senseless knife crime that results in the murder of young Londoners, many just teenagers. Thirty teenagers were killed in the capital last year – every one of them a shocking tragedy. We know the way to reduce this kind of terrible violence is not just through tough enforcement, but by the police working in partnership with families, local communities, charities and others to prevent children from being sucked into gangs and violence in the first place. The truth is that communities will only act as the eyes and ears of the police, and be active partners in working to prevent crime, if the necessary trust is established. That’s one of the main reasons why I’m deeply concerned by how public trust and confidence in London’s police service has been shattered so badly – not just by the Hotton report, but by a succession of serious incidents. These include: the kidnap, rape and murder of Sarah Everard by a serving police officer; the policing of a peaceful vigil; two officers caught sharing pictures of the murdered sisters Bibaa Henry and Nicole Smallman; and failings by the Met Police which contributed to the deaths of the final three victims of Stephen Port, with accusations that homophobia within the police impeded the investigation. It has become crystal clear that there are deep cultural issues within the Met. It’s my job as Mayor to support the police and also to hold the police to account on behalf of Londoners, so it was my duty to act decisively as soon as I concluded that the only way we were going to start seeing the level of change urgently required was with new leadership right at the top of the Met. Londoners need to hear their police service publicly acknowledge the widespread nature of the problem, which is the most important step in starting to rebuild credibility with Londoners, crucial to public safety. I’d like to thank Dame Cressida Dick again for her years of dedicated service and her role in helping to reduce crime in London over recent years. I will now work closely with the home secretary as we select a new commissioner. And as we start this important process, I make this commitment to Londoners – I will not support the appointment of a new Commissioner unless they can clearly demonstrate that they understand the scale of the cultural problems within the Met and the urgency with which they must be addressed. In short, they need to get it, and they need to have a proper and robust plan to deal with it. I’m optimistic that we can meet the challenges ahead. There are thousands of decent, dedicated and brave police officers in London who are doing an incredible job. Who understand the crucial link between trust, confidence and public safety. I believe in the Met, and I know it contains many brilliant police officers who share my aspirations for policing in London, and who are keen to play their full part in raising standards, adhering to the values Londoners expect and ensuring the bond with the communities they serve is restored and strengthened.A future variant of Covid-19 could be much more dangerous and cause far higher numbers of deaths and cases of serious illness than Omicron, leading UK scientists have warned. As a result, many of them say that caution needs to be taken in lifting the last Covid restrictions in England, as Boris Johnson plans to do next week. At the same time, demands are growing for Chris Whitty and Patrick Vallance, the government’s most senior advisers on Covid, to hold a press conference to reveal what evidence there was to back the decision to end all pandemic restrictions. The dangers posed by accepting the widespread assumption that Covid-19 variants would continue to get milder in their impact was highlighted by epidemiologist Prof Mark Woolhouse, of Edinburgh University. “The Omicron variant did not come from the Delta variant. It came from a completely different part of the virus’s family tree. And since we don’t know where in the virus’s family tree a new variant is going to come from, we cannot know how pathogenic it might be. It could be less pathogenic but it could, just as easily, be more pathogenic,” he said. This point was backed by virologist Prof Lawrence Young of Warwick University. “People seem to think there has been a linear evolution of the virus from Alpha to Beta to Delta to Omicron,” he told the Observer. “But that is simply not the case. The idea that virus variants will continue to get milder is wrong. A new one could turn out to be even more pathogenic than the Delta variant, for example.” David Nabarro, a special envoy on Covid-19 for the World Health Organization, also highlighted the uncertainty of how future variants might behave: “There will be more variants after Omicron and if they are more transmissible they will dominate. In addition, they may cause different patterns of illness, in other words they may turn out to be more lethal or have more long-term consequences.” Nabarro urged authorities to continue to plan for the possibility that there will be surges in numbers of people who are ill and need hospital care. “It would be prudent to encourage people to protect themselves and others consistently. An approach that does not do this would be a gamble with potentially severe consequences. I cannot see any upsides to such a gamble. The pandemic has a long way to go and – as is the case since it started – people and their leaders will influence its long-term impact through actions they take now.” The warnings came as charities and teachers called for England’s chief medical officer and chief scientific adviser to offer a public explanation of the plan, unveiled in parliament last week, to lift all Covid restrictions – including the requirement to isolate after testing positive – in England from Thursday 24 February. The call comes as new figures suggest that people with blood cancer are now accounting for a higher proportion of Covid deaths than at any point in the pandemic. According to analysis by the Office for National Statistics, a total of 458 people with blood cancer in England and Wales died of Covid between October and December 2021 – one in 20 of those who died of Covid during that time. People with blood cancer have weakened immune systems and so are less likely to be protected by vaccines. “The lack of any joined-up plan to support the immunocompromised suggests that they have not featured prominently in the government’s decision to lift the remaining Covid restrictions,” said Gemma Peters, chief executive of Blood Cancer UK. “We understand we cannot keep restrictions for ever, but given the potential negative impact for immunocompromised people, it is important that the government’s advisers set out the scientific basis.” Fiona Loud, policy director of Kidney Care UK, urged the government to show commitment to the nation’s 500,000 immunosuppressed people by sharing their plans, and evidence for their decision-making: “Abandoning all measures without preventive treatments, free testing, and a duty not to expose immunosuppressed people to Covid-19 unnecessarily risks making us into second-class citizens.” Robin Bevan, headteacher of Southend high school for boys, said last week’s announcement felt premature: “It would be much more reassuring – and also be much easier to explain to parents and to pupils – if there was a narrative rooted in science rather than a narrative rooted in libertarian aspiration.” Ceinwen Giles, who has reduced immunity after cancer treatment, said Johnson’s announcement left her feeling excluded. “There seems to be the perception that somehow immunocompromised people are very old and very sick and it doesn’t really matter. If you are old and sick, you still matter. This just means we’re being shut out.” A government spokesperson said: “Those considered clinically extremely vulnerable are advised to follow the same guidance as the general public, but consider taking extra precautions to reduce their chance of catching Covid-19. Vaccines are the best way we can protect ourselves from the virus.”Sadiq Khan, the mayor of London, today sets the stage for a dramatic showdown with the home secretary, Priti Patel, over who should be the next Metropolitan police commissioner as he vows to oppose anyone who does not understand the deep “cultural problems” within the beleaguered force. Writing in the Observer, three days after his intervention forced Cressida Dick to abruptly resign, Khan says recent revelations of officers bragging about violence towards women and exchanging racist and Islamophobic messages rekindled personal memories of the “bad old days of the Met” during his own childhood. Khan says it was common when he was growing up on a south London council estate in the 1970s and 80s to hear “stories of racist, misogynistic and abusive conduct by police officers”. He adds: “One of the things I remember being told as a teenager by my dad was: ‘Don’t make eye contact with the police, don’t give them an excuse.’ My brothers and I would routinely cross the road when we saw officers on the beat, simply due to the fear of being unjustly targeted.” While it is the home secretary, Patel, who has the ultimate power to appoint the next commissioner, she can only do so having taken into account the preference of the mayor. In his article, Khan makes absolutely clear that he will use his right to be involved in the process to ensure the appointment of someone who can guarantee an end to the Met’s toxic culture. In effect, threatening to veto anyone whom he feels cannot rise to the huge challenge, Khan writes: “I will not support the appointment of a new commissioner unless they can clearly demonstrate that they understand the scale of the cultural problems within the Met and the urgency with which they must be addressed. In short, they need to get it, and they need to have a proper and robust plan to deal with it.” His threat is likely to further provoke Patel, who is smarting after claiming that Khan did not inform her he was withdrawing support from Dick, a decision that forced her out. The mayor’s mention of the need to avoid someone who lacks a “robust plan” appears to be a reference to Dick and her proposals to improve the Met, which were handed to Khan less than a week before she resigned. He considered the proposals distinctly underwhelming, both because of the time they would have taken to deliver and because he thought they were insufficient to change the cultural mindset within elements of the force. The appointment of the new commissioner is particularly fraught because the force is presiding over the most politically sensitive investigation it has ever undertaken, into a string of lockdown parties in Downing Street. This weekend, No 10 confirmed that Boris Johnson had received a questionnaire to complete about his knowledge of and involvement in the gatherings. Many Tory MPs believe that if he is found to have broken lockdown rules and is issued with one or more fixed penalty notices it could spell the end of his premiership. Opposition parties, fearing that Johnson might try to use the new commissioner’s appointment to delay or influence the Met’s report, last night stepped up demands that he remove himself entirely from the process. Yvette Cooper, the shadow home secretary, said: “The police always need to operate without fear or favour and be seen to do so. That’s why no one who is subject to investigation by the police should be involved in appointing senior officers who have to take charge of those investigations – and that includes the prime minister. No one is above the law. For the sake of trust and transparency, he needs to recuse himself from any role in the appointment process for the Metropolitan police commissioner while the investigation into Downing Street is continuing.” Sir Bob Neill, the Tory chair of the justice select committee, said Patel would need to have “very good reasons” to go against Khan’s choice for the next commissioner. “Politically, this could lead to a massive row. Unless she could produce a good reason to go against the mayor’s recommendation, it could even lead to a legal challenge.” The relationship between Johnson and Patel will be scrutinised in the coming weeks with the home secretary’s political career having relied on his intervention when he kept her in post despite a report accusing her of breaking the ministerial code. Relations between Khan and Patel are already tense with reports of disagreements over the size of Dick’s payoff and simmering tensions over the way the mayor forced London’s first female police commissioner out. Whitehall sources, however, dismiss claims that Patel was blindsided by Khan, saying the home secretary’s officials were fully aware of the mayor’s concerns over Dick and also knew of last Thursday’s meeting which Khan arranged to discuss the commissioner’s future. Sources are bemused at the Home Office’s briefings about Patel not being informed, and point out that it makes her look both “weak” and “out of the loop”. One option being considered is the appointment of an interim commissioner while the search for a permanent chief is launched. Another solution might be to ask Dick to stay on for two months to steer the No 10 party inquiry over the line, a move that would prevent her replacement being contaminated by its findings. Khan’s full support for the next commissioner is critical because of the intimate working relationship between the mayor and the leader of the force in the capital and the fact that Khan oversees the Met’s budget. Meanwhile, Labour has urged Patel to instigate fundamental reform of the police to raise standards before the new chief is appointed. Cooper unveiled five key areas for reform, including the urgent inclusion of violence against women and girls in the Home Office’s strategic policing requirement, and the overhaul of training and misconduct proceedings.Around half-past-six it was all a little quiet in the Stade de France, the rapt crowd of 80,000 seemed to be too nervous to sing or scream or shout any more for a game they thought they had seen their team win once, twice, three times already. Ireland never actually held the lead, but they never stopped chasing it either. Joey Carbery had just kicked a penalty to cut three out of France’s six-point lead. They could have gone for the corner, they had scored twice from attacking lineouts already, but they were confident, had all the ball, and, like everyone watching, felt sure there was one twist left in this dizzy game. France’s head coach, Fabien Galthié, made a point of telling his squad all about how Ireland’s captain, James Ryan, had promised he and his team were going to hush the fans at Stade de France the day before the game. And now, for a moment at least, Ireland had. And then, inevitably, 10, 20, 30, 40 and who knows how many more thousand launched into La Marseillaise as Gaël Fickou launched a chip over the Irish line, raced through, gathered it in and set France pouring forward again into the Irish 22. The move stopped short but the ball went wide to Melvyn Jaminet, who cut over the line, trailing Dan Sheehan from his shoulders like a scarf in the wind. Jaminet thought he had scored. So did everyone else. But the referee, Angus Gardner, called for the TMO, who ruled that the ball had been held up after all. The Irish had conceded a penalty, though, somewhere in all the chaos. Jaminet kicked it. That made it 30-24, which was how it finished. “Whatever people say,” Galthié said afterwards when he was asked about Ryan’s remark, “what matters is what happens on the pitch.” It had promised to be one of the great games, and it was, not least because, way back at the beginning, when France went 10-0 up before the late-comers had even made their seats, it looked as if it was going to be a blow-out. It took just over a minute to start going wrong. Ireland were caught flat-footed by a quick lineout and soon after it France’s gargantuan prop Uini Atonio was barrelling up the midfield. It took three men to stop him and that left a gap for Romain Ntamack, who slipped through and flicked the ball back inside to Antoine Dupont, who raced through to score. It got worse when France broke downfield, then won a penalty – the first of many – when an Irish ball carrier was done for holding on to the ball at the breakdown. The Irish, who did not concede one penalty in the first half when they beat Wales last week, gave up seven in the first half here. Andy Farrell thought there was something fishy about it. “We’ll have to analyse the legality of the French defensive breakdowns,” Ireland’s head coach said, “but all credit to them, they were very vigorous in that department.” Soon enough, though, Ireland had scored a startling try of their own. Jaminet was hanging back on his heels waiting for the restart. Mack Hansen sprinted full tilt, leapt, grabbed the ball, swerved, landed and raced away into the wide-open space behind Jaminet, who was left staring after him like a man who had just watched his bus race past without braking. That made it 10-7. Things settled down for a stretch after that. But the French began to assert themselves as the half went on. They were that much sharper when they had the ball, and that much more brutal when they didn’t. And while they did not cleave Ireland open again, they started to kill them by a thousand cuts instead. Jaminet kicked a second penalty after another offence at the breakdown, a third after a superb break down the right by Damian Penaud, and a fourth right before half-time, after France had destroyed the Irish scrum. He added a fifth right after the break, for an off-side this time. Which made it 22-7. Jaminet had just about finished banging in the last nail in, then, when Ireland burst back into life. Josh van der Flier scored one try off a rolling maul, and moments later, Gibson-Park got another when he spotted a sliver of a gap in front of him as he picked the ball up off the floor. It was more than he needed, and since he scored right under the posts, another conversion followed. All of a sudden there was only one point in it. It did not stay like that long, either. Ireland were turned over off the back of a defensive lineout on their own try-line, and from it Atonio ploughed through tacklers towards the try-line. They stopped him, but not Cyril Baille, who was following right behind, and scored the try that set up that six-point lead. Even then, the Irish weren’t done. They kept fighting right to the finish. “It shows the spirit and character of our side that we were still in with a chance at the end,” said Farrell. “A lot of teams would get taken advantage of when they’re 22-7 down in Paris, a lot of teams would get tipped over the edge, but that wasn’t the case with us.” They were beaten, and badly bruised too, but unbowed.Dan Biggar described Wales’s win over Scotland in Cardiff as “one of the best victories I’ve had in a Welsh shirt”. The fly-half, captaining his country in his 100th Test, slotted the game-winning drop-goal with 11 minutes left to secure a victory seven days after the embarrassment of the 29-7 defeat in Ireland. “We didn’t get it right last week and, when you don’t get it right, especially in this country, you get a fair bit of flak for it,” Biggar said. “But for me it was a brilliant day. My family was here, my little boy could come out on the pitch afterwards and it doesn’t get much better than that. Just a really special day.” Wales’s improved performance was built on an impressive display from the back row – Ross Moriarty and the pair of 22-year-olds, Taine Basham and Jac Morgan – as well as an improved tight five that contested well in the lineout and set up a rolling-maul try for Tomas Francis. “The boys put in a lot of work during the week,” Wayne Pivac, the coach, said. “That was the Wales team that we know.” Scotland’s wait for a first win in Cardiff since 2002 continues and, after their victory over England last week, they will lament their inability to put in another convincing display. Their captain, Stuart Hogg, told the BBC: “We’re bitterly disappointed. The stuff that we’re in control of, when we’re on the front foot, we’re really dangerous … We’re a lot better than what we showed. “You have to take your opportunities or you get on the wrong end of scorelines. We gave away penalties and Wales cheap field position, easy avenues into the game, and that’s the frustrating part. It’s a horrible feeling right now but that’s Test match rugby.” The decisive score came from a drop-goal when Wales had a man advantage and could have gone for a try. “It proved to be the right decision,” Biggar said. “What it enabled us to do in the last 10 minutes was play without the ball. If you’re chasing the game or didn’t quite get what you wanted, then you force something and give up a cheap turnover or a breakdown penalty and all of a sudden you have to chase the game again. So it enabled us to play a territory-based game rather than a possession game, which suited us.” No one would argue with him. This hero of Wales capped off a fairytale evening. His coach was gushing in his praise for his No 10, who also finished the match nursing an injured right knee. “Dan epitomises what you want in a rugby team,” Pivac said. “That is somebody who is prepared to fight for every last inch.” How fitting, then, that it was his blow that proved decisive.This was a contest for 31 minutes, and a fairly good one at that. Then Raheem Sterling sublimely beat Angus Gunn with the first goal of his hat-trick and, after that, any doubt over the outcome was purely for dreamers. Manchester City do not give games up from there and with every passing week the prospect of a title battle looks more remote. Pep Guardiola may outwardly fear one but that would require his team to make a misstep, and then at least one more. They have taken 43 points from the last 45 available: it is not exciting fare for most onlookers outside their circle but it is controlled, clinical, consummate and often crushing. The margin of victory reflected their domination but they would not have been flattered to leave with even more. Norwich’s fight against relegation will not stand or fall on nights like this, even though taking a scalp of City’s size would have done wonders for their momentum. Dean Smith might rue the moment, 18 minutes in and with the game goalless, when Grant Hanley headed Pierre Lees-Melou’s cross against the inside of a post. It came amid a ding-dong set of early exchanges but, even then, the sense lingered that the home side’s best chance of creating a serious contest had passed. City had already struck the woodwork themselves through Bernardo Silva, while the otherwise excellent Ilkay Gündogan fluffed a free header. That was the problem for Norwich: their clear chances would always be few, while it took City little effort to turn on the taps. A helping hand was certainly not necessary, so, while Sterling’s curled opener from 18 yards was superbly taken, it was galling that he was given possession by Max Aarons’ failure to cut out Kyle Walker’s cross. “For his confidence it will be massive,” Guardiola said of his scorer. “The first goal was brilliant: when Raheem executes without thinking he is excellent. In general he was active and made good touches.” The other two of consequence were tap-ins, nodding City’s third across the line from a yard after Rúben Dias had headed back across and then following up after Gunn had saved his penalty in the dying seconds. Smith was furious that the spot kick had been awarded, calling Andre Marriner’s decision to punish Hanley’s challenge on Liam Delap “pathetic” and saying he had taken it up with him in person after full-time, but Norwich’s goal difference appears so far gone that it will matter little. They were Sterling’s first goals of the calendar year, and the hat-trick was his first since the 5-0 win at Brighton in July 2020. City have rampaged through the last two seasons without the forward needing to be at his most potent and, if this proves the catalyst for a concerted spell of form, there will be even less hope for everyone else. Norwich could still hold some at half-time here and, at one goal down, Smith would have wished them to stay competitive for as long as possible. But the game was sealed within 90 seconds of the restart when, in his words, the hosts “forgot our principles”. It was more that they got lost in the muck: Phil Foden had met Gündogan’s cutback with an awkward effort off his thigh that Gunn repelled, and then battled to dig the ball back out again as it squirmed around the six-yard box. Eventually he squeezed in a shot that deflected off Brandon Williams and, in crossing the line by a foot, rendered Hanley’s last-ditch clearance futile. “We started the second half on the front foot and it helped us a lot to score in the first minutes,” Guardiola said. “Our behaviour and concentration was good. All the time it looks easy but it is difficult to do our job and we did it again.” Just as they have done it again, and again, and again. Guardiola was again at pains to talk up the threat of Liverpool, who are 12 points behind with two games in hand. “They won’t drop many points for the quality they have,” he said. “It’s the best squad they have had in the last decade. We’ll have to win a lot of games.” Perhaps, but they are making that look easy.The quest is finally over. Chelsea can say that they have won the lot under Roman Abramovich. They were determined not to fly home empty-handed this time and, 10 years on from losing the final of the Club World Cup to Corinthians, the celebrations were joyous once the full-time whistle had confirmed that Chelsea had not stumbled again against stubborn Brazilian opponents. Perhaps it had to be this way. Stodgy in attack, there was a predictability to Chelsea leaving it late on a tense evening at the Mohammed bin Zayed Stadium. They were hardly banging on the door as the end of extra-time approached and Palmeiras, who were after their first world crown, must have thought that they had done enough to earn a penalty shoot-out. Disciplined and dangerous, Palmeiras had made their magnificent fans proud. Chelsea, though, were not interested in a fairytale ending. Thomas Tuchel’s side kept going and they would be rewarded for their persistence when Kai Havertz, one of Abramovich’s biggest investments, saw a chance to make more history in a blue shirt. César Azpilicueta, the first Chelsea player to have won every major club title, had just won a penalty after seeing his volley handled by Luan. There were three minutes left and Havertz, who scored the winner in last season’s Champions League final, was ready. The 22-year-old German nervelessly sent Weverton the wrong way and although Chelsea had laboured for long spells, they had managed not to fluff their lines in front of Abramovich. This, the 21st trophy of the Abramovich era, meant a lot. Tuchel looked satisfied with life as he chatted away to Marina Granovskaia, the Chelsea director, after full-time. Abramovich was also down on the pitch, no doubt reflecting on the wisdom of hiring one of the most accomplished managers around a year ago. This was the third trophy of Tuchel’s reign and the German, who had to miss the semi-final against Al-Hilal after testing positive for Covid-19 last week, was relieved that his journey was not for nothing after he finally made it to Abu Dhabi on Friday night. “I was several times on my way to the airport and on my way I was called back as the test was not yet negative,” Chelsea’s manager said. “I arrived for dinner on Friday. Today we told the players this was a fantastic opportunity. So many young boys dream to be in this final and we reminded ourselves that we were once that boy.” Tuchel understood the significance of winning it for Abramovich. “We met shortly on the pitch and I said ‘Congrats’ and he said ‘Congrats’ to me,” he said. “I said ‘It is for you – your input and passion made it possible’. The trophy is for him.” It did not come easily. Chelsea were edgy and could not hold on after Romelu Lukaku opened the scoring with a fine header in the 55th minute. Palmeiras, who finished with 10 men after Luan saw red for fouling Havertz, were a constant nuisance and levelled when Thiago Silva’s handball allowed Raphael Veiga to equalise from the spot. This was an occasion to savour, even if Fifa’s official cheerleaders would not be swayed from their doomed attempts to silence the Brazilian din with their overblown pre-match entertainment. Memo for Gianni Infantino: Palmeiras’s 15,000 supporters needed no help creating an atmosphere. The noise was deafening long before kick-off and initially there was a sense of Chelsea trying to draw the sting, their approach seemingly to calm the crowd by taking few risks on the ball. The plan felt too controlled. Tuchel had taken no chances, disappointing Kepa Arrizabalaga by starting Édouard Mendy in goal, but Chelsea lacked urgency. The attacks were forced and the sense of foreboding grew when Mason Mount was forced off with damaged ankle ligaments. Palmeiras, well-drilled by Abel Ferreira, took confidence from Mount making way for Christian Pulisic. The Copa Libertadores champions had their moments. Dudu, a willing runner up front, twice went close in the first half . Forced to improve, Chelsea went ahead after finally stretching the play. Mateo Kovacic and N’Golo Kanté had set a sharper tempo in midfield, Callum Hudson-Odoi reached the byline before crossing with his weaker left foot and Lukaku headed past Weverton after bullying Luan. Soon, though, the Palmeiras fans were roaring again. A long throw spread panic in the Chelsea defence and it was difficult to know what Silva was complaining about when Scott Beath pointed to the spot after consulting the VAR monitor. The Brazilian defender had clearly handled the ball and Chelsea were back to square one when Veiga beat Mendy from 12 yards. Desperate for a spark, Tuchel made some surprising changes after seeing Pulisic waste a good chance. Lukaku and Hudson-Odoi made way for Timo Werner and Saúl Ñíguez, while the introduction of Malang Sarr and Hakim Ziyech for Andreas Christensen and Kovacic saw Chelsea ditch their 3-4-2-1 system for 4-2-4 during extra-time. Palmeiras grew weary. Gaps appeared and Chelsea broke through when another VAR check confirmed that Azpilicueta’s volley had been handled by Luan. Havertz put the penalty away and Chelsea were world champions at long last.Here’s Jacob Steinberg’s report from Abu Dhabi. Steven Wingrove gets in touch: “Just have to counter Jack’s claim that Brazilians put aside club differences to support “the Brazilian team”. That may be the case in the notoriously top-flight-free Brasília, but here in São Paulo, everyone who is not Paleimerense was supporting Chelsea (even me and I’m Liverpool). It all kicked off here in the road in the closing minutes with insults being hurled from house to house as the celebrations by Corinthianos, São Paulinos and Santistas started!” Up go Chelsea, at last, and they get to meet Gianni Infantino too, continuing his role as the Fifa suit who does an impression of “Shake Hands” off Boys From The Blackstuff. Edouard Mendy looks happy; he won the AfCon just six days ago. Big hugs between Azpilicueta and Infantino. Then, off goes Gianni, of course, to hand over the trophy and it’s done and confirmed. Chelsea celebrate being champions of the world. The Palmeiras fans clap politely. If you’re wondering, the medal ceremonies are still ongoing and Chelsea haven’t been up to get their medals.....it’s taken longer than extra time. Translation corner: “If Jack in Brasiíia is happy about the Chelsea win, he means “força Chelsea” (power to Chelsea) as “fora Chelsea” means “Chelsea out”… just sayin’ (Martin, former resident of Brasília, happy Chelsea fan).” The Chelsea players get to receive their medals, and Gianni Infantino will do the honours, with Chelsea chairman Bruce Buck up on the podium. Cesar Azpilicueta receives the Fifa Fair Play award, the sole survivor of losing the final in 2012. First, Palmeiras get the awards, with Dudu winning the silver medal for second-best player. Thomas Tuchel speaks to Channel 4. In the end if you score late, you need luck but we were relentless, we did not stop trying. We took the effort and we didn’t give up. The penalty does not look nervous but of course he was nervous, he knows what was at stake. I am happy for him. I am a part in it, and I am happy to have the chance. We said in the dressing room what an opportunity, everyone is jealous to play a game like this, and as boys we all dream to have finals like this. We wanted to play with no regrets, and there’s still things to win and it never stops. Kai Havertz speaks to Channel 4. Amazing, champions of Europe, now champions of the world, an incredible feeling. I was nervous, it was as a big penally. It was good that I kept my nerve and I was very happy. I think I was third penalty taker, Jorginho and Rom were out. The rest of the players gave me their trust, I dreamed always of of this, an amazing feeling. I am thankful for everyone, my family, my girlfriend, it’s all for them. Palmeiras are destroyed, and can count themselves very unlucky. Is ball to hand a penalty? Probably, but it seemed terribly unfair. Palmeiras’s quest for the trophy continues and Chelsea can begin the celebrations in Abu Dhabi. Kai Havertz is the man. Kai Havertz, let slip the dogs of war Jack’s back: “Won’t lie, I’m happy for Chelsea but my local neighbourhood know me as the only Brit and I may need to lie low for a few days! Alternatively, I will be hanging my Union Jack from the window and accepting all that comes my way. Fora Chelsea! Fora Havertz!” That’s it, Chelsea have done it, and have won a complete set of trophies since Roman Abramovich took over the club (let’s not forget the Cup Winners’ Cup in 1971). 120+5 min: A red card for Luan, who conceded the penalty for fouling a clean through Havertz. He leaves the field in tears. He’s had a miserable few minutes and will probably remember this for the rest of his life. 120+3 min: A foul on Saul buys time, and the clock goes past the three minutes added on. Navarro charges on and loses the ball, only for it to go down the other end. Saul goes down, and there’s a VAR call for a possible red card. Off goes the ref to have a look. 120+2 min: Not much football being played at the moment. The tears of the Palmeiras fans are filling the screens. 120 min: Into the last minute though there may be a few more to follow. The Palmeiras plan hasn’t come off, and penalties look a distant dream. There’s some delay as Gomez and Thiago Silva clash. The Palmeiras bench are raging as only three minutes are added. Abel Fereira has been booked, too. 118 min: Kai Havertz cost a fortune and we haven’t seen the best of him. But it looks like he’s scored the winner in the Champions League final and now the Club World Cup final. They’ve made worse investments, it has to be said. Azpilicueta, the captain, takes the ball, but Havertz takes it off him. And he steps up, so coolly and slots it to the left, and Weverton goes the wrong way. 114 min: Handball appeal! Chelsea want a penalty. The ball goes dead after Weverton knocks the ball behind. There’s some VAR in the offing. And the Italian ref goes over to look. It’s hit the hand of Luan as Azpilicueta swings and misses. An echo of the Palmeiras equaliser. 112 min: Both teams far slower than in normal time, running through glue, both of them though Chelsea seem far fitter. Close! Ziyech pings in the ball, and Havertz has the ball whipped away from his head just as he seemed destined to nod in. 111 min: Rudiger plays in Werner down the wing and he’s full of energy right now, but Sarr, another sub, looks a bit tired. Werner tries one from distance, and it’s over but he’s missed by far wide this season. 109 min: Timo Werner’s job is to scamper down the left, while Ziyech is trying to do the same on the other wing. The Moroccan’s ball comes in and Havertz clatters into Weverton. Free-kick that Palmeiras take their time over 107 min: Palmeiras probably want penalties, Chelsea would prefer to win this game in the last 15 minutes. That’s the equation at hand here. 106 min: Thomas Tuchel looked crazed in his half-time team talk while Abel Ferreira, the Palmeiras coach, seemed calmer as he allowed his players to take on fluids. Both teams looked drained by the heat and the occasion. 105 min: Late flurry saw Navarro baulked by Rudiger then Scarpa scream out when tackled by Ziyech. The one minute of time added on ticks by. Here comes the second half of extra time. 104 min: A queue of Chelsea players climb high in the Palmeiras box and end up conceding a collective foul for their brute force. At the other end, Wesley is booked for a tactical foul. It’s not been a dirty game in truth. 103 min: Rare Palmeiras territory comes to an end as Rocha, the full-back is offside. A very tired Dudu leaves the field as Rafael Navarro comes on. 101 min: Dudu is cutting a lonely figure whenever Palmeiras try to attack, and relieve the pressure. 100 min: Chelsea piling it on, Palmeitas back in numbers to defend as more and more corners are counting up. 99 min: Off the woodwork, as Werner again gets down the left but offside before Pulisic deflects the ball off the far angle. 98 min: Sarr sees glory, and smashes the ball miles off the goal and some way into the stands. 97 min: Werner shows off his speed down the wing and hits the byline, only to hit the defender with his cross. There’s not been enough of him in this game since replacing Lukaku. 96 min: Pulisic fouled by Danilo and Ziyech will hit the free-kick into the Palmeiras box, but it’s cleared by Jailson. 94 min: Ziyech scored in the Super Cup final win over Villarreal and that undoubtedly entered the thinking of Tuchel. Though that went to penalties, too. 93 min: Palmeiras made no changes, and have perhaps been practising penalties for months for this one. 91 min: Back we go on, with Christensen and Kovacic off, and Sarr and Ziyech on. That looks an attacking change from Tuchel and Christensen had pulled up with cramp. A missive from Brazil from Jack: “I’m a Brit living in Brasilía, Brasil and the fierce local rivalries are kind of put to one side for this game. I was just out and passed a bar full of Flamengo fans who were uproariously celebrating the equaliser by singing Flamengo chants and telling the Palmeiras players to “Eat my arsehole”. I won’t be cheering a Chelsea win for the sake of my health!” When Romelu Lukaku scored that header, it looked like Chelsea would be kings of the world but then came that Thiago Silva handball. The Brazilians have often looked more likely since then, with Lukaku off the field. Weverton does well with the corner, punching clear, and Palmeiras try to see out the time. And they manage to do so, and extra time is on its way. 90+4 min: Pulisic tries to get away in midfield but is fouled, as Chelsea pile on pressure and force a corner with it. 90+2 min: Havertz forces a corner, and Gianni Infantino is giggling away in the stands, the corner is cleared, but only as far as Werner, whose ball back in was cleared by Gomez with Weverton was flapping a little. 90 min: Free-kick chance for Chelsea, and it falls to Pulisic from the right-hand side. It’s cleared by the head of Gomez, and there’s five more minutes of time added on to come. 88 min: Palmeiras continue to be patient, and Chelsea have to be, too. Their urgency has gone, and Lukaku seems to have been a big loss, as does the timing of the equaliser. 86 min: One more chance can win this. Kovacic, who has been the main ball carrier for Chelsea, is robbed on the edge of the Palmeiras box and the Brazilians are patient in their buildup. Atuesta, who has been good since coming on, forces a corner. Roman Abramovich looks very antsy in the stands. 84 min: Atuesta and Wesley, two subs, involved in a quick Palmeiras attack before Saul comes across to clear, another sub involved. Os cilindros sound very loud at the moment. 83 min: Neither side willing to risk much, those Chelsea changes look to have slowed down what seemed like their momentum. Not much coherence in their play. 81 min: A Rudiger foul allows Palmeiras the opportunity to get the ball hit long, Atuesta hits it and Palmeiras keep the territory after the ball is cleared. Any mistake from either team now will be fatal. 79 min: Those changes have Chelsea to three at the back with a front two of Werner and Havertz. A long ball launched that looks better suited to Lukaku. 77 min: Rony off, Wesley on for Palmeiras. The other scorer, Veiga goes off, and Atuesta on. 76 min: Boos as Lukaku goes off, and Hudson-Odoi, with Werner and Saul on. Lukaku looked up for it, and scored a fine goal. Odd change. 75 min: Lukaku has a smile on his face, looks to be relishing the battle far more than before. Off the bench, Timo Werner and Saul are being called. 73 min: Kante drives on, a ball to Lukaku is played up to Pulisic who shoots wide, and perhaps should have done better. The spaces are opening up at either end. 72 min: This game is on a knife-edge. It’s not a classic but there is real tension and jeopardy. 70 min: Havertz has been prominent, and gets to the byline, only for his ball to result in a Palmeiras attack. Scarpa keeps the ball in at the far side, and Kovacic and Danilo do battle in midfield before Veiga wallops a shot wide. Palmeiras working like dogs in there. Do they want this more? 69 min: Havertz almost stole in at the corner, Palmeiras having gone to sleep but the angle was too tight. 68 min: Thomas Tuchel is moaning to his assistants, looking not too impressed. The momentum is with the Brazilians. His team respond to his glowering with some attacking and Scarpa concedes a corner. 66 min: Big big noise from the Palmeiras fans, and Chelsea’s heads may be heading downwards. Palmeiras forces a corner, and Scarpa takes, the ball only hurriedly cleared. Eduoard Mendy, hero of the Afcon final, up against Veiga, who keeps his cool and slots it to the right, Mendy going to the left. Oh Thiago, oh no. 62 min: Kante is in hoover mode, running back to baulk Rony and Dudu off the ball, and only conceding a throw. From that throw, there’s a chance for Palmeiras, and there’s call for a handball and the ref is going to have a look at the screen. Thiago Silva’s arm was high and in an unnatural position! It’s been given, the ref pointing to the spot. 60 min: Palmeiras sub: off goes Ze Rafael, on comes Jailson. 59 min: Ian Copestake calls in: “Lukaku seems as cryptic on the pitch as he is on social media. Peter Oh: “One of Palmeiras’ mascots is a pig. In the crowd photo in Jacob Steinberg’s article, the banner says “pigs eat rubbish” in Portuguese. That alone should motivate Chelsea to not be rubbish today.” 58 min: Hang on a tick...Dudu through? No, just crowded out and almost certainly offside, too. 57 min: Lukaku full of confidence and he makes a neat lay-off that Pulisic drills wide. This is where they can become champions of the whole world..... 56 min: Palmeiras’s plan must change now and space must open up. Chelsea have this game right where they want it. At last! And at last he moved! And at last he got the service! Hudson-Odoi escapes down the left, great cross from the byline and Lukaku heads the ball with real power, having climbed highest. That’s a classic Lukaku goal and what great work from Hudson-Odoi. 54 min: Good defending by Rudiger, just as Rony looked to have got away. Then Hudson-Odoi is fouled in the corner, just as Palmeiras were pressing high up the pitch. 52 min: Lukaku does some shouting at his teammates. They could do with him doing some more moving. 51 min: A Kovacic foul buys some thinking time for Palmeiras, but they give it up cheaply and Chelsea go on the counter with Kante who just fails to release Havertz. 49 min: Another shot from a Chelsea centre-half, who are getting all the space, this time from Rudiger, but it goes over. 48 min: Free-kick chance for Chelsea, and the kick by Pulisic is meat and drink for Weverton, who is able to claim with some ease. 47 min: Hudson-Odoi has chance to get down the left but his ball into the middle is poor, and Chelsea do look at least to have begun the half with more attacking intention. 46 min: Extra time and penalties will ensue at the end of the 90, and they look a high possibility. The teams are back in the tunnel, hopefully with a new detail to entertain, but it seems unlikely. Palmeiras will stick to their plan, and Chelsea will have to provide the verve. It’s been cagey and Chelsea are up against a highly organised and tough opponent. The loss of Mason Mount has been significant but the arrival of Christian Pulisic has opened up a few gaps. The odd goal will win this one and Palmeiras look capable of scoring it, too 45+3 min: Another Chelsea corner, one they need to make the best of. Rudiger again gets on the end but nods behind to close out the half. That’s it. 45+2 min: From the Chelsea corner, Rudiger heads over. 45+1 min: Rony does well in stopping an overlap from Hudson-Odoi and Thiago Silva, again granted space, has a dig from range and Weverton palms behind. 45 min: Rudiger overhits the ball and Weverton claims with ease. That was an impatient pass. Three minutes have been added on to this half. 44 min: Space for Palmeiras, with Ze Rafael almost setting up Dudu, only for a hurrying Christensen to dart back and block the pass. 42 min: Slow buildup from Chelsea, and it has to be as their opponent is sat deep and in numbers. Christensen chips up and Havertz tries to control but is outnumbered. Lukaku needed to be on the end of that one. 40 min: Rony sees glory and smashes the ball miles over. The shooting in this game so far has been pretty damned poor. 39 min: Lukaku the target for a Christensen ball and Weverton palms away before going down hurt though it doesn’t look too serious. 37 min: A foul on Pulisic in a dangerous area, and no Mount to take this. Pulisic will take the honour but goes over. That needed to be better. The keeper watches it whistle by. 36 min: Pulisic does look on it, and goes down the right, his ball aimed at Havertz but a deflection takes the ball away from the German and catches Lukaku unawares, too. 35 min: Kovacic attempts to barrel through but the ball is whacked clear. Pulisic is also trying to cause problems. 33 min: Palmeiras have a corner, and it takes two Chelsea hacks the ball to get it clear. These feel like dangerous moments for Chelsea. 31 min: Chelsea sub: Mason Mount has been down on the floor and he leaves the field, to be replaced by Christian Pulisic. Big chance for the American, big loss for Chelsea. 30 min: Palmeiras try to construct an attack, with some slow passing, looking to eventually send the likes of Dudu away before a foul in midfield stops them. 29 min: Gianni Infantino looks on from his dais high up in the stands, flanked by high-ranking Emirati officials. 28 min: Dudu again goes close, as Chelsea’s defenders get tied up with Veiga’s pace finding them wanting. Dudu snatched at the chance but he looks a danger. 27 min: Space opens up for Havertz at last but he shoots wide. He ought to have done far better there. 26 min: Havertz has a long-range effort himself, and his goes wide, too. Two sighters, one from each team. 24 min: First big shot of the game, all created for himself by Dudu, who turns and cracks the ball over the bar. A warning sign for Chelsea. 22 min: Veiga, perhaps not deliberately, cuts out a Kante pass just as it seems space has finally opened up. Lukaku’s movement for his support players is yet to be electric. 21 min: Thiago Silva powers forward again but Palmeiras’s defenders are holding firm for now. Perhaps the spaces will open up a bit more as this game goes along. 19 min: This is no easy assignment for Chelsea; Palmeiras are tough as teak and have all that noise on their side. 17 min: Rudiger fouls Rony and another set-piece will be pumped in, Scarpa taking and Chelsea getting it clear. Then the ball goes back in and Mendy claims eventually but there was some discomfort there. 16 min: Another chance for Mount to bend in a free-kick, but he shoots when Lukaku and co were ready for a cross. That was poor, just like the other one. Lukaku, never good at hiding his feelings, looks annoyed. 14 min: Hudson-Odoi has been lively and cuts in again, as Azpilicueta, again, comes in on the back post but fails to get a clean touch. The veteran will be asked to get through a lot of mileage, it seems. 13 min: Mount is fouled in the centre of the Palmeiras half and there’s a chance to pump in a free-kick. Mount takes himself, but it’s cleared to set up a counter that comes to nothing when Dudu, the sole runner, is missed. 11 min: Cheers from the Palmeiras fans as Hudson-Odoi, cutting in from the left, is blocked. They are dropping deep and holding their line. Thiago Silva is being given space to pass the ball from the back. 10 min: Rony gets away, holds the ball up, stands up Rudiger who narrows the angle and the shot flies wide. 9 min: A Christensen foul in midfield buys Palmeiras some time, they are set up in a defensive shape but like to spring forward at speed. Kovacic is chased down in midfield. The Brazilians push and press in packs. 7 min: Scarpa down the other end has to do some defending as Chelsea push forward. The drums, the drums are loud from the Brazilian fans. Os cilindros if you like. 5 min: Rony heads Scarpa’s header behind for a Chelsea goal kick. It had not got as far as the near post. 4 min: Chelsea dominating possession, as was expected in the prelims. Palmeiras are a team that get the job done by defending hard first. They get a corner as Dudu’s shot is deflected. 3 min: Early run by Havertz after being played in by Thiago Silva, Hudson-Odoi from the left whips the ball in, with Ewerthon in the Brazil goal flapping, though Azpilicueta was also out of kilter at the back post. 1 min: And away we go, with Chelsea taking the kick-off. They need to play much better than in the semi-final. Palmeiras look well up for this one, roared on by their very loud fans. The fireworks have begun in Abu Dhabi, and the sound of loud music suggests the teams are ready to take the stage. Seven Nation Army is, of course, the tune playing. The word is that there will be 15,000 Palmeiras fans in the Mohammed bin Zayed Stadium of a capacity of around 40,000. The stadium, of course, is named after the half-brother of the owner of Manchester City, Sheikh Mansour, the Crown Prince of the Emirate of Abu Dhabi. Here’s the main reason Palmeiras are in this final. They were in this event last year, too, but lost in the semis to Tigres UANL of Mexico before Bayern Munich won the tournament. Thomas Tuchel, negative for Covid, ready and raring, speaks to Channel 4. It’s difficult not to be with your team at a competition. It’s also the moment to trust your players and your staff but once you are here you have a good feeling. I am happy I could be here in Abu Dhabi. We want to win it all, we are here to win it and we will not hide from the fact we are not happy to be in the final, we want to win it, that’s what we are here for. This is a very realistic approach. The demand for ourselves today is that we have to respect our opponent, the game and anything can happen. And we want to do it. The intro on Channel 4’s UK TV production, presented by James Richardson (that’s what happened to him...), was full hipster, and a bit more spacey and studied cool than a Sky intro. Though Jimbo’s just gone for an “Abu Dhabi doo” gag. Jacob Steinberg spoke to Mason Mount in Abu Dhabi. Minor injuries have stalled his momentum and he was out for a few weeks after having all of his wisdom teeth out in November. “You don’t think your teeth are going to stop you from playing football,” Mount says. “It did actually really mess me up. It was Newcastle away and I woke up on the day in agony. I was in the car back to London and it was the worst journey I’ve ever been on. I wanted to just rip them out myself but it wouldn’t have been the best idea.” This is a huge moment for Palmeiras; a chance, at long last, to silence taunts from rival Brazilian clubs about their barren record in this tournament. The Copa Libertadores champions understand what is at stake. They have long since had to accept that their triumph in the Copa Rio in 1951, the original intercontinental club tournament, is not enough to stop the chants of “Palmeiras não tem Mundial” – Palmeiras don’t have a World Cup – from fans of Corinthians, São Paulo and Santos. There is only one way to scratch the itch: by defying the odds and dashing Chelsea’s hopes of becoming world champions for the first time. The big news for Chelsea is Mendy starting over Kepa in goals as one of four changes. Mason Mount replaces Hakim Ziyech and N’Golo Kanté is in for Jorginho. Callum Hudson-Odoi will play left wing-back with Marcos Alonso dropping to the bench. Palmeiras pick the same team that beat Al Ahly in the semi-final. Chelsea: Mendy, Christensen, Thiago Silva, Rudiger; Azpilicueta, Kante, Kovacic, Hudson-Odoi; Mount, Havertz, Lukaku. Subs: Kepa, Bettinelli, Alonso, Chalobah, Sarr, Jorginho, Saul, Barkley, Kenedy, Ziyech, Werner, Pulisic Palmeiras: Weverton; Rocha, Gómez, Luan, Piquerez; Danilo, Zé Rafael; Dudu, Veiga, Scarpa; Rony. Subs: Benjamin, Jorge, Wesley, Mayke, Deyverson, Lopes, Atuesta, Cerquiera, Navarro, Jailson, Mateus, Marcelo It’s almost ten years - December 2012 in fact - when Chelsea got to the final of this tournament and lost to Corinthians in Japan. This time, in Abu Dhabi, they face another team from Sao Paulo, Palmeiras, coached by Abel Ferreira, not to be confused with the Hollywood film director Abel Ferrara, and one in the more tough traditions of Brazilian football. With Chelsea not exactly flowing with goals this could be what is politely referred to as an intriguing tactical battle. Thomas Tuchel, Covid test permitting, will be in the dugout as the club try to add this prestigious yet oddly superfluous trophy to their cabinet. It matters greatly to South American clubs but only the English clubs when they win it, not that it wouldn’t be a great disappointment to lose in the final for Chelsea. Kick-off is 4.30pm UK time. Join me.First-half goals from Filip Helander, Kemar Roofe and Fashion Sakala sealed a comfortable 3-0 victory for Rangers against Annan Athletic at Galabank to secure their place in the Scottish Cup quarter-finals. Giovanni van Bronckhorst changed the whole team from their midweek defeat of Hibs, handing Aaron Ramsey and Mateusz Zukowski both made their first starts with Helander featuring for the first time in five months after recovering from a knee injury. Helander headed in the opening goal after seven minutes before strikers Kemar Roofe and Fashion Sakala added further goals to end any hopes of the League Two side providing a shock. Hearts progressed to the quarter-finals beating Livingston 4-3 on penalties. The contest finished 0-0 after extra time at Tynecastle with the visitors coming closest to breaking the deadlock in 90 minutes when Scott Pittman hit the post. Livingston’s Cristiano Montaño struck the outside of a post and Ayo Obileye had his penalty saved by Craig Gordon. John Souttar, Peter Haring, Ben Woodburn and Ellis Simms all converted as Hearts edged through. Greg Kiltie scored two goals to help St Mirren to a comprehensive 4-0 win over fourth division Kelty Hearts. The Buddies opened the scoring after 16 minutes when Alex Grieve followed up a save by Darren Jamieson from a Richard Tait attempt to nod in. Jordan Jones’ superb strike increased their lead after 50 minutes and he assisted Kiltie to score after 58 minutes. Kiltie added the fourth goal with five minutes remaining. Kevin van Veen and Connor Shields scored as Motherwell fought back to beat Aberdeen 2-1 at Fir Park to secure their passage to the next round. Christian Ramírez opened the scoring with a header for Aberdeen in the third minute and the visitors appeared to be on course to bounce back from their defeat to Celtic in midweek. Van Veen’s deflected strike levelled the scores half an hour later and Shields pounced to score as the home side turned the match around before half-time. Motherwell had further opportunities to increase their advantage but Liam Kelly produced a great save from Ramírez late on. The win for the Steelmen adds to the pressure on Stephen Glass and the visiting fans showed their unhappiness at full-time. Elsewhere, a first-half goal from midfielder Ian Harkes gave Dundee United a 1-0 win over a stoic Partick Thistle side on a boggy Firhill pitch. Celtic host Raith tomorrow after Hibernian visit Arbroath. The draw for the next round will take place on Monday after the conclusion of the Peterhead versus Dundee tie.For Liverpool, Wednesday’s Champions League tie against Internazionale will inevitably conjure memories of 1965. Leading 3-1 from the first leg of their first European Cup semi-final, Liverpool went to San Siro and lost 3-0 in a game that players insist was fixed. The first Inter goal was scored direct from a free-kick they believed to be indirect, the second after the ball was nicked from the goalkeeper Tommy Lawrence as he bounced it before clearing. The evidence in that instance is circumstantial, although as Brian Glanville noted in an investigation into match-fixing in the Sunday Times almost a decade later, Italian sides did remarkably well when the referee who officiated that game, José María Ortiz de Mendíbil, was in charge. There had been some very strange decisions as well in the previous year’s semi-final when Inter had beaten Borussia Dortmund, but the first concrete evidence of fixing came the following year. As the Hungarian journalist Péter Borenich revealed in his 1983 book Csak a labdán van bőr, ”Only the Ball has a Skin”, Budapest in the 1960s and 70s became the nexus of European match-fixing. At its heart was the Hungarian Dezső Solti, who had approached the referee György Vadás, offering him enough money for “five, six Mercedes” to ensure Inter beat Real Madrid in the semi-final first leg. But Vadás refused, the game finished 1-1 and it was Madrid who went on to beat Partizan in the 1966 final. By 1983, Solti was already serving a ban from football for his part in the scandal exposed by Glanville, having offered the Portuguese referee Francisco Marques Lobo $5,000 and a car if he ensured Juventus beat Derby in the semi-final of the 1973 European Cup. Lobo reported the approach and is generally deemed to have officiated the second leg fairly but the damage had been done in the first leg, which Juve won 3-1. Brian Clough was so certain the game had been fixed that the Derby manager’s post-match press conference consisted of a single sentence: “I will not speak to cheating bastards; to cheating bastards I will not speak.” As he left, he turned to Glanville: “Translate that for them, Brian.” If Solti is remembered at all now, it is as a bogeyman, but his story is far more complicated than that. He was born Dezső Steinberger in 1912 to a family of merchants in Balmazújváros, a small town 20 miles north-west of Debrecen. In 1944, after the German invasion of Hungary, he was rounded up with the area’s other Jews and sent to Auschwitz. His immediate family was killed within hours of arrival but Steinberger was physically fit and so used as labour. He played in goal for one of the camp football teams and began to secure favours by informing on other prisoners. At some point in the winter of 1944-45, Steinberger fixed an SS officer’s car. Impressed by his linguistic ability and general usefulness, the officer began to use Steinberger as a runner and general factotum. That officer was Josef Mengele. As Soviet forces closed in, Steinberger went on one of the death marches west. Having spent time at Dachau and Mühldorf-Mettenheim he was packed on a train to be taken into the mountains and massacred. However, a local Wehrmacht commander, in a fit of conscience, delayed the train to ensure it would be intercepted by US forces. The US housed him in a temporary camp at Feldafing near Munich, and he was interviewed over his links with Mengele before, eventually, being returned to Hungary. The war had changed him. “I was weakened in everything,” he wrote in his memoir. “I was weak in character, in will, in everything. Auschwitz burned everything.” He was approached by the ÁVH, the Hungarian secret police. Péter Veres, the head of the National Peasants Party, who was the biggest opponent of the Communist programme of collectivisation, was also from Balmazújváros. Did Steinberger know him, and could he trap him into something that would force him to resign? He could, and he did. As a reward, Steinberger said he wanted to leave the country. The ÁVH told him it could be done if he qualified for an entertainer’s visa. So Steinberger trained as a stage magician and, in 1949, he was granted a passport, issued in the name Dezső Solti. He left for Italy with six female dancers he claimed were essential to his act, but it is clear from ÁVH records that this was cover for trafficking prostitutes. In Milan, Solti met the great coach Béla Guttmann, another Hungarian Jew. It was Solti’s car, imported from the US, that Guttmann was driving (without a licence) when he struck and killed a 17-year-old student. Solti took the blame for long enough that Guttmann was able to leave the country and avoid the courts. Solti worked with football clubs as an agent – and then more. In March 1990, Solti spent a day with the film director Béla Szobolits, who was researching a documentary. “He was good-humoured with a mischievous look in his eyes,” Szobolits said. “He talked a lot about women. He was very religious, sensitive, easily moved. “He lived alone in a very average two-bedroom apartment in Milan. Every day he got up at 7am and prayed for an hour. He would read passages from the Torah. There was a Jewish jeweller of about his age from Romania who came round between 10 and 12 every day. Solti would have lunch alone and sleep. Then, he read the newspapers and went into the town centre for an ice cream. He read philosophy after that. He would have his evening meal, then stand in the window looking over the city, taking in the fresh air, before going to bed after midnight.” Solti didn’t exactly come clean, but he did admit he had at times given gold watches to referees. “Football is a game of fine margins,” he told Szobolits. “All we did was try to ensure those were not against Inter. If a free-kick is going to be given one way or the other, we wanted to make sure we were seen as the victim not the opposition.” Just another ambiguity in a life lived in a world of limited morality.The Taliban have detained 29 women and their families in Kabul, a senior US diplomat said on Saturday, adding to concerns about rising numbers of people seized and held indefinitely in Afghanistan. Rina Amiri, US special envoy for Afghan Women, Girls and Human Rights, said that women were among 40 people seized on Friday. “These unjust detentions must stop,” she said in a tweet. It has since been deleted, but other sources confirmed that multiple women had been detained in Kabul. The state department did not respond to requests for comment on why it was removed. Earlier on Friday, the Taliban released a group of journalists including two foreigners, after news of their detention caused an international outcry. They also freed an activist who had disappeared after a women’s rights protest, amid mounting diplomatic pressure including from the UN secretary general. “I am increasingly concerned about the wellbeing of missing women activists in Afghanistan. Several have ‘disappeared’, some not heard from in weeks,” António Guterres had said on Twitter on Thursday. “I strongly urge the Taliban to ensure their safety so that they can return home.” But other female activists, some of who were abducted from their homes in the middle of the night, have not been set free. The Taliban police and the interior ministry denied any role in their arrests. Rights groups denounced the disappearances as a campaign of intimidation, after the Taliban brought in oppressive rules including barring girls from secondary education, and women from most work outside the health and education sectors. “Every disappearance highlights one of the huge gaps in Afghanistan today, the lack of rule of law,” said Heather Barr, associate women’s rights director at Human Rights Watch. “This is not how you act when you are trying to be a government, and it highlights the callousness with which they seem to think they can just abduct women and sloppily deny it.” There are also concerns about Alia Azizi, a senior prison official who has been missing for more than four months after reporting for work. Several women who worked for the security forces under the previous government have been attacked and killed since the Taliban came to power. “While we welcome the release of Parwana, these families and others, including Alia, are still detained,” Amiri said in her tweet. None of those held have been charged with any crime, or able to contact lawyers or speak to their families. The British government has also raised concerns about citizens who have been held for several months. The family of cameraman-turned-businessman Peter Jouvenal have gone public with their concerns about his health since he was seized in December. He is married to an Afghan citizen and was in Kabul for work and to settle family affairs. Friends are concerned about his health and safety; he requires medication for high blood pressure and Covid is rampant in the Afghan prison system.The ghosts of Albertville 92 are twitching. It is 30 years since Great Britain returned from a Winter Games without a single medal and more than 20 since the money taps began to flood across Olympic sport. But suddenly a nation used to every Games bringing ever greater glories – and stories– is starting to notice an alien sensation: potential failure. Team GB arrived in Beijing confident they would win between three and seven medals. They still might. But as each gold-plated opportunity slips by – a loose curling stone here, a mistimed snowboard turn there – the sense of nervousness grows. Having talked a good game, they increasingly resemble a gambler on tilt, desperate for any kind of win. On Saturday there was more pain as Britain’s skeleton sliders, who had won a medal at every Games since 2002, were so far off the pace that if it was horse racing there would have been a steward’s inquiry. Brogan Crowley, tipped as a future star, finished 22nd out of 25 competitors while Laura Deas, a bronze medallist four years ago, was 19th. “I’m sorry I couldn’t deliver something better for you,” said Deas, fighting back the tears. “The speed that I so desperately want is not there, and there’s nothing I can do about that now.” What made these results even more puzzling is that Team GB athletes consistently made better starts than the German gold medallist Hannah Neise. But a combination of poor driving and a strangely slow sled meant they were soon propping up the rear. So what is behind Britain’s poor performance? Part of it is simple variance. A small number of medal prospects, combined with many winter events being highly chaotic, is a recipe for unpredictability – good or bad. And in Beijing it has so far been bad. Some Team GB staff insist that getting a medal under your belt early builds momentum. What if Britain’s world champion mixed curlers had continued their good start in their semi-final against Norway? Or if world No 1 Charlotte Bankes had not made a mistake in the snowboard cross? Britain could easily be sitting on two medals and hearts would be still, not beating uneasily. The impact of Covid is another factor. Around 60% of Britain’s 50-strong squad spend large parts of their year abroad. Having less time to train on snow and ice due to travel restrictions inevitably hurts. But for some insiders there is a more troublesome issue: a fear that Team GB has lost its tech advantage. Take skeleton. For years it has benefited from superior helmets, aerodynamic skin suits and fast sleds. But in Beijing their new in-house designed sled has appeared more Lada than Mercedes. Ironically the silver and bronze medallists, from Australia and the Netherlands, were on British-made Kristian Bromley sleds. Others in UK Sport believe the organisation has never completely replaced Scott Drawer, their former head of research and innovation for more than a decade until 2013. It was Drawer who was responsible for using applied science, medicine and engineering projects to help Team GB – and was far ahead of his time in bringing advanced aerodynamic expertise into Olympic sport. Notably when Drawer departed the innovation programme was moved out of UK Sport and into the English Institute of Sport with mixed results. The EIS got a lot more cash and staff. However, there have been some notable white elephants. Before the Sochi Winter Olympics, for instance, more than £500,000 was wasted on building a state-of-the-art bobsleigh – with the help of F1’s McLaren – that was not considered good enough to be used for the 2014 Games. As one squad member told the Guardian, when it was given back to the team by McLaren in October 2013, it had to be re-engineered because it was found to be too small to fit in all four men. Even after that the widespread feeling in the camp was that it was “rubbish” and “substandard”. The sled used by Britain’s athletes in Beijing is said to be a work in progress. With a few tweaks maybe it will one day fire GB to more medals. However so far the signs are not entirely encouraging. An urgent question for skeleton remains: if GB has no tech advantage to help it win low-hanging fruit, why should it enjoy £6.4m in funding over the Olympic cycle – especially when there are no tracks in the country? Yet some perspective is needed. A week remains. Team GB can still emerge with medals. On Monday, the brilliant 17-year-old Kirsty Muir goes in the women’s freestyle skiing slopestyle. On Wednesday Dave Ryding, the 35-year-old slalom skier, has his fourth attempt at an Olympic medal. The men’s two and four-man bobsleigh teams could yet win a medal. The men’s curling – and perhaps the women too – almost certainly will. There have also been performances here – such as Muir and figure skaters Lilah Fear and Lewis Gibson – that are surely building blocks for the Milan Cortina 2026 Games. A setback in Beijing will not be the end of the world. It might encourage UK Sport to ask what it can do better. Finding better ways to tackle the chronic lack of diversity in Britain’s Olympic teams is long overdue. So is deepening the talent pool and finding new ways to define success that goes beyond mere medals. But perhaps some of this is on us too. As a nation we have gorged on Olympic medal success for so long that we have forgotten what it is like to stumble, to fall short – and, yes, to get back on your feet.Thanks for reading this MBM. Nighty night! Dean Smith adds: “A frustrating evening, beaten by a really good team. I’m frustrated and hurt by the manner of the goals. We hung on, they missed some big chances, we had some moments ourselves. So it wasn’t one-way traffic, but the second goal killed us. We forgot our principles, and that deflated the whole stadium.” Pep talks to Sky. “From the first minute we created changes. We did a really good performance overall. Norwich were in a good moment and confidence, so it was important to prove ourselves again. It is many years the players have done it. They don’t have to convince me about their quality. Everyone must be involved, you cannot play with 11 or 12 players, we need fresh legs. The team is alive.” He also says that he doesn’t expect Liverpool to drop many points, and “wants more” from the “exceptional” Riyad Mahrez. A hard taskmaster all right. Nick Ames was at Carrow Road this evening. His report for the Observer has landed, and here it is. Managers still to be interviewed, of course, so don’t leave us yet. Raheem Sterling - who scored a perfect hat-trick, left foot, right foot, header - talks to Sky. “We take it one step at a time, keep chipping away at it. Get in the right areas, and the goals will come. Our mindset is that we keep wanting to win. We’ll not rest on our laurels. To be a top team, it’s every three days, and that’s the challenge to us, to win every three days.” Guardiola gathers his men and shoves them towards their fans. They soak up the applause, and give a little back, too. The away end deserves it: they’ve been bouncing all evening. Norwich asked a couple of questions of the leaders in the first half hour, but once the dam broke, there was no hope for the Canaries. They remain in the bottom three, with a trip to Anfield coming up next. Manchester City meanwhile take one more serene step towards the title. The whistle goes, and Manchester City go 12 points clear at the top again. 90 min +3: Sterling wins Sky’s man of the match award. No great surprise there! 90 min +2: Sterling completes a busy evening by picking up a booking for hauling Dowell to the ground. 90 min +1: There will be three added minutes, and the first flies by without incident. Sterling misses the penalty, telegraphing his kick towards the bottom right. Gunn saves well, but the ball breaks back across the face of goal and Sterling completes his hat-trick from a couple of yards. 89 min: Delap chases a pass down the inside-left channel and scampers into the box. He’s barged over by Hanley, and the ref points to the spot. 87 min: Williams bursts through a gap down the left but overruns the ball upon reaching the Manchester City box. Goal kick. Norwich send on Dowell in place of Sargent. 85 min: Williams tries to release Pukki down the inside-left channel but gets way too much on the pass. Ederson deals with the situation. 84 min: A Premier League debut for the 18-year-old Brazilian Kayky. He replaces Mahrez. 83 min: McAtee clumsily stands on Rashica’s heel. The Norwich man felt that. Also it’s an opportunity to go down to eat up some time, with the home side very much in damage-limitation mode. 82 min: Foden is replaced by Delap. 80 min: Manchester City stroke it around the back, their work long done. 78 min: Well, it is a chance, but they don’t get one. Gibson wins a header, but only loops weakly into the air, gifting Ederson an easy pluck. 77 min: Pukki is never going to beat Foden in a foot race down the left, but he’s wily enough to earn a cheap free kick by clanking into the Manchester City midfielder. Chance for a consolation? 75 min: Sterling is wrestled off the ball by Gibson. Free kick to the left of the Norwich D. Before it’s taken, Silva is replaced by McAtee. Then the free kick is lumped into the mixer, the ball twanging off Fernandinho’s chest and over the bar from close range. 73 min: The Manchester City fans are giving it plenty, as they have been all evening. They can sense a fourth title in five years now. 72 min: McLean busies himself down the right and wins a corner. Byram competes for the ball, but it sails gently into Ederson’s arms. 71 min: ... and there’s even more good news, as Walker is back up and running. As Walker sits it out getting treatment, one corner leads to another, then Dias nods across the face of goal, left to right, allowing Sterling to head home from close range. Something for Manchester City fans to cheer this time. 68 min: Something for Norwich fans to cheer, as Walker, flying to win a corner down the right, disappears over the advertising hoardings. He gets no sympathy whatsoever, but it looks as though he’s hurt himself. 67 min: Zinchenko glides down the left and into the box, but overhits his cross with white shirts queuing up to head home from six yards. 66 min: Walker strides down the right and has a dig. Blocked. 65 min: Pukki has trouble Ake on more than one occasion this evening, and now his harrying down the right forces the Manchester City defender into the concession of a corner. Nothing comes of the set piece. 64 min: Mahrez drops a shoulder to make space down the right, and whips a shot into the side netting. That was overly ambitious given the angle he was faced with, and the fact he had team-mates in the centre waiting to tap home. 63 min: Norwich make a double change, replacing Aarons and Lees-Melou with Byram and Normann. 61 min: Rashica is found in a little bit of space by the left-hand corner of the Manchester City box. He whistles a shot straight at Ederson, who hasn’t had much to do since his team-mates took the lead. 60 min: Walker hangs out a leg to cynically trip an in-flight Williams, and is lucky not to concede a foul, never mind receive a booking. 58 min: Sterling turns Aarons inside out like an old sock. He enters the box. Aarons, falling down dizzy, lightly clips his heel. Sterling does him a favour by not going down for what would have surely been a certain penalty. Sterling settles for a corner, from which nothing comes. 57 min: City continue to pass the ball around relentlessly. 55 min: The Norwich fans would have started to dream of a repeat of 2019 after 29 minutes or so. Now, with Manchester City strolling around imperiously, they’re pretty deflated. Only the away end can be heard right now. 53 min: They nearly take that goal-difference advantage to five, as Ake sticks out a leg to meet Gundogan’s corner from the left. Leaning back, he scoops the ball over, scraping the top of the bar. 52 min: Manchester City may fancy boosting their goal difference now. As things stand, they’ve got a four-goal advantage over Liverpool (as well as the small matter of the 12 points, obviously). 50 min: Hanley made a good stab of clearing that shot - Foden should never have given him any chance whatsoever - but the scuffed shot rolled a good few inches over the line. Sterling’s cute reverse pass down the left releases Gundogan into the Norwich box. Gundogan rolls across for Foden, six yards out. He should score, but slams his shot straight at Gunn. He then does score - just - by prodding the rebound over the line. Hanley hooks clear, but the referee’s watch buzzes, and Manchester City will be 12 points clear of Liverpool this evening. 47 min: A slow start to the half. Manchester City get the second half underway. No half-time changes. Half-time entertainment. The rampant leaders could have had a hatful ... though Norwich held on for half an hour, and even came close to taking the lead when Hanley headed against the post. Either way, as things stand, Manchester City will go 12 points clear this evening. 45 min: Aarons should gather a loose Foden pass down the left, but hovers aimlessly and allows Sterling to nip in front of him. Aarons responds by shoving Sterling in the back. A free kick that’s effectively a corner on the left. Gundogan swings in. Gunn claims. There will be one added minute. 43 min: Walker crosses low from the right. Gibson stoops to head behind for Manchester City’s nth corner of the half. The corner’s cut back for Foden, who launches a shot that’s already travelled halfway to Ipswich. 41 min: Dias sprays a pass down the left. Norwich collectively attempt to shepherd the ball out for a goal kick. Sterling doesn’t give it up, and stops it on the byline. Fortunately for the hosts, his cross isn’t up to much, and easily cleared. 39 min: Fernandinho wedges a pass down the inside-right channel. Walker cuts back for Silva, who floats a cheeky chip across and over Gunn. Gundogan tries to head home from close range but, under pressure from the keeper, sends the ball over the bar. 38 min: Silva wins Manchester City yet another corner down the right. Mahrez takes, but not particularly well. Aarons heads clear, and though the ball’s sent back into the mixer, the flag goes up for offside. 37 min: Fernandinho, from a deep position down the inside-right channel, curls to the far stick. Zinchenko tries to Van Basten home from a ridiculously tight angle. Nope. Goal kick. 36 min: One corner leads to another. The second one is skelped clear by Gibson. 35 min: A free kick for Manchester City out on the left. Foden whips it in. Hanley eyebrows out for a corner with Dias lurking behind him. 34 min: Some space just inside the Norwich box for Mahrez, who drives towards the near post. Gunn parries well, and the resulting corner is something of a non-event. 33 min: Norwich try to respond immediately. Pukki worries Ake down the right again. He pulls back for Sargent, who lays off to Gilmour, who in turn rolls backwards for the in-rushing McLean. A first-time shot squirts harmlessly wide right. Walker crosses deep from the right. The ball finds Sterling, on the left-hand edge of the six-yard box. He drops a shoulder to cut inside, then curls an unstoppable shot across Gunn and into the top right. What a finish! 30 min: Manchester City only half clear the corner. Norwich come back at them down the right, McLean backheeling to release Aarons, who cuts back from the touchline to nobody in particular. The leaders clear, go up the other end, and ... 29 min: Gunn launches long. Sargent flicks on down the right, allowing Pukki to tussle with Ake. Pukki wins a corner off the Manchester City defender. 27 min: Aarons goes down, requiring some attention after whacking his knee. He’s back up and running again soon enough. 25 min: Manchester City work down the left through Gundogan, then Zinchenko. The full back cuts back for Sterling, ten yards out. Sterling pinball-flippers an instant shot towards the bottom left. Gunn, falling backwards, boots clear. Manchester City keep pressing, but Norwich keep clinging on. 24 min: Sterling tries to dribble into the Norwich box from the left, but is chased back up the flank by McLean. Some resolute defending that earns the Norwich man a big cheer. 22 min: Gundogan swings the corner in from the left. Hanley blooters clear in the no-nonsense style. 21 min: Fernandinho floats one into the Norwich box. Gibson heads away from Silva, who was waiting to smack home. Hanley hacks behind for a corner. 20 min: Norwich have their tails up now, and here’s Gilmour skedaddling in the gallus style, across the front of the Manchester City box, left to right. He can’t quite get a shot away, but forces a corner. However the flag then goes up for offside. A brilliant response from Norwich to Manchester City’s opening domination. 18 min: From the resulting free kick, Norwich win a corner on the right. Sargent’s header sends the ball skimming to the left. The ball’s hooked back into the Manchester City box. Hanley rises highest, and sends a downward header twanging off the base of the right-hand post. One each! The rebound looks to have fallen to Gibson, but he can’t force home because Fernandinho is on point to block and clear. 17 min: Rashica, on the edge of his own box, embarks on a sensational run down the middle, racing past Fernandinho as though the Manchester City midfielder wasn’t there. He looks to skate past Dias on the halfway line. Dias is not of a mind to let him pass, and cynically checks him. Into the book he goes. What a run! 15 min: A long pass down the Manchester City right. It looks as though Williams runs it out for a corner, but the linesman’s flag is sympathetic. Goal kick. The nearby Mahrez is a picture of incredulity. 14 min: A free kick for Manchester City out on the left. Foden shapes to swing it into the Norwich box, but instead works a short one, and the ball’s shuttled to the right wing instead. Norwich are pulled all out of shape. Silva, on the right, curls to a gathering of white shirts at the far post. Somehow the cross evades them all and sails out for a goal kick. 11 min: Manchester City go up the other end, Gundogan whistling a low cross through the six-yard box from the left. Foden is this close to poke home but can’t stretch far enough. If he was one inch taller, that was in. Williams traps instead and hoicks clear. 10 min: Pukki drives in from the right and has a whack at goal from 12 yards. It’s a fierce drive but well handled by Ederson. 8 min: Space for Zinchenko down the left. He crosses towards Gundogan at the near post. Gundogan flashes a header straight at Gunn. This has been a slightly surreal start, with Manchester City going very close three times, and Norwich suggesting on a couple of occasions that the visitors can be got at. 7 min: Walker plays a loose ball in from the right, allowing McLean to intercept and launch long for Pukki down the left. The pass isn’t accurate enough, and Dias covers easily enough. 5 min: Mahrez is played into space down the right. He feeds Silva just inside the box. Silva opens his body, and curls a gorgeous shot around Gunn and towards the bottom corner. Carrow Road waits for the net to bulge ... but the ball cannons off the base of the post, and flies across the line, into the prone Gunn’s arms! What a let-off for Norwich. 3 min: That will have given Norwich some early hope, though. Manchester City can be got at ... so the visitors remind them how dangerous they can be. Sterling wins a corner. The set piece is worked back up the pitch, before a ball’s lobbed down the inside-left channel to release Foden, who slams home after some staunch Gunn resistance. Another offside flag pops up. In a parallel universe somewhere, it’s 1-1 already. 1 min: Almost a sensational start! Gunn blooters long. Dias fresh-air kicks, allowing Rashica through on goal! Rashica doesn’t back himself, though, and in looking to find Pukki in the middle, slips over and loses control. It doesn’t matter, though, because the flag goes up correctly for offside. Norwich City get the ball rolling ... but only after everyone takes the knee. Applause greets the gesture. There’s no room for racism. The teams are out. Norwich wear their famous yellow, while Manchester City sport second-choice white. A fine atmosphere at Carrow Road as ever. The Chain by Fleetwood Mac blasting out of the speakers. We’ll be off in a couple of minutes! ... and now Sky speak to Pep Guardiola. “All my career, when you play three days later, I don’t like to play all the same players. Jack Grealish is injured, he was not ready today but hopefully next Tuesday. Every team plays for something important and we know it will be difficult. We will try to discover their weak points, and hopefully the guys in the final third will be clever enough to create chances.” Dean Smith talks to Sky Sports. “We can all look at what Manchester City have done for the last ten years and admire the statistics, the titles and the cups. But they are just human, and we have to think that way, and go into the game full of confidence for the unbeaten run we’re on at the moment. Billy Gilmour has been getting back to full fitness, but Adam Idah has a knock on his knee and his ankle, so we didn’t want to risk him with all the important games we have to come.” It’s been a mixture of good and bad news for Norwich in the 3pm kick-offs. Everton have beaten fellow relegation-haunted giants Leeds 3-0 at Goodison, while 19th-placed Watford went down 2-0 at home to Brighton. Tim de Lisle has the details of those matches. Norwich make two changes to the starting XI selected for the 1-1 draw with Crystal Palace. Billy Gilmour and Josh Sargent, the latter having recovered from illness, replace Adam Idah - 21 yesterday and injured - and Przemyslaw Placheta. Manchester City make five changes to the team sent out for the 2-0 win against Brentford. Nathan Ake, Kyle Walker, Oleksandr Zinchenko, Ilkay Gundogan and Fernandinho replace John Stones, Aymeric Laporte, Joao Cancelo, Rodri and Kevin De Bruyne, all of whom drop to the bench. Norwich City: Gunn, Aarons, Hanley, Gibson, Williams, Gilmour, Lees-Melou, McLean, Rashica, Sargent, Pukki. Subs: Byram, Zimmermann, Dowell, Placheta, Normann, Tzolis, Giannoulis, McGovern, Rowe. Manchester City: Ederson, Walker, Dias, Ake, Zinchenko, Gundogan, Fernandinho, Bernardo Silva, Mahrez, Foden, Sterling. Subs: Stones, Laporte, Rodri, De Bruyne, Joao Cancelo, Carson, Kayky, Delap, McAtee. Referee: Andre Marriner (West Midlands). Nobody is expecting too much of Norwich this evening. That’s not a slight on Dean Smith’s side, who have taken seven of the last nine points available, a spirit-restoring run that has sparked genuine belief of a successful scrap against the drop. It’s just that tonight’s opponents Manchester City are ... well, Manchester City. They’ve won 13 of their last 14 Premier League games, for goodness sake, and drawn the other. They’ve not even been playing particularly well of late, not by their own standards anyway. The mark of champions. Yet there’s always hope ...and while Manchester City beat Norwich 5-0 in the corresponding fixture at the Etihad earlier in the season, they’ll also have sore memories of coming a cropper on their last visit to Carrow Road. The 3-2 scoreline that September 2019 day flattered the visitors, who were uncharacteristically swept aside that day. What they’d give for a repeat performance. They set about trying to replicate it at 5.30pm GMT. It’s on!The sky over Los Angeles is forecast to be clear and blue and the temperature around 30C when the Cincinnati Bengals and Los Angeles Rams run out for Super Bowl LVI on Sunday. It should be a chance for the NFL to celebrate weathering Covid‑19 with television ratings up 10% from 2020, as well as an opportunity to pay tribute to the greatest Super Bowl champion of all time, Tom Brady, who has announced his retirement after seven championships and 10 trips to the big game. But this is the NFL, which often appears closer to a soap opera than a sports league. On the day Brady signalled the end of his career, the league duly delivered its latest plot twist. As is often the case in the league and the US as a whole, it had much to do with race and inequality: Brian Flores, the former head coach of the Miami Dolphins, filed a lawsuit claiming the league “is racially segregated and is managed much like a plantation”. Flores, who is Black, was fired by the Dolphins in January despite the team posting a second straight winning season for the first time since 2003. The lack of minority head coaches in a league with nearly 70% of players are Black has long been a point of criticism. The NFL’s Rooney rule, which states that teams must interview at least one minority candidate for major coaching vacancies, has done little to correct that deficiency. When the rule was introduced there were three Black head coaches in the NFL; on the day Flores filed the lawsuit there was one. The NFL quickly denied that its multibillion annual revenue is built on plantation dynamics – that is, rich white men profiting from the bodies of young Black men. But at his annual pre-Super Bowl address the NFL commissioner, Roger Goodell, admitted work needs to be done. “We have to continue to look and find and step back and say: ‘We’re not doing a good enough job here.’ We need to find better solutions and better outcomes. “Let’s find more effective policies. Let’s make sure everyone understands. Let’s make sure that we’re looking at diversity and incentivizing that for everybody in our building.” The problem is that no one is quite sure what the solution is. Goodell cannot tell the ultra-rich owners – the “poorest” of whom is worth a mere $500m – who to employ. The owners know money will continue to roll in regardless of who coaches their teams. Flores’s lawsuit contained another barb, though. He alleges he was offered bonuses to lose games in order to secure higher picks in the NFL draft, something the Dolphins vigorously deny. It is an open secret teams often fail to field competitive rosters as they rebuild. But offering coaches money to lose is a different story and, if proven to be true, would hit the integrity of a league that has been tarnished by players’ brain trauma and its handling of the anthem protests started by Colin Kaepernick. These mostly self-inflicted problems distract from what will be an intriguing match. The home town Rams, packed with stars on offense and defense, are the slight favourites in the $5bn SoFi Stadium, a beautiful arena that will also host the opening ceremony of the 2028 Olympics. The Bengals are in their first Super Bowl for 33 years and were the worst team in the NFL two seasons ago. Few outside Cincinnati thought they would beat the talented Kansas City Chiefs to reach the Super Bowl, but they did so thanks to a superb performance from their defense and the cool head of their 25-year-old quarterback Joe Burrow, who has drawn early comparisons to Brady. Neither man has been the fastest or strongest player on the field but they find a way to win and deliver at the right time. Happily for their bank balances, they share the swagger and clean-cut good looks that sponsors find irresistible. It is unlikely Burrow will ever get anywhere near Brady’s record seven Super Bowl titles. But an upset win would be a good start – and a nice distraction for the NFL from its troubles.The anti-poverty campaigner Jack Monroe returned to her local supermarket on Saturday for the first time since her tweets about the increasing price of groceries went viral to find that her campaign had been successful. The activist has been urging supermarkets to make the cheapest food ranges more widely available after highlighting the inflation in products such as rice and value ranges being removed from shelves in her local Asda in Shoeburyness, Essex, last month. She tweeted that in January 2021 the cheapest pasta was 29p for 500g. It had increased to 70p amid the cost of living crisis. Monroe also highlighted that the cheapest rice in the Asda branch in January 2021 was 45p for a 1kg bag which had increased to £1 for 500g. She tweeted on Saturday that a pasta bag was available for 29p and rice had returned to 45p for a kilogram bag. The campaigner also posted pictures of baked bean tins and canned spaghetti which had returned to last year’s prices. She tweeted: “I’ve cried in supermarkets plenty in the last 10 years. Putting back jam that had crept up by sixpence, meaning SB and I faced a week of bone dry toast. Trying to work out what to put back, what to do without, out of a tenner’s worth of groceries that weren’t enough to start with. “I’ve cried tears of humiliation when a shelf-edge label turned out to be advertising an expired promotion, tipping my shopping over what I could afford from the six pounds or so in change – the only money I had in the world – in my hand. “And today I cried, quietly, to myself, in Asda, as the enormity of all of the last few weeks finally sank in among all the white labels in my shopping basket. “So I guess I just wanted to say thanks to everyone at Asda who has worked really hard over the last few weeks to bring the missing Smart Price products back.” In an article for the Observer last month, Monroe wrote that she was launching her own price index alongside a team of economists, charitable partners, anti-poverty campaigners, retail price analysts and former staff from the Office for National Statistics to document “the disappearance of the budget lines and the insidiously creeping prices of the most basic versions of essential items at the supermarket.” The campaigner, who has given evidence to parliamentary inquiries and been consulted on the School Food Plan and the National Food Strategy, added: “And today, I could put extra treats in my shopping basket for SB. Today, I managed to get so much in my £20 basket that I was clutching rice and oats and muesli to my bosom as I wrestled to the checkout. Today is the happiest shopping experience in over a decade. “The turnaround for this has been almost immediate – the speed at which they responded, not just with words, but with exactly what they said they would do – has been absolutely remarkable.” It comes after Asda on Monday committed to making its cheapest food ranges more widely available after Monroe’s social media campaign. The retailer said it had taken onboard Monroe’s comments and would stock its full Smart Price and Farm Stores ranges in all 581 food stores and online, increasing the number of customers who have access to the products. Meg Farren, Asda’s chief customer officer, said on Monday: “We want to help our customers’ budgets stretch further and have taken onboard the comments about the availability of our Smart Price range made by Jack Monroe.”Claire Denis’s new film is a seductively indirect love triangle, a drama of the mind as much as the heart. It’s intriguing if contrived and anticlimactic, though acted at the highest pitch of sensual conviction. Denis has co-written the screenplay with the author Christine Angot, with whom she wrote her previous movie Let the Sunshine In, and this has the same novelistic feel. The original French title is Feu, ou Avec Amour et Acharnement (which translates as Fire, or With Love And Fury); the English subtitle comes from a Tindersticks’ track composed especially for this film about the lacerating agony of an impossible choice: (“I’m sliding down both sides of the blade”). The three combatants are heavyweights of French cinema. Juliette Binoche is Sara, a presenter on a highbrow Paris radio talk show, who for 10 years has lived with Jean (played by the smoulderingly rumpled Vincent Lindon); he is a former sports star, retired through injury, who has served time in prison for an unspecified offence and now is apparently denied a credit card and so deals in cash. Jean has a teen son, Marcus (Issa Perica) whose mother now lives abroad and who is being raised by Jean’s mother Nelly (Bulle Ogier). The third corner of the triangle is François (Grégoire Colin), Sara’s ex-lover whom she left for Jean on a passionate impulse a decade ago. Jean and Sara haven’t seen François since then, but one morning outside the studio, Sara glimpses François in the street and all her old feelings are devastatingly reignited. Did he see her, too? It’s not clear, but maybe it’s not a coincidence that he contacts Jean trying to get his help with a sports agency he is setting up. The movie interestingly shows that when a person is having an affair, they are capable of the most profound emotional doublethink. On the one hand (or perhaps on one side of the blade) this person is able to be happy in the marriage and yet also passionately infatuated with the other person. We see Sara intensely engaged with François, her old flame (he even appears to have a key to her flat). But in the next scene, we see her indignantly deny Jean’s accusations with all the integrity and tearful, injured innocence that Binoche can project so convincingly. Watching her in these moments, it takes almost an effort of will to remember what we have just seen of her with François. Did it really happen? Was it a dream? An alternative reality that Sara was wistfully picturing? No. It was real. But, in the strangest way, Sara’s denials are real as well: entirely sincere, if self-deluding, in the moment. Because her love for Jean is real: it is not to be wished away as easily as all that. The weakness of the film is how lightly François’s personality and background is sketched in: he is a mystery, a perhaps not entirely intentional mystery, compared to how intensely we are presented with Jean and Sara. Marcus and Nelly are engagingly and very humanely drawn and Jean’s other life as a troubled dad is also sympathetically imagined. But perhaps their lives crowd out the space that should have been made for François – and incidentally we could have been told more about Jean’s jail time and what led up to it. This is a film with plenty of ideas, some less than fully formed. • Fire (or Both Sides of the Blade) screened at the Berlin film festival.Finally some good news for Italian rugby. On Friday, the under-20 side claimed a first win against England in Treviso. England were kept scoreless for good measure for the first time in the competition and though the senior side are on a run of 33 defeats, here is something for Italy to point to. To keep the reformists at bay, and to demonstrate signs of a promising future. On Sunday, in Rome, against the most inexperienced England side Eddie Jones has selected in the Six Nations, and buoyed up by the youngsters’ exploits, the senior side couldn’t follow suit, could they? No, is the simple answer. Progress at senior level is still to be gauged by margins of defeat and Jones’s face turned to stone this week when discussing one ex-international’s suggestion that England could be the scalp Italy have been seeking since 2015. As a former coach of a developing nation, Jones is well versed in preparing his side for matches like these and in Rome they have had few problems during his tenure. They have been largely forgettable affairs, memorable only for Maro Itoje’s debut in 2016 and the long-term injury suffered two years later by Ben Youngs, for whom it should be a cathartic return if he comes off the bench and equals England’s all-time caps record. That is mainly because Jones has cared little for aesthetics. He hammers home to his players that while the expectation is to win well, the aim first and foremost must simply be to win. Just like 12 months ago, they have a disappointing defeat by Scotland to get out of their system. Yet there is something in the air. Jones normally makes changes against Italy – five a year ago, seven the year before that and six on Sunday – but with Alex Dombrandt, Harry Randall and Marcus Smith lining up at 8-9-10, with Joe Marchant returning to the centres and Jack Nowell coming on to the wing to give the backline a more balanced feel, he has taken off the shackles. It is no surprise he has stacked his replacements bench with more caps than the starting XV and if all goes to plan it is easy to envisage Luke Cowan-Dickie and Sam Simmonds filling their boots in the last 20 minutes. The preceding hour, however, promises to be more significant. These days Italy tend to be able to live with more heralded opponents, just not for long enough. They were defensively robust for spells against New Zealand in the autumn and France last week but there is a familiar pattern that the superior fitness and greater depth of their opponents pays off in the closing stages. It was the same when England were last in Rome, seeking the 2020 title in the postponed October fixture. At half-time England, seeking a bonus point, led only 10-5 but the dam subsequently burst.What piques the interest is how the rookies perform from the word go. Try to force things and, as we have seen against lesser sides, some of them may not be seen in an England shirt again for a while. But marry patience with poise and show the cutting edge that was missing at Murrayfield and Jones will feel he has found the blueprint for matches at the 2023 World Cup that will require a high tempo. A plan B, as it were. “It is about developing a new England side we want to equip for the next World Cup,” he said. “The World Cup in France is reasonably unique because you are going to be playing the majority of the pool games and up to the quarter-final on fast open pitches so to progress to the last four you are going to need to have a very good attacking game. We need to be able to play the old England way and the new England way.” Which brings us back to the balance he is trying to strike between challenging for the Six Nations title with memories of last year’s fifth-place finish still lingering and preparing his side for the World Cup. It is a fine line to tread and it got a little finer after the defeat by Scotland but before sterner tests after the first rest week, Italy’s inferiority affords them wriggle room. The key will be how they put it to use.Joe Biden on Saturday night warned Vladimir Putin that the US would “impose swift and severe costs on Russia” if his forces invaded Ukraine. In a phone call that lasted more than an hour, the US president said an invasion would “produce widespread human suffering and diminish Russia’s standing”. The call was the culmination of a frantic day of diplomatic activity aimed at averting a war in Ukraine, which the US has warned could start as soon as Wednesday. It brought “no fundamental change” to the worsening crisis, according to a senior US official briefing reporters afterwards. The official said the two leaders agreed to stay engaged in the coming days “but Russia may decide to proceed with military action anyway”, adding there was no evidence of “meaningful” de-escalation on the Ukrainian border. In Moscow, Yuri Ushakov, a senior foreign policy adviser, called the conversation between the leaders “balanced and businesslike” and confirmed “the presidents have agreed to continue contacts at all levels”. But he rejected US claims that a Russian attack was imminent. “Hysteria has reached its peak,” Ushakov said. Earlier, Emmanuel Macron held a separate conversation with the Russian president, which was reported to last one hour and 40 minutes, while the US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, also spoke to his Russian counterpart, Sergei Lavrov. Blinken called for “a diplomatic resolution to Russia’s unprovoked military buildup around Ukraine”. Lavrov accused the US of ignoring its security proposals, which include a guarantee that Ukraine would not join Nato and a withdrawal of Nato forces from eastern Europe. The US has said there is a high risk of a Russian attack on Ukraine before the end of the Winter Olympics in China on 20 February, and the CIA is reported to have briefed allies that Russian troops have been ordered to be ready by Wednesday. Blinken told a news conference in Honolulu on Sunday that the risk of Russian military action in Ukraine was high and imminent enough to justify the departure of much of the staff at its embassy in Kyiv, as countries continued to pull citizens out of the country. “We ordered the departure of most of the Americans still at the US embassy in Kyiv. The risk of Russian military action is high enough and the threat is imminent enough that this is the prudent thing to do,” Blinken said. Ukraine’s president, however, has hit out at the US for causing “panic”. “I think there’s too much out there about a full-scale war from Russia, and people are even naming dates. The best friend for our enemies is panic in our country, and all this information only creates panic, it doesn’t help us,” said Volodymyr Zelenskiy, who has been saying for weeks that the tone of the US messaging is helping to cause panic and economic pain in Ukraine and is thus playing into Putin’s hands. Zelenskiy was speaking in the Kherson region, where he was observing drills by interior ministry troops. Ukrainian forces began 10 days of training on Thursday, to coincide with Russian exercises in Belarus that have been seen as a key part of Russia’s threatening buildup. “No one can look into the heads of Kremlin leaders and say for sure what exactly their actions may be. But we are ready for absolutely all scenarios,” said Ukraine’s defence minister, Oleksiy Reznikov. In Moscow, Lavrov denied there were any plans for an attack, saying US warnings were part of a propaganda campaign. “After Russian troops finish drills and return to barracks, the west will declare ‘diplomatic victory’ by having ‘secured’ Russian ‘de-escalation’,” the Russian foreign ministry quoted him as saying, describing it as a “predictable scenario and cheap domestic political points”. Later on Saturday, the US denied it had carried out military operations in Russian territorial waters, after Moscow said a Russian naval vessel chased away an American submarine in Russian waters near the Kuril Islands in the Pacific. The Russian defence ministry said it had called in the US defence attache over the alleged incident, but a US military spokesperson said there was ‘“no truth” in the claims. The US and Russia have begun rapid evacuations of their embassies, as has Australia. The US state department said a small number of diplomats would remain in Kyiv to keep channels of communication open with the Ukrainian government, some will pull back to Lviv in the west to provide emergency consular services, while most will be posted in neighbouring countries. “I think prudence requires us to assume to plan for, and prepare for, a worst-case scenario and the worst-case scenario would obviously involve substantial Russian attacks on the Ukrainian capital,” a senior state department official said. “These developments mean for private American citizens that it isn’t just time to leave Ukraine – it is past time for private citizens to leave Ukraine,” the official added, stressing that the consular staff were no longer in a position to help private citizens leave. Western intelligence agencies have predicted that a Russian attack would be immediately preceded by a fabricated pretext, such a “false-flag” attack on Russia or the Donetsk and Luhansk regions run by Moscow-backed separatists. Michael Kofman, the director of Russia studies at the Center for Naval Analyses, said Russia could move to formally recognise the Moscow-controlled so-called “people’s republics” in eastern Ukraine. He said this could “offer a basis for Russia to extend security guarantees, and militarily protect those considered to be Russian citizens living in the separatist regions. This may be interpreted as a clause which formally authorises the Russian state to use force in Ukraine.” The Russian Duma is due to consider an appeal to Putin to recognise Donetsk and Luhansk as independent republics on Monday, although there have been suggestions the hearing may be postponed in a sign Russia is still weighing up various options. Several governments yesterday urged their citizens to leave Ukraine as soon as possible. In the UK, the shadow foreign secretary, David Lammy, called on the government to learn “the right lessons” from the chaotic withdrawal from Afghanistan last summer, which saw frantic efforts to escort British nationals and vulnerable Afghans out of the country. Lammy wrote to Liz Truss, the foreign secretary, on Saturday night calling for a substantial increase in staff with relevant language skills to deal with the crisis, a cross-government crisis centre and a contact line for MPs with urgent constituency cases in Ukraine. “The opposition stands united with the government in the face of Russian aggression and in support of Ukraine’s sovereignty,” wrote Lammy. “However, following the chaos of the evacuation from Afghanistan, we ask the government for reassurance that the right lessons have been learned. The first duty of any government is to keep its people safe. The government must act now to ensure it is prepared to provide safety for British citizens in case of any incursion.” Melinda Simmons, Britain’s ambassador to Ukraine, said on Saturday that she was staying in the country to “continue to work there with a core team”. She added that the embassy remained open and operational. Dutch airline KLM said it had suspended flights to Ukraine until further notice after a security analysis and in light of Dutch government warnings against travel to Ukraine. A debate around the extent of Britain’s potential involvement broke out this weekend. Tobias Ellwood, the Conservative chair of the defence select committee, described the tensions as “our Cuban missile crisis moment” and called for British-led Nato divisions to be deployed to the country. However, Tom Tugendhat, the Tory chair of the foreign affairs select committee, said that providing training assistance was more useful to Ukraine than the deployment of British troops. He said the country’s own troops were “increasingly capable to defend themselves”. “We’re enabling them to have the ability to fight themselves, and having served in combat in countries around the world I can tell you that training local forces to fight for themselves is a significantly better defensive technique than putting troops in,” he said. “The reality is that the Ukrainians already have some 145,000 in their army, they have another – depending on how you count – 100-odd thousand border guard reserves and people like that so they have a significantly larger army even than we do.” The former foreign secretary, Malcolm Rifkind, said the deployment of a Nato division inside Ukraine would be “very unwise”. Rifkind and Ellwood said that the current instability caused by Boris Johnson’s alleged involvement in Downing Street lockdown parties was undermining Britain’s standing on the world stage. Dominic Cummings, the PM’s former chief adviser and now his fiercest critic, condemned Tory MPs for allowing Johnson to continue in office “while another major global crisis unfolds”.The temptation was to think that Jürgen Klopp had committed £50m to secure a successor to Sadio Mané. Luis Díaz might be Liverpool’s speedy, goalscoring left winger for much of the 2020s, the replacement in waiting for Klopp’s first great signing at Anfield. But the Liverpool manager’s forward thinking is altogether different. Mané turns 30 in April but Klopp feels his peak could lie in the future. Mané may have had a mixed 18 months, admitting last season was his worst before a burst of form in the autumn of 2021 gave way to his longest Liverpool goal drought, but rather than seeing it as a sign of decline, the German cites Senegal’s maiden Africa Cup of Nations triumph as a career-defining achievement as proof he can improve again. “He was a great player, a world-class player, when he left here but he comes back as a leader on a different level,” Klopp said. “It was a big tournament, the biggest of his life. Or life so far; I don’t want to finish that line. For him, as a person, 100% he made a massive step.” Mané missed an early penalty in Sunday’s final against Egypt before scoring the decisive spot-kick in the subsequent shootout. Fifty-six years after Senegal’s first Africa Cup of Nations, four after Mané’s inability to convert from 12 yards resulted in their elimination, two after a final defeat, he ended a long wait. Klopp often seems to relish stressful situations. Not this one. “I couldn’t have more respect for what Sadio did. He is for sure now one of the biggest Senegal legends of all time and rightly so,” he said. “The pressure on his shoulders was absolutely incredible. I usually have no problem with facing pressure but, when he walked to the penalty, I thought that was a really difficult moment in life. He faced it, he mastered it, I was really impressed.” Mané missed Liverpool’s win over Leicester on Thursday, with Klopp semi-jokingly suggesting he was sleeping after Senegal’s celebrations. His comeback could instead occur on Sunday at Burnley, but Klopp has no qualms about his professionalism and no doubt he was right to enjoy his success. “He was the best player of the tournament,” he added. “An incredible achievement for him. We all know Sadio doesn’t drink a sip of alcohol so it’s not that he was running around through the city and doesn’t know where he wakes up. I saw the pictures with the president of Senegal, the people in the streets: it was a massive thing.” Yet Mané’s exploits came amid a backdrop of uncertainty and seeming transition. The January signing of Díaz and the prowess of Diogo Jota suggested Klopp was shaping a new-look attack. Roberto Firmino is six months Mané’s senior, Mohamed Salah nine weeks his junior and all three are out of contract next year. If the question of the succession forms the context at Anfield and the challenge for Klopp’s definitive forward line is to sustain their potency into their thirties, the manager takes heart from trends among the best. While the duopoly of Lionel Messi and Cristiano Ronaldo long seemed to defy time and the ageing process, they have company. Klopp’s former Borussia Dortmund striker Robert Lewandowski has become more prolific since his twenties ended and all of the top six finishers in the 2021 Ballon d’Or are now over 30, while Salah was placed seventh. Mané came fourth in 2019 and Klopp believes his excellence in Africa can propel him to greater heights. “He can use that and become an even better player that he was two or three years before. That’s the plan with all of them,” he said. “There is no age roof. Clubs think differently. They look at a player aged 32 or 33 and think: ‘We cannot sell him any more.’ But if they are already inside the club then that’s outstanding because they already have experience and desire and quality.” If a player’s downward slope is not dictated by his birth certificate, Klopp referenced his latest signing, who was bought at 25, to support his case that footballing trajectories can vary. “They are all different. There is no longer a peak in mid-20s. Luis Díaz is not a kid any more; his career started pretty late. He’s a late bloomer, he isn’t the biggest player, so maybe he can go for a long time.” If that potential longevity bodes well for Liverpool, the prospect of an enhanced Mané flourishing could present a roadblock to Díaz’s path to a place in Klopp’s strongest side.Joe Biden on Saturday night warned Vladimir Putin that the US would “impose swift and severe costs on Russia” if his forces invaded Ukraine. In a phone call that lasted more than an hour, the US president said an invasion would “produce widespread human suffering and diminish Russia’s standing”. The call was the culmination of a frantic day of diplomatic activity aimed at averting a war in Ukraine, which the US has warned could start as soon as Wednesday. It brought “no fundamental change” to the worsening crisis, according to a senior US official briefing reporters afterwards. The official said the two leaders agreed to stay engaged in the coming days “but Russia may decide to proceed with military action anyway”, adding there was no evidence of “meaningful” de-escalation on the Ukrainian border. In Moscow, Yuri Ushakov, a senior foreign policy adviser, called the conversation between the leaders “balanced and businesslike” and confirmed “the presidents have agreed to continue contacts at all levels”. But he rejected US claims that a Russian attack was imminent. “Hysteria has reached its peak,” Ushakov said. Earlier, Emmanuel Macron held a separate conversation with the Russian president, which was reported to last one hour and 40 minutes, while the US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, also spoke to his Russian counterpart, Sergei Lavrov. Blinken called for “a diplomatic resolution to Russia’s unprovoked military buildup around Ukraine”. Lavrov accused the US of ignoring its security proposals, which include a guarantee that Ukraine would not join Nato and a withdrawal of Nato forces from eastern Europe. The US has said there is a high risk of a Russian attack on Ukraine before the end of the Winter Olympics in China on 20 February, and the CIA is reported to have briefed allies that Russian troops have been ordered to be ready by Wednesday. But Ukraine’s president yesterday hit out at the US for causing “panic”. “I think there’s too much out there about a full-scale war from Russia, and people are even naming dates. The best friend for our enemies is panic in our country, and all this information only creates panic, it doesn’t help us,” said Volodymyr Zelenskiy, who has been saying for weeks that the tone of the US messaging is helping to cause panic and economic pain in Ukraine and is thus playing into Putin’s hands. Zelenskiy was speaking in the Kherson region, where he was observing drills by interior ministry troops. Ukrainian forces began 10 days of training on Thursday, to coincide with Russian exercises in Belarus that have been seen as a key part of Russia’s threatening buildup. Read more from my colleagues Julian Borger in Washington, Shaun Walker in Kyiv and Michael Savage in London: Ministers must learn lessons from the “chaos” of the Afghanistan evacuation to help people fleeing Ukraine in the event of a Russian invasion, Labour has said. Britons have been told by the foreign office to leave Ukraine immediately as fears grow that Vladimir Putin will order an attack in the coming days. Foreign secretary Liz Truss has faced calls to ensure UK nationals can leave safely, but also to prepare for a vast number of Ukrainian refugees in the event of an invasion. Truss’ Labour shadow David Lammy called for a series of assurances citing what happened in Afghanistan last summer, PA news reports. He asked whether phone lines will be staffed 24/7 so parliamentarians can help constituency cases, if extra resources are in place to process visas and if embassy staff are being bolstered in neighbouring nations. Lammy also asked what conversations were being conducted with the UN refugee agency, the International Committee of the Red Cross and non-governmental organisations in the event of “large-scale movements of displaced people”. He wrote: The opposition stands united with the government in the face of Russian aggression and in support of Ukraine’s sovereignty. However, following the chaos of the evacuation from Afghanistan, we ask the government for reassurance that the right lessons have been learned. The first duty of any government is to keep its people safe. The government must act now to ensure it is prepared to provide safety for British citizens in case of any incursion. Ministers have ruled out RAF airlifts out of Kyiv, as seen in Afghanistan, in part because of the nature of the aerial warfare that would be likely in Ukraine. The Australian government has temporarily suspended its embassy operations and will evacuate staff, amid warnings a Russian invasion of Ukraine is increasingly imminent. Foreign minister Marise Payne issued a statement on Sunday morning saying the government would move its operations to Lviv, a few hundred kilometres west of Kyiv and close to the Polish border. She said: Given the deteriorating security situation caused by the build up of Russian troops on Ukraine’s border, the government has directed the departure of staff at the Australian Embassy in Kyiv and temporarily suspended operations at our embassy in Kyiv. We will be moving our operations to a temporary office in Lviv. She also urged Australians in Ukraine to leave the country, warning security conditions could change at short notice. She said: We continue to urge Russia to remain engaged in reciprocal diplomatic dialogue on what would be an extraordinary unilateral action. We support Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity. We support a unified European and Nato response. She added that Australia was “standing together with Ukraine at this very difficult time”. Here are the key developments from this evening: Joe Biden and Vladimir Putin talked by phone for over an hour on Saturday in what is widely seen as a last-ditch effort to fend off a Russian invasion of Ukraine which the US has warned could start as early as Wednesday. A statement said that during the call Biden made clear if Russia undertakes a further invasion of Ukraine the US and allies “will respond decisively and impose swift and severe costs on Russia”. It added that the US was “prepared to engage in diplomacy” but “are equally prepared for other scenarios”. Vladimir Putin told Joe Biden in a phone call on Saturday that the US response to Russia’s main security demands had not taken into account key concerns and that Moscow would respond soon, the Kremlin said. Kremlin official Yuri Ushakov said the phone call took place against a backdrop of “hysteria” in the west about an impending Russian invasion that he said was absurd. Sincere negotiations are incompatible with an escalation in tensions over Ukraine, the French president, Emmanuel Macron, told Vladimir Putin on Saturday, the Élysée Palace said. Following the French president’s trip to Moscow earlier this week, Macron and Putin discussed ways to move forward on the implementation of the Minsk Agreements as well as conditions for security and stability in Europe. The call lasted close to 90 minutes, the Élysée added. During a call between the US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, and Russian foreign minister, Sergey Lavrov, Blinken warned of “a resolute, massive and united Transatlantic response” to any Russian aggression. Lavrov said the US and EU have ignored Russian proposals on security and accused the US of a “propaganda campaign” about possible Russian aggression. Blinken had earlier said he would speak to his Russian counterpart, the foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, to advise that the US was prepared for either diplomacy or “aggression” and warned of economic sanctions in the event of an invasion. “If President [Vladimir] Putin decides to take military action, we will swiftly impose severe economic sanctions in coordination with allies and partners around the globe,” Blinken said during a trip to Fiji. “We will bolster Ukraine’s ability to defend itself, we will reinforce our allies on the eastern flank of Nato.” More on that here. The US has picked up intelligence Russia is discussing next Wednesday as the target date for starting military action, officials told the New York Times, but they acknowledged it’s possible mentioning a particular date could be part of a Russian disinformation effort. The US State Department ordered non-emergency staff from the US embassy in Kyiv to leave. A small number of diplomats will stay in the capital, some will pull back to Lviv in the west to provide emergency consular services while most will be posted in neighbouring countries. Washington has stressed that it will not be sending US troops to Ukraine in case of a Russian attack, meaning that it would not be able to arrange evacuation plans for its citizens should war break out. Earlier on Saturday, Russia said it was also starting to pull some embassy staff out of Ukraine, citing fears of “possible provocations from the Kyiv regime”. Several thousand Ukrainians rallied in Kyiv on Saturday to show unity amid fears of a Russian invasion, as Ukraine’s leader told people not to panic and pushed back against what he said was a glut of bleak war predictions being reported in the media. Volodymyr Zelenskiy, who attended police drills in the southern Kherson region, said a Russian attack could happen at any time, but pushed back against what he called excessive amounts of information about a major looming war. “The best friend of our enemies is panic in our country. And all this information is just provoking panic and can’t help us,” he said. “I can’t agree or disagree with what hasn’t happened yet. So far, there is no full-scale war in Ukraine.” The US did not carry out operations in Russian territorial waters, the US military said on Saturday, after Russia said it had chased away a US submarine in Russian waters in the Pacific. The US military spokesman captain Kyle Raines said in a statement: “There is no truth to the Russian claims of our operations in their territorial waters.” Passengers arriving in the UK on one of the first flights from Kyiv since the call for Britons to immediately leave Ukraine have described growing alarm in the country. The Foreign Office on Friday warned British nationals to leave Ukraine immediately while commercial flights are still available and the land border with Poland remains open. The number of British nationals in Ukraine is believed to be in the low thousands. British troops helping with training in Ukraine will leave the country this weekend, the armed forces minister James Heappey said as he warned that Russia could launch an attack “at no notice”. Here’s an explainer of what Putin wants in Ukraine. The massive military buildup could be a bluff, or a political ploy designed for a Russian audience. Either way, the US is digging in: The US did not carry out operations in Russian territorial waters, the US military said on Saturday, after Russia said it had chased away a US submarine in Russian waters in the Pacific. The US military spokesman captain Kyle Raines said in a statement: There is no truth to the Russian claims of our operations in their territorial waters. I will not comment on the precise location of our submarines but we do fly, sail, and operate safely in international waters. Joe Biden and Vladimir Putin talked by phone for over an hour on Saturday in what is widely seen as a last-ditch effort to fend off a Russian invasion of Ukraine which the US has warned could start as early as Wednesday. The White House said that the Kremlin had suggested the call and Biden had accepted, and it began shortly after 11am Washington time, ending just over an hour later. A statement said that during the call Biden made clear if Russia undertakes a further invasion of Ukraine the US and allies “will respond decisively and impose swift and severe costs on Russia”. It added that the US was “prepared to engage in diplomacy” but “are equally prepared for other scenarios”. Western intelligence agencies have predicted that a Russian attack would be immediately preceded by a fabricated pretext, such a “false-flag” attack on Russia or the Donetsk and Luhansk regions run by Moscow-backed separatists. Michael Kofman, the director of Russia Studies at the Center for Naval Analyses, said the Russia Duma was due to consider recognition of Donetsk and Luhansk as independent republics on Monday. Kofman said on Twitter: 14 February looks like it may offer a basis for Russia to extend security guarantees, and militarily protect those considered to be Russian citizens living in the separatist regions. This may be interpreted as a clause which formally authorises the Russian state to use force in Ukraine. Read the full story here: Vladimir Putin told Joe Biden in a phone call on Saturday that the US response to Russia’s main security demands had not taken into account key concerns and that Moscow would respond soon, the Kremlin said. Kremlin official Yuri Ushakov said the phone call took place against a backdrop of “hysteria” in the west about an impending Russian invasion that he said was absurd. He said that Biden in the phone call warned Putin of major potential sanctions, but did not place special emphasis on it. Foreign secretary Liz Truss said she spoke to US secretary of state Antony Blinken on Saturday, and shared her “acute concerns” that Russia could launch further military aggression against Ukraine within days. Several thousand Ukrainians rallied in Kyiv on Saturday to show unity amid fears of a Russian invasion, as Ukraine’s leader told people not to panic and pushed back against what he said was a glut of bleak war predictions being reported in the media, AFP reports. Tension has mounted as Russia has built up more than 100,000 troops near Ukraine and carried out large-scale exercises. The US said on Friday an invasion could start at any moment. Russia denies planning to invade. Ukrainians filed through the centre of Kyiv in a column, chanting “Glory to Ukraine” and carrying Ukrainian flags and banners that said “Ukrainians will resist” and “Invaders must die”. The Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, who attended police drills in southern Kherson region, said a Russian attack could happen at any time, but pushed back against what he called excessive amounts of information about a major looming war. It came amid reports that an invasion could happen as soon as Wednesday. He said: The best friend of our enemies is panic in our country. And all this information is just provoking panic and can’t help us. I can’t agree or disagree with what hasn’t happened yet. So far, there is no full-scale war in Ukraine. Read more here: The EU is not withdrawing its diplomatic presence from Ukraine, its foreign policy chief said on Saturday, after the US warned that Russian forces could invade at any time. Josep Borrell said in a statement: The EU and its member states are coordinating their actions in view of the current threats on Ukraine. Our diplomatic missions are not closing. They remain in Kyiv and continue to operate in support to EU citizens and in cooperation with the Ukrainian authorities. We recall that any further military aggression against Ukraine will have massive consequences and severe cost in response. Joe Biden and Vladimir Putin talked by phone for over an hour on Saturday in what is widely seen as a last-ditch effort to fend off a Russian invasion of Ukraine which the US has warned could start as early as Wednesday. The White House said that the Kremlin had suggested the call and Biden had accepted, and it began shortly after 11am Washington time, ending just over an hour later. Earlier in the day, Emmanuel Macron held a separate conversation with the Russian leader, which was reported to have lasted one hour and 40 minutes, in which the French president said a “sincere dialogue” was incompatible with the escalating tensions, as Russia continued to move troops from staging areas to positions closer to the border. Moscow did not immediately publish its version of the call. The US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, also talked to his counterpart, Sergei Lavrov, earlier on Saturday to call for “a diplomatic resolution to Russia’s unprovoked military buildup around Ukraine”. Blinken said: I reiterated that further Russian aggression would be met with a resolute, massive, and united transatlantic response. The US has said there was a high risk of a Russian attack on Ukraine before the end of Winter Olympics in China on 20 February, and the CIA was reported to have briefed allies that Russian troops have been ordered to be ready by Wednesday. Read the full story here: French president Emmanuel Macron will speak to German chancellor Olaf Scholz and the presidents of Ukraine and the US on Saturday as fears mount that Russia is preparing to invade Ukraine, Macron’s office said. Macron stressed during a call with Russian president Vladimir Putin that the west would react with “determination” should Russia invade Ukraine, it added. French presidential aides said Paris considered that Putin believed “that it was not he who took the initiative for the escalation”, but the west who approached the Russian border, AFP reports. Putin’s goal was to achieve the “neutralisation of Ukraine. He knows that this is unacceptable (for the west) and that his military exercises carry a risk of additional escalation,”, they said. He remained demanding and provocative “taking care nevertheless to keep all his options open”, they added. France would strengthen advice to its nationals to tell them to avoid travelling to Ukraine, but would not ask them to leave the country, the president’s office said. The White House has released some details of the conversation Joe Biden held with Vladimir Putin about Russia’s escalating military buildup on the borders of Ukraine. The statement said: President Biden was clear that, if Russia undertakes a further invasion of Ukraine, the United States together with our Allies and partners will respond decisively and impose swift and severe costs on Russia. President Biden reiterated that a further Russian invasion of Ukraine would produce widespread human suffering and diminish Russia’s standing. President Biden was clear with President Putin that while the United States remains prepared to engage in diplomacy, in full coordination with our Allies and partners, we are equally prepared for other scenarios. Antony Blinken, the US secretary of state, stressed during a 35-minute call on Saturday with his Russian counterpart Sergei Lavrov that the path for diplomatic engagement remained open in the escalating crisis between the eest and Russia over Moscow’s troop buildup, a State Department official said. A Russian naval vessel chased away a US submarine in Russian waters in the Pacific after it ignored the ship’s orders to surface, Interfax news agency cited the defence ministry as saying on Saturday. Russia accused Washington of breaking international law and creating a national security threat over the incident, which came at a time of high tensions between Moscow and Washington over a Russian military buildup near Ukraine, Reuters reports. There was no immediate comment from the US. The crew of the Marshal Shaposhnikov frigate used “corresponding means” to make the submarine leave Russian waters, the defence ministry was quoted as saying. It said it had called in the US defence attache over the incident. The submarine was spotted near the Kuril islands early on Saturday as Russia was conducting naval exercises with its Pacific Fleet and it was ordered to surface immediately, the Russian ministry was quoted as saying. It said the order was ignored by the US submarine’s crew, leading the Russian frigate to take unspecified action to make it leave. “The US submarine ... left Russian territorial waters at maximum speed,” the defence ministry was quoted as saying. The call for Britons to flee Ukraine as the threat of Russian invasion looms caused “quite a panic” and a rush to return home, according to a student who landed in the UK on one of the first commercial flights out of Kyiv since the warning. Here’s a PA News report on the situation: Passengers arrived at Gatwick Airport, south of London, on a direct flight from the Ukrainian capital shortly after noon on Saturday, just hours after the Foreign Office warned UK nationals in the country, thought to number in the low thousands, to “leave now while commercial means are still available”. Those returning suggested there were mixed signals about the level of concern in the country about the threat of war. Haider Ali spoke to the PA news agency after landing at Gatwick Airport from Kyiv on Saturday. He said: “I’d been in two minds about coming back because of the advice coming out by the British Embassy, about the amber alert, red alert. A lot of people, a lot of students were waiting for the red alert, and it happened yesterday. “Once that happened, everybody booked their tickets and left as soon as possible.” The 21-year-old from Birmingham said his university, the Dnipro Medical Institute in Dnipro, a city in central Ukraine, had advised students to “get out as soon as you can”. He said around half the students at the university are British. The UK and other Nato countries have urged their citizens to leave as fears grow that Russian president Vladimir Putin could order an invasion in the coming days. Ali said: “I think the main thing that people were getting worried about as well is, because it’s along the Dnieper River, a lot of the people were saying, if Putin wants to suffocate Kyiv, push his warships along that path as well.” The student said he had paid 210 for his one-way flight ticket and thought prices would get much more expensive over the next three days as more people rush out of the country. He said he was hoping to return to Ukraine by June to continue his studies. Ali said Ukrainians’ opinions were split on the likelihood of a Russian incursion, but that the perception that Western media were blowing the crisis out of proportion was changing. He said: “The Ukrainians are generally very laissez-faire as in terms of people, but the last couple of days they’ve started to get worried. And when that happens, alarm bells should be ringing.” Italy’s foreign ministry says Italian nationals in Ukraine should leave now and should not enter the country, amid growing fears of a Russian invasion. “As a precautionary measure, we are asking Italian citizens to leave Ukraine or to postpone travel to Ukraine,” said foreign minister Luigi Di Maio. Di Maio said he has also ordered staff from Italy’s embassy to leave. He added: Italy fully recognises the territorial integrity of Ukraine and the right of all sovereign states to determine their own alliances. We keep a channel of dialogue open with Moscow and we are all working for diplomatic a solution. Joe Biden and his Russian counterpart Vladimir Putin concluded their call regarding the troop buildup around Ukraine, a White House official said on Saturday. The secure call started at 11:04 a.m. Eastern time (4:04pm GMT) and ended more than an hour later at 12:06 pm (5:06pm GMT), the official said. Vladimir Putin said nothing during a phone call with French president, Emmanuel Macron, on Saturday that indicated he was preparing to invade Ukraine, an official in the French presidency said. The official told reporters after Macron and Putin spoke on the phone for nearly 90 minutes: We see no indication in what President Putin says that he is going to go on the offensive. We are nevertheless extremely vigilant and alert to the Russian (military) posture in order to avoid the worst. France would, however, now be recommending that French nationals avoid trips to Ukraine, the official said. The US department of state has issued a statement regarding the conversation between secretary of state, Antony J Blinken, and UK foreign secretary, Elizabeth Truss. Ned Price, the spokesperson, said they spoke about their “acute and shared concerns” that Russia may be considering launching further military aggression against Ukraine in the coming days. Price said: Secretary Blinken emphasised the importance of working with our Nato allies and European partners in the region to impose swift, severe costs on Russia in response to any further military aggression by Russia against Ukraine. They also discussed that international efforts should continue to seek a meaningful dialogue with Russia on mutual security concerns that could lead to a diplomatic resolution. Blinken “reaffirmed” that any decision the US makes in Europe will be in consultation with its allies and partners, Price said. The two also discussed UK-EU negotiations over the implementation of the Northern Ireland Protocol and preserving the gains of the Belfast/Good Friday agreement, Price said. They also talked about the importance of reaching a successful conclusion on talks with Iran on mutual return to full implementation of the joint comprehensive plan of action. Athens has urged Greek citizens in Ukraine to contact embassy officials in Kyiv although it appears to have stopped short of advising them to pull out. Athens’ foreign ministry said in a statement: Greek citizens who are in Ukraine or travelling to the country are advised to keep in contact with the Embassy in Kyiv. Ukraine is home to a large ethnic Greek community that traditionally has lived in the south eastern Donbas region around the city of Mariupol. The minority is estimated at around 100,000 people although Greek officials also put the figure at almost twice that number. Some analysts have suggested that in the event of a Russian invasion, Hellenic navy ships could be dispatched to evacuate the community by sea. Joe Biden and Vladimir Putin are currently talking on the phone. The closely watched call between the US and Russian president on Ukraine comes as the US warns that a Russian invasion of its neighbour may be imminent. The high stakes conversation started at 11:04 am Eastern time (4:04pm GMT), a White House official said. More to follow Here is a quick recap of some of the main developments from today so far: Sincere negotiations are incompatible with an escalation in tensions over Ukraine, the French president, Emmanuel Macron, told Vladimir Putin on Saturday, the Élysée Palace said. Following the French president’s trip to Moscow earlier this week, Macron and Putin discussed ways to move forward on the implementation of the Minsk Agreements as well as conditions for security and stability in Europe. The call lasted close to 90 minutes, the Élysée added. The US defence secretary, Lloyd Austin, has spoken on the phone to his Russian counterpart, Sergey Shoygu, and they discussed Russia’s troop buildup in Crimea and around Ukraine, the Pentagon said. US president, Joe Biden, and Russia’s Vladimir Putin plan to speak by phone later on Saturday after the US and its allies warned Russia could invade Ukraine at any moment. During a call between the US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, and Russian foreign minister, Sergey Lavrov, Blinken warned of “a resolute, massive and united Transatlantic response” to any Russian aggression. Lavrov said the US and EU have ignored Russian proposals on security and accused the US of a “propaganda campaign” about possible Russian aggression. Blinken had earlier said he would speak to his Russian counterpart, the foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, to advise that the US was prepared for either diplomacy or “aggression” and warned of economic sanctions in the event of an invasion. “If President [Vladimir] Putin decides to take military action, we will swiftly impose severe economic sanctions in coordination with allies and partners around the globe,” Blinken said during a trip to Fiji. “We will bolster Ukraine’s ability to defend itself, we will reinforce our allies on the eastern flank of Nato.” More on that here. The US has picked up intelligence Russia is discussing next Wednesday as the target date for starting military action, officials told the New York Times, but they acknowledged it’s possible mentioning a particular date could be part of a Russian disinformation effort. The US State Department ordered non-emergency staff from the US embassy in Kyiv to leave. A small number of diplomats will stay in the capital, some will pull back to Lviv in the west to provide emergency consular services while most will be posted in neighbouring countries. Washington has stressed that it will not be sending US troops to Ukraine in case of a Russian attack, meaning that it would not be able to arrange evacuation plans for its citizens should war break out. Earlier on Saturday, Russia said it was also starting to pull some embassy staff out of Ukraine, citing fears of “possible provocations from the Kyiv regime”. Several thousand Ukrainians rallied in Kyiv on Saturday to show unity amid fears of a Russian invasion, as Ukraine’s leader told people not to panic and pushed back against what he said was a glut of bleak war predictions being reported in the media. Volodymyr Zelenskiy, who attended police drills in southern Kherson region, said a Russian attack could happen at any time, but pushed back against what he called excessive amounts of information about a major looming war. “The best friend of our enemies is panic in our country. And all this information is just provoking panic and can’t help us,” he said. “I can’t agree or disagree with what hasn’t happened yet. So far, there is no full-scale war in Ukraine.” About 150 US troops from the Florida National Guard who are in Ukraine to help train Ukrainian forces are leaving the country as the threat of a Russian invasion increases, two US officials told Reuters. The officials, speaking on condition of anonymity, said the decision was made after the State Department ordered some US embassy staff in Ukraine to leave. British troops helping with training in Ukraine will leave the country this weekend, the armed forces minister James Heappey said as he warned that Russia could launch an attack “at no notice”. Heappey said the small number of UK personnel sent to train Ukrainian troops on anti-tank missiles would be withdrawn, alongside about 100 helping with wider troop training as part of Operation Orbital. Story here. Numerous countries including Germany have urged their citizens to leave Ukraine as tensions rise. That’s all from me for today. Thank you so much for reading along. I’ll now be handing over to my colleague Nicola Slawson. Take care! Slovakia recommended its citizens avoid travel to Ukraine, and is pulling out family members of diplomats at its embassy in Kyiv and a consulate in the western city of Uzhhorod, the foreign ministry said on Saturday. EU and Nato member Slovakia shares a near 100-km (60 mile) border with Ukraine in the east. “The decision is based on an evaluation of the latest shared intelligence information that speaks about further deterioration of the security environment and escalation of tensions,” a ministry spokesman said. Poland, which also has a border with Ukraine, advised citizens against non-essential travel to the country, its ministry of foreign affairs said on Saturday, but has not yet decided to evacuate diplomatic staff or urged citizens to leave the country. “Due to the changing security situation caused by military and political escalation on the part of the Russian Federation, Poland’s ministry of foreign affairs advises against non-essential travel to Ukraine,” the ministry said in a tweet. A spokesperson for the ministry declined to provide any details about potential evacuation plans when approached by Reuters. The French president, Emmanuel Macron, told Vladimir Putin on Saturday that sincere negotiations were incompatible with an escalation in tensions over Ukraine, the Élysée Palace said. Following the French president’s trip to Moscow earlier this week, Macron and Putin discussed ways to move forward on the implementation of the Minsk Agreements as well conditions for security and stability in Europe. The call lasted close to 90 minutes, the Élysée added. The Russian president, Vladimir Putin, and his French counterpart, Emmanuel Macron, have discussed the Ukraine crisis in a telephone call that lasted one hour and 40 minutes on Saturday, Interfax news agency cited the Kremlin as saying. Kremlin spokesperson Dmitry Peskov gave no further details, Reuters reports. Putin received Macron in the Kremlin earlier this week in the first summit Putin has held with a western leader since the Kremlin began massing troops near Ukraine last year. Several thousand Ukrainians rallied in Kyiv on Saturday to show unity amid fears of a Russian invasion, as Ukraine’s leader told people not to panic and pushed back against what he said was a glut of bleak war predictions being reported in the media. Tension has mounted as Russia has built up more than 100,000 troops near Ukraine and carried out large-scale exercises. The US said on Friday an invasion could start at any moment. Russia denies planning to invade. Ukrainians filed through the centre of Kyiv in a column, chanting “Glory to Ukraine” and carrying Ukrainian flags and banners that said “Ukrainians will resist” and “Invaders must die”. Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, who attended police drills in southern Kherson region, said a Russian attack could happen at any time, but pushed back against what he called excessive amounts of information about a major looming war. “The best friend of our enemies is panic in our country. And all this information is just provoking panic and can’t help us,” he said. “I can’t agree or disagree with what hasn’t happened yet. So far, there is no full-scale war in Ukraine.” The US and numerous western governments have urged their citizens to leave Ukraine, and Washington on Saturday said it was ordering most of its embassy staff to leave. “We have to be ready each day. It did not begin yesterday. It began in 2014, so, we are ready and this is why we are here,” Zelenskiy said in a reference to Russia’s annexation of Crimea and backing for an anti-Kyiv separatist insurgency in the east. He voiced frustrations just last month with dire assessments of a war. Such warnings have taken their toll on the economy, piling pressure on the national currency. Joe Biden and Vladimir Putin will speak later on Saturday. Turkey has advised its citizens not to travel to eastern Ukraine. About 150 US troops from the Florida National Guard who are in Ukraine to help train Ukrainian forces are leaving the country as the threat of a Russian invasion increases, two US officials have told Reuters. The officials, speaking on condition of anonymity, said the decision was made after the State Department ordered some US embassy staff in Ukraine to leave. The officials said it was not yet clear where the troops would be repositioned. It was not immediately clear what would happen with the small number of US special operations forces in the country, said one of the officials. “The decision was made out of an abundance of caution,” the official said. Australia, New Zealand, Germany and the Netherlands on Saturday joined countries urging their citizens to leave Ukraine. Washington said on Friday that a Russian invasion, likely beginning with an air assault, could occur at any time. Moscow has repeatedly disputed Washington’s version of events, saying it has massed more than 100,000 troops near the Ukrainian border to maintain its own security against aggression by Nato allies. Swedish nationals should leave Ukraine as soon as possible in light of the “changing security situation”, the government said on Saturday. Up to 300 Swedes are in Ukraine, according to Sweden’s embassy in Kyiv. The US defence secretary Lloyd Austin has spoken on the phone to his Russian counterpart, Sergey Shoygu, and they discussed Russia’s troop buildup in Crimea and around Ukraine, the Pentagon said. US president Joe Biden and Russia’s Vladimir Putin plan to speak by phone later on Saturday after the US and its allies warned Russia could invade Ukraine at any moment. The State Department has been briefing reporters on evacuations from the US embassy in Kyiv. A small number of diplomats will stay in the capital, some will pull back to Lviv in the west to provide emergency consular services while most will be posted in neighbouring countries. “I think prudence requires us to assume to plan for, and prepare for, a worst case scenario and the worst case scenario would obviously involve substantial Russian attacks on the Ukrainian capital,” a senior state department official said. “These developments mean for private American citizens that it isn’t just time to leave Ukraine – it is past time for private citizens to leave Ukraine,” the official added, stressing that the consular staff were no longer in a position to help private citizens leave. “We are not engaged in those activities, because up to this point in time, there have been ample opportunities via normal commercial means” to leave the country, the official said. The official stressed that the embassy was not being shut down entirely and that a core staff of diplomats would stay on in Kyiv, “sufficient to be able to continue working closely with the Ukrainian government to be able to ensure we’ve got the best possible information for our senior leaders and the president about what’s happening broadly in society, and what the Ukrainian government is telling us about how the situation is unfolding”. The official acknowledged stresses in the relationship with the Ukrainian government which has consistently complained about US alarmism but said Ukrainian officials had been “very professional”. “The Ukrainians understand why we are taking these steps even if all of them don’t necessarily agree with our threat assessment.” The United States government used its first trip to the South Pacific by a secretary of state in almost 40 years to warn Russia to back off Ukraine, Lice Movono reports from Nadi. Antony Blinken told reporters in Fiji he would speak to his Russian counterpart, the foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, to advise that the US was prepared for either diplomacy or “aggression” and warned of economic sanctions in the event of an invasion. “If President [Vladimir] Putin decides to take military action, we will swiftly impose severe economic sanctions in coordination with allies and partners around the globe,” Blinken said. “We will bolster Ukraine’s ability to defend itself, we will reinforce our allies on the eastern flank of Nato.” Blinken also made an apparent swipe at China, whose influence has grown in the Pacific region in the past few decades and pushed for a “a free and open Indo-Pacific”. “Pacific Islanders are proud. They believe that no matter their size, they alone should be able to choose their path, whether that’s how they manage their natural resources, or who they partner with. We share that belief. And we think the world is a more secure and prosperous place when core international principles like that are respected.” Read more here: Ukraine: Blinken warns Russia US is prepared for ‘aggression’ As has been the case all along, the urgent threat assessments from the US do not necessarily go down well in Kyiv, Shaun Walker reports from the city. President Volodymyr Zelenskiy had this to say today, the Ukrainskaya Pravda news site reports: I think there’s too much out there about a full-scale war from Russia, and people are even naming dates. The best friend for our enemies is panic in our country, and all this information only creates panic, it doesn’t help us. We should be ready on any day. We understand the risks, we understand they exist. If you or anyone else has extra information about the 100% invasion of Russia starting on the 16th, please, give it it to us. In a reissued travel advisory, the United States on Saturday ordered all non-emergency Kyiv embassy staff to leave because of the threat of Russia invading Ukraine. The advisory also repeated an earlier call by US president Joe Biden for Americans to leave the country immediately. The State Department has “ordered the departure of most US direct hire employees from Embassy Kyiv due to the continued threat of Russian military action,” it said in the updated travel advisory. “The Department of State will suspend consular services at the US Embassy in Kyiv,” it said, adding that a small consular presence would be maintained in Lviv in western Ukraine to handle emergencies. Washington has stressed that it will not be sending US troops to Ukraine in case of a Russian attack, meaning that it would not be able to arrange evacuation plans for its citizens should war break out. Earlier on Saturday, Russia said it was also starting to pull some embassy staff out of Ukraine, citing fears of “possible provocations from the Kyiv regime”. The full text reads: Ukraine – Level 4: Do Not Travel Do not travel to Ukraine due to the increased threats of Russian military action and Covid-19; those in Ukraine should depart immediately via commercial or private means. If remaining in Ukraine, exercise increased caution due to crime, civil unrest, and potential combat operations should Russia take military action. Some areas have increased risk. Read the entire Travel Advisory. On February 12, 2022, the Department of State ordered the departure of most US direct hire employees from Embassy Kyiv due to the continued threat of Russian military action. US citizens should not travel to Ukraine, and those in Ukraine should depart immediately using commercial or other privately available transportation options. The Department previously authorized the voluntary departure of US direct hire employees and ordered the departure of eligible family members on January 23, 2022. As of Sunday, February 13, 2022, the Department of State will suspend consular services at the US Embassy in Kyiv. The Embassy will maintain a small consular presence in Lviv, Ukraine to handle emergencies, but will not be able to provide passport, visa or routine consular services. US citizens may seek these services at U.S. Embassies in neighboring countries. US citizens seeking emergency assistance in Ukraine should complete this online form and the State Department will respond. US citizens who decide to remain in Ukraine and who do not depart immediately as advised, should also complete this online form so that we may better communicate with you. There are continued reports of a Russian military build-up on the border with Ukraine, indicating potential for significant military action against Ukraine. The security conditions, particularly along Ukraine’s borders, in Russia-occupied Crimea, and in Russia-controlled eastern Ukraine, are unpredictable and can deteriorate with little notice. Demonstrations, which have turned violent at times, regularly occur throughout Ukraine, including in Kyiv. US citizens in Ukraine should be aware that the US government will not be able to evacuate US citizens in the event of Russian military action anywhere in Ukraine. Military action may commence at any time and without warning and would also severely impact the US Embassy’s ability to provide consular services, including assistance to US citizens in departing Ukraine. For more information, please review what the US government can and cannot do to assist you in a crisis overseas. Jordan has called on its nationals to leave Ukraine in light of the “current developments”, the foreign ministry said in a statement on Saturday. It also called on citizens to postpone any plans to visit the country. During the call between US secretary of state Antony Blinken and Russian foreign minister Sergey Lavrov, Blinken warned of “a resolute, massive and united Transatlantic response” to any Russian aggression. Lavrov said the US and EU have ignored Russian proposals on security and accused the US of a “propaganda campaign” about possible Russian aggression. After the call, US state department spokesperson Ned Price said: Secretary of State Antony J. Blinken spoke with Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov today by phone to discuss acute and shared concerns that Russia may be considering launching further military aggression against Ukraine in the coming days. The Secretary made clear that a diplomatic path to resolving the crisis remained open, but it would require Moscow to deescalate and engage in good-faith discussions. He reiterated that should Moscow pursue the path of aggression and further invade Ukraine, it would result in a resolute, massive, and united Transatlantic response. The US has picked up intelligence Russia is discussing next Wednesday as the target date for starting military action, officials told the New York Times, but they acknowledged it’s possible mentioning a particular date could be part of a Russian disinformation effort. More details from the Times here: “We continue to see signs of Russian escalation, including new forces arriving at the Ukrainian border,” Jake Sullivan, the president’s national security adviser, told reporters, adding that an invasion could begin “during the Olympics,” which are scheduled to end on 20 February. US officials do not know whether Mr. Putin has decided to invade, Mr. Sullivan insisted. “We are ready either way,” he said. “Whatever happens next, the west is more united than it has been in years.” ... The combination of the Russian troop movements and the new information about a possible date helped to trigger a flurry of diplomatic activity and public warnings by the Nato allies on Friday. The Kremlin said Mr. Putin would also speak again on Saturday with President Emmanuel Macron of France. The Saudi embassy in Ukraine has urged citizens to quickly contact the embassy to facilitate their departure. In a Twitter post, translated by Google, the embassy said: “The Kingdom’s embassy in Ukraine calls on all citizens to postpone their travel to Ukraine at the present time, and all citizens present in Ukraine should quickly communicate with the embassy ... to facilitate their immediate departure”. It follows a cascade of embassies – from the UK to Lithuania to the Netherlands – warning their citizens to assess whether to flee the country. Russian foreign minister, Sergey Lavrov, has aid the US and EU have ignored Russian proposals on security while speaking to US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, over the phone, Reuters reports. Lavrov also accused the US of a “propaganda campaign” about possible Russian aggression. It continues a line of attack that has seen Russia accuse the US of hysteria – and of using propaganda to seek cover for Ukrainian forces to attack Russian-backed separatists in the country’s east. Before the call, Blinken said” “We’re in the window when a Russian invasion can start at any time if president Putin so decides.” US President Joe Biden and Russian President Vladimir Putin will speak later today. After the Blinken-Lavrov call, US state department spokesperson Ned Price said: Secretary of State Antony J. Blinken spoke with Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov today by phone to discuss acute and shared concerns that Russia may be considering launching further military aggression against Ukraine in the coming days. The Secretary made clear that a diplomatic path to resolving the crisis remained open, but it would require Moscow to deescalate and engage in good-faith discussions. He reiterated that should Moscow pursue the path of aggression and further invade Ukraine, it would result in a resolute, massive, and united Transatlantic response. Russian tensions threaten UK food suppliers, the president of the UK’s National Farmers’ Union (NFU) has warned. Minette Batters, NFU president, told the Independent Russia’s two-month block on exports of ammonium nitrate – from 2 February to 1 April – will impact British agriculture. The chemical is crucial for boosting yields such as from wheat and cotton crops. “I cannot understand why you would not treat food security as importantly as defence,” Batters said. “The quickest way to create a serious issue [for a country] is if you have food shortages.” The upshot is that global fertiliser costs are surging – likely to compound the impacts of the UK’s costs of living crisis as inflation, at 5.4%, is already the highest for almost 30 years. “Last year I paid under £300 a tonne for nitrogen fertilizer, this year, it’s over £700 a tonne,” Batters said. “[Russia and Ukraine] know exactly how much the world is reliant on them for natural gas and fertilizer.” The Dutch foreign minister Wopke Hoekstra has called on Dutch citizens to leave Ukraine as soon as possible due to the security situation there and issued a notice advising against travelling to the country. This report is from Reuters. Taiwan is closely watching the situation in the narrow strait that separates it from China and raising its preparedness in response to what is happening with Ukraine, the government said on Saturday, though it added the two cases were very different. China, which claims Taiwan as its own territory, has stepped up military activity near the self-governing island over the past two years, though Taiwan has reported no unusual manoeuvres by Chinese forces in recent days as tensions over Ukraine have soared. As Western nations warn a war in Ukraine could ignite at any moment, Taiwan’s presidential office said the military continues to strengthen its surveillance operations, adding that regional peace and stability is “the shared responsibility of all parties”. “All military units continue to pay close attention to the situation in Ukraine and movements in the Taiwan Strait, continue to strengthen joint intelligence and surveillance, and gradually increase the level of combat readiness in response to various signs and threats to effectively respond to various situations,” it added. Taiwan complains most frequently about China’s air force flying into its air defence zone, part of what Taipei says is a pattern of harassment by Beijing. Taiwan last month reported the largest incursion since October by China’s air force, with the island’s defence ministry saying Taiwanese fighters scrambled to warn away 39 aircraft. Those flights have continued on an almost daily basis but with far fewer aircraft: Taiwan reported just five were involved in a mission on Saturday. However, the presidential office added that the situation in the Taiwan Strait was “fundamentally different” from the situation in Ukraine, and called on people not to be misled by false information. It said fake information had been circulating using the situation in Ukraine to affect morale in Taiwan, though gave no details. Speaking to Indian news channel CNN-News18 on Friday, Taiwan foreign minister Joseph Wu said they were watching very carefully whether China was going to take advantage of a West distracted by Ukraine to attack the island. However with China in the midst of hosting the Winter Olympics, it may not want any “major events” to divert attention from that, he added. “It’s going to be very hard to say that after the Winter Olympics are over whether Russia is going to launch at attack against Ukraine or whether China is going to think about using its military force against Taiwan,” Wu said. Taiwan president Tsai Ing-wen last month set up a Ukraine working group under the National Security Council to watch developments and the possible impact on Taiwan’s security. Tsai has expressed “empathy” for Ukraine’s situation due to the military threat the island faces from China. US president Joe Biden and his Russian counterpart Vladimir Putin will speak on Saturday as Western nations warned that a war in Ukraine could ignite at any moment. The US warned on Friday of the “very distinct possibility” of a Russian invasion of Ukraine in the next few days and told all remaining Americans to leave the country in the next 48 hours. On Saturday, Biden will speak with Putin by phone. Putin requested the telephone call between the leaders to take place on Monday, a White House official said, but Biden wanted to conduct it sooner as Washington detailed increasingly vivid accounts of a possible attack on Ukraine. More here: Biden and Putin to speak as US warns Russia could attack Ukraine ‘any day’ Lithuania said on Saturday its nationals in Ukraine should “assess whether continued presence is necessary”. The Lithuanian embassy in Ukraine would continue to perform its duties, the foreign ministry added in a statement. Berlin has closed its Donetsk consulate and asked German nationals to leave Ukraine unless their presence in the country is “absolutely necessary”, Deutsche Welle reports. Germany’s Foreign Ministry warned that a military conflict between Russia and Ukraine “cannot be excluded” and said it was closing its consulate in Donetsk. “If you are currently in Ukraine, make sure that your presence is absolutely necessary. If it is not, leave the country shortly,” it said on Saturday. This is from Der Spiegel’s Matthias Gebauer As tensions soar, here is a visual guide to what we know about Putin’s recent troop deployments and what his options are. Explainer: Russia-Ukraine crisis: where are Putin’s troops and what are his options? Earlier, we reported on the armed forces minister James Heappey’s confirmation that British troops helping with training in Ukraine will be leaving the country this weekend. Heappey said of the UK personnel sent to train Ukrainians on the anti-tank missiles supplied by Britain: All of them will be withdrawn. There will be no British troops in Ukraine if there is to be a conflict there. He added to BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: They will be leaving over the course of the weekend. The Foreign Office issued guidance on Friday advising British citizens in Ukraine to leave while commercial means are still available, amid increasing concern of an invasion by Russia. The US warned on Friday of the “very distinct possibility” of a Russian invasion of Ukraine in the next few days and told all remaining Americans to leave the country in the next 48 hours. On Saturday, President Joe Biden will speak with Vladimir Putin by phone. Before the discussion, Australia and New Zealand became the latest countries to urge their citizens to leave Ukraine as soon as possible, joining Britain, Japan, Latvia, Norway and the Netherlands. Israel said it was evacuating relatives of embassy staff. More here: UK troops sent to help train Ukrainian army to leave country this weekend The United States has decided to withdraw US staff at the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) from Ukraine immediately, two diplomatic sources told Reuters on Saturday, amid fears of a possible Russian invasion. The OSCE did not respond to a Reuters request for comment. Tensions have been mounting for weeks during a Russian military buildup near Ukraine and a surge of military activity that has fuelled fears that Russia could invade. Russia denies such plans. The OSCE conducts operations in Ukraine including a civilian monitoring mission in the Russian-backed self-proclaimed separatist republics in the country’s east where a war that erupted in 2014 has killed more than 14,000 people. One of the sources, who spoke on condition of anonymity, told Reuters the US decision to withdraw its OSCE members was effective immediately and that they expected other nations to make similar decisions soon. Two sources told Reuters that Britain had decided to move its members of the OSCE from the rebel-held regions of Ukraine to the government-controlled area. The United States and its allies have urged their citizens to leave Ukraine right away to avoid an invasion, including a possible air assault, warning an attack could occur at any time. Russia has accused Western nations of spreading lies and “hysteria”. Sky News reports that foreign ministry spokeswoman Maria Zakharova said in a post on Telegram: The hysteria of the White House is indicative as never before. The Anglo-Saxons need a war. At any price. Provocations, misinformation and threats are a favourite method of solving their own problems. The whole world is watching as militarism and imperial ambitions expose themselves. And the propaganda team led by Bloomberg serves all this. Britons are being urged to flee Ukraine immediately because Russia has amassed the firepower to attack “at no notice”, as diplomatic efforts to avert war continue. Nato allies were ordering citizens to leave while fears grew that Russian president Vladimir Putin could order an invasion in the coming days. UK nationals, thought to number in the low thousands, are being told by the Foreign Office to “leave now while commercial means are still available”. Armed forces minister James Heappey said with the Kremlin having amassed weaponry and an estimated 130,000 troops on Ukraine’s border, Russia could attack “very, very quickly”. Unlike when the Taliban seized Kabul, Heappey stressed that the RAF would not be carrying out evacuations in the event of war in Ukraine, which is not a Nato member. “We are now confident that the artillery systems, the missile systems and the combat air are all in place that would allow Russia to launch - at no notice - an attack on Ukraine,” he told BBC Breakfast. He went on: And on that basis I think it is our responsibility to share with UK citizens our view that they should leave the country immediately while commercial means are still available. There will be a big difference between what they may have seen on their TV screens in Afghanistan over the summer and what may happen over the next week or so and that is that the Royal Air Force will not be in a position to go in and to fly people out so they need to leave now by commercial means or drive out of Ukraine into a neighbouring country. British ambassador to Ukraine Melinda Simmons was remaining with a “core team” in Kyiv, but some embassy staff and their families were being withdrawn. Heappey said it was necessary to maintain a diplomatic presence while a possibility of talking down tensions remains. “That’s a brave thing for our diplomats to want to do, given that there will effectively be no notice now, if Putin decides to go, everything is in place for him to be launching strikes on Ukraine within minutes,” he told Times Radio, adding: Because diplomacy needs to be given a chance it is an infinitely better outcome than what could be just the most catastrophic waste of life in the biggest war that we’ve seen in Europe since 1945. The Foreign Office’s order was issued as intelligence and advice from experts on the ground suggested an increased threat level, with an invasion at some point deemed highly likely, the PA news agency understood. US president Joe Biden and Putin will discuss the crisis by phone on Saturday, as the Pentagon orders an extra 3,000 troops to Poland to support allies. The UK defence secretary Ben Wallace said an invasion could come “at any time”, while US national security adviser Jake Sullivan said an attack before the end of the Winter Olympics on 20 February is a “credible prospect”. Western leaders have threatened Moscow with a damaging package of sanctions in the event of a further incursion into Ukrainian soil. Heappey rejected a call from Ukrainian ambassador Vadym Prystaiko for Britain to send combat troops to Ukraine to deter an attack. “Putin and his colleagues would very much like to be able to say is what they may do is a consequence of Western aggression in Ukraine,” he told BBC Breakfast. “So it’s very important to us, to everybody frankly involved, that we’re very clear we won’t play an active part in Ukraine.” The UK personnel sent to train Ukrainians to use British-supplied anti-tank missiles will be “leaving over the course of the weekend”, Heappey told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. Polish prime minister Mateusz Morawiecki, who met Boris Johnson in Warsaw this week, urged Europe to go further in applying financial pressure on Moscow. “Faced with a growing Russian threat, European governments have largely reacted passively. Leaders have lacked the courage or determination to cut business ties with the Kremlin,” he wrote in the Daily Telegraph. “The noose is tightening around Europe’s neck, not Moscow’s.” Good morning. The United States has ordered most of its embassy staff to leave Ukraine amid rising tensions with Russia. Writing on Twitter on Saturday, the embassy said the US State Department has ordered non-emergency US embassy staff to leave Ukraine: Despite the reduction in diplomatic staff, the core embassy team, our dedicated Ukrainian colleagues, and @StateDept and U.S. personnel around the world will continue relentless diplomatic and assistance efforts in support of Ukraine’s security, democracy, and prosperity. Sky News reports that as of Sunday, consular services in Kyiv will be suspended and the embassy will maintain a small consular presence in Lviv, Ukraine, to handle emergencies, according to the Department of State. Routine services including the provision of visas and passports will no longer be available. Earlier, the Russian foreign ministry said it had decided to “optimise” its staff numbers in Ukraine. It did not specify whether that meant reducing the number of employees in Ukraine but said the embassy and consulates continued to perform their key functions. Moscow fears “provocations” by Kyiv or another party, a spokeswoman said. There are concerns that Russia evacuating its own staff could signal that it plans to attack Ukraine. The Russian president Vladimir Putin and US president Joe Biden are due speak on the phone later today. I will be bringing you all the latest developments on the situation in Ukraine for the next few hours. Please don’t hesitate to contact me if you have any thoughts to share: Email: lucy.campbell@theguardian.com Twitter: @lucy_campbell_