1) Will candid Conte repeat Chelsea trick? Antonio Conte returns to the Etihad, a stadium that helped announce him to English football. Chelsea’s 3-1 defeat of Manchester City in December 2016 came midway through the 13-match winning run that seized control of that title race. Like Conte, Pep Guardiola was in his first Premier League season, and his team had no answer to Chelsea’s vigour and power. More than five years on and Guardiola is master of all he surveys, part of the furniture, commanding a bespoke, multifunctional squad. Conte has gained a reputation for blowing up and blowing out when all is not to his satisfaction. His Sky Italia interview this week was explicit in its opinion of Tottenham’s January transfer window. Conte taking on Guardiola in a battle between two of the game’s finest coaches should be an enticing prospect, but the Italian does not appear to believe his squad is capable of making it a contest. JB Manchester City v Tottenham, Saturday 5.30pm 2) Arsenal out to avenge sorry opener The visit of Brentford to the Emirates gives Arsenal a chance to show how much things have changed since the opening day of the season, when Mikel Arteta apologised to fans following a 2-0 defeat. The side that Arteta picks on Saturday will be very different to the one that played back in August, not least because Bernd Leno is no longer first-choice goalkeeper, Callum Chambers has been sold and Pablo Marí and Folarin Balogun have left on loan. Aside from the quality that has been added since, Arsenal seem to have developed a grittiness that has served them well in recent weeks. With Brentford no longer as buoyant, this is a prime opportunity for Arsenal to take a step closer to Champions League qualification, a possibility that seemed far-fetched a few months ago. PD Arsenal v Brentford, Saturday 3pm 3) Will Chelsea let crown slip at Palace? Back from Abu Dhabi, Chelsea’s fans will doubtless celebrate their team’s new status as world champions, but questions remain over the two goalscorers against Palmeiras, Romelu Lukaku and Kai Havertz.. Lukaku’s header exhibited a quality of finishing that has been lacking since his return to England. Havertz, so calm with his deciding penalty, continues to be a man for the big occasion while inconsistent during the lower tariff assignments. Mason Mount will be missing with an ankle injury sustained at the Club World Cup so Thomas Tuchel needs more from Havertz, Timo Werner, Hakim Ziyech and Christian Pulisic in a forward line packed with talent but short on magic. Palace, without a league win in 2022, may still be dangerous opponents, even if they have lost their last three matches to Chelsea, conceding 11 goals and scoring just one. JB Crystal Palace v Chelsea, Saturday 3pm 4) Gerrard seeks Villa midfield spark Steven Gerrard has lost more matches than he has won as Aston Villa manager. There were redeeming qualities in the defeats to Manchester City, Liverpool and Chelsea, but nothing to admire in last week’s awful performance at Newcastle. The centre-backs performed competently but their attackers were hardly involved, principally because Villa’s midfield allowed Jonjo Shelvey and Joelinton to run the show. That is damning of John McGinn and Douglas Luiz and helps explain why Gerrard was so keen to sign Brighton’s Yves Bissouma in January. Reinforcements will have to wait, so Gerrard needs to find another way to make his team consistently solid and dangerous. There should be a big improvement this weekend, especially as Watford at home is about as good a fixture as a team can get in the Premier League. PD Aston Villa v Watford, Saturday 3pm 5) Allan and Van de Beek can rescue Everton What does Allan really make of life at Everton? Rather than playing in sun-drenched Naples and competing near the top of Serie A, he finds himself on wintry Merseyside, teetering on the edge of a relegation scrap. The Carlo Ancelotti signing was asked to sit and protect the back four under the now departed Rafael Benítez, with few opportunities to attack. He is playing under his third Everton manager in Frank Lampard, and the arrival of Donny van de Beek may be just the tonic. Allan has been far from consistent this season, like the rest of the team, but the pair impressed in midfield during last weekend’s 3-0 dismissal of Leeds. Newcastle sit just a point behind 16th-placed Everton and Southampton have lost once in 10 matches. Lampard and his men need a result at St Mary’s; Allan and Van de Beek achieving midfield harmony may go a long way to determining their fortunes. LM Southampton v Everton, Saturday 3pm 6) Time for Howe to unleash Guimarães? Eddie Howe’s attempt to guide Newcastle to a fourth victory in a row has been complicated by injury to Kieran Trippier and possibly also to Javier Manquillo. The manager will be forced to change a winning lineup at least a little but the most interesting alteration may be voluntary: Bruno Guimarães has yet to start since joining in January. Newcastle’s other midfielders have responded to his arrival by improving their own performances but this weekend could be the ideal time to start the Brazilian as the visitors to West Ham attempt to subdue Declan Rice and Tomas Soucek. PD West Ham v Newcastle, Saturday 12.30pm 7) James can show Rangnick what he’s missing At Elland Road, Daniel James takes on the club that sold him in August a couple of weeks after he had played his part in Manchester United’s 5-1 destruction of Leeds on the season’s opening weekend. James’s two goals against Aston Villa in last week’s 3-3 draw were reminders what an effective player he can be. Manchester United received £25m for him but, despite their raft of attacking talent, appear to lack a player of his pace on the counter, even if Anthony Elanga has started to fulfil that role. James may not have the star quality of those who remain at Old Trafford but he is prepared to follow his manager’s instructions to the letter. Ralf Rangnick, bequeathed a group of soloists, might have found good use for a Welshman willing to give everything for the collective. JB Leeds v Manchester United, Sunday 2pm 8) Klopp can count on squad against Canaries With Liverpool facing two league matches in four days on the back of a gruelling Champions League encounter at San Siro, Jürgen Klopp is likely to showcase his new squad depth. Klopp has hailed Mohamed Salah and Sadio Mané as “forces of nature” and said they have recovered quickly from the Africa Cup of Nations exertions but Salah, in particular, looked tired against Internazionale, even if he scored his customary goal. To preserve his African stars for even bigger matches ahead, Klopp could afford to give Salah and Mané a rest this weekend, even if Diogo Jota is unavailable and the game against Norwich is no gimme. PD Liverpool v Norwich, Saturday 3pm 9) Burnley need more than draws Before last weekend’s 2-0 victory at Watford and Tuesday’s defeat by Manchester United, Brighton recorded three consecutive 1-1 draws in the Premier League. Burnley, before losing to Liverpool last week, drew three matches in succession. No one can match Brighton’s appetite for a draw; they have 12 this season, compared with 11 for Southampton, Crystal Palace and – that’s right – Burnley. A point isn’t really good enough for Sean Dyche and the Clarets. They sit bottom, seven points behind 17th-placed Newcastle and still with one league victory to their name. On the plus side, Wout Weghorst’s link-up play has been a positive since his transfer-window arrival, and Dyche expects the Dutchman to feature against Brighton despite picking up an injury last weekend. Burnley are unbeaten in their past five league visits to Brighton. Four of those were draws and eight of the past 12 league meetings have ended level. The smart money is on more of the same. LM Brighton v Burnley, Saturday 3pm 10) Rodgers should look to Lage for lift There was an inevitability to West Ham’s late equaliser at Leicester. A set piece and injury time make a likely combination for the Foxes to concede from and Craig Dawson’s shirt sleeve delivered, such has become the soft underbelly of Brendan Rodgers’ defence. That Rodgers is no disciple of Giovanni Trapattoni-style catenaccio is no secret, the question is whether his problems organising a defence are down to his idealism or to incompetence. Pressure is beginning to grow on an Ulsterman who was very recently linked with vacancies at Tottenham and Manchester United. A keen note-taker during matches, perhaps his perpetual journey of self-improvement might take in watching the practices of Bruno Lage, his opposite number on Sunday. Wolves, who don’t score many and yet don’t concede many, are in the type of position Leicester would have expected to be before the season. JB Wolves v Leicester, Sunday 4.30pmDominic Raab has announced the creation of 4,000 new prison places in England and Wales, as the government plans for an increase of almost 25% that could take the prison population to an all-time high. There were 79,765 prisoners in England and Wales in the week ending 11 February, according to Ministry of Justice figures, while the maximum capacity in the system was 81,368. The latest announcement of 4,000 new places, which will include extending or refurbishing 16 prisons, is part of a plan to provide 20,000 “innovative” new prison places by the mid-2020s. If all these were taken up, it would push the prison population to its highest ever level, above 100,000. The previous peak was 88,000 in November 2011. Prisons being extended or refurbished as part of the new announcement include Birmingham, Liverpool and Norwich. Projects have already been completed at four other prisons, including Feltham and Aylesbury. The Ministry of Justice is also planning to build six new prisons – with the department stressing the benefits for the local economy in terms of job creation. Raab, the justice secretary, said: “Our prison-building programme will deliver an extra 20,000 prison places by the mid-2020s to punish offenders, deter crime and protect the public. “We are also overhauling the prison regime, using prison design, in-cell technology, abstinence-based drug rehabilitation and work to drive down re-offending.” But the Liberal Democrat home affairs spokesperson, Alistair Carmichael, said the drive to build new prison places was an admission of failure. “The UK already has more people in prison than any other country in western Europe, and now the government is spending an extra £4bn because crime is rising,” he said. Peter Dawson, director of the Prison Reform Trust, said: “Endlessly making the same announcement about building new prison spaces is not going to solve the chronic failure of our prison system. For 30 years overcrowding and the continued use of prisons built in the 19th century have made a mockery of promises of reform. Nothing in the government’s plans changes that.” The government was censured by the Statistics Authority earlier this month, for misleadingly claiming that crime has been falling. Boris Johnson and Priti Patel, the home secretary, had both said crime had fallen by 14%. The figures refer to the period September 2019 to September 2021, but exclude fraud and computer misuse. Once these are included, crime actually increased over the period.A 24-acre fake lagoon constructed in the middle of the California desert will be at the heart of a new Disney-branded planned community, the company announced this week. Rancho Mirage, California, a city in the Coachella Valley not far from Palm Springs, will be the site of Disney’s first “Storyliving” community, the company said in a press release. The new developments will be staffed with “Disney Cast Members” and offer Disney entertainment and activities, with the goal of creating “neighborhoods that are infused with the company’s special brand of magic”, the company said. Some neighborhoods will be designated as senior living communities for people over the age of 55. Plans at the site, chosen in part because Walt Disney himself owned vacation properties in the area, include a private waterfront club and private beach access for members, as well as some paid public access to the man-made beach. Storyliving is not Disney’s first attempt to translate the popularity of its theme parks and vacation resorts into a model for daily life. In the mid-1990s, the company developed Celebration, Florida, a community at the border of its Disney World resort, known for its rigid small-town Americana aesthetic and pre-scheduled fake snow. Celebration has since dealt with challenges, including the foreclosure crisis, a 2016 lawsuit by some residents over mold, leaks, and other overdue repairs, and the high-profile trial of a man accused of murdering his wife, three children, and their family dog inside their Celebration home in 2020. The town is no longer owned by Disney. While Rancho Mirage’s mayor said the Disney development was a “fabulous fit” and the project is estimated to bring the city more than $8m per year, an environmental expert said that constructing a giant lagoon in the middle of a parched desert landscape raised some obvious issues. “Having a large lake – 24 acres is big – in a very hot desert, in a state where we do not have a lot of extra water to go around, doesn’t make sense environmentally,” said Nicola Ulibarri, who researches water management at the University of California, Irvine. “In California, pretty much every drop of water is spoken for,” she said. “If you have water that is sitting in a lake and evaporating, it’s not going to provide drinking water for people, it’s not going down to a river where it’s providing a habitat for fish.” If the lagoon were constructed with recycled graywater, that would mitigate some of the environmental impact, she said. In a press release, Disney said it would build the lagoon “sustainably” and “with low water consumption and using a minimum amount of additives and energy”. The environmental impact report for the project, which was approved before Disney announced its involvement, said the development would reduce its “potential to substantially decrease groundwater supplies” by using recycled water and other strategies, The Desert Sun reported. The Coachella Valley is already the site of extensive water-intensive developments like golf courses and lush green retirement communities, Ulibarri said. The “Storyliving” announcement also raised questions of “equity,” since the Disney “Cotino” development is likely to be expensive and targeted towards higher-income retirees. “Not too far away from the Coachella Valley is the Salton Sea, which historically was a big lakefront resort. Now it’s evaporating more and more every year, and is creating huge health problems for the lower-income communities in that area,” she said. Dust from the evaporating Salton Sea is a major problem for local residents, and children in who live near the sea have higher rates of asthma. “You’re creating this wonderful amenity for this wealthy group, turning your back on the Salton Sea and all the problems it’s created there,” Ulibarri said. Twitter users have already embraced the “Storyliving” brand as a source of inspiration for jokes, many focused on an imagined dystopian future of the Disney community. Other participants in the online joke-workshop focused on how Disney might manage the problems of a residential neighborhood.Donald Trump and two of his children have been ordered by a New York judge to appear for a deposition within the next three weeks, as part of the billowing investigation over alleged fraud in the valuation of assets belonging to his family business. The ruling by Judge Arthur Engoron to force Trump and his two eldest children – Donald Jr and Ivanka – to comply with subpoenas amounts to a sharp escalation of the legal perils that are rapidly tightening around the former president. The family has been striving to fend off demands for documents, information and testimony from the New York state attorney general, Letitia James. She is investigating whether the Trump Organization used “fraudulent or misleading” valuations of its assets to attract loans and reduce its tax burden. Following a two-hour hearing on Thursday, Engoron delivered a blunt rebuttal to arguments put forward by Trump lawyers that the former president should not be subjected to questioning in the civil case because the information could be used against him in criminal proceedings that are running in parallel. The judge went so far as to say that had James not subpoenaed them, it would have been “a blatant dereliction of duty”. Responding to the news, James said that it showed that “no one will be permitted to stand in the way of the pursuit of justice, no matter how powerful they are”. Under the judge’s ruling, Trump must now testify within 21 days and hand over “documents and information” within 14 days. The development is the second severe blow for the former president in the space of a week. On Monday, it was revealed that the longtime accounting firm for the Trump Organization, Mazars USA, had broken off ties with the family business, saying that it could no longer stand by 10 years of annual financial statements that it had prepared for the group. The accountants said that they had reviewed the “totality of the circumstances” and reached the conclusion that “we are not able to provide any new work product” to the Trumps. Now Trump and his two children must face questioning by James, New York state’s top prosecutor who has relentlessly pursued alleged irregularities in the family’s finances. The event is likely to present the former president with a legal and political conundrum. Should he answer James’s piercing questions, he risks potentially implicating himself in a criminal investigation into Trump accounts that is being conducted by James in tandem with the Manhattan district attorney Alvin Bragg. If he pleads the fifth amendment and remains silent that could also be difficult for him. Responding to the ruling in a statement on Thursday, Trump accused James’ office of “doing everything within their corrupt discretion to interfere with my business relationships and with the political process”. Trump called the ruling “a continuation of the greatest witch-hunt in history and remember, I can’t get a fair hearing in New York because of the hatred of me by judges and the judiciary. It is not possible”. In legal arguments before Engoron delivered his decision, lawyers for Trump argued that he could not feasibly plead the fifth without hurting his potential criminal defense. “If he goes in and follows my advice, which will be you cannot answer these questions without … immunity because that’s what the law provides, and take the fifth amendment, that’ll be on every front page in the newspaper in the world. And how can I possibly pick a jury in that case?” said Ronald Fischetti, Trump’s criminal defense lawyer. Politically, the deposition is also likely to be awkward. In the past, Trump has poured scorn on those who remain silent under questioning. During his 2016 presidential election campaign, he ridiculed the practice, saying “the mob takes the fifth. If you’re innocent, why are you taking the fifth amendment?” Michael Cohen, an ex-vice president of the Trump Organization, said the issue raised problems for his former boss. “Let’s not forget Trump’s declaration that only guilty people plead the fifth. I wonder if that applies to him and his children as and when they remain silent,” Cohen told the Guardian in response to Engoron’s ruling. The judge referred to Cohen in his decision, pointing out that it was the testimony of Trump’s former personal lawyer before the House oversight committee in February 2019, in which Cohen accused Trump of “cooking the books”, that triggered the James investigation in the first place. Cohen, who spent three years in prison himself for fraud and other offences, told the Guardian that it was “only in Trump’s delusional world that law enforcement should not be permitted to depose him and members of his family. Their concerns stem from their inability to tell the truth and risk additional perjury charges.” Trump has consistently denounced the investigation by James, who is a Democrat, as a partisan witch-hunt. On Tuesday he slammed the investigation yet again, calling it a “sham investigation of a great company that has done a spectacular job for New York and beyond”. Such an aggressive posture has worked for Trump over the years in staring down many of the legal challenges brought against him. But in this case, Thursday’s ruling is likely to put new wind into the sails of the James investigation and make an easy get-out clause less likely. The James investigation, combined with its criminal Manhattan equivalent, are now top of the league of a plethora of legal troubles facing the former occupant of the White House. A Guardian tally this month found that Trump was facing a total of 19 legal challenges, six of which involve alleged financial irregularities. The Associated Press contributed reportingThe British government has handpicked former Australian foreign minister Alexander Downer to review the country’s border force, months after he urged the UK to adopt Australia’s controversial boat turn-back policy. British home secretary Priti Patel announced Downer, a key proponent of Australia’s Pacific Solution, would review the UK Border Force and examine the agency’s “structure, powers, funding and priorities”. Unions in Britain were quick to condemn the appointment, which they described as “deeply concerning”, citing Downer’s role in Australia’s “inhumane” immigration policies. Asylum seekers arrived in the UK in record numbers last year, fleeing persecution by boat across the English Channel. Many say they have no alternative but to make the hours-long journey across the Channel because there are no alternative “safe and legal routes”, a criticism also aired by the French president Emmanuel Macron. Both Patel and Downer have advocated for harsher policies as a deterrent. Patel has suggested boats be “pushed back” to the French coast, a proposal that Downer supported in a piece for the Daily Mail in September, boasting of Australia’s policy of sending boats back to Indonesia. Downer said the suggestion people were fleeing France was “ridiculous”, saying his recent holiday experience in Dordogne which was “very civilised”. The border force review is expected to take several months to complete. “The public rightly expects this work to be carried out to the highest possible standard, which is why I have ordered this review of Border Force to identify ways in which it can keep improving its operations,” Patel said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Recent freedom of information data shows two-thirds of UK asylum seekers arriving by small boat after crossing the Channel were suffering from hypothermia. Hundreds more had petrol or saltwater burns sustained on the journey. The Public and Commercial Services Union (PCS), which covers Border Force staff, criticised the appointment of Downer as “deeply concerning”, according to UK media. “He was a prime architect of Australia’s inhumane immigration policy and his support for pushback recently makes him a wholly inappropriate choice to lead this review,” a spokesperson said. The issue has caused strain between France and the UK, with Macron suggesting Britain’s immigration system favours clandestine migration and makes it impossible for asylum seekers to find legal ways into the country. Patel described those comments as “just wrong”. The two nations blamed each other after a dinghy sank in November, leading to the deaths of 27 people. Downer has suggested the UK begin turning back boats and give the French only limited information. “My advice to Miss Patel would be to introduce the ‘push-back’ policy without fanfare, and to keep the French informed on a need-to-know basis only,” he wrote last year. Downer said he planned to lead an evidence-based review of the border force. “I look forward to assessing Border Force’s structure, powers, funding and priorities, and hearing from a wide range of voices from across the organisation and beyond,” he said.Depending on which newspaper you read, Geoff Bainbridge is either a chief executive who lost his job after he was exposed smoking a substance purported to be meth in one of several videos filmed last year, or he is the victim of an elaborate six-year extortion racket by foreign criminals. Bainbridge resigned on Wednesday as the chief executive of Lark Distillery, an ASX-listed alcohol company, after the footage was published in the Australian. The first version of the Grill’d co-founder’s downfall, written by Sharri Markson and Kylar Loussikian, was published in the Australian after the paper spoke to Bainbridge’s lawyers, who said the 2015 timestamp on one of the videos had been manipulated to look as if it was filmed in 2021, that it was “unverified” and that other allegedly explicit video footage that had been given to the paper was fake. The second version was published in the Age and the Sydney Morning Herald after Bainbridge himself spoke to chief reporter Chip Le Grand, detailing an incredible tale of “public humiliation and shame [that] has stalked the Melbourne entrepreneur” since he was set-up in a bar in south-east Asia. “The rest is a jumble,” the Age reported. “He confirms it is him in the video but says he isn’t an ice user and doesn’t know how he came to have the drug or what else he was given.” Incensed by The Age article, Markson, who had offered Bainbridge an interview, wrote a second piece giving the background to her scoop. She said she had given Bainbridge 24 hours to respond to her questions when he ran to the rival newspaper with an amended version of events, no longer saying the videos were “fake, manipulated or unverified”. She accused the Age of “suspending belief”. “Bainbridge claims it was part of an ongoing extortion attempt that began six years ago but my sources say the videos were filmed more recently,” Markson wrote. But the Age, who said in their report they had been provided with text messages and numerous other documents – including a “control risks” report from a global risk consultancy firm which they said assessed Bainbridge was facing an “escalating, credible threat” – was clearly satisfied Bainbridge was telling them the truth. This will likely be of little consolation to Bainbridge, whose high-flying career has crashed in the most spectacular way. “Although I consider myself a victim of a crime, I accept that I am also responsible for the circumstances I find myself in,” he said in a statement. “Ultimately, I put myself in a situation I shouldn’t have been in. I’m a victim of extortion but that wouldn’t have occurred without my poor judgment. I am deeply remorseful for my own actions.” Viewers turn off PM The Morrison family’s interview with the Nine Network’s 60 Minutes program on Sunday night sparked a media frenzy which failed to translate into viewers. When Jenny Morrison told Karl Stefanovic she was a little bit disappointed with the behaviour of the former Australian of the Year Grace Tame at the Lodge in January, only 574,000 people were watching. The police drama Vera on ABC beat the highly publicised interview with 587,000 viewers. But it was Tame’s appearance last week at the National Press Club with Brittany Higgins that may have set records. The consolidated (including catch-up) figure for Wednesday’s telecast was 504,000 viewers, an extraordinarily high figure for a Press Club broadcast which rarely reaches half that when a politician is talking. MAFs diplomacy Under the PacificAus TV initiative Australian content is aired free of charge by commercial broadcasters in seven Pacific nations at a cost of $17.1m to the government, in a move seen as an attempt to combat Chinese influence in the Pacific region. But thousands of hours of lifestyle, news, drama and sport has never matched the soft diplomacy the ABC once provided to the region before it was axed by the Abbott government in 2014. Greens senator Sarah Hanson-Young asked the ABC managing director David Anderson in Senate estimates this week if there was any progress in attempts to get the ABC broadcasting internationally again. “You’d have to think that the ABC and even SBS would have a better soft diplomatic reach than Married at First Sight or some of that rubbish which is what you currently broadcast out there,” Hanson-Young said. To which Anderson said: “Arguably yes.” During the two-hour hearing, which included the usual hectoring by Tasmanian senator Eric Abetz who loves to cut him off mid-sentence, Anderson was asked how many hours a year he spent at estimates. Anderson, who released a 90-page essay about the public broadcaster this week, said he spent 13 or 14 hours at estimates each year and countless hours answering questions on notice. Something for everyone Speaking of ABC statistics, a new report reveals the relative value of the public broadcaster’s service to taxpayers. The ABC is provided with $41 for each Australian every year to deliver its comprehensive services which include the streaming service iView, four broadcast television channels, 11 national and digital radio services, a 53-station local radio network, national news, local news for 53 regions, podcasting, audio streaming and specialist websites. By comparison, the cheapest Netflix subscription costs $131.88 a year, a digital-only subscription to the Australian newspaper costs $520 a year and a Spotify subscription will set you back $143.88. The total for the three subscriptions would be $795.76 a year or almost 20 times the ABC’s per capita funding, according to a report by former staffers Quentin Dempster and Fergus Pitt about the contemporary history of political interference and harassment directed at the ABC. Stop the press Seven West Media’s West Australian newspaper locked out 102 printers on 4 February after their rejection of the proposed enterprise bargaining agreement which the union says would slash workers’ terms and conditions. The paper has continued to be printed by other West Australian staff and casuals, with some less than perfect results, according to a photo tweeted by the union. Take down Twitter melted down when Shaun Micallef revealed Mad as Hell had been taken down from iView to be edited. Were they too harsh on the prime minister they asked? The program had to be re-edited to remove a coincidental reference to a shark attack which may have been construed as insensitive in light of the tragedy at Little Bay this week. “We removed an animation that was explaining superannuation which referenced a shark attack,” an ABC spokesperson said. “It was removed in deference to the family of the victim in NSW.” News wastelands A report by ABC online this week showed media releases written by politicians’ staff are being presented as news stories in some regional papers. The editor of the Mildura Weekly, John Dooley, was quoted in a report saying that his aim was to present local community news rather than parse controversial public debates. Dooley reportedly said the vast majority of the political releases he uses are about local funding announcements, which he took “on face value”. “I think the releases should always be scrutinised and not always reproduced verbatim,” he said. “But generally speaking, I take releases on face value. If one was to follow up and question, and in a sense create another story from that release you wouldn’t have the resources to do it anyway,” Dooley said. The Public Interest Journalism Initiative’s Australian Newsroom Mapping Project has revealed the location of news deserts for the first time. The project has revealed that 6.3% or 33 local government areas have no local print or digital news coverage. This information is included in PIJI’s submission to the inquiry into Australia’s regional newspapers examining regional news’ vulnerabilities.Truckers who have blockaded downtown Ottawa for nearly three weeks have defied a growing police presence in the Canadian capital and ignored repeated warnings that they could face steep fines and possible arrest. Officers had warned of an impending crackdown on Thursday, as busloads of police reinforcements arrived in the city and work crews took the rare step of erecting metal fences outside the senate and parliament. Despite heavy rain, supporters flocked to Parliament Hill, while the mood of imminent confrontation receded. “I ain’t going anywhere,” said Pat King, one of protest organizers. “I haven’t overstayed my welcome. My taxes paid for me to be here.” One of the leaders of the so-called “freedom convoy” was arrested as the interim police chief warned that action was “imminent”. Chris Barber was taken into custody on Thursday afternoon and was set to face criminal charges. Hours later, Tamara Lich, another organizer of the convoy, was arrested in downtown Ottawa. Tamara had earlier tearfully told supporters she expected to be arrested. Both of the arrested leaders will face charges of mischief as well as counselling to commit mischief. As snow fell heavily, police also arrested at least two other individuals. A speaker on the stage in front of parliament pleaded for protesters to “bring in the human reinforcements” amid fears that police could use the inclement weather to begin breaking up the blockade. Earlier in the afternoon, the city’s deputy police chief said officers had planned for a number of scenarios after people ignored two formal warnings to leave the area immediately. “We want people to peacefully leave,” said Steve Bell said, adding: “But I can tell you that if they do not peacefully leave, we have plans, strategies and tactics to be able to get them to leave.” Police had established 100 checkpoints along a wide-ranging cordon around the city’s downtown. Amid growing criticism of police tactics, the deputy police chief had declared his intention to break up the protest and take back Ottawa’s downtown “in the coming days”. In parliament, the Canadian prime minister, Justin Trudeau, told MPs that it was “high time that these illegal and dangerous activities stop”. “They are a threat to our economy and our relationship with trading partners,” he said. “They are a threat to public safety.” Additional police officers from Quebec were deployed to reinforce Ottawa city police, the Ontario provincial police, and the Royal Canadian Mounted police in the city. With heavy snow expected in the evening, police handed out a second round of written warnings – most of which were refused by the protesters or immediately thrown away. “I’m Romanian, I lived through communism – this is a communist country!” said Christian Muntean, a trucker from Windsor, Ontario, who said he had no intention of leaving. Other members of the so-called “freedom convoy” jeered at the officers, with some calling them “traitors” and others claiming they had no authority to move the vehicles blockading the city centre. Despite the largest show of police numbers in weeks, the strategy for enforcement remained unclear. Police started blocking off key roads to isolate groups of protesters, but officers were often chased off by groups by demonstrators. And despite local bylaws prohibiting the transport of fuel – used by protesters to keep heaters and truck engines running – officers continued to turn a blind eye as activists towed wagons of fuel towards the protest camp. Ottawa is the convoy’s last stronghold after weeks of demonstrations and blockades that have spawned a national crisis, shuttering key border crossings and halting hundreds of millions in trade. The protests, which have increasingly large support from prominent US conservatives, have inspired similar convoys in France, New Zealand and the Netherlands. Late on Wednesday prominent organizers had appeared to recognise the occupation was nearing its end, but also attempted to rally the protesters for a final showdown. “It’s going down,” said King in a Facebook video early Thursday morning. “Truckers, get up. Get on your radios. Get on your horns. One long blast. Let’s go, guys.” The warnings from police came days after Trudeau invoked Canada’s Emergencies Act, empowering law enforcement authorities to declare the blockades illegal, tow away trucks and punish the drivers by arresting them, freezing their bank accounts and suspending their licenses. Addressing a handful of supporters gathered outside parliament, King claimed that Trudeau’s actions were “unlawful” and that they did not need to comply with police orders to leave. Since late January, protesters in trucks, tractors and motor homes have jammed the streets of Ottawa and obstructed border crossings. The demonstrations initially focused on Canada’s vaccine requirement for truckers entering the country but soon morphed into a broad attack on Covid-19 restrictions and Trudeau’s government. The protesters are a tiny minority in a country which has, on the whole, embraced the protection against Covid offered by science. Canada has one of the highest rates of full vaccination anywhere in the world, with more than 80% of people covered. The protests around the country have drawn support from rightwing extremists and military veterans, and authorities hesitated for weeks to move against them – in part out of fear of violence. But Ottawa police have come under intense criticism for the cautious approach – and for failing to prevent or disperse the occupation. The force’s commander resigned on Monday, but Ottawa mayor Jim Watson has also come under pressure. Frustration erupted at a chaotic city council meeting on Wednesday night amid tears and recriminations over the handling of the crisis. “Mayor Watson, I have lost all confidence in you as mayor of the city of Ottawa,” said councillor Catherine McKenney at a council meeting that descended into chaos the night before. Councillor Anne Meehan echoed such calls, and abruptly resigned from the Ottawa Police Services Board, saying: “This city is in chaos and it doesn’t need to be.” As of Tuesday, Ottawa officials said more than 350 vehicles remained with the blockade, down from a high of roughly 4,000. But many of those were large trucks crammed into a handful of downtown streets, presenting a logistical challenge for police hoping to tow them out of the area. The occupation has infuriated many Ottawa residents, who have complained of being harassed, intimidated and forced to endure a constant barrage of truck horns. At a cafe near the protests, one woman said: “ I don’t care what the police do, as long as they end this thing. I work two jobs, and when I get home all I can hear is horns. I’m sick of this. I just want it to end.”Antony Blinken is to meet the Russian foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, next week, as the US secretary of state warned the crisis in Ukraine was a “moment of peril for the lives and safety of millions of people”. The US state department said on Thursday night that Blinken had accepted an invitation to meet Lavrov provided there was no invasion of Ukraine. The move provides hope that diplomatic channels remained open even as US warnings of an imminent invasion grow louder. “If they do invade in the coming days, it will make clear they were never serious about diplomacy,” said state department spokesperson Ned Price. Blinken said earlier on Thursday he had sent a letter to Lavrov proposing a meeting in Europe. A fresh flurry of meetings between western leaders begins on Friday, with the US president, Joe Biden, hosting a call with the leaders of Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Poland, Romania, Britain, the European Union and Nato. The US vice-president, Kamala Harris, is also due to arrive in Munich for several days of talks with global leaders including the German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, the UK foreign secretary, Liz Truss, and Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy. On Friday, Germany’s foreign minister, Annalena Baerbock, criticised Russia for its “cold war demands” and for declining to attend the meeting. Earlier, the Ukrainian military said it had recorded 60 ceasefire violations by pro-Russian separatists over the past 24 hours, with one soldier injured. Separatists had opened fire on more than 10 settlements, using heavy artillery, mortars and a tank, it said. Russian separatists made competing claims, accusing Kyiv government forces of firing artillery and mortars in three incidents on Friday, Interfax news agency reported. Kyiv and the pro-Russian separatists have been at war for eight years and the ceasefire between the sides is routinely violated, but the intensity of fighting increased notably this week. Echoing comments from Biden, Blinken told a UN security council meeting on Thursday night of the urgency of the situation: “Our information indicates clearly that [Russian] forces, including ground troops, aircraft, ships, are preparing to launch an attack against Ukraine in the coming days. “We don’t know precisely how things will play out, but here’s what the world can expect to see unfold. In fact, it’s unfolding right now,” he said. “First, Russia plans to manufacture a pretext for its attack. This could be a violent event that Russia will blame on Ukraine, or an outrageous accusation that Russia will level against the Ukrainian government. We don’t know exactly the form it will take. It could be a fabricated so-called terrorist bombing inside Russia. The invented discovery of the mass grave, a staged drone strike against civilians, or a fake – even a real – attack using chemical weapons. “Russia may describe this event as ethnic cleansing, or a genocide, making a mockery of a concept that we in this chamber do not take lightly.” Before the UN meeting, the Russian mission circulated allegations of war crimes and “genocide” against the people of the Moscow-backed Luhansk and Donetsk separatist republics. Most of the allegations concerned accounts of civilian casualties from Ukrainian shelling, largely in 2014, when the conflict was most intense. The Russian documents referred to “mass graves”, but it was unclear whether they were alleging the burial sites were dug by Ukrainian forces or by the families and communities of the dead during the fighting. On Thursday night, the US Senate voted overwhelmingly to show unwavering support for an independent Ukraine and “condemn” Russian military aggression. The vote was unanimous, without objection or the formal roll call. Senators have been racing all week to mount a response to rising tensions in the region, many eager to go even further by imposing sanctions on Vladimir Putin that would send shock waves through the Russian economy. Ukraine has strong allies in the Senate, where there is broad support for sanctions on Russia as a powerful foreign policy tool to be used if Putin furthers his aggression toward Ukraine. Tensions in the east of Ukraine have risen dramatically after Russian-backed separatists launched an intense artillery barrage on Thursday across the line of control with Ukrainian forces, shelling a nursery school and injuring three people. Biden believes Russia is on the brink of invading Ukraine, and joined Nato allies in warning that the shelling may be an attempt to set up the pretext for an incursion. The US president, speaking shortly after the expulsion of his country’s deputy ambassador to Moscow, said his administration had “reason to believe” that Russia was “engaged in a false-flag operation to have an excuse to go in”. He told reporters: “Every indication we have is they’re prepared to go into Ukraine, attack Ukraine … My sense is it will happen in the next several days.” The British prime minister, Boris Johnson, called the attack on the nursery a “false-flag operation” aimed at discrediting the Ukrainian government. Separatists in the Luhansk region claimed they had been forced to return fire in response to Ukrainian shelling, describing it as a “large-scale provocation”. Kyiv disputed the separatists’ claims, saying that Russian-backed groups had initiated the shelling and that its forces had not fired back. Two civilians were wounded when the nursery building in Stanytsia Luhanska was hit, according to the Ukrainian military. More shelling of the town was reported on Thursday night, but with no immediate reports of casualties. Zelenskiy described the actions of the pro-Russian separatists as a “big provocation”. Russia handed over its long-awaited response to American and Nato proposals about European security on Thursday. The Kremlin said in its 10-page letter that the US had not taken its concerns seriously about Ukraine’s potential to join Nato and that Russia would need to take unspecified “measures of a military-technical nature”.Major parties’ financial disclosures were riddled with errors including a $1m transaction omitted by the Nationals, and the Liberals incorrectly identifying donors, according to compliance reviews. The Australian Electoral Commission’s reviews for 2018-19 picked up errors across the political spectrum, including a total of $1m in donations to Queensland Labor by Labor Holdings Pty Ltd mislabelled as “other receipt”. The outcomes of the reviews have come under new scrutiny after the revelation a fundraising body for independent MP Zali Steggall’s campaign received a $100,000 donation from the family trust of former coal company director John Kinghorn. The AEC found the money was not properly declared. The AEC found three transactions to the National Party of Australia were not disclosed, one of which required an amendment to declare a $1m “other receipt” from John McEwen House Pty Ltd. The Nationals’ federal director, Jonathan Hawkes, defended the error, stating the amount “was clearly identified as not being a donation”. “It was an internal financial transaction as a result of a restructure of the party’s administration,” he said. “The Nationals have always and will continue to abide by all legislative and regulatory requirements under the Commonwealth Electoral Act.” The Liberal Party of Australia misidentified a number of donors, including: A total of $418,990 in donations and other receipts from the Liberal party (WA division) Inc, originally attributed to the Cormann LP Campaign Committee. A $20,000 donation from Michael Siddle, originally attributed to Ramsay Health Care Australia. A $20,000 other receipt from Graham Burke, originally attributed to Village Roadshow Ltd. A spokesperson for the Liberal party said the AEC had “previously accepted” use of references to the Cormann Campaign Committee “to describe payments from party subunits”. “As part of this review the AEC requested that the relevant state division be listed instead,” the spokesperson said. “The changes in relation to Mr Siddle and Mr Burke clarify that these payments were received from the two individuals, not from the companies they represented. “The Liberal party fully complies with Australia’s funding and disclosure regime. Unlike so-called ‘independents’, the Liberal party doesn’t say one thing and then do another.” The South Australian Liberal party omitted then updated their disclosure to add a $16,000 donation from the Ahrens Group and $25,000 from the Australian Hotels Association federal office. It also revised up the value of an “other receipt” from weapons-maker Raytheon from $25,000 to $65,000. The $100,000 donation made to Steggall’s Warringah campaign from the Kinghorn Family Trust has been weaponised by her political opponents, with Liberal MPs facing challenges from independent campaigns, including Dave Sharma and Tim Wilson, accusing her of hypocrisy. Steggall has defended the receipt of eight individual pledges from a “large family living in [her] electorate”. The individual pledges were originally claimed to be under the $13,800 disclosure threshold, but the review found they should be considered as one payment of $100,000 from the trust. “If you ruled out taking donations from anyone who has invested in coal at one time or another, you pretty much rule out everyone as most people have through their superannuation,” Steggall said in a statement. On Friday Steggall continued to defend the handling of the donation, posting on social media: “I never tried to hide it.” Steggall also complained about a disproportionate focus on Warringah Independent Ltd, suggesting that a Nine newspaper story about the Nationals was timed for “a non sitting Friday with huge front page visibility”. In other 2018-19 compliance reviews, the New South Wales Greens were forced to add payments from Integro Insurance Brokers Ltd and the NSW electoral commission, and a donation of $20,600 from the Australian Greens. As a result of its audit, GetUp added other receipts from the Nature Conservation Council of NSW ($24,670) and Solar Citizens ($31,765). Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The Business Council of Australia added $727,374 of receipts from entities including KKR AUS, JB Hi-Fi Group and Goldman Sachs. As first reported by Nine newspapers, Peninsula Independent Ltd, which aimed to elect former Liberal Julia Banks in Greg Hunt’s seat of Flinders, added a $25,000 other receipt from Alex Turnbull, the son of former prime minister Malcolm Turnbull. Turnbull told Nine the issue was a misunderstanding over who should have lodged the information with the AEC in 2019. “Sometimes people forget paperwork,” he reportedly said.This time Eileen Gu didn’t leave things late. After her first two events at the Winter Games came down to nail-biting finishes, the emerging American-born superstar representing China lay waste to all-comers in the Olympic freeski halfpipe final, adding to her big air gold and slopestyle silver to complete an unprecedented hat-trick of medals in the mountains north west of Beijing. The 18-year-old soared into history on Friday morning in becoming the first action-sports athlete to win three medals at a single Olympics – missing out on triple gold by a fraction of a point in Tuesday’s slopestyle – making good on years of hype that only intensified in the months leading up to the Beijing Games and grew to deafening levels over the past fortnight as her culture-straddling origin story has become the subject of intense public scrutiny on both sides of the Pacific. “It has been two straight weeks of the most intense highs and lows I’ve ever experienced in my life,” said Gu, who became the youngest person to win three individual medals in the history of the Winter Olympics. “It has changed my life for ever. The second I landed the last 16 in big air I knew my life was never going to be the same. Even then I would have never imagined that I’d walk away with another silver and another gold.” The reigning world halfpipe champion wasted no time in taking full command of Friday’s contest, where 12 entrants made three trips each down the 200m-long course known as the Secret Garden with the best score counting towards their finishing position. She set the target of 93.25 with aA sensational opening run, launching herself high above the seven-metre walls on back-to-back 900s in the top section, then adding a switch left 360 followed by an alley-oop 540, which in effect turned the affair into a race for silver. Gu created even more distance atop the leaderboard with a 95.25 on her second descent, notching up the amplitude despite heavier gusts and linking consecutive alley-oop 540s at the finish as hordes of bundled-up spectators and volunteers chanted her name on a sunny 0C (32F) morning that offered reprieve from the bitterly cold conditions of the past week. With her second Olympic title in hand after no one came within four and a half points of her benchmark, a beaming Gu took a casual ski down the pipe on her final run, gliding into the finish area and mobbing her fellow medallists in celebration. A pair of Canadians filled out the podium as defending Olympic champion Cassie Sharpe won the silver with a best score of 90.75, three points clear of teammate Rachael Karker, who took bronze. The Estonian triple-threat Kelly Sildaru, the slopestyle bronze medallist who turned 20 on Thursday, finished in fourth with a high score of 87.00 on her second run, a fraction of a point off the podium. Great Britain’s Zoe Atkin fell on her first two runs but was clean on her final trip and finished ninth. The American contingent mostly struggled with 17-year-old Hanna Faulhaber, fourth at last year’s worlds, coming in sixth ahead of Pyeongchang bronze medallist Brita Sigourney (10th) and Carly Margulies (11th), who overcame seven knee surgeries including one in December to make her Olympic debut. Once more the day belonged to Gu, whose knack for coming up big under pressure shone repeatedly in her first two events in Beijing. She was in danger of missing the big air final entirely after a ski popped off on her second run, but confidently landed her last attempt, then won the gold from third place entering her final run by throwing down a 1620, a four-and-a-half-revolution manoeuvre that she had never even attempted in practice. She then avoided a shock exit in Monday’s slopestyle qualifying after an error-strewn opening attempt to reach the final, where she surged from eighth place to silver with a clutch final run that included a double-cork 900 punctuated with the Buick grab that has become her signature. No such dramatics were required on Friday morning as Gu quickly validated her favorite status at the Genting Snow Park, the sparkling new venue nestled in the tree-lined southern foot of Xiaohaituo Mountain. Now the real fun begins. Gu was already well on her way to becoming a household name even before these Olympics with upwards of 1.3m followers on Weibo and more than two dozen major sponsors, including Cadillac, Tiffany, Fendi, Estée Lauder and Victoria’s Secret, eager to trade on her magnetic blend of athletic prowess, model looks and bright intellect. But the San Francisco native’s ability to coolly deliver a historic medal haul under immense pressure as Team China’s most popular athlete and the face of the Beijing Games leaves her positioned to soar into the upper echelons of the world’s top-earning athletes. Doing so will require walking a narrow line of pleasing both sides of her heritage, a precarious tightrope she’s proven more than capable of navigating over the past two weeks. One of America’s most hyped action-sports prospects in years, Gu’s decision to compete for her mother’s home nation three years ago was a major boost for a host country that had won a total of 13 gold medals in the history of the Winter Olympics but only one of those on snow. Her change of affiliations, which didn’t attract much attention at the time, has drawn international attention at a Beijing Games where global condemnation of China’s human rights abuses against Uyghurs and other Turkic Muslims in far western Xinjiang has been thrust to the fore. But having come of age in a post-Kaepernick age of athlete activism where speaking out on social issues has become fashionable, Gu has adhered to a disciplined, almost pathological apoliticism that feels like a throwback to the “Republicans buy sneakers, too” mentality that prompted a generation of athletes to keep their heads down when it came to divisive topics, lest they alienate the consumer base. She’s largely been successful, steering all potentially thorny lines of inquiry toward uncontroversial messages like following your passions, inspiring children and making a positive difference in the world, while adroitly sidestepping the steady barrage of questions over her ambiguous citizenship status and whether she’s given up her US passport with what’s become something of a catchphrase: “When I’m in China, I’m Chinese. When I’m in the US, I’m American.” Criticism has come from both sides as the spotlight has intensified. The hashtag #EileenGuTraitor has trended on social media in the US during her events, while she was called privileged and out of touch with ordinary Chinese people earlier this week after engaging with an Instagram commenter who asked why she was able to use the photo-sharing service that is blocked in China when millions of others cannot. (“Anyone can download a VPN,” Gu replied in a screenshot of the since-deleted exchange, which quickly went viral on Chinese social media. “It’s literally free on the App Store.”) But as the incoming Stanford student and budding model fielded questions after Friday’s win alternating seamlessly between English and Mandarin Chinese inside a rammed media center, Gu once again showed her limitless potential as a dual-culture star for a new age thanks to timeworn virtues as old as the Olympics itself. “I put so much work into this, and to just feel like it was all worth it – all those little moments, the time I put in, in the gym after shooting a fashion editorial for eight to 10 hours, when I ran a half-marathon every week over the summer, when I pushed myself to be the first person in practice and the last person to leave – just all those little moments I feel like added up and it was just this great realization that it was all worth it and that it was all real,” Gu said. “The overriding emotion is just this deep-seated sense of gratitude and resolution, just like this all coming together, years and years in the making and it’s like letting out a deep breath.”Thanks for following our live coverage of the Ukraine crisis. We will be closing this blog but you can follow all the latest developments on our new feed here. Germany’s foreign minister, Annalena Baerbock, has released a statement ahead of the Munich security conference (which we mention in our post here), which starts today. She criticises Russia for its “cold war demands” and for declining to attend the meeting. “With an unprecedented deployment of troops on the border with Ukraine and cold war demands, Russia is challenging fundamental principles of the European peace order,” Baerbock said in a statement. “I am travelling to Munich today to discuss how we can still counter the logic of threats of violence and military escalation with the logic of dialogue ... It is a loss that Russia is not taking advantage of this opportunity.” The United States has criticised Brazilian president Jair Bolsonaro’s declaration of “solidarity” with Russia during a visit there this week. The State Department said in a statement, as reported by Reuters: The timing of the president of Brazil expressing solidarity with Russia, just as Russian forces are preparing to launch attacks on Ukrainian cities, could not be worse. It undermines international diplomacy directed at averting a strategic and humanitarian disaster, as well as Brazil’s own calls for a peaceful resolution to the crisis.” Brazil’s foreign ministry and spokespeople for Bolsonaro did not immediately respond to a request for comment. On Wednesday, during his state visit to Russia, Bolsonaro said in a statement he was “in solidarity with Russia” without elaborating. Later in a joint statement, alongside Vladimir Putin, he said: “We stand in solidarity with all those countries that want and strive for peace. We have intense collaboration in key international forums such as the BRICS, the G20 and the United Nations, where we defend the sovereignty of states, respect for international law and the United Nations Charter.” As we reported earlier, US secretary of state Antony Blinken is to meet the Russian foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, next week, warning the crisis in Ukraine was a “moment of peril for the lives and safety of millions of people”. The US state department said on Thursday night that Blinken had accepted an invitation to meet Lavrov provided there was no invasion of Ukraine. The move provides hope that diplomatic channels remained open even as US warnings of an imminent invasion grow louder. “If they do invade in the coming days, it will make clear they were never serious about diplomacy,” said state department spokesperson Ned Price. Blinken said earlier on Thursday he had sent a letter to Lavrov proposing a meeting in Europe. Read our full report below. Russian-backed rebels in eastern Ukraine have accused Kyiv government forces of shelling a village with artillery on Friday, the Interfax news agency is reporting. Similar accounts emerged on Thursday in operations that western leaders described as “false flag” operations designed to give Russia an excuse to invade Ukraine. You can find further background on conflict in the region here. Some more photos from the scene of a shelling in the city of Stanytsia Luhanska in eastern Ukraine have emerged. According to the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) there were “multiple shelling incidents” on Thursday morning across the frontline in eastern Ukraine. A nursery school in the Donbas region was hit by Russian-backed separatists as residents woke to find a hole blown through the wall. The move has been described by leaders in the west as a “false-flag operation” aimed at discrediting the Ukrainian government, while Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, accused the Russian side of “provocative shelling”. A White House official has just confirmed earlier reports that US president Joe Biden will host a call on Friday with Nato allies to discuss the Ukraine crisis. In a statement, the official said: The President will speak with Transatlantic leaders on a phone call tomorrow afternoon about Russia’s buildup of military troops on the border of Ukraine and our continued efforts to pursue deterrence and diplomacy.” Russia is on the brink of an “all-out conflict” in Ukraine, according to Australia’s defence minister. Peter Dutton told Australian broadcaster, the Nine Network, on Friday: It’s tragic and we’ll see terrible scenes unfolding. You would expect that President Putin, who obviously can’t be taken at his word, is manufacturing some sort of trigger, or is in the process of executing the final stages of his plan to go into Ukraine.” Dutton said while European leaders have attempted to prevent a conflict in Ukraine, he believed Putin was intent on military action. That really is going to result in the loss of innocent life. We’ve seen it before in eastern Europe, we don’t want it repeated but we live in a very uncertain world. This is an issue Nato and Europe need to deal with and those European leaders really need to step up and put the pressure, even more pressure, on Russia to stop them.” The defence minister said Australia has not been asked to provide troops to Ukraine, should there be any military retaliation. The US Senate has voted in a rare bipartisan moment late on Thursday to send a show of support for an independent Ukraine, the Associated Press reports. The vote comes shortly after Biden said the US has “every indication” of a potential Russian attack on Ukraine in a matter of days. The resolution from the senators does not carry the force of law but puts the US legislative body on record supporting Ukraine and condemning Russian aggression. The vote was unanimous, without objection or the formal roll call, according to the Associated Press. Republican senator Rob Portman, in introducing the measure with Democratic counterpart Jeanne Shaheen among others, said: This Congress is united in its support of Ukrainian independence and sovereignty.” Ukraine has strong allies in the Senate, where there is broad support for sanctions on Russia as a powerful foreign policy tool to be used if Vladimir Putin furthers his aggression toward Ukraine. Senators held back on legislation sanctioning Russia, saying the White House can impose sanctions on its own, regardless of congressional action. “It is not a question of if but how we will respond to Putin,” said Shaheen in a statement. US secretary of state Antony Blinken will meet Russia’s foreign minister, Sergey Lavrov, next week “provided there is no further Russian invasion of Ukraine,” US state department spokesperson Ned Price has annoucened. In a statement, Price said: The Russians have responded with proposed dates for late next week, which we are accepting, provided there is no further Russian invasion of Ukraine. If they do invade in the coming days, it will make clear they were never serious about diplomacy. We will continue to coordinate with our Allies and partners and push for further engagements with Russia through the NATO-Russia Council and OSCE.” Global leaders are preparing to meet in Germany for Friday’s Munich security conference to hold talks on the crisis in a bid to avert war in Ukraine. In attendance will be the US secretary of state, Antony Blinken and vice-president, Kamala Harris, along with the German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, the UK foreign secretary, Liz Truss, and Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy. The foreign ministers of the Group of Seven (G7) most developed nations are set to speak at length over the four-day conference, discussing efforts to get Russia to de-escalate and ways to strengthen European security. The increasingly pointed warnings from Joe Biden and Antony Blinken, plus the shelling in separatist regions of Ukraine sent jitters through Asia’s markets as they opened on Friday. Gold also reached an eight-month high as investors looking for safety ahead of the weekend. Here are the details from Reuters: MSCI’s broadest index of Asia-Pacific shares outside Japan, was down 0.3% in early trade. Japan’s Nikkei fell 1.4%. Korean shares and Australian shares each fell 1%. On Wall Street overnight the Dow Jones’ 1.8% fall was its worst session of the year so far, the S&amp;P 500 fell 2.1% and the Nasdaq dropped 2.9%. Gold shot to an eight-month high of $1,900 an ounce and held its gains. “The market will be on high alert over the possibility of a Russian invasion next week once the Beijing Olympics are over,” analysts at ANZ Bank said in a note. Overnight safe-haven currencies such as the Japanese yen and Swiss franc climbed to two-week highs on the dollar, with the yen edging a tad higher still in Asia to 114.84 per dollar. US secretary of state Antony Blinken earlier told a United Nations security council meeting on Ukraine that the unfolding crisis represents a “moment of peril for the lives and safety of millions of people” as Russian continues to deny plans to invade Ukraine. Blinken addressed those assembled, saying: “Our information indicates clearly that [Russian] forces, including ground troops, aircraft, ships, are preparing to launch an attack against Ukraine in the coming days.” Watch the highlights of the speech in the video below. US president Joe Biden will host a call on Friday about the Ukraine crisis with the leaders of Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Poland, Romania, Britain, the European Union, and Nato, the office of Canada’s prime minister Justin Trudeau has said, according to a Reuters report. Connecticut senator Chris Murphy has put together his view of the situation in Ukraine. In it, he questions the extent to which Vladimir Putin is succeeding in his ambitions, and praises the united response of western leaders to the crisis. Mobile internet service has returned to Vodafone subscribers in the Luhansk region in eastern Ukraine after an earlier network disruption that lasted over an hour and had high impact near the border with Russia, network data from internet monitoring service NetBlocks has confirmed. The cause of the outage has not yet been determined, with some uncorroborated sources claiming a technical issue, while others have attributed the disruption to alleged shelling in the region. Hello it’s Samantha Lock with with you as my colleague Nadeem Badshah signs off. Shortly after addressing the UN security council meeting and predicting a Russian invasion “in the coming days”, the US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, spoke with Poland’s foreign affairs minister Zbigniew Rau. Blinked thanked the central European nation for their “close partnership to pursue diplomacy” in a tweet late on Thursday. The White House said US president Joe Biden and Italy’s prime minister Mario Draghi reaffirmed on a call on Thursday their commitment to Ukraine’s sovereignty and readiness to hit Russia with severe economic costs if it invades its neighbour, Reuters reports. Addressing the UN security council meeting, the US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, said Russia is preparing an invasion “in the coming days” and that there is no evidence it is pulling out any troops. He urged Russia to pull back from war and declare it has no plans to invade Ukraine. Russia and Ukraine have traded accusations after a flare-up of violence in the Donbas region that saw a kindergarten shelled, injuring three people. Monitors at the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe reported “multiple shelling incidents” in eastern Ukraine, where government forces have faced Moscow-backed separatists since 2014. The Kremlin accused Ukraine of firing first, while Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, called the shelling of the nursery school “a big provocation”. Western leaders accused Moscow of attempting to stage a pretext for war. The US president, Joe Biden, said he believed an attack would happen in “the next several days” and that a false-flag operation was underway. The UK prime minister, Boris Johnson, shared this assessment, saying the aim was to discredit Ukraine’s government. Meanwhile, Nato secretary-general Jens Stoltenberg said the alliance was concerned that Russia was “trying to stage a pretext for an armed attack against Ukraine” A prominent commander of Russian-backed separatists in a breakaway area in eastern Ukraine sought to rally his veteran troops on Thursday, heralding a potential intensifying of the region’s conflict, Reuters reports. Alexander Khodakovsky, a former political leader in the self-proclaimed Donetsk People’s Republic who now oversees a military unit, said that “all who want to rejoin ranks should be ready.” A German army convoy of 130 soldiers and 60 vehicles reached Lithuania on Thursday, bringing almost half of planned reinforcements for the country’s German-led Nato battlegroup amid fears of a Russian invasion of Ukraine. Diplomatic tensions were hardly eased as Moscow sent its response to US proposals on security: it warned it could take “military technical” measures, as it accused the west of ignoring its concerns. Russia again denied any intent to invade Ukraine. In another downturn for diplomacy, Russia expelled the US’s second most senior diplomat in Moscow, which the US state department described as “an escalatory step”. Further shelling of Stanytsia Luhanska was reported on Thursday night, but with no immediate reports of casualties. Reuters reports: Nataliya Poshyvaylo-Towler, an Australian mother-of-two of Ukrainian descent, found out her son had tested positive for Covid-19. They were preparing to fly last week from Ukraine to Melbourne, where they live, after receiving an advisory from Australian authorities that citizens should immediately leave Ukraine over fears a Russian invasion could be imminent. To board a plane back, Nataliya needed to complete a declaration form and show a negative Covid-19 test. “I’m looking at the email with results and there’s an email coming from DFAT (Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade) - ‘evacuate now’. And the result is positive,” Nataliya recalled in an interview with Reuters. “My legs started shaking, I didn’t know what to do,” she said. Nataliya and her son Michael had to miss the 9 February flight and remain in Poltava, a town 300 kilometres (185 miles) to the south-east of capital Kyiv. Reuters: US officials held discussions with Saudi Arabia about a “collaborative approach” to managing potential market pressures stemming from a possible Russian invasion of Ukraine, Reuters reports. “In Saudi Arabia, state department special envoy for energy affairs Amos Hochstein joined Brett McGurk (coordinator for the Middle East and North Africa) to discuss a collaborative approach to managing potential market pressures stemming from a possible Russian invasion of Ukraine,” the White House said in a statement. Russia’s deputy prime minister Yury Borisov will arrive in Cuba on Thursday, after a stop in Venezuela, for a working visit in the midst of Moscow’s standoff with the West over Ukraine, Havana said. Borisov will have “meetings with various Cuban authorities to study the functioning of bilateral collaboration in different areas,” a foreign ministry statement said, AFP reports. He previously visited Venezuela, another ally of Moscow in Latin America. Reuters reports: A prominent commander of Russian-backed separatists in a breakaway area in eastern Ukraine sought to rally his veteran troops on Thursday, heralding a potential intensifying of the region’s conflict. Alexander Khodakovsky, a former political leader in the self-proclaimed Donetsk People’s Republic who now oversees a military unit, said that “all who want to rejoin ranks should be ready.” “At previous meetings with veterans of the militia, the algorithm of actions was discussed, and the places of arrival were indicated. I will inform you of the date and time of the gathering by all available means,” Khodakovsky wrote on his Telegram account. A German army convoy of 130 soldiers and 60 vehicles reached Lithuania on Thursday, bringing almost half of planned reinforcements for the country’s German-led NATO battlegroup amid fears of a Russian invasion of Ukraine. Lithuanian President Gitanas Nauseda said he was assured by German Chancellor Olof Scholz in Brussels the German soldiers are authorised fight to defend Lithuania. “The German army is on our territory to defend us, and if there’s a threat to Lithuania, they are really ready to do their duty,” Nauseda said. The German reinforcement operation will continue until the end of the week, bolstering German forces in Lithuania by more than 350 soldiers and 100 vehicles, Enhanced Forward Presence battlegroup commander Lieutenant-Colonel Daniel Andrae said. “We have proven that we are capable of bringing in forces at short notice from long distance,” he told Reuters. US stocks dropped more than 1% on Thursday, with investors gravitating toward defensive sectors and safe havens such as bonds and gold as geopolitical tensions heightened between Washington and Russia over Ukraine. The growth-oriented technology and communication services sectors were among the hardest hit, while financials also declined as US Treasury yields moved lower. “Right now this is certainly the chief consideration and the one that has been causing this market to move really every day this week,” said Randy Frederick, vice president of trading and derivatives for Charles Schwab in Austin, Texas. “The longer it festers, the less of an issue it becomes, assuming that nothing happens. Obviously if we get into ground combat battles or something, that is a whole different story.” Russia has amassed 45,000 soldiers in Belarus and their presence is threatening to Baltic states and Poland, Lithuanian President Gitanas Nauseda said. The joint Russian and Belarus military exercise near the Belarus border with Ukraine is scheduled to end on Sunday, Reuters reports. “They amassed 45,000 troops, a lot of military equipment, air forces. And we do not hear very clearly articulated promises that this will be removed to Russian territory after the military exercise ends. This is one more way to keep the tension up”, said Nauseda in a video statement after an EU leaders meeting in Brussels. “This creates more potential threats now and for Baltic States and Poland,” he added. Britain believes that nearly half of Russian forces that have massed near Ukraine are now within 30 miles of the border, in contrast to statements from Moscow that its forces were being sent back to barracks. Reinforcements from 14 battalions were in the process of arriving, officials added, while highlighting a pontoon bridge that had been briefly set up in Belarus in the past few days as an example of unusual military activity. There is evidence, a defence source said, “of Russian forces leaving the deployment sites for staging areas closer to the border”. A couple of hours later, the US president Joe Biden warned that an attack could take place “in the next several days”. Russia has repeatedly said it has no intention of invading Ukraine and on Tuesday announced a drawdown of troops from Crimea, accompanied by videos of tanks being loaded on to transport trains. There is no certainty on what will happen in terms of the Russia-Ukraine conflict in the coming days, NATO secretary general Jens Stoltenberg told Polish state broadcaster TVP , Reuters reports. Russia delivered a letter to the U.S. ambassador accusing Washington of having ignored its security demands, which include promising never to allow Ukraine to join Nato, Reuters reports. “In the absence of the readiness of the American side to agree on firm, legally binding guarantees of our security from the United States and its allies, Russia will be forced to respond, including through the implementation of military-technical measures,” the document said. US secretary of state Antony Blinken said Washington was evaluating the letter and that he had earlier sent a letter to Russian foreign minister Sergei Lavrov proposing a meeting next week in Europe to try to resolve the crisis. The US State Department said the ejection of deputy chief of mission Bart Gorman from the US embassy in Moscow was unprovoked and it was considering its response. Russia said it had ordered the diplomat out in response to the U.S. expulsion of a senior official at the Russian embassy in Washington, who it said was forced to leave before a replacement could be found as part of a US “visa war”. The UK’s foreign secretary Liz Truss said: “The Duma’s request that Vladimir Putin recognises the Ukrainian regions of Donetsk and Luhansk as independent shows flagrant disregard for Russia’s commitments under the Minsk agreements. “If this request were accepted, it would represent a further attack on Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, signal an end to the Minsk process and demonstrate a Russian decision to choose a path of confrontation over dialogue. We urge Russia to end its pattern of destabilising behaviour against Ukraine and to implement the commitments it has freely signed up to, including the Minsk agreements.” Estonia’s foreign minister, Eva-Maria Liimets, is in Washington today, and talked to the Guardian about her assessment of the situation, saying Russia’s “heavy military buildup is also a sign of readiness to attack its neighbours”. Liimets also looked at the implications of a permanent Russian military presence in Belarus. She said Alexander Lukashenko had become reliant on Moscow since he overturned the presidential election 2020 in order to hold on to power. Liimets said: Unfortunately, Belarus has limited its choices by itself, due to the stolen elections in 2020. They have limited access, limited communication, with other neighbouring countries and with other countries in Europe and and also in the world. If Russia keeps its troops in Belarus, Liimets said: Then it changes the security environment in our region, and also changes the balance of power. And, of course, then NATO has to make another assessment of its security planning and defence planning and then increase the defence and deterrence posture of the eastern flank. She pointed out that the alliance is due to adopt a new strategic outlook at this year’s summit in Madrid, with the heightened threat in mind. But so far she thought it had responded well to the crisis. I think that Nato has behaved really, very decisively, and has showed its very united approach to understanding the threat. And so I think that NATO is really in good shape and the transatlantic bond is very strong. Our political correspondent, Aubrey Allegretti, reports on the UK government’s decision to axe the “golden visa” scheme: The “golden visa” system that allows wealthy foreign investors a fast track to live in the UK has been axed amid concern about applicants acquiring their wealth illegally and the growing strain on diplomatic relations with Russia. The home secretary, Priti Patel, announced that the scheme would end with immediate effect to help to stop “corrupt elites who threaten our national security and push dirty money around our cities”. Launched in 2008, the “tier 1 investor visa” programme allowed people with at least £2m in investment funds and a UK bank account to apply for residency rights, along with their family. The speed with which applicants were allowed to get indefinite leave to remain was hastened by how much money they planned to invest in the UK: £2m took five years, while £10m shortened the wait to just two. The scheme had been under review for some time, and its opponents were planning to push for the visas to be suspended through an amendment to the nationality and borders bill in the House of Lords, due to be debated later this month. According to the anti-corruption watchdog Spotlight, 6,312 golden visas – half the number of all those issued – had been reviewed for “possible national security risks”. Russia’s military aggression towards Ukraine presents a clear threat to the rules-based international order and Nato will do its best to deter this, Canada’s defence minister, Anita Anand, said. Speaking on a conference call with reporters from Brussels, Anand said: Nato is a defensive alliance … we cannot and we will not stand idly by while a nation seeks to erode international norms that have kept us safe since the end of world war two. Russia said it had ordered the expulsion of US deputy chief of mission, Bart Gorman, from the country in response to the US expulsion of a senior official at the Russian embassy in Washington. In a statement, the Russian foreign ministry said: The American diplomat was indeed ordered to leave Russia, but strictly in response to the unreasonable expulsion of the minister-counsellor of our embassy in Washington, despite his status as a leading official. The mother of a child whose nursery was struck by Russian-backed separatists in the Donbas region of Ukraine said she “still can’t calm down”, Agence France-Presse reports. The woman, who agreed to identify herself only as Natalia out of fear for her safety, said she and her husband rushed to the kindergarten in a panic the moment they heard about the strike. She told the news agency: I was very scared. The kindergarten has no bomb shelter. It only has thick walls. But they even managed to puncture those. I still can’t calm down. Kindergarten worker Natalia Slesareva was thrown against a door by the shell blast that blew a hole in the wall of a two-storey building being used by 20 children and 18 staff. She told AFP: The children were eating breakfast when it hit. It hit the gym. After breakfast, the children had gym class. So another 15 minutes, and everything could have been much, much worse. Boris Johnson has claimed the shelling of a nursery school in the Donbas region of Ukraine by Russian-backed separatists was a “false-flag operation” aimed at discrediting the Ukrainian government. According to the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) there were “multiple shelling incidents” on Thursday morning across the frontline in eastern Ukraine. Three people were injured in the attack in the city of Stanytsia Luhanska, which blew a hole through the wall of a nursery. Volodymyr Zelenskiy, the Ukrainian president, accused the Russian side of “provocative shelling”. Speaking on a visit to RAF Waddington, in Lincolnshire, the UK prime minister said: “Today, as I’m sure you’ve already picked up, a kindergarten was shelled in what we are taking to be – well, we know – was a false-flag operation designed to discredit the Ukrainians, designed to create a pretext, a spurious provocation for Russian action. “We fear very much that that is the kind of thing we will see more of over the next few days.” A false-flag incident is one in which its origin is disguised, usually in an attempt to provoke retaliation. The Kremlin accused US president Joe Biden of stoking tension by saying he expected Russia to invade Ukraine within days, RIA news agency reported. Separately, Russia accused Ukraine of repeatedly violating a 2015 ceasefire agreement aimed at bringing peace to the breakaway Donbas region. Russia’s deputy foreign minister, Sergey Vershinin, told the UN security council: “Ukraine stubbornly refuses to implement the provisions of the Minsk agreements.” He accused Kiev of repeated attacks on the Donbas region in eastern Ukraine, causing “thousands of victims. “Attempts to place the blame on Russia are futile and baseless” and aim at “shifting of the blame away from Ukraine,” Vershinin said. He also rejected as “a baseless accusation” claims by the US and European allies that Moscow is seeking to fabricate a pretext to invade Ukraine. Meanwhile, the website of Russia’s foreign ministry went back online after going down for a few hours. The Tass news agency cited the ministry as saying that the website had gone down due to technical issues, without elaborating. Before today’s UN security council session, the Russian mission circulated documents alleging Ukrainian forces “have been exterminating the civilian population of the self-proclaimed People’s Republics of Donetsk and Luhansk”. About 14,000 people have been killed since fighting started in eastern Ukraine and Russia seized Crimea in 2014. Three thousand of the dead have been civilians, who have been killed on both sides of the front line, according to international monitors. The Russian document focuses on casualties on the Moscow-backed rebel side of the line, but does not make claims of the number of dead, just saying “thousands of civilians were wounded or killed”, saying they were killed by Ukrainian government forces using “explosive weapons, small arms and light weapons”. The Russian documents say that Russian investigators “obtained information about spontaneous unmarked mass graves that were arranged outside specially designated places out of necessity due to the ongoing hostilities”. It seems that when Russia is talking about mass graves, it is talking about the hasty burial of dead where they fell by their own families and communities. It does not seem to be a claim that the alleged mass graves were dug by Ukrainian forces to disguise war crimes. Nor does it make claims of executions of civilians. It does, however, make the claim that the civilian casualties from the fighting amount to a “genocide of the Russian-speaking population of Donbas”. The UK’s foreign minister, James Cleverly, has accused Russia of “patently failing to live up to the international commitments that it has made around military transparency”. Speaking to the UN security council, Cleverly said the whole world can see “Russia has deployed the forces necessary to invade Ukraine and now has them readied for action”. With regards to Russian rhetoric of a withdrawal, he said it is “all too clear that the opposition is in fact true and the Russian military build-up continues”. Cleverly said: Russia’s actions are clearly designed to intimidate, to threaten and to destabilise Ukraine. We know it, they know it, and the international community knows it. If Russia is serious about a diplomatic resolution “then it needs to show up to the diplomatic meetings and commit to meaningful OSCE [Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe] talks”, seeing as they did not show up on Wednesday and “they do not intend to show up on Friday”. The UK condemns the actions taken by the Russian Duma to propose the Russian president recognise the regions of Luhansk and Donetsk as independent, Cleverly added. Russia is using “increasing disinformation” to “fabricate a pretext” to invade Ukraine, he said. We are seeing increasing disinformation about events in the Donbas that are straight out of the Kremlin playbook. It is therefore clear that we are at a critical juncture to prevent further escalation. Russia will target specific groups of Ukrainians, the US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, continues. He told the UN security council: Conventional attacks are not all that Russia plans to inflict upon the people of Ukraine. We have information that indicates Russia will target specific groups of Ukrainians. It is unclear exactly what the secretary of state is talking about here, but earlier unconfirmed versions of Russian war plans, in particular those published in the German Bild newspaper, suggest that potential Ukrainian resistance leaders would be rounded up and put in camps. Blinken said: We’ve been warning the Ukrainian government of all that is coming. And here today, we are laying it out in great detail with a hope that by sharing what we know with the world, we can influence Russia to abandon the path of war and choose a different path while there’s still time. US secretary of state Antony Blinken urged Russia to pull back from war and declare it has no plans to invade Ukraine. If it seeks peace, Blinken told the UN security council: The Russian government can announce today with no qualification of equivocation or deflection, that Russia will not invade Ukraine. Blinken reiterated concerns that Russia is formulating a “false flag” operation or “manufactured provocation” that it will blame on Ukraine to give it a reason to invade. He said: The [Russian] government will issue proclamations declaring that Russia must respond to defend Russian citizens or ethnic Russians in Ukraine. Next, the attack is planned to begin. Russian missiles and bombs will drop across Ukraine. Communications will be jammed. Cyber-attacks will shut down key Ukrainian institutions. After that, Russian tanks and soldiers will advance on key targets that have already been identified and mapped out in detailed plans. We believe these targets include Ukraine’s capital, Kyiv, a city of 2.8 million people.” The US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, has been speaking to the UN security council, having made a last-minute change of plan to go there in person. Blinken said: Our information indicates clearly that [Russian] forces, including ground troops, aircraft ships, are preparing to launch an attack against Ukraine in the coming days. He went on to say that the US does not know precisely how things will play out but that a Russian attack could begin with a manufactured pretext. He said: First, Russia plans to manufacture a pretext for its attack. This could be a violent event that Russia will blame on Ukraine or an outrageous accusation that Russia will level against the Ukrainian government. We don’t know exactly the form it will take. It could be a fabricated so-called terrorist bombing inside Russia. The invented discovery of the mass grave, a staged drone strike against civilians, or a fake – even a real – attack using chemical weapons. Blinken continued: Russia may describe this event as ethnic cleansing, or a genocide, making a mockery of a concept that we in this chamber do not take lightly. Addressing the UN security council meeting, the US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, has reiterated concerns of a Russian attack on Ukraine that will begin with a manufactured pretext. He says it could be a fabricated terrorist bombing in Russia, the discovery of a mass grave, a staged drone strike against civilians, or a fake – or real – chemical weapons attack. Addressing the UN security council meeting, the US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, said Russia is preparing an invasion “in the coming days” and that there is no evidence it is pulling out any troops. Blinken said: Russia has amassed more than 150,000 troops around Ukraine’s borders. Diplomacy is “the only responsible way” to resolve the Ukraine crisis, he said, adding that he has sent a letter to Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, proposing a meeting in person next week. On a day when tensions in eastern Ukraine have escalated sharply, here is a summary of the main events so far: Russia and Ukraine have traded accusations after a flare-up of violence in the Donbas region that saw a kindergarten shelled, injuring three people. Monitors at the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe reported “multiple shelling incidents” in eastern Ukraine, where government forces have faced Moscow-backed separatists since 2014. The Kremlin accused Ukraine of firing first, while Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, called the shelling of the nursery school “a big provocation”. Western leaders accused Moscow of attempting to stage a pretext for war. The US president, Joe Biden, said he believed an attack would happen in “the next several days” and that a false-flag operation was underway. The UK prime minister, Boris Johnson, shared this assessment, saying the aim was to discredit Ukraine’s government. Meanwhile, Nato secretary-general Jens Stoltenberg said the alliance was concerned that Russia was “trying to stage a pretext for an armed attack against Ukraine” Diplomatic tensions were hardly eased as Moscow sent its response to US proposals on security: it warned it could take “military technical” measures, as it accused the west of ignoring its concerns. Russia again denied any intent to invade Ukraine. In another downturn for diplomacy, Russia expelled the US’s second most senior diplomat in Moscow, which the US state department described as “an escalatory step”. That’s all from me, Jennifer Rankin, as I hand over to Léonie Chao-Fong. Yaşar Halit Çevik, the chief monitor of the OSCE special monitoring mission, has said that there were 500 explosions overnight along the front line, mostly in the Luhansk oblast. “It’s critically important to deescalate immediately to avoid further aggravation of the situation,” Çevik said. The Russian deputy foreign minister, Sergey Vershinin, will address the UN security council in a few minutes, while the US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, is on the way from the airport, writes the Guardian’s Julian Borger. Last night the Russian mission circulated documents alleging atrocities committed in eastern Ukraine by Ukrainian forces. Western diplomats have declared them false, and noted that the monitors from the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) have made no mention of the alleged atrocities. Details of the allegations are not yet clear, but presumably Vershinin will spell them out. The state department has confirmed the expulsion of the US deputy chief of mission (DCM) to Moscow, Bart Gorman. A state department spokesperson said: Russia’s action against our DCM was unprovoked and we consider this an escalatory step and are considering our response. DCM Gorman’s tour had not ended; he had a valid visa, and he had been in Russia less than three years. We call on Russia to end its baseless expulsions of US diplomats and staff and to work productively to rebuild our missions. Now more than ever, it is critical that our countries have the necessary diplomatic personnel in place to facilitate communication between our governments. We note that Russia’s actions have led to the US mission to Russia being staffed at levels well below the Russian mission to the United States. Western intelligence believes that Russia is continuing to build up forces near Ukraine, despite Moscow’s claims of a return to barracks for some forces, writes the Guardian’s defence and security editor, Dan Sabbagh. Western officials believe Russia is at the point where nearly half of the combat forces “are now within 50km of the border of Ukraine”. Some of the 14 Russian battalion tactical groups that were seen heading towards Ukraine have now arrived in the region, adding to a force of 100 battalions. Officials were reluctant to turn that into troop numbers but other estimates have suggested the massed Russian force is around 150,000. There is evidence, officials believe, “of Russian forces leaving the deployment sites for staging areas closer to the border” and the “continued movement of Russian ground equipment in Belarus”, where Moscow is holding joint military exercises with its neighbour to the north of Ukraine. Firm evidence of Russian forward deployments is limited, however. Western officials pointed to the recent construction of a pontoon bridge across the Pripet river during the Allied Resolve exercises 8km from Ukraine’s border in an area in the exclusion zone around the site of the former Chernobyl nuclear reactor. But, according to Tom Bullock, a defence intelligence specialist at Jane’s, as of Wednesday the bridge had been taken down again. Western officials said its construction was nevertheless noteworthy: “This activity is highly unusual and inconsistent with any past exercise”. The UN security council session on Ukraine is underway, writes the Guardian’s world affairs editor Julian Borger. The US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, made a last-minute decision to address the session. Ironically, Russian is currently the president of the council and has some say on how the meeting will be held. The UN under-secretary general for political and peacebuilding affairs, Rosemary DiCarlo, has told the meetings about reports of new ceasefire violations at the contact line in Luhansk and Donetsk and said “these violations must not be allowed to escalate further”. Here are some images of the UK foreign secretary, Liz Truss, meeting her Ukrainian counterpart, Dmytro Kuleba, in Kyiv earlier on Thursday. The two are pictured laying flowers at a memorial to the Holodomor, the famine instigated by Stalin that killed millions of Ukrainians. It is clear that Truss had a warmer reaction compared with her visit to Moscow a week earlier, when Russian foreign minister Sergei Lavrov described their meeting as like a conversation of “the mute with the deaf”. Joe Biden has said that a Russian invasion of Ukraine is imminent and that he believes a false-flag operation was under way that Moscow would use to justify an invasion, agencies in Washington report. Speaking to reporters as he left the White House, AFP reports him as saying: Every indication we have is that they’re prepared to go into Ukraine, attack Ukraine. My sense is it will happen in the next several days. According to Reuters, he described the threat as “very high”. He said Russia had not moved back its forces from the Ukrainian border and that the US had reason to believe Russia was engaged in a false-flag operation that Moscow would use to justify an invasion. Antony Blinken, the US secretary of state, is due to speak at the UN security council later on Thursday. Liz Truss has urged the Kremlin “to deescalate and choose diplomacy”. Russia must think again. Despite their claims Russia’s military buildup shows no signs of slowing. The UK foreign secretary repeated warnings of sanctions: We are ready with our allies to impose severe costs on Russia. There would be a severe economic cost through an unprecedented package of economic sanctions. When discussing sanctions, she refers to the US, but does not mention the European Union. The UK foreign secretary, Liz Truss, has vowed the UK’s “steadfast support for Ukraine” and said she admires the country’s fortitude in the face of Russian aggression. She has just started speaking at a press conference in Kyiv with her Ukrainian counterpart, Dmytro Kuleba. Russia has expelled the deputy US ambassador to Moscow, Bartle Gorman, in what the US embassy has called an “escalatory step”, the Guardian’s Andrew Roth reports. According to Russian media, Gorman has been ordered to leave the country as part of an ongoing dispute between Russia and the US over embassy staffing levels. The US is considering a retaliatory response. The decision comes at a moment of extraordinary tension, as the US has said a Russian invasion of Ukraine could be “imminent” and has threatened Moscow with sanctions if it launches an attack. An embassy spokesman told Russian media: We can confirm that Russia has expelled [the] US deputy chief of mission to Russia, Bart Gorman. DCM Gorman was the second-most senior official at US embassy Moscow after the ambassador and a key member of the embassy’s senior leadership team. The US has recently imposed a rule that requires Russian diplomats who have spent longer than three years in the US to leave the country. Russia has called the rule discriminatory and had promised to retaliate. The decision was announced on Thursday as Russia also provided a written response to the US ambassador, John Sullivan, regarding Moscow’s demands for “security guarantees”. It is not clear if the decision was delivered during Sullivan’s visit to the foreign ministry. Gorman is a career member of the foreign service and is “responsible for managing key aspects of the US–Russia relationship,” according to the embassy website. He previously served as he head of the diplomatic security service’s office of intelligence and threat analysis, as well as a senior regional security officer in postings including Moscow and Baghdad. He has a Ph.D in Slavic literatures and languages from the University of Southern California. Russia has accused the US of ignoring its core demands on security and threatened “a military-technical” response in a letter to Washington issued on Thursday. The letter has not been published, but Elena Chernenko of the Russian newspaper Kommersant has seen the 10-page document and has a full breakdown. This is a significant paragraph from the Russian response, cited in her report. In the absence of the readiness of the American side to agree on firm, legally binding guarantees of our security from the United States and its allies, Russia will be forced to react, including by implementing measures of a military-technical character. The Russian government restates it has no plans to invade Ukraine and describes US warnings of such an attack as “an attempt to put pressure and devalue Russia’s proposals for security guarantees”. The US did not give a “constructive answer” to the “basic elements” of Russia’s proposals, namely a veto on Ukraine and Georgia’s Nato membership and removing troops from the eastern flanks of the alliance, the document states. The Kommersant report is summed up by the FT’s Moscow bureau chief, Max Seddon. Here is his analysis: The US has received Russia’s response to American and Nato proposals about Ukraine and European security, Associated Press reports. The Kremlin’s response was given to the US ambassador in Moscow, John Sullivan, the agency says, citing an unnamed official. No details about the letter have been released. It is the latest volley in the diplomatic ping pong, since the US and Nato wrote to Moscow on 26 January outlining proposals on European defence, in response to the Kremlin’s demands for security guarantees the previous month. Boris Johnson has described an attack on a kindergarten in eastern Ukraine as a “false-flag operation designed to discredit the Ukrainians”, PA Media reports. “We fear very much that that is a thing we will see more of over the next few days,” he said. The comments from the UK prime minister are more direct, but in tune with other western political leaders. Jens Stoltenberg, the Nato secretary general, said he feared Russia was trying to stage a pretext for an armed attack, while the EU’s foreign policy chief, Josep Borrell, has spoken of “a lot of disinformation” from Russia. Western security officials have been monitoring the shelling in Donbas closely, saying it was “the sort of provocation that has the potential to escalate”, while also stressing that exchanges of fire across the line of control in eastern Ukraine were not uncommon. An official said there was “more concern with what is happening now” than with any possible pretext for an invasion by Russia that had been set out previously, so-called false-flag operations in which a faked incident would be used to justify an attack on Ukraine. Nevertheless, similar levels of hostilities have been seen previously and it was not uncommon for issues to “flash up and go away”. One western official concluded: “I’m not saying this is a pretext, but I didn’t say it wasn’t a pretext.” The European Union’s foreign policy chief has voiced alarm about heavy bombing in eastern Ukraine and said a “lot of disinformation” was coming from Russian sources. Josep Borrell, the EU’s high representative for foreign policy, who recently visited the front line, was asked about the situation in eastern Ukraine. We are very much concerned, very much worried … about increasing fighting and heavy shelling … and also we notice a lot of disinformation from Russian sides in order to create an atmosphere of alleged attacks against Russian people in this part of Ukraine. Borrell, who attended the Nato defence meeting earlier on Thursday, was in tune with comments from the alliance’s secretary-general Jens Stoltenberg, who said he feared Russia was “trying to stage a pretext for an armed attack against Ukraine”. The EU high representative for foreign policy said he was ready to present a “very tough package” of sanctions against Russia “when the moment comes”. Borrell, a former Spanish foreign minister, said the EU would concentrate all its efforts on the diplomatic process, but had already prepared a full package of sanctions. With the technical support of the commission we have a very tough package prepared … If there is an aggression I will immediately call the foreign affairs council [of EU ministers] to propose the package of sanctions and I am sure that even if unanimity is required the council will approve that. He did not specify what Russian actions could trigger EU sanctions, saying: “When the moment comes we will act decisively.” The US defense secretary, Lloyd Austin, has alleged Russia is moving troops closer to Ukraine’s borders and stocking up on blood supplies in anticipation of casualties on the battlefield. “I was a soldier myself not that long ago. I know first hand that you don’t do these sorts of things for no reason,” said Austin, a retired army general. “And you certainly don’t do them if you’re getting ready to pack up and go home. “We see them fly in more combat and support aircraft. We see them sharpen their readiness in the Black Sea,” Austin said at Nato headquarters in Brussels. “We even see them stocking up their blood supplies.” Moscow denies it is planning to invade and says it is pulling back some troops. Volodymyr Zelenskiy has tweeted about the shelling of the kindergarten. He called it a “big provocation”. Carl Bildt, a former prime minister of Sweden, has claimed the heavy artillery used this morning in eastern Ukraine is orchestrated by Moscow. “When heavy artillery is used it’s as a rule under direct [Russian] command rather something by local hotheads,” tweeted Bildt, who is now co-chair at the European Council on Foreign Relations. In Moscow, Kremlin spokesperson Dmitry Peskov has said Russia was “seriously concerned” about the reports of escalation. Russia’s military build-up is a sign of the “new normal for European security”, the Nato secretary-general, Jens Stoltenberg, has said. What we are seeing now is a new normal for European security, where Russia contests fundamental principles for European security and where they are willing to use force as they have done in Ukraine and Georgia. Speaking after a meeting of Nato defence ministers with their counterparts in Ukraine and Georgia, Stoltenberg repeated his warnings about the Russia’s military build-up, while calling on Russia to look for a diplomatic solution, when asked about the situation by Fox News. They have enough troops, enough capabilities to launch a full fledged invasion of Ukraine with very little or no warning time and that is what makes the situation so dangerous. But it remains to be seen what they actually do … To have so many combat troops around Ukraine, it’s not a normal exercise. It’s never too late to de-escalate, it’s never too late to find a political solution. Nato had asked its military commanders to advise on next steps for a longer-term presence in Romania and the south-eastern flank of the alliance, he said. And these are the main lines from the press conference. Nato is still waiting for a response from Russia on security proposals the military alliance sent in January, secretary-general Jens Stoltenberg has said. At a press conference in Brussels he was asked by Deutsche Welle whether he expected Russia’s response on Thursday, after Moscow promised to send its answer to Washington later in the day. Stoltenberg did not answer the question directly, but reiterated that he saw “room for common ground to find solutions that will improve security for all of us”, citing arms control. Nato secretary-general Jens Stoltenberg has said it is considering battlegroups in Romania and the south east of the alliance. “Nato has to respond when we see aggressive actions by Russia,” he said while urging Moscow to enter a dialogue with the west. In response to a question from the BBC, he also defended the alliance’s approach of going public with its intelligence about Russia’s intentions. All of this we do to try to prevent an attack on Ukraine. The fact that we are describing risk doesn’t believe we think it would happen with 100% certainty. Nato secretary-general Jens Stoltenberg has said the alliance is concerned that Russia is “trying to stage a pretext for an armed attack against Ukraine”. He was asked by the Wall Street Journal about the Kremlin’s comments blaming Kyiv for shelling in the Donbas. Stoltenberg said: We are concerned that Russia is trying to stage a pretext for an armed attack against Ukraine. There is still no clarity, no certainty about Russia’s intentions. Russia has amassed the biggest force we have seen for decades, he said. Nato secretary-general Jens Stoltenberg has repeated that the alliance has seen “no sizeable withdrawal so far” from Russia. We call on Russia to do what it says and withdraw its forces from the borders of Ukraine. This will be an important first step towards a peaceful political solution. He is speaking now at a press conference after a meeting of Nato defence ministers with their counterparts in Ukraine and Georgia, two countries that aspire to join the Atlantic military alliance as a security guarantee against Russia. Stoltenberg said Nato’s door remained open and there could be no return to big powers bullying others. Earlier this week, he said that the military alliance was considering deploying new battle groups in eastern and central Europe, adding to forces already in the Baltic States and Poland. Ukraine has no intention of giving up its right to join Nato, its president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has said. Speaking to the BBC’s Sarah Rainsford, he put the accent on Ukraine’s right to choose its own path, recalling that 15,000 people have died in the war with Russia. It’s not about Nato, it’s about the future of the people. It’s not about membership in Nato. If we are speaking about Nato, about the EU, about temporarily occupied territories, we are just speaking about our independence, that we are deciding what we want, that we are deciding what we will do in our future. You can watch a clip of the BBC interview here. Ukraine’s foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, has said the village of Stanytsia Luhanska has been shelled with heavy weapons and called on other countries to condemn the attack. Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, said he had spoken to the European Council president, Charles Michel, about the “provocative shellings”. Michel is chairing an emergency meeting of EU leaders on Ukraine. The union’s 27 leaders were meeting for a long-planned summit with 40 African heads of state and government to discuss bilateral relations. With tensions in Ukraine still at boiling point, an impromptu meeting was shoe-horned in. Moscow correspondent Oliver Carroll, who has reported from both sides of the frontline in eastern Ukraine, says three people were injured in the shelling of a kindergarten in the Donbas region. He tweets a video showing a ruined playroom, posted by Illia Ponomarenko, defence reporter for the Kyiv Independent. A senior Ukrainian government source has said shelling from rebel territory in the east of the country is “not typical” and “looks like a provocation”, Reuters reports. Earlier on Thursday the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe, which has been monitoring the Donbas conflict for years, reported “multiple incidents of shelling” in eastern Ukraine. Ukrainian officials have released pictures of a kindergarten they say was damaged by the shelling, while the Kremlin has accused Ukraine of firing first. The Kremlin said on Thursday it was deeply concerned with the flare-up in violence in eastern Ukraine and hoped that the west would use its influence on Kyiv to prevent further escalation, Reuters reports. Vladimir Putin’s spokesperson Dmitry Peskov accused Kyiv of “terrible provocations” and accused Ukrainian forces of firing first. Peskov said Moscow had long warned of the “excessive concentration of Ukrainian armed forces” in the immediate vicinity of the line of contact, according to the Ria Novosti agency. He said: Now we see that these terrible provocations are taking place, we see reports from representatives of the self-proclaimed republics that on the line of contact there is an exchange of fire, that the first strike came from Ukraine. This is worrying information. We are continuing to observe. Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, has promised Moscow will send its reply to western proposals on European security to Washington later on Thursday. Speaking at a press conference alongside his Italian counterpart, Luigi Di Maio, Lavrov said Russia’s response would be publicly available in “a few hours”. It’s absolutely necessary that relevant civil society groups in our two countries know [what is in the response]. Russia is responding to the western papers on European security issued on 26 January, which followed Moscow’s sweeping demands last December that escalated the crisis. The Kremlin called for a veto on Ukraine’s Nato membership and rollback of the western military alliance in eastern Europe. Moscow has previously criticised Washington and Nato for not publishing their written replies. Meanwhile, Di Maio told the press that talks with Lavrov and Ukrainian foreign minister, Dymtro Kuleba, convinced him that a diplomatic solution was possible. According to the Italian press agency Ansa, Di Maio said: Italy has always been in the front row for a diplomatic solution and we can count on Italy to reach a diplomatic solution. One remarkable aspect of the Ukraine crisis is how the US and the UK have been so open with their intelligence on Russia, hoping to rob Vladimir Putin of the element of surprise. The Guardian’s Julian Borger and Dan Sabbagh have written a fascinating piece on the story behind this strategy. There have been regular briefings in Washington and London – sometimes from national security officials who do not often talk to the press – going into detail about potential Russian military tactics, regime change plots, and false-flag operations Moscow is allegedly planning to provide a pretext for invasion. Derek Chollet, the state department counsellor, said on Wednesday that the US and its allies wanted to warn of Russia possibly carrying out such operations in Ukraine “in order to hinder their ability to do so”. “We are trying to be as forthcoming as possible, to say that’s their play and what could be coming,” Chollet said. In doing so, the US and UK are trying to beat Russia at what has largely been Moscow’s game in recent years – or at least to provide better opposition. “I think it’s the west getting a little more savvy on using intelligence in an actionable way,” John Sipher, a veteran of the CIA’s clandestine service, said. “It’s what we used to call – when the Russians did it – information warfare, and it’s something we’ve never got very good at. You can read their full article here: US and UK trying to fend off Russian invasion by making intelligence public Vladimir Putin’s spokesperson Dmitry Peskov has said the situation is “escalating” in the Donbas region and referred to the “huge strike potential of Ukrainian forces”. He has been speaking in Moscow and his remarks are being summarised on the Twitter feed of the independent radio station Echo Moskvi. Peskov also said Putin had not yet answered the Russian Duma about recognition of the so-called “people’s republics” of Donetsk and Luhansk, the two breakaway regions in eastern Ukraine. On Tuesday the Duma called on the Russian president to recognise them as independent. Such a move would destroy any hope of peace via the Minsk accords, western leaders have said. Peskov also accused Nato of conducting “undisguised information aggression against Russia”. And he said the Russian foreign ministry was bringing to the west its reply on “the problems of security guarantees”. The Nato secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, said this week that Moscow was yet to answer the west’s written proposals on security, which were delivered last month in response to the Kremlin’s earlier demands. Here are some images released by Ukrainian military officials of a kindergarten in eastern Ukraine that they say has been damaged by shelling. The kindergarten is in Stanytsia Luhanska, a small town on the frontline of Ukraine’s war against Moscow-backed separatists. Nobody was hurt, according to the Ukrainian reports. The Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe reported “multiple shelling incidents along the line of contact in east Ukraine” earlier on Thursday, but is yet to release details. Nato is “deadly serious” about bolstering its eastern flank to counter Russian threats, the UK defence secretary, Ben Wallace, has said. Speaking before talks in Brussels between Nato defence ministers and their counterparts from Ukraine and Georgia, Wallace said: We are deadly serious in how we’re going to face the threat that is currently being posed to both Ukraine and potentially to our security. This is not a joke or a light matter. This is a real challenge to the stability of Europe. One of the ways we can make sure there is no overspill or escalation is to provide resilience to our partners at Nato and that’s what we’re all doing. Nato has asked its military commanders to draw up plans to send more forces to its eastern members, amid persistent fears of a potential Russian invasion of Ukraine. Wallace repeated that Russia was continuing to increase its forces along Ukraine’s border, despite claims of troop withdrawals from Moscow. We’ll take them at their word but we’re going to judge Russia by their actions and at the moment, the troop buildup continues. Quotes from AFP. And in case you missed it, here is an interesting profile of the British defence minister by the Guardian’s defence and security editor, Dan Sabbagh. Wallace, touted as a future secretary general of Nato, had a slow rise through the Conservative party but is now the most popular member of the cabinet among Tory activists. Shelling has been heard in the area of Donetsk airport and Elenovka village in eastern Ukraine, a witness has told Reuters. The Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe said earlier on Thursday that “multiple shelling incidents” had taken place along the line of contact in eastern Ukraine, where government forces have been facing Russian-backed separatists since the outbreak of conflict in 2014. Ukraine’s military on Thursday said Russian-backed forces in eastern Ukraine had fired shells at a village in the Luhansk region, hitting a kindergarten. The military said no injuries were caused. The Russian-backed separatists had earlier accused government forces of opening fire against them four times in the past 24 hours and said they were trying to establish if anyone had been hurt or killed. France has stepped up calls for a new security framework in Europe to replace the current “nearly obsolete or irrelevant” arrangements on arms control and transparency about troop movements. In an interview with the FT, France’s foreign minister, Jean-Yves Le Drian, said an agreement was needed to ensure long-term stability on the continent, adding that Vladimir Putin had to choose whether “to make Russia a destabilising power” or “the partner, in a new security and stability order in Europe”. The French president, Emmanuel Macron, who met Putin last week, has called for an overhaul of Europe’s security arrangements, while the European Commission has promised to come up with proposals. In the FT interview, Le Drian set out a three-phase approach to defusing the crisis: verified withdrawal of Russian forces from Ukraine’s borders; resumption of talks on the Minsk accords to end the fighting in Ukraine’s eastern Donbas region; and a new European security framework. He also said he did not believe Putin’s claims to be unaware of the actions of the Russian mercenary group Wagner in Mali. Wagner has been hired by the ruling military junta and is pushing out French troops deployed there since 2013 to fight Islamist insurgents. Le Drian said: I cannot understand how President Putin can be unaware of this situation since they are former Russian soldiers, transported by Russian planes and using Russian weapons. Given the amount of intelligence available to President Putin and his closeness to the Wagner chief … one must conclude he knows. He says he doesn’t but I don’t believe him. You can read the full interview here: France urges revamp of Europe’s security order in face of Russia threat Ryanair, one of the largest foreign airlines in Ukraine, has said it will continue to fly planes in and out of the country. The chief executive, Michael O’Leary, said it was the company’s “duty and obligation … to support the people of Ukraine as long as there is no war or missiles flying there,” Reuters reports. Speaking to a conference in Lisbon on Wednesday, he said: It is important not to panic … People need to get home and people want to leave and fly abroad to the EU … airlines have to provide that service. The statement is likely to be welcomed by Ukraine’s government, which has complained that warnings of war are damaging its economy and making it impossible to borrow on international financial markets. Last week the Dutch airline KLM announced it was halting flights to Ukraine, after the Dutch government called on its citizens to leave the country as soon as possible. The Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe has recorded “multiple shelling incidents along the line of contact in east Ukraine” in the early hours of Thursday, Reuters is reporting citing a diplomatic source. Russian-backed separatists in the region have accused Ukraine of opening fire four times in the last 24 hours. The source of the shelling and the seriousness of the incidents remains unclear. Shelling has occurred many times during the last eight years of conflict, but the latest reports only heighten tensions. The Russian army has said 10 military convoys with “large, heavy and dangerous loads” have left Crimea, the Interfax news agency has reported. Citing the press service of the Southern Military District, the Russian agency said the convoys had finished training exercises. Western politicians and intelligence agencies are deeply sceptical about Russian troop withdrawal claims; Nato’s secretary general has said the military buildup continues. Hello, this is Jennifer Rankin, taking over the liveblog from Samantha Lock. I’ll be bringing you the latest news on the Ukraine crisis, with EU leaders due to hold emergency talks in Brussels, while Nato defence ministers conclude their meeting. Before I hand over to my colleague, Jennifer Rankin, here is a quick recap of all the key developments so far: Russian-backed rebels in eastern Ukraine accused Kyiv government forces of using mortars to attack their territory, in violation of agreements aimed at ending the conflict. Ukraine has denied the accusations. A duty press officer of the Ukrainian Joint Forces Operation said its troops were fired upon but did not retaliate. Britain has finished its military training activities in Ukraine and the only remaining UK troops in the country are there to protect the ambassador, Britain’s armed forces minister, James Heappey, said on Thursday. The Conservative chair of the House of Commons defence select committee, Tobias Ellwood, says it is now too late to send Nato troops to defend Ukraine but allies could still impose a no-fly zone. Vladimir Putin could drag out the Ukraine crisis for months in an attempt to challenge western unity, the British foreign secretary, Liz Truss, has said. Britain’s defence intelligence chief made a series of rare public comments late on Wednesday, adding to the west’s scepticism that Russia is committed to de-escalating any conflict. Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has thanked Britain’s prime minister, Boris Johnson, for his support. Britain has finished its military training activities in Ukraine and the only remaining UK troops in the country are there to protect the ambassador, Britain’s armed forces minister, James Heappey, said on Thursday. Britain had supplied defensive weapons and training personnel to Ukraine. Heappey told the BBC early on Thursday morning: Within Ukraine itself, there is a small force that remains for the purposes of protecting the ambassador and her team. Beyond that, all of our training activity alongside the Ukrainians has been ceased and we’ve been very clear throughout that there will be no UK involvement in any conflict in Ukraine.” The Conservative chair of the House of Commons defence select committee, Tobias Ellwood, says it is now too late to send Nato troops to defend Ukraine but allies could still impose a no-fly zone. “This is a serious moment and we’re being tested,” he told Sky News’s Kay Burley from Kyiv. Ellwood added that Nato allies should stop “hiding behind” the fact that Ukraine is not a Nato member as an excuse not to send Nato troops to defend Ukrainian territory. Ukraine’s national guard is urging citizens to “keep calm”: Vladimir Putin could drag out the Ukraine crisis for months in an attempt to challenge western unity, the British foreign secretary, Liz Truss, has said. Truss wrote in the Daily Telegraph newspaper: We must not be lulled into a false sense of security by Russia claiming that some troops are returning to their barracks, while in fact the Russian military build-up shows no signs of slowing. There is currently no evidence the Russians are withdrawing from border regions near Ukraine. We must have no illusions that Russia could drag this out much longer in a brazen ploy to spend weeks more - if not months - subverting Ukraine and challenging Western unity. This is a test of our mettle.” Truss will visit Ukraine and Poland for talks with her ministerial counterparts before attending the Munich Security Conference with Nato foreign and defence ministers on Saturday. Britain’s defence intelligence chief made a series of rare public comments late on Wednesday, adding to the west’s scepticism that Russia is committed to de-escalating any conflict. In case you missed it, Lt Gen Sir Jim Hockenhull said more Russian armoured vehicles, helicopters and a field hospital were spotted despite the Kremlin’s assertion it has withdrawn troops. We have not seen evidence that Russia has withdrawn forces from Ukraine’s borders. Contrary to their claims, Russia continues to build up military capabilities near Ukraine. This includes sightings of additional armoured vehicles, helicopters and a field hospital moving towards Ukraine’s borders. Russia has the military mass in place to conduct an invasion of Ukraine.” US officials have described as “false” Russian claims that it is withdrawing troops. And Nato’s secretary general said on Wednesday that Russia was still building up its forces. Some more detail has emerged regarding the denial from Ukrainian government forces over accusations of having targeted separatist positions in the country’s east. Ukraine says its troops were fired upon but did not retaliate. A duty press officer of the Ukrainian Joint Forces Operation told Reuters by telephone: Despite the fact that our positions were fired on with prohibited weapons, including 122mm artillery, Ukrainian troops did not open fire in response. Authorities in Ukraine’s second largest city of Kharkiv are urging residents not to panic or succumb to “Russian propaganda” or “psychological attacks”. Officials in the city, a thriving technology hub just 40km from the Russian border, held an emergency meeting on Thursday morning local time, Interfax news agency reports. We appeal to the residents of our region and all Ukrainians not to spread panic, rumours and Russian propaganda, not to succumb to information and psychological attacks and not to play the aggressor. Our peace helps the government, diplomats and security forces to do their job to protect the state and Ukrainians. Ukraine is denying accusations made by Russian-backed separatists that its government forces conducted mortar attacks in the east of the country, Reuters reports. We will have more as this story continues to develop. Japan’s prime minister, Fumio Kishida, may speak to Vladimir Putin as early as Thursday night, a government source in Tokyo said. Arrangements were being made for the talks with the Russian president but a time had not yet been set. Western nations warned on Wednesday that there is a growing Russian military presence at Ukraine’s borders, contradicting Moscow’s insistence of a pullback. Kishida spoke to the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, on Tuesday and said Japan is ready to extend at least $100m in emergency loans to the country. Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has thanked Britain’s prime minister, Boris Johnson, for his support. “Let’s join forces to keep the peace!” Zelenskiy said in a post over Twitter on Thursday morning. We have some more background on the accusations that Russian-backed separatists have made against Ukraine government forces of alleged mortar attacks. It was not immediately clear how serious the incidents were and there was no immediate reaction from Ukraine or from the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), which has been monitoring the situation in eastern Ukraine but has pulled out some of its monitors in recent days, Reuters reports. Although such incidents have occurred many times over the last eight years, any escalation in conflict could fuel tensions between Russia and the west. The so-called “golden visas” offering fast-track residency in the UK for wealthy foreign investors are expected to be scrapped by the British government amid concerns over links between Russia and the UK and against the backdrop of mounting tensions, the BBC is reporting. A government source confirmed reports of an announcement due next week on tier 1 investor visas, which offer residency to those spending at least £2m, the broadcaster says. The scheme, introduced in 2008 to encourage wealthy people from outside the EU to invest in the UK, has been under review for some time, after concerns it is open to abuse. The Labour former minister Chris Bryant previously called for a full review of the scheme and accused the government of “giving out golden visas to dodgy Russian oligarchs” and said the system was used as a “backdoor loophole” to funnel dirty money into the UK. The expected announcement to scrap the visa comes amid pressure on ministers to cut UK ties to Russia over the threat of invasion to Ukraine. Russian-backed rebels in eastern Ukraine have accused Kyiv government forces of using mortars to attack their territory, in violation of agreements aimed at ending the conflict, Reuters reports. The agency cites a report published by the RIA news agency, claiming representatives of the self-proclaimed Luhansk People’s Republic accusing Ukrainian forces of using mortars, grenade launchers and a machine gun on Thursday. Representatives of Luhansk region in the Ukrainian-Russian ceasefire control group were quoted cited by Interfax news agency as saying: Armed forces of Ukraine have rudely violated the ceasefire regime, using heavy weapons, which, according to the Minsk agreements, should be withdrawn.” There has been no comment from Ukraine and no independent verification of the rebels’ claims. A more lighthearted story here from Guardian reporter Stephen Burgen on the ground in Barcelona, Spain. When Vladimir Putin and Emmanuel Macron faced each other at either end of an improbably long table last week, the image became a metaphor for the fraught negotiations over Ukraine. Now the table stakes have been raised after furniture makers in Spain and Italy both claimed that they were commissioned by the Kremlin to make the four-metre-long table. Read about the controversy here: Hello it’s Samantha Lock with you as we take a look at all the latest live coverage on the Ukraine crisis. Let’s jump in with a summary of the key events overnight. Russia has deployed another 7,000 troops to the border with Ukraine, a US official has said, as the Biden administration dismissed reports that Russia is withdrawing forces as it has claimed over the last two days. Many of them arrived in their position in the past 24 hours, the official claimed. It came amid multiple other reports that appear to contradict Moscow’s claims of a “partial” drawdown of Russian forces, including from Britain’s defence intelligence chief who said more Russian armoured vehicles, helicopters and a field hospital had been spotted. Nato’s secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, said Russia was continuing to send troops to what is now the biggest concentration of forces in Europe since the cold war. He said Nato was “prepared for the worst” but hoped for a diplomatic solution. The Russian defence ministry shared a video on Wednesday purportedly showing columns of military equipment and forces leaving the area that borders Ukraine. The British defence secretary, Ben Wallace, said the UK was doubling the number of personnel in Estonia and sending additional equipment, including tanks and armoured fighting vehicles. Four additional UK Typhoon jets landed in Cyprus on Wednesday. The US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, will be attending the Munich security conference in Germany on Friday to discuss Russia’s aggression towards Ukraine. The vice-president, Kamala Harris, will also be there, along with the German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, the UK foreign secretary, Liz Truss, and Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, Zelenskiy toured the country on Wednesday to mark a newly declared national unity day as cyber-attacks on the Ukrainian defence ministry stretched into a second day. Ukrainians were asked to fly the national flag and sing the national anthem. The head of the European Commission, Ursula von der Leyen, warned Russia that EU sanctions “can bite very hard” as she urged the Kremlin not to choose war. In a speech to the European parliament in Strasbourg, she said EU institutions and member states were working on a “robust and comprehensive package of potential sanctions” in cooperation with the US, UK and Canada.Robert Pattinson says he originally tried doing a different voice when playing Batman, but was told to stop because it was “absolutely atrocious”. Speaking to American talkshow host Jimmy Kimmel, Pattinson – who stars in the new Batman film directed by Matt Reeves – said there was something about putting the suit on that meant “you have to speak in a certain way”. “Everyone does this kind of gruff, gravelly thing, and I’m like, ‘I’m going to do the opposite, I’m gonna go really whispery’,” he said. “I tried to do it for the first two weeks, and it just looked absolutely atrocious, and they told me to stop doing it.” The Batman is due to be released next month, and also stars Zoë Kravitz as Catwoman and Paul Dano as the Riddler. Speaking to GQ earlier this month, Reeves described Pattinson as a “chameleon”, saying he “never plays a character with exactly his voice. The voice is one of his ways in.” In the same profile, Pattinson admitted that he sometimes made things up in interviews. Pattinson, 35, told Kimmel that he was not the first actor in the role to attempt to change the voice. “That’s what Christian Bale did on Batman Begins as well,” he said. “If you listen to the first Batman Begins teaser trailer, you can hear the original voice. I only found this out a couple of weeks ago.” Pattinson, who rose to fame as vampire heart-throb Edward Cullen in the Twilight films, said he had received practical advice from one of his predecessors. He told Kimmel: “I bumped into Christian Bale next door at a urinal and I guess that kind of inspired him to say the first thing you need to do in the batsuit is figure out a way to pee. “So I went into the costume department and was like, ‘First things first – I need a patch, I need a flap on the back’.” Sign up for the fun stuff with our rundown of must-reads, pop culture and tips for the weekend, every Saturday morning As well as Bale, Pattinson follows in the footsteps of George Clooney and Ben Affleck, who have all portrayed the character over the years; he was given the opportunity to try on the previous actors’ batsuits prior to filming. He added that the film brought his girlfriend, Suki Waterhouse, to tears. The Batman will be released in cinemas on 3 March in Australia, and 4 March in the US and the UK.I walk up the lane in the dark. Inside the car, all the glows betrayed the sky, but now I’m out, I can see its light goes deep. Deeper with every step. Soon I’m the only sound. I slow my walk and lighten my steps. I’m hoping for owls, which I’ve seen hunting here. What I hear is rodents, agitating the hedges to the left, and at my feet when I climb a stile, its surface shimmering with frost. Now in the field, I look right until the house appears. It’s a husk: chimneys from a square, like bottles in a carrier. Anyone who comes up here could find many things to ponder about what this place could represent with the slightest of metaphysical squints. I’ve done it myself. The ruin of what in the 17th century was a commanding house, on a hill – rare in itself here – now crumbling, and surrounded by a trifecta of time and place: the stone town of Stamford one way, the A1 another, the grand estate of Burghley the last. And in the middle of this intersection, Wothorpe Towers. Mainly I come here because it’s atmospheric. By day, the road-roar corrupts any serenity, but late at night, it lessens. And nothing’s lit. No unnecessary “accent lighting”, as planners call it. A few cottages with lampglow in the windows down the hill, and that’s it: a column of pristine darkness, or close enough. As a human, the towers conjure unease. Empty windows like skull sockets, evoking the rural spooks of MR James or Susan Hill. But the nature around it, particularly at night, unexpectedly calms the edge. The grand tree to the left. A tawny owl, which I can’t see but hear. And the luminous sky. Stars go back in time, of course. A glance at them and you’re seeing light that left its origin four, 10, hundreds of years ago, thousands for some. A million temporal journeys, and here you are to receive them all. I look at the tower, and at the stars. Think of the twitch of the rodents, and the hiss of the traffic. All parallel lifespans, all intersecting, and all here. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryAmazon drivers have been awarded an enforceable minimum rate of pay in the New South Wales Industrial Relations Commission, in what is believed to be a world first. From 1 March, Amazon Flex drivers will receive a minimum rate of pay, starting at $27.83 an hour and increasing to $37.80 by 1 July 2025, after a successful bid by the Transport Workers Union to overhaul the award in the commission. TWU national secretary Michael Kaine said the successful application would see pay rises of up to 45% for some drivers. The union said it was the first time rates had risen for owner drivers and contract couriers in 15 years. But a spokesperson for Amazon said the claim was “another attempt to grab headlines based on claims that are not true” and that its drivers were on average paid more than the new rates. “They have put in place a model that deliberately classifies workers as independent contractors so they can try to place them outside the system of protections,” Kaine said. “Amazon can now be held to account.” Amazon was not involved in the proceedings, which did not make any findings about their current practices. Amazon launched Flex in Australia in 2020 and promoted the parcel delivery service as a way for people to make extra money. It has about 2000 contractors signed up to the service, who all use their own cars and cover their overheads, like petrol. Many say it is impossible to make a living wage. One Amazon driver, who asked not to be named, said drivers are currently paid in a lump sum for blocks of work and have to send a request for any overtime. On Facebook, drivers share screenshots of blocks on offer. Recent ones show Amazon offering drivers $87-$90 for three hours of work. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning One of the “runs” on offer asks drivers to cross the city, delivering 39 packages to 33 stops within four hours – the first of which is 50 minutes away. To request overtime, the driver said they have to contact an overseas call centre, which reviews their application. “You have to call Amazon Flex support and tell them you have overtime, they say ‘oh yeah we will pay it’ but then you have to send email, and after two or three weeks they reply, often saying you are not eligible,” the driver said. A spokesperson for Amazon said this was “simply not true”. “We undertake a proactive pay reconciliation process across Australia, on a regular basis, to ensure delivery partners are paid for excess time spent (longer than the allocated block time) on delivery work. “Delivery partners in NSW driving a sedan earn an average of over $128 for a four hour block which already exceeds the new rates that will come into effect from 1 March.” Another driver, known only as Chris, who spoke after the decision was made, said at one point he lived in his van because he did not make enough money to rent a home. “I decided to stick it out and the way for me to do that and keep my head afloat was to live in my van for two years,” he said. “Today is a personal thing, that’s why I am feeling emotional … it creates a bit of closure for myself also.” A spokesperson for Amazon said this was “simply not true”.The federal government has revealed it paid $13.75m to the creator of the Aboriginal flag, Luritja artist Harold Thomas, to assume copyright, and $6.3m to two non-Indigenous businesses who held licences to the design, amid a clash in Senate estimates over whether the flag had been “colonised”. WAM Clothing received $5.2m and Wooster Holdings, $1.1m, a Senate estimates committee has been told. Ben Wooster, a Gold Coast-based businessman, has interests in both businesses. Wooster was previously director of Birubi Art, a company fined a record $2.3m by the federal court for selling fake Aboriginal art. The government’s legal costs in the matter ran to $500,000. The total package of more than $20m came from “additional” funds supplied by Treasury. In a heated exchange in Senate estimates, Greens senator, Lidia Thorpe, said the flag had been “colonised by the Australian government”. “The people I am bringing voice to in this place are very concerned that our flag has been colonised, given this is the colonisers’ headquarters and they’ve just purchased our flag,” Thorpe said. The LNP senator, Amanda Stoker, responded that the flag had been made free for all Australians, not “colonised”. “We have taken the flag from a situation where it was effectively being privately owned to a situation where, in accordance with the wishes of the Indigenous designer of the flag, it has been put in a position where it is safe, where it is available for Indigenous Australians, and indeed, all Australians full stop, because we want this to be a flag that gets the respect and enthusiasm it deserves,” Stoker said. “This is only about making things better. It is not about taking things away. And quite frankly the designer of the flag made it very clear that’s what he wanted for all Australians so that the flag could be the symbol of unity he wanted it to be.” Thorpe said the flag was now “Australian”. “Just like all Indigenous people,” Stoker replied. “They’re Australian. It’s wonderful.” “Really?” Thorpe replied. “Yes. I think it’s an uncontroversial proposition that Indigenous Australians are Australians,” Stoker said. Thorpe replied that it was “insulting” to her to be called an Indigenous Australian. “I’m not going to be told by a white senator that I’m an Indigenous Australian. That is insulting,” she said. “I’m a Gunnai Djap Wurrung Bralakaulung Gunditjmara woman,” Thorpe said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Labor senator Malarndirri McCarthy had asked if the commonwealth had plans for the flag’s future management and custodianship. McCarthy chaired a 2020 parliamentary committee which recommended a series of options to “free the flag” and manage it. The committee recommended that if the government could voluntarily secure Thomas’ copyright, the flag should be administered by an independent Aboriginal statutory authority, in the same way the Torres Strait Islander flag is managed by the Torres Strait regional authority. Blair Excell, of the National Indigenous Australians Agency, said the recommendation had been considered by government, but it was Harold Thomas’ “very strong desire, intent and preference” that the copyright be managed by the commonwealth. The Aboriginal flag image can now be freely reproduced on websites, clothing, in paintings and other artworks, used digitally and in any other medium without having to ask for permission or pay a fee. Previously, Thomas’ sole copyright allowed him to grant licences to other parties to make copies of the flag design, or refuse permission entirely. In 2018, he gave an exclusive licence to WAM Clothing, which raised the ire of many by issuing infringement notices to small non-profit Aboriginal organisations as well as the AFL and NRL for their past use of the design. In announcing the deal on 25 January, the Morrison government said the Aboriginal flag “will now be managed in a similar manner to the Australian national flag, where its use is free, but must be presented in a respectful and dignified way”. But the company which retains exclusive rights to produce flags for sale, Carroll and Richardson Flagworld, accused the government of misleading the public by saying it had “freed the flag”. “As far as the flag’s concerned, it’s really business as usual. The only difference is the royalties will be paid to the government, which the government’s already indicated they’re going to use to fund programs for Naidoc, which is perfectly acceptable,” Wayne Gregory, the managing director of Carroll &amp; Richardson Flagworld, said. “But what they’ve done is created the illusion that everything’s going to be free.” At Senate estimates, Excell said the media had misinterpreted the announcement. The media release announcing that the flag design would be freely available did acknowledge Flagworld’s continuing licence for the commercial production of flags and bunting – but this may not have been widely reported. “That is something that I think probably did contribute to some lack of understanding of the components,” he said. “But I think the government release was quite clear.”Picks of the week Dua Lipa: At Your Service Widely available, episodes weekly Does the world really need another celebrity interview podcast? If Lipa’s involved, the answer is yes. Not content with being one of the world’s finest pop stars – and launching her Service95 newsletter – we get this thoughtful batch of interviews; a far cry from the interruption-filled rambling of some celebrity pods. First up, the creative director of Balmain, Olivier Rousteing, talking about overcoming obstacles to get where he is today. Hannah Verdier The History of Marvel Comics: Black Panther Widely available, episodes weekly Nic Stone’s six-parter offers the official history of T’Challa, Marvel’s first Black superhero, starting with his 1966 debut against the backdrop of the civil rights movement. She promises “untold stories, missteps, twists and turns”, plus exclusive interviews with creators and the story of how Kamala Harris gave the Black Panther her approval. HV Shamima Begum: The Blame Game Widely available, all eps out now Seven years after leaving London to join Isis in Syria, Shamima Begum (now 22 years old) is a figure of hate for many people in the UK. As she remains in a detention camp, ITV journalist Rohit Kachroo unpicks her complicated case from the start, compiling extensive archive, testimonies and exclusive interviews. Hollie Richardson Bad Vibes Spotify, episodes weekly TikTok’s finest Talia Lichtstein and Alexis Barber are sick of people trying to pander to gen Z, so they’ve launched an unfiltered podcast under the Betches umbrella (which will make anyone born before the mid-90s feel ancient). Their offer to verbally rip Joe Rogan apart is suitably bold, as are their opinions on sex. HV Trapped in Treatment Widely available, episodes weekly Correcting “troubled teens” is big business in the US but, as Paris Hilton found out, the programmes can involve overmedication and physical abuse. Hilton is fighting for change and the way she describes being dragged out of her bed and taken to Provo Canyon treatment facility in the first episode should be enough to put a spotlight on the issue. HV Producer pick: Science Vs: Joe Rogan: The Malone Interview Chosen by George Cooper After outrage at Joe Rogan’s controversial interview with virologist Dr Robert Malone, the latest podcast from Science Vs looks to debunk the claims made during the podcast. Gimlet, itself owned by Spotify, produces Science Vs: a fun, irreverent podcast that combines science with humour. In the episode, Science Vs: Joe Rogan, host Wendy Zukerman quickly addresses the “elephant in the room”, having written to the Spotify CEO, calling the decision to support Rogan a “slap in the face”. From now, Science Vs will only make new episodes that aim to debunk misinformation on the platform. Will it make a difference? Who knows? But it’s an admirable stance regardless. Rather than doing a deep dive into each of the examples of supposed misinformation that the Science Vs team counted in the episode, they choose a few claims to focus on. Using these, Zukerman and her producer instead explore how data and information can be manipulated and focused to present something very different from the whole picture, from cherry picking your samples to using anecdotal evidence instead of facts. If you’ve ever wondered how to counter some of these kinds of claims, it’s certainly a useful tool to know where they come from. Talking points Love a TV companion podcast? The upcoming final season of BBC shows Killing Eve and Peaky Blinders will be accompanied by the return of the Obsessed With ... podcast series. And they’re trying something a bit different this time – BBC Three will air live recordings of the pods after the TV episodes. Why not try: Conversations with People Who Hate Me | Are you Michelle from Skins? Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about Hear Here or any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to the Guide, our weekly look at the best in pop cultureThe first thing I did when I sat down to write this piece was to have a conversation with Ben. Ben is a polite, clean-cut, white American thirtysomething with a five o’clock shadow, and he’s sitting against a plain blue wall. The only thing hanging in his study is a white frame with “less” on it in lower-case serif, which makes me think he’s a graphic designer. But the only thing I really know about Ben is he’s too easily distracted, and so am I. I have been randomly assigned to work with Ben on a website I use every day called Focusmate, which uses a sense of accountability to help you focus. The homepage kind of looks like a Google calendar: you book in a 50-minute session and the site matches you with someone else who wants to work in that time slot (this is mostly done randomly, although brand new users are matched with more experienced ones). When the time comes, you and your buddy get placed on a video call. You politely and briefly tell each other what you’re planning to use the time to do – and then you get on with it. When the pandemic hit and many of us started to work from home, I experienced what I like to call the kitchen drift. You sit down to write six emails, but halfway through the first you find that you’re making a cup of coffee, and then, actually, your bedroom is messy so why not just put a few clothes away, but that’s also where your phone is charging, and so why not treat yourself to a YouTube video or five – after all, no one is watching. Oh, look, it’s lunchtime. This kind of procrastinating didn’t mean I ended up working less, just that work that would take me a few hours in the office was dragging into my evenings and early mornings, eating up my social time. I know I’m not alone in this: after monitoring changes in web activity of their huge user base during the pandemic, NordVPN released a study that showed the average American’s working day was lengthened by three hours once they started working from home. I had tried other things in the past to cut down on distraction – putting blockers on my Chrome to stop me going on non-work websites, the popular “Pomodoro technique” in which you work for 25 minutes and then take a break for five (my breaks could last for hours). Discovering Focusmate saved me. First of all, it makes you think about what you can reasonably do in 50 minutes – the length of a session. It forces you to organise your day and prioritise your goal. Sitting down with another human being and sharing those goals creates accountability and urgency. The site was created by Taylor Jacobson. The brainwave came to him in 2015: a friend had a big presentation coming up but was a terrible procrastinator and was worried he wouldn’t get his preparation done in time. They decided they would stay on a Skype call, telling each other what they were doing and leaving the window open to make sure they were doing it. Both of them felt they were suddenly in a productive, concentrated state of flow they hadn’t previously managed to reach. I wanted to ask Jacobson about how he got from that idea to setting up a business, but when I put in my interview request he suggested that rather than a phone call we send each other voice notes on WhatsApp. “It can be a nice way to get high fidelity and do some back and forth, sans scheduling.” Who am I to argue with the person who has already improved my productivity threefold? I record my first message for him. In his reply, Jacobson says almost as soon as he had done the proto-Focusmate Skype call, he thought that “millions of people need this”. He speaks loftily about what he describes as the philosophical aims for the project. He says he had “a dramatic paradigm shift of vulnerability” and started to think: “What if we stopped trying so hard to figure out everything on our own, and just asked ourselves: what do we actually need in order to be successful?” He says he took a lot of inspiration from tribal psychology, nervous system co-regulation, concepts that have been popularised recently by Bessel van der Kolk’s 2014 book The Body Keeps the Score, a book about trauma that is rarely off the Amazon bestseller list. “Our lifestyles create constant stress in a way we weren’t designed to handle,” Jacobson says. “Our nervous systems are designed to handle imminent physical danger and help us survive. There’s a tiger, so I need to run or fight for my life, for example.” He says that in our daily lives we experience stressors that our nervous systems can’t distinguish from those life and death situations. “So socially and physically, we repress all of the fight/flight energy that is constantly being stimulated in our nervous system. A low attention span is basically just a symptom of stress. When we feel safe we can focus, and humans are designed to experience safety through connection with others, through the tribe.” When my session begins, I move my buddy to the corner of the screen and focus on what I need to be doing – constantly aware that we will be swapping notes about our progress at the end. For anyone who slouched their way through school but managed to pull it out of the bag during the final exam, you’ll know the feeling of working with a proctor – everything speeds up as you feel the time pressure. Since the start of the pandemic I have booked more than 180 of these sessions, although many users I match with have completed thousands. If you respect the session and set a clear goal, I find you can get more done in three 50-minute blocks than you could in a whole day not using it. What people are trying to achieve, and how much they think they can get done in the time, varies greatly. Some are just trying to read academic texts without distractions: “I made it to the end of the article!” is a common, joyous refrain at the end of a session. Not everyone uses it for work – in early morning sessions you get people writing stream-of-consciousness “morning pages”, or even just reading the paper. I’ve had a couple of people use it just for tidying their room. Occasionally, at the end of the session, we talk a bit more about what we worked on. One young woman in Philadelphia tells me she would never have completed her undergraduate degree in psychology without hundreds of Focusmate sessions. A teacher in Oregon says it has changed the way she marks papers, and has given her more demarcation between work and life. By connecting with someone on a video call, you’re providing some of those tribe-like feelings; it stops you feeling like just a little atom alone at your kitchen table. “When you mix together some structure, some accountability, and the human element, we move into an optimal, focused state,” says Jacobson. This might all seem like some deep psychology for an app that basically puts you on a Zoom call with a stranger, but Jacobson is far from the only one who is concerned that our lack of focus is now a central societal problem. There are big concerns that technology has stolen our ability to enter any kind of flow state, and this has been worsened by the disintegration between our personal and work lives. Recent books like Oliver Burkeman’s Four Thousand Weeks (named after the amount of time most of us have on earth), Jenny Odell’s How to Do Nothing and Johann Hari’s Stolen Focus: Why You Can’t Pay Attention are part of an ever-growing literature that suggests an inability to use time meaningfully is one of the central problems facing the world today. Jacobson says that there were almost a million Focusmate sessions last year, and his aim is for the platform to one day reach 100 million users. People often ask me whether there are any weirdos on the site – Chatroulette, a somewhat utopian website that launched in the late 00s and lets you speak with a random person anywhere in the world, quickly descended into little more than a meet-up for masturbators – but I have never been matched with anyone who wasn’t using the service genuinely. Jacobson says the high barriers to entry (you have to create a profile and talk about why you want to join) mean in the site’s history there has only ever been a tiny handful of isolated complaints, all dealt with by his team. A bigger problem is that it does feel as though its initial power can wane over time. Sometimes, by the fourth session of the day, I take my pledge to my working partner less seriously and end up distracted. In those moments I go full nuclear mode and share my screen with my Focusmate – the site offers this functionality – obliterating my right to privacy and creating an extra layer of accountability. This is incredibly effective – although make sure the Guardian doesn’t find out about this, as I’m sure it violates their privacy policy in 12 different ways. About 11 Focusmate sessions later, I’m now at the end of working on this piece – I finish with Hilla, on the west coast of the US, who is making some changes to an online course. At the end, she asks me what my article is about, and I lie and tell her it’s about the US midterms. Talking to your Focusmate about your Focusmate article? I have to draw the line somewhere.Nasa is setting up two space missions that will help us understand space weather and the constantly changing space environment. Space is filled with charged particles and magnetic fields that originate on the Sun. This “solar wind” is turbulent and can damage technology on Earth and in space. Because it is a form of radiation, it can also be harmful to astronauts. Nasa’s two new missions will study the origin of the solar wind and the turbulence within it. The Multi-slit Solar Explorer (Muse) will study the forces responsible for the heating of the Sun’s outer atmosphere, and the flares and eruptions that help drive space weather. To do this it will use a camera that captures extreme ultraviolet radiation coming from the hot gas in this atmospheric region of the Sun. The HelioSWARM mission consists of nine small spacecraft that will fly in formation to simultaneously measure the conditions of the solar wind across a larger area of space. This will allow the first large scale, in-situ study of turbulence in the solar wind. The missions cost $192m (£140m) and $250m respectively and are expected be ready for launch no later than February 2026.A new set of stamps is being launched to pay tribute to David Gentleman, the designer credited with changing the face of the British stamp. Gentleman, who has been hailed as the most prolific and influential British stamp designer, designed more than 100 stamps for Royal Mail between 1962 and 2000, and provided many more designs that were not used. Royal Mail collaborated with him to choose a selection of some of his most famous and influential images. The tribute to Gentleman is notable as it is the first time Royal Mail has dedicated an entire issue to a designer of its commemorative stamps. David Gold, a spokesperson for Royal Mail, said Gentleman was “one of the foremost artists involved in British stamp design”. “For over half a century, he has made an enduring contribution to British stamp design. His work continues to influence and inspire designers today.” The first designs of Gentleman’s that were successful were for National Productivity Year in 1962, and used symbolic arrows. Three years later he wrote to the new postmaster general, Tony Benn, in response to a general invitation for ideas about stamps, recommending more interesting subjects than had been featured previously. He also proposed a new size of stamp and introduced a small cameo of the Queen, based on her profile as depicted by Mary Gillick on coins from 1953. His most recent issued stamp designs were for the millennium timekeeper miniature sheet, depicting the stylised hands of a clock and globe. The new set of six stamps will be available from Friday, and feature the 1962 National Productivity Year, the 900th anniversary of the Battle of Hastings and the 25th anniversary of the Battle of Britain. Royal Mail has issued commemorative stamps in the past to celebrate historic events and notable figures, such as stamps commemorating the Rolling Stones and celebrating 150 years of rugby union. Gentleman said: “Stamps were fun to design, though squeezing a lot into a small space wasn’t easy. At first it was difficult to fit in the Queen’s head until I turned it into the simple profile which is still used today. “Stamps I particularly enjoyed designing were for the Battle of Hastings 1066, and Social Reformers.”After a treacly, uneven third season, The Marvelous Mrs Maisel (Amazon Prime) appears to have found its fangs again. “Revenge … I crave it. I am completely consumed by the need for it,” purrs Midge/Miriam (nobody seems to call her Midge any more), rediscovering her sharp edges, now back on a small stage in a dingy nightclub, with an act that is heavy on the F-word. This show is never better than when Miriam is having to fight tooth and nail for her spot in the limelight, and it is a welcome relief to see her having to do it again. “That’s life. Shit happens,” she declares, ending the routine on a surprisingly acerbic note. I say surprising because, while the first two seasons were a lot of fun, Mrs Maisel found herself in a rut during the third, which paired huge set pieces with a meandering plot and episodes that felt far longer than they were. Season three all-but guaranteed that Miriam was going to make it big, until her seemingly certain path to stardom and home ownership hit not so much a road block as a solid brick wall, when she accidentally(ish) outed the biggest star in the world to his adoring audience. It appears that few picked up on the Judy Garland references that felt a little ahead of their time, but it was enough to get her fired from her fame-making tour, and bring her back to where it all started. This down-in-the-dirt, underdog position suits Mrs Maisel far more than the big-bucks razzle-dazzle of a dance troupe performing on a huge stage for a massive audience of soldiers, for example. We pick up precisely where we left off, with Miriam on the runway, pleading for her job back, and Susie – whose financial entanglements make losing the opportunity of a lifetime one of the least stressful parts of the episode – lamenting the fact that she left her client alone for four hours, “and you blow your career and buy an apartment”. The stakes are relatively low in this world, though, even when it comes to outing closeted superstars, or insurance fraud and theft on a grand scale. The resolutions come quickly and neatly. This is partly why I find it hard to love this series, despite frequently admiring it. While the balance between domesticity and ambition is part of its fabric – this is a female stand-up comedian with two children in 1960, after all – it is tricky to muster up the same amount of enthusiasm for a sequence about how Miriam will balance her various store credits and what happens when the milk delivery fails to turn up, as it is for a fearsome standup set that showcases the best of Rachel Brosnahan’s magnificent, mesmerising performance. Here, Brosnahan makes light work of a woman reduced once again to the lowly status of “girl comic”, albeit a girl comic who has made more enemies than she realises. That said, the zip and bounce really are back, whether that’s Susie and Joel having a characteristically quick and fiery conversation about money, or Susie and Miriam drunkenly bitching about mediocre male comics who make a living from punchlines that are visible from a mile away. The smoother edges have been roughed up, scoured away, and there’s an intriguing conflict emerging between the importance of financial security and the pursuit of art and satisfaction. This time, Amazon is releasing two episodes per week, rather than the whole season at once, and for a show that can be rich, it proves to be a clever act of moderation.Across the world, public murals have given bursts of cultural and political expression to cityscapes. Some of their creators, such as Banksy, have even become millionaires in the process. But in Ireland, a collective of street artists known as Subset are about to enter a court battle as part of a 10-year “game of cat and mouse” with Dublin city council over three murals, including one celebrating the life of Sir David Attenborough. Under Irish law, organisers of public murals need planning permission. Subset argues Dublin is behind the times and should embrace street culture as others cities have, such as Melbourne where the authorities say artists are free to paint murals in certain zones providing permission has been granted by the building owner and the content is apolitical. Previously, they say they have complied with any enforcement proceedings on the 12 sites they have used across the city by painting over the murals or replacing the mural in question with a fresh work of art, any time they were issued with warnings or enforcement proceedings. The council is now taking the artists to court for alleged breaches of planning laws which require prior consent for public murals. But Subset have decided to fight legal proceedings in relation to three of their murals – the Attenborough work, another known as “horseboy” celebrating the traditional horse fair in city centre Smithfield and a third which marked mental health awareness month. Subset said all their murals are painted with permission and consultation of the buildings occupants or owners but are calling on the government to liberalise the rules governing murals. “We have put forward proposed amendments to the laws in conjunction with architects, solicitors, but we were left just going around the houses; speaking with city council representatives, Arts Council representatives, ministers and really to no avail. “We thought the only way we could actually grab the attention and focus of the city council was to engage in the legal proceedings that they have brought against us because we have tried on multiple occasions to have this conversation and got nowhere,” said a spokesperson who requested anonymity as do all the collective’s artists. Subset’s works are well known in Dublin with impactful takes on contemporary issues including Covid, LGBTQ+ rights and the abortion referendum in 2018. The Attenborough mural which covers a gable wall and rear extension on a privately owned house close to the city centre took 10-12 people eight days to paint and was designed as a tribute for his 93rd birthday in 2019. Horseboy took two artists five days and is based on a photograph taking by an Australian artist who agreed to his work being the basis on the work on a council house wall. Proceedings were initiated in 2020 with a district court hearing scheduled for next month. In many cities across the world, public murals are illegal but authorities turn a blind eye to their existence but Subset has said that other cities have relaxed the rules in certain zones. “We don’t want artists to be in a position of weakness, which is the case when you don’t have the law on your side,” said the spokesperson. Dublin city council said it could not comment on active legal proceedings.Restrictions on political topics in schools will harm young people by curbing discussions about the polarised arguments and issues they are exposed to on social media, according to the government’s former mental health champion. Natasha Devon said young people from minority backgrounds stood to be the biggest losers if the new guidelines meant teachers in England were afraid to provide students with a safe environment to debate issues. “I work with 14- to 18-year-olds and my experience is that young people are bringing ideas from social media, from activists that they admire, into the classroom,” said Devon, who was the first ever mental health champion for schools. “Teachers are trying to help them to make sense of those ideas, and discuss them in a way that is non-partisan. But the desire to address these things in the classroom is 100% coming from young people, it’s a not a case of indoctrination by teachers.” This week the education secretary, Nadhim Zahawi, published guidance aimed at teachers in England, as part of an effort by the government to dampen down critical debate about the history of the British empire, and controversy over the role of leaders such as Winston Churchill. The guidance – which is a reformulation of existing statutory regulations and legal duties – stresses the need for impartiality when teaching “contentious” issues such as imperialism. It cautions teachers against adopting or advocating “extreme” political positions such as those it claims are espoused by the Black Lives Matter movement, which is singled out by name in the document as needing to be balanced. But Devon compared the guidance to the section 28 regulations concerning classroom discussion of homosexuality in force during the late 1980s and 1990s. “With section 28 it didn’t say you can’t talk about homosexuality, it said you were not allowed to ‘promote’ homosexuality,” she said. “But what ended up happening is that no one talked about it and I think the same thing is going to happen now, which will harm minority students by taking away their space to explore issues like race and social justice that are affecting them all the time.” Rowena Seabrook, Amnesty International UK’s humans rights education manager, agreed, saying: “The government’s guidance for schools is unnecessary – and it will have a chilling effect in classrooms across the country. “Suggesting that teachers should not use material from social justice movements such as Black Lives Matter is entirely partisan, and lacks balance and safe spaces for students to explore issues labelled ‘controversial’.” Natasha Robinson, a researcher at the University of Oxford who studies how controversial subjects are taught in history classrooms, said the guidance “leaves teachers with the impression that they could be bludgeoned for most of what they teach”. She added: “Giving teachers a list of thing that they shouldn’t talk about, or of things they should avoid, is very different from giving them practical strategies in the classroom. When a student makes a racist comment or a very partisan political comment, how do teachers deal with that? That takes a great deal of skill. And this report – because it’s so vague – just comes across as scare-mongering.” Nick Lowles, chief executive of Hope Not Hate, a campaigning antifascism and antiracism group, said the DfE’s guidelines seemed designed to create headlines about “culture wars” rather than improving education. “Turning the need to teach children about racism and prejudice into a political football is cynical and does little to help schools navigating this complex topic,” Lowles said.On 4 September 2020, Roger Michell and Jim Broadbent came to Venice to unveil a British film called The Duke. The forecast was stormy and the festival was in peril, staged in defiance of a global pandemic, with tubs of hand sanitiser on the red carpet and thermal cameras at the doors. The premiere shouldn’t have worked and yet somehow it did. Afterwards, Broadbent recalls, he and the director unhooked their masks and breathed a sigh of relief. “I remember turning to Roger and saying: ‘Oh, I am glad that we came.’” I was in Venice that day; I was glad they came, too. The premiere was a hit and The Duke was a hoot, a boisterous true-crime caper, pungently set in early 60s Newcastle and spotlighting the theft of a famous oil painting. Michell’s timing was impeccable. He delivered the perfect picture for the perfect moment, a tonic for flagging spirits. For a few hours at least, The Duke felt like a reaffirmation of core values, a tale of the past that pointed to a brighter tomorrow. Indirectly, it assured us that everything was OK. But 18 months later, the world is still waiting to see it. Onscreen, The Duke plays out as a comedy. Offscreen, however, the film is a tragedy – at once a casualty of the pandemic and a posthumous classic. Covid scuppered its scheduled release. Michell died suddenly in September last year. The film’s cast and crew are still reeling, in shock. I speak to Nicky Bentham, The Duke’s producer. She explains that she now sees her role as that of the director’s spokesperson. She wants to honour his intentions and celebrate his legacy. But she’s still processing the loss; can’t quite believe that he’s gone. She had hoped the film would be the first of many collaborations with Michell. Instead, it turned out to be the last. “I get quite emotional talking about it,” she says. “This is like therapy for me.” Perhaps fittingly, The Duke spins the tale of a dead man’s masterpiece, whisked from under our noses and securely hidden from view. It stars Broadbent as the true-life Kempton Bunton, a soapbox revolutionary and wannabe playwright who stashed a stolen Goya in his back bedroom as part of a crackpot scheme to secure free TV licences for the nation’s pensioners. Along the way, Michell juggles knockabout farce with kitchen-sink social realism; domestic spats with soaring rhetoric. Ostensibly, The Duke is a salute to the rackety British underdog – a comic tradition that extends back through Tony Hancock, Lucky Jim and The Lavender Hill Mob. But it is also, inadvertently, a film about its creator. It shows us what moved him, what drove him. His presence back-shadows what we see in the frame. “This is his last film,” says Helen Mirren, who co-stars as Dorothy Bunton, Kempton’s pinched, harried wife. “And it’s a wonderful film to be his last because it carries within it all his strengths as a film-maker. His brilliant technique. His warmth as a person. His wonderful understanding of life and humanity. And we all recognised that as we were making it. We all knew that we were in Roger’s film.” It’s curious, in hindsight, to realise that there was ever anything so instantly recognisable as a Roger Michell production. Most successful directors like to announce their presence and perfect a signature style. Michell, though, was the quiet man of British cinema, a sort of expert butler in the wings. In the course of an eclectic 40-year career, he glided from the stage to TV to feature film-making and back again. He directed big, splashy Britpics (1999’s Notting Hill) and small, knotty human dramas (Venus, The Mother). He shot Hollywood pictures (Changing Lanes, Hyde Park on Hudson) and oversaw intimate documentaries (the acclaimed Nothing Like a Dame and the forthcoming Elizabeth, completed just before his death). He created fine, lasting work but he flew under the radar. Bentham would largely go along with that. Actually, she says, that’s what she loved about the man: the fact that he could turn his hand to anything and find a home in any setting. “Probably he flew under the radar because he wasn’t paying attention to the radar. He was paying attention to the story, the people, the script.” She sighs. “If he were more guided by trends – by public opinion or branding – he might have been seen as a landmark director of a certain genre. But that wasn’t him. He was never guided by external forces.” It’s clear he was loved. His cast and crew all adored him. Broadbent first worked with Michell on the 2013 film Le Week-End, in which he played an anguished old academic rattling around Paris. After that the pair became friends. They were north London neighbours. Michell was imaginative, generous, entirely without ego. “He was my favourite director,” Broadbent says. “He allowed everyone to be the best possible version of themselves.” The Duke’s co-writers, Richard Bean and Clive Coleman, paint a similar picture. They recall that the project was initially offered to several other directors, who either weren’t interested or weren’t available. “The key thing that Roger brought was a kind of calm,” Bean says. “He made us all confident that the film was going to get made. There was no anxiety, or histrionics, or drama. The sense was just: ‘Oh, here’s the guy who knows what he’s doing.’ And all of a sudden everyone’s happy.” “Yes, he was a calming presence,” says Coleman. “I think that’s probably why actors loved him. Whatever neuroses actors suffer from, he was somehow the great antidote.” Finally, I hear from Anna Maxwell Martin, who plays a supporting role in The Duke. Martin says that she first met the director on a play, Honour, at the National theatre, and “fell in love with him straight away”. The pair were married between 2002 and 2020 and had two daughters together, Maggie and Nancy. “Roger only made films and plays about human interaction,” she explains. “That seems obvious. Aren’t all films and plays about human interaction? But no, they aren’t. They get swamped by bells and whistles. The relationships get lost.” In Michell’s work, she feels, the human element was always front and centre. “I suppose I had a particularly intimate experience of working with Roger,” Martin says. “He thought I mucked about far too much. ‘Put the cheese down, dear!’ he’d shout across the set as I was lobbing about a wheel of cheddar, just because. He’d sit in the corner with a little handheld monitor, like a monk. Never being demonstrative. Just doing the work, serving the script.” The Duke wrapped production just before the first lockdown. It premiered to glowing reviews at Venice and Telluride and was set for release in autumn 2020. Cameron McCracken, managing director of Pathé UK, says that the plan was to capitalise on the festival buzz and introduce it into the all-important awards corridor, riding the wave through the Baftas to a possible finish at the Oscars. But Covid rates kept spiking and the film’s success depended on an older audience showing up. The release was delayed a full year, to September 2021, before being pushed back yet again in response to Omicron. It has been a wretched situation, an ongoing exercise in crisis management. But McCracken doesn’t see how it could have been handled differently. Pathe, he points out, is a small independent outfit. It develops, produces and finances perhaps three or four films every year. So the stakes are high; every release is a gamble. He says: “If we get it wrong, I’ve destroyed the company.” Next Friday, two years after it went before the cameras, Michell’s film comes limping across the finish line. McCracken is pleased to have at last seen it through, but it is a bittersweet coda; hardly the triumph he had envisaged. “This was supposed to be a great time,” he says. “It was going to mark the moment a modest, understated, brilliant director suddenly came into his own. I looked at The Duke as a coronation.” Instead, it’s a funeral, which feels rubbish and wrong. McCracken is sad that the delayed release appears to have largely shut the film out of the awards conversation. Mostly, he’s upset that Michell never had the chance to watch this quintessentially British movie on home soil. “The fact that he was denied that is horrible,” he says. Ultimately, though, it’s the work that remains. One winter evening I revisit The Duke in more humdrum surroundings (in the living room, on a laptop), 18 months after its Venice premiere. There, on screen, as if by magic, is Broadbent’s glorious performance as loudmouthed Bunton, a socialist upstart who puts his faith “not in God but in people”. He is berating shopfloor managers in Newcastle. He is telling the Old Bailey jury: “I’m you and you’re me.” That we are stronger together; that we build a better world, too. The film, I am relieved to note, is just as good as it ever was. But its circumstances have changed and those ripples are still being felt. What was conceived as a rousing class-war comedy now looks slightly different. It is shop-damaged and tragedy-struck a victim of human frailty; perhaps a reflection of it, too. “The film doesn’t change,” says McCracken. “What’s changed is the emphasis of the message and how that is read by the public. Because when we started shooting, the idea that Kempton speaks to in the film – that a society is only as strong as its weakest link – might have seemed a bit abstract. We couldn’t know that we were moving into two years of Covid, death and insecurity, where our society would be judged on a daily basis by how well it protects its oldest and most vulnerable. So that journey’s been fascinating. It somehow makes the film feel more trenchant.” Michell died on 22 September 2021 at his London home. He was 65. The cause of death was never made public, but his family has now confirmed that he died of a heart attack. He is survived by four children (including Harry and Rosanna by his first wife, the actor turned lawyer Kate Buffery) and 15 feature films, heaps of stage productions, buckets of TV dramas. He leaves us The Duke, which is a particularly lovely parting shot. Coleman says he was devastated when Bentham called him with the news. Then he attended the funeral and came away feeling better. “It was an absolutely extraordinary experience,” he says. “I almost made notes and gave them to my family. The funeral was held in a church in Hampstead and there must have been 350 people there, everyone he’d ever come into contact with; the place was rammed to the rafters. And as well as being sad, it was also fantastically uplifting and joyous. I think that Roger was a truly joyous man, actually. That’s why The Duke is a great testament to his personality. But in a strange way, I think that the funeral was, too.” It is a drizzly afternoon in mid-February and Jim Broadbent has been speaking to reporters all day. The journey that began alongside Michell on the Venice red carpet wraps up here, in a London hotel, staring down the barrel of a laptop and doggedly moving from one interview to the next. The actor is dry-mouthed and exhausted; he says that he has never talked quite so much in his life. Nonetheless he’s determined to do right by the film. “It’s an emotional day for me,” he says. “It’s not enjoyable, but it’s something I want to do. Because this is the last chance to celebrate what a brilliant director Roger was, and what a wonderful person he was. That makes me want to promote the film more than I would normally want to promote a film. I want to put it out there and remember what we did. I want to tell people about it. To tell them about him.” • The Duke is out in the UK on 25 FebruaryDevelopers will be forced to help fund the construction of social housing in Victoria through a new levy that has been described as “fantastic” by advocates for homeless people but which the property industry says will worsen housing affordability. From 1 July 2024, new Victorian developments of three or more dwellings and lot subdivisions of three or more must contribute 1.75% of the as-if-complete market value to a social housing growth fund. Victoria’s treasurer, Tim Pallas, said the contribution would affect fewer than 30% of all residential planning permits but would raise more than $800m each year, paying for up to 1,700 new social and affordable homes and supporting 7,000 jobs in the construction sector every 12 months. “This is a big, generational reform,” Pallas told reporters on Friday. On a house valued at the median Melbourne price of $1.1m, the levy would equate to about $19,600. Jenny Smith, chief executive of the Council to Homeless Persons, described it as a “fantastic” initiative. “As the population grows, the demand also for social housing grows, and that’s what people forget – that as a state, as we become richer as more and more people contribute to our economy, we have to do more to take care of people who are priced out of the market at the bottom of the scale,” Smith said. But with developers likely to pass the cost on to buyers, and house prices already at record highs, the property industry has questioned why homebuyers have been targeted. Matthew Kandelaars, chief executive of the Urban Development Institute of Australia’s Victorian branch, said homebuyers should not be responsible for the historical underinvestment in social housing by successive state governments. “We do appreciate the urgent and critical need for greater funding for social housing, but what disappoints us is ultimately it is shifting the cost from the government’s balance sheet to homebuyers,” he said. Kandelaars said first home buyers and young families would be most affected by the levy, given they are more likely to be buying new properties, including apartments in metropolitan Melbourne and house and land packages in growth areas. “It’s a missed opportunity. We think that there should have been a broader base to this tax, it shouldn’t have to fall solely to the feet of Victorian new homebuyers,” he said. While some local councils in New South Wales and South Australia require developers to pay a contribution towards the cost of providing social or affordable housing, this is the first state government scheme to be introduced. The Victorian government on Friday also announced social housing properties would be exempt from paying council rates from mid next year. The rates reform will be phased in over four years from 1 July 2023 and will only apply to social housing properties. Housing minister Richard Wynne said the $54m currently spent on public housing rates will be reinvested into public housing maintenance, upgrade works and better open spaces. Both initiatives will apply to all local government areas in metropolitan Melbourne, as well as the regional cities of Ballarat, Greater Bendigo and Greater Geelong. “Today really is about the biggest reform to social housing since the formation of the Housing Commission in the 1940s,” Wynne said. It follows the $5.3b “big housing build” announced by the government in 2020 to fund 12,000 new social and affordable homes in four years. Katelyn Butterss from the Victorian Public Tenants Association said the rates exemption would be a “huge relief” to those who live in old public housing stock, which is in “desperate need” of modification. She welcomed the additional funding for the social housing growth fund but noted it traditionally has funded only community housing projects. “We call on the government to ensure that at least a portion of these new homes are publicly owned and managed,” Butterss said. The Property Council of Australia’s Victorian executive director, Danni Hunter, said it was the 10th new property-based tax introduced by the Andrews Labor government. “At a time where other jurisdictions in Australia are discussing tax reform, Victoria remains the only state in Australia that is implementing tax increases,” she said. “This is yet another wrong tax at the wrong time.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The state’s opposition leader, Matthew Guy, described the reforms as “completely unfair” for first home buyers and maintained he would introduce “no new taxes” if elected in November. Smith, however, said the measures would make “very little difference to developers or homebuyers in the fullness of time”. “We pay for it anyway in our hospitals and psych hospitals and prisons. There are so many people using those very expensive beds, who really just need a home and the support to keep them,” she said. “The international evidence shows that it actually settles house prices down when there’s enough social housing in the community.”The Graham Norton Show 10.35pm, BBC One Dawn French leads the guest list on tonight’s show, ahead of her performance alongside Jennifer Saunders in the upcoming Death on the Nile adaptation. Tick, Tick … Boom! star Andrew Garfield, comedian Rob Beckett, and, Magic Mike himself, Channing Tatum, also join Norton in the studio, while the Australian-British singer Natalie Imbruglia marks her return to music with a performance of her new single Nothing Missing. Hollie Richardson Your Garden Made Perfect 8pm, BBC Two The show that lingers for a bit too long over garden transformations heads to London, where a sloping lawn suggests a pretty obvious solution: terracing. The execution is full of smart ideas, however, as is the revamp of a narrow space outside a Manchester mental health clinic. Jack Seale Death in Paradise 9pm, BBC One Reggae musicians sway behind mics, a hooded figure appears, a gun is brandished and a singer ends up with a bullet in the head. So runs the set-up for tonight’s episode of this lighthearted Caribbean crime caper, plunging DI Neville Parker (Ralf Little) into more enjoyably frothy procedural antics. Alexi Duggins Gogglebox 9pm, Channel 4 Nearly 10 years after viewers wondered what the appeal of watching other people watching telly would be, here comes Gogglebox’s 19th series. The Siddiquis and Dave and Shirley are among the armchair favourites returning. And, from Boris Johnson to the Beijing Winter Olympics, there is plenty to dissect this week. Hannah Verdier A Discovery of Witches 9pm, Sky Max In this supernatural caper’s final episode, Matthew is in a bad place (read: being tortured to death by Benjamin). It’s up to Diana to unite various vampires and witches to save him. Amid earnest debate about “daemon DNA”, the cast is still having fun – especially Trevor Eve as the nefarious Gerbert. Henry Wong Dating No Filter 10pm, Sky Max Rosie Jones and the hosts of The Receipts podcast help pick apart blind dates. And nobody is impressed by cocky Kyle the skater (“I hope she’s hot, and potentially blonde,” he declares). HR Film choice Texas Chainsaw Massacre (David Blue Garcia, 2022), Netflix “Try anything and you’re cancelled, bro.” Find out if that threat works on Leatherface in this social media-era reboot of the slasher saga. Ignoring the seven sequels, and beginning 50 years after the events of the 1974 original, it follows Lila (Elsie Fisher, so good in Eighth Grade, here facing terrors of a more visceral nature), her sister Melody (Sarah Yarkin) and other friends. They set up a business in a ghost town in the Lone Star State, only to fall foul of the hitherto dormant killer. So it’s lucky the “final girl” from the first film is still around and tooled up, isn’t it? Simon WardellSomalia’s displacement camps are coming under intense pressure with more than 300,000 people leaving their homes in search of food and water so far this year as the country experiences its worst drought in decades. People have been walking miles to camps, already home to those escaping the country’s protracted violence, after three consecutive failed rainy seasons since October 2020 that have decimated crops and livestock. Somalia has more than 2,400 such settlements, which already lack resources. The UN has warned that Somalia is “staring at a potential catastrophe” this year. “This camp is overcrowded, with no access to food, water and healthcare. We have not had water for one week. The truck that used to bring us water did not come,” said Mohamud Mohamed, who travelled 80 miles to a displacement camp in Luuq, in southern Gedo province, after most of his village’s livestock died of thirst. “People eat one meal a day or two, if they are lucky, and making tea counts as a meal here. The situation is extremely difficult.” According to the UN, more than a quarter of Somalia’s population urgently needs food aid. About 1.4 million children under five are likely to be acutely malnourished. Conditions are expected to get worse, with no rains due until April. The famine early warning systems network has warned April’s rains will probably be below average, which humanitarians say would increase the likelihood of a famine. Islamic Relief said that during a visit to the Bardhere camp in Gedo, its staff found people living in basic shelters with little food and water, with many on “the brink of death”. The charity said there had been several deaths, including that of a baby, during their visit. At the Luuq camp, the Irish Catholic NGO Trócaire said it had found starving children. On Wednesday, Care International’s Somalia country director Iman Abullahi said schools at displacement camps were overcrowded because of the new arrivals. Figures from the UN refugee agency suggest most of the 317,000 people displaced since January left their homes because of drought. Almost a fifth of Somalia’s population is now internally displaced. “The camps are the only place they know there is help, so if all of your food is gone and livestock is dead you go there,” said Aliow Mohamed, disaster response manager at Islamic Relief. “This means growing pressure on existing IDP [internally displaced people] camps. Many are living in shelters just made of plastic sheeting and poles. These camps have nothing. As they grow more crowded, there are more issues with hygiene, water supply and protection.” He said farmers had already been hit hard by the locust swarms in early 2020 that wiped out crops. Save the Children said that at least 700,000 livestock had died in two months last year. The UN reported some areas have lost 80% of their livestock. Mohamed, at the Luuq camp, said his family lost 80 goats and 12 cows in three months last year. “Everyone left the village,” he said. “If we stayed any longer, my children and elderly parents would be the next to die of hunger.” At the beginning of the month, 43 died and more than 14,000 were displaced when fighting over land for pasture and water erupted between two clans. Those displaced are now living in makeshift shelters. A $1.46bn (£1.07bn) humanitarian appeal for Somalia launched in December has only received 2% of the money needed. Etienne Peterschmitt, the Somalia representative for the UN’s Food and Agriculture Organization, said the humanitarian response to the crisis had been more effective than in the past, but needed scaling up to ease the rising pressure on displacement camps. “A concerted humanitarian scale-up by the international community is needed urgently to prevent even worse outcomes in the coming months,” said Peterschmitt. “Bringing assistance to rural areas, as close as possible to affected communities, will prevent massive displacement, related aggravating risks and excess mortality.” Abdullahi Osman, a member of the national emergency committee, the Somali government body overseeing the response to the crisis, said the country was calling for international support. “We have been mobilising local resources from the business community to reach those most vulnerable. “The committee sent money to 19 cities so far but that is not enough. In addition to the resource shortages we are also hampered by accessibility due to insecurity as well as lack of coordination and absences of public authority in some of the regions affected by the drought.” According to the World Food Programme, the Horn of Africa is experiencing its driest conditions since 1981, with 13 million people across Kenya, Somalia and Ethiopia facing severe hunger.Top story: Russia seeks ‘excuse to go in’ says Biden Hello, it’s time for Friday’s Guardian morning briefing with me, Warren Murray. Antony Blinken, the US secretary of state, has agreed to meet his Russian counterpart, Sergei Lavrov, next week provided there is no invasion of Ukraine in the meantime. A fresh flurry of meetings between western leaders begins today with the US president, Joe Biden, hosting a call with the leaders of Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Poland, Romania, Britain, the European Union and Nato. The US vice-president, Kamala Harris, is due to arrive in Munich for weekend talks with leaders including the German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, the UK foreign secretary, Liz Truss, and Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy. Biden has said he believes Russia is on the brink of invading and his administration had “reason to believe” the Kremlin was “engaged in a false-flag operation to have an excuse to go in”. Blinken has told a UN security council meeting that “Russia plans to manufacture a pretext for its attack. This could be a violent event that Russia will blame on Ukraine, or an outrageous accusation that Russia will level against the Ukrainian government.” Claims of attacks by Russian-backed separatists at several locations in Ukraine’s Donbas region, including at a kindergarten and a school, were said to bear the hallmarks of an attempt to incite conflict. Russia continues to deny that it has any intention of invading Ukraine but Blinken told the security council: “Our information indicates clearly that [Russian] forces, including ground troops, aircraft, ships, are preparing to launch an attack against Ukraine in the coming days.” We will have updates all day at our Ukraine crisis live blog. * * * Batten down for Storm Eunice – The east of England, including London, has been added this morning to the red weather warning for wind issued by the Met Office because of Storm Eunice, whose arrival has prompted rare danger-to-life warnings, with people told to stay indoors at home to avoid its 90mph winds. It joins the warning starting from 7am along the coastline of Devon, Cornwall and Somerset, as well as the south coast of Wales, due to the combination of high tides, strong winds and storm surges. People have been warned to stay home if possible, tie down objects in their gardens and be wary of fierce winds that could cause trees to topple over and tiles to fly off buildings. A Network Rail spokesman said disruption is “inevitable” and Welsh services will be suspended for the whole day. Airports including Gatwick and Stansted are advising customers to check with their airlines. National Highways announced a severe weather alert for strong winds covering the whole strategic road network. The M48 Severn Bridge, the alternative Prince of Wales bridge, A14 Orwell Bridge in Suffolk and QEII Bridge in Dartford are all closing this morning. Yellow weather warnings for wind and snow are in force for a large part of Scotland, where blizzards are predicted, and the whole of Northern Ireland. Strong winds from Storm Dudley have already caused significant disruption to rail and ferry services, with trees blown on to train tracks and overhead power lines. * * * Call to rein in APPGs – More than £13m has been poured into MPs’ interest groups by private firms including healthcare bodies, arms companies and tech giants, analysis by the Guardian and openDemocracy has found. There are now 755 all-party parliamentary groups (APPGs) – a number that has ballooned from 560 five years ago. They are chaired by MPs but often run or funded by lobbyists and corporate donors seeking to influence government policy. The chair of the Commons standards committee, Chris Bryant, has called in the Guardian for parliamentary authorities to be able to shut down the largely self-policed groups where there are clear conflicts of interest. His standards committee has opened an inquiry into the system. * * * Mural makers in court – A collective of street artists known as Subset are about to enter a court battle as part of a 10-year “game of cat and mouse” with Dublin city council over three murals, including one celebrating the life of Sir David Attenborough. Under Irish law, organisers of public murals need planning permission. Subset argues Dublin is behind the times and should embrace street culture like others cities of the world. It says all its murals are painted with permission and consultation of the buildings’ occupants or owners. Subset’s works are well known in Dublin with impactful takes on contemporary issues including Covid, LGBTQ+ rights and the abortion referendum in 2018. * * * Trumps on witness stand – Donald Trump, Donald Jr and Ivanka have been ordered by a New York judge to appear for a deposition within the next three weeks as part of the investigation over alleged fraud in the valuation of assets belonging to the family business. Under the judge’s ruling, Trump must testify within 21 days and hand over “documents and information” within 14 days. On Monday it was revealed that the longtime accounting firm for the Trump Organization, Mazars USA, had broken off ties with the family business, saying it could no longer stand by 10 years of annual financial statements that it had prepared for the group. * * * Stamp man gets own issue – A set of stamps is being launched to pay tribute to David Gentleman, the designer credited with changing the face of the British stamp. Gentleman designed more than 100 stamps for Royal Mail between 1962 and 2000, and provided many more designs that were not used. Among his innovations, Gentleman introduced a small cameo of the Queen, based on her profile as depicted by Mary Gillick on coins from 1953. Gentleman said: “Stamps were fun to design, though squeezing a lot into a small space wasn’t easy. At first it was difficult to fit in the Queen’s head until I turned it into the simple profile which is still used today. Stamps I particularly enjoyed designing were for the Battle of Hastings 1066, and Social Reformers.” Today in Focus podcast: Tory fifth column against net zero The Net Zero Scrutiny Group insists it accepts the facts of the climate emergency. But as the cost of living crisis deepens, they see an opportunity to push back against their own Conservative government’s climate agenda, as Helena Horton reports. Lunchtime read: Dirty money secrets of ‘London laundromat’ In 2021 the multimillionaire DJ Mikaela Jav, real name Izzat Khanim Javadova, and her husband were forced to hand £4m to Britain’s National Crime Agency (NCA) after admitting in a settlement they brought it into the UK illegally through a $2.9bn (£2.1bn) money-laundering scheme. The pair had entered the UK years earlier after investing at least £2m under the “golden visa” scheme, which attracted thousands of wealthy people from Russia and former Soviet states to settle in Britain if they brought some of their millions with them. The scheme remained open for years, and even after parliament’s joint intelligence and security committee said it was “welcoming oligarchs with open arms”. The Home Office finally ended it on Thursday with immediate effect. Sport Rangers have dismantled a stunned Borussia Dortmund 4-2, leaving their hosts and earlier Europa League favourites staring elimination square in the face. Novak Djokovic could be allowed to enter this year’s Italian Open despite the men’s world No 1 being unvaccinated, according to officials in Italy. The undersecretary for sports, Valentina Vezzali, said tennis is “an outdoor sport and the tighter green pass is not required”. The FIA has dismissed Michael Masi as Formula One’s race director after his role in the controversial finale to last season’s championship-deciding Abu Dhabi Grand Prix. At the Winter Olympics, Team GB are guaranteed a medal at last, in the men’s curling – keep up with the action at our live blog. Business US stock futures have bounced and selling pressure eased in Asian share markets today. MSCI’s broadest index of Asia shares outside Japan was last down 0.5%, but markets in Tokyo, Hong Kong, Sydney and Seoul all pared deeper morning losses. At time of writing, the FTSE looks like opening a quarter of a percent higher, while the pound is on $1.361 and €1.197. The papers The Guardian’s front-page lead today is “Russia ready to fake cause for Ukraine attack – Biden”. Britain’s curling men are shown at work as the team prepares to bring home Team GB’s first medal of these Winter Olympics. “Is this what Putin means about pulling out troops?” asks the Metro, showing Russian rockets being fired in border drills. Its splash though is “Red alert!”, about the arrival of Storm Eunice. “UK braced for the 100mph sting jet storm” says the i, and other papers use this same bit of weather jargon that we all just learned – in fact the Daily Mail’s headline is more or less the same. The Sun dials it up to “100mph killer storm” and the Daily Express calls it the “Storm of the century”. The Telegraph has “Russia begins ‘false flag attacks’” and the Times says “Whitehall convinced Putin is about to invade”. Joe Biden’s line that the Financial Times uses is becoming repetitive: “Russia poised to invade Ukraine within days, Biden warns allies”. The Mirror’s splash is about the social care crisis – its headline: “Inhumane: thousands of elderly residents kicked out in tsunami of private care home closures”. Sign up The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekendWhen I first watched The Tinder Swindler last month, in anticipation for an interview with director Felicity Morris, I was, like many viewers, completely absorbed by the story. Several women meet a man on Tinder who claims to be the billionaire heir to an Israeli diamond fortune, lavishes them with attention, flies to them on actual private jets, then swindles them for hundreds of thousands of dollars? I’m a single woman in my late 20s in New York: of course I ate it up. The documentary was also much, much better than it could have been; I appreciated that Morris didn’t have much interest in probing the psychology of its swindler, Simon Leviev. Instead, she foregrounded three women’s first-person accounts of getting conned – why they believed him, why they cared for him, what such manipulation and confusion does to someone – as well as the journalists at the Norwegian paper VG who unspooled his lies for an initial exposé in 2019. Still, I figured that The Tinder Swindler would be a hit – it’s true crime meets scam meets Catch Me If You Can meets the perils of modern dating – and that made me nervous. I have come to associate “Netflix hit”, at least in the reality and documentary department, with a feeling of ominousness, portentous of something queasy, cringey, sad, or sinister. The scale of Netflix’s reach is such that almost anything that succeeds on the streaming platform invites exploitation; Netflix fame opens subjects who might not be prepared for international recognition up to intense levels of scrutiny and at this point in the life of the internet, there’s always a dark, seedy undercurrent to attention. Popularity attracts backlash, desperation and grifters. Netflix fame has traditionally not aged well – think of 2020’s standout Tiger King, which spawned a virtual cottage industry of hustling for its dubious participants. Or another Netflix hit, the docuseries Cheer, whose participants – junior college cheerleaders in the small town of Corsicana, Texas – became overnight stars. I wrote in February 2020, at the peak of Cheer’s popularity, about the unsettling experience of watching its stars’ “character” arcs wrap on screen as their fame expanded, warped and monetized in real time off it. I loved the show’s first season, but the buzz around it, its brief ubiquity felt unstable, fragile. Then its breakout star, Jerry Harris, was charged with soliciting sex from minors and alleged to have abused his influence with younger athletes for sex. (I have not seen Cheer’s second season, which premiered earlier this year and addresses the fallout of fame and Harris’s arrest, in part because of this wariness.) It was practically a given that someone would adapt The Tinder Swindler into a dramatic film. (Netflix is in early talks of doing so, though no formal plans have been announced.) It is also a given, if you have seen the documentary, that Simon Leviev would attempt to spin his new notoriety into some sort of financial gain. But I’m still impressed by the speed at which this attention curdled. Earlier this week, Leviev signed with Hollywood talent manager Gina Rodriguez, a self-described “D-list diva” who has turned the scandals of a truly impressive roster of unscrupulous figures into deals, further exposure, and cash. (An incomplete selection of her client list: Lindsay Lohan’s parents, Nadya Suleman, AKA “Octomom”, Tareq and Michaele Salahi, AKA the White House gatecrashers, “Teen Mom” Farrah Abraham, and several Real Housewives.) Leviev also launched an account on Cameo, a platform through which people can buy personalized shoutouts from celebrities, charging $200 for personal use and $1,400 for businesses. “I’m Simon Leviev – if you want any blessing, anything birthday, whatever, shout out … I’m so excited to be here,” he says in his intro video; there’s a button to join his fan club “to unlock even more content”. I don’t want to blow this out of proportion – just because Leviev signed with a talent manager and has expressed an interest in having a dating show doesn’t mean he’ll actually get a content deal. He’s already been banned from dating apps such as Tinder and Hinge. Upon the release of the film earlier this month, he posted an Instagram story to his account (heavily featured in the film and since deactivated, though it can be hard to know – there are now countless impersonations of @simon_leviev_official) that he would soon tell his version of events, but so far that’s nothing more than bluster. (Morris and her team were in contact with Leviev during filming – his voice notes are included – but he declined to sit for an interview.) His Cameo account has, as of this writing, just five reviews and 51 fans. It is possible that Leviev will fade into obscurity with the tide of viral content. But it’s unlikely – grifters will grift, attention begets attention, and there’s so many ways to parlay 15 minutes of fame into a life of hustling content for deals, cash and fans. It is a bleak comment on which avenues attention greases that while Leviev has signed with a veteran manager and is hustling his fame for money, the three women featured in the film – Cecilie Fjellhøy, Pernilla Sjoholm and Ayleen Charlotte – have started a GoFundMe to help pay off their debts from Leviev’s cons and offer a legit alternative to several fake fundraisers. “We don’t want more people getting defrauded,” the three wrote in their info section. “All we want are our lives back.” As of this writing, the page has raised about $193,000 of their roughly $800,000 goal. Since the documentary, a study emerged that found Americans lost more than $1bn in 2021 alone to “romance scams”. This is not to blame the film-makers for spawning Leviev’s demi-celebrity. Leviev was still at large when Morris began the project, and the three victims – first Fjellhøy and Sjoholm, then Charlotte – were justifiably trying to spread the word as far as possible to protect other women. The film is much more about the experience of being conned, both emotionally and financially, than about Leviev; lots of true crime series get hung up on the question of why someone hurts someone else, but The Tinder Swindler thankfully just accepts Leviev as a pathological narcissist and liar, no explanation needed. It’s just that the swift churn of attention to profit, regardless of what said subject has done and who has paid for it, is fatiguing. None of this is surprising, but that doesn’t mean it’s not worth noting. With Netflix true crime hits, if you’re enjoying it, if you’re interested, then there’s likely a cost – if not the dark toll of fame, then someone unsavory profiting from it.The beds pile up outside Hong Kong’s Caritas hospital. In the cold night, elderly patients lie on gurneys covered with blankets and thermal foil sheets. A woman in pink folds her arms against the chill, while another reaches across her bed in an apparent gesture of comfort to a neighbour. Nearby, others crowd into yellow and blue spillover tents lining the car park edges. The hospital staff attend people calling out when they can, but they are outnumbered. Wails from patients carry through the air. There are similar scenes across the city, where 11 public hospitals were operating at or beyond capacity as of Friday. Private hospitals refuse to take Covid patients. Photos supplied to the Guardian show a treatment room inside one hospital earlier this week (88% capacity) with gurneys three deep across the thoroughfare, on a floor strewn with garbage. Bathrooms that no one has had time to clean were soiled with faeces, dirt and discarded biohazard bags. Health workers and residents who spent two years after strict Covid controls are now asking how it all went so wrong. The city that had managed to quash outbreak after outbreak was finally being engulfed and the authorities didn’t seem to be ready. ‘Nowhere near the peak’ At North Lantau hospital, a doctor on the emergency ward says frontline medics can no longer keep up with the mounting caseload. More than 10,000 Covid patients are waiting for hospital treatment or isolation during Hong Kong’s Omicron outbreak, with thousands more added to the backlog each day. The doctor, who asked not be named, says some patients are having to wait outdoors because wards equipped to house Covid patients are perpetually full. “The most ridiculous thing we’ve seen so far is … a 90-year-old woman lying outside for three days and still she could not be admitted.” He says medics are spread too thinly to keep a close eye on patients. “If someone’s condition urgently deteriorates, we may not catch it. It is sheer luck that it has not happened yet,” he says. Hong Kong has been smashed by a wave of Omicron. It has recorded more than 16,600 cases so far this year, surpassing the Covid totals for 2020 and 2021 combined. At the moment there are about 5,000 people in hospital or isolation, though fewer than 20 are critical and about 60 in a serious condition. On Friday, chief executive Carrie Lam said next month’s elections for her post would be postponed to 8 May, saying the administration’s focus now had to be on the fight against the pandemic. Hospital beds were already at 90% capacity because of a policy which saw every positive case hospitalised regardless of symptoms. Close contacts were isolated offsite in government facilities which quickly began to strain. Labs buckled under a requirement for a second test to confirm every “preliminary positive”, with reported delays of up to five days. “No system is designed to be able to cope with this level of cases,” says government adviser and University of Hong Kong’s dean of medicine, Prof Gabriel Leung. But it’s going to get worse. “We are nowhere near the peak.” ‘Sandcastles in a tsunami’ Hong Kong social media is littered with mirthless and sarcastic responses of “if only they’d had two years to prepare”. For most of 2020 and 2021 Hong Kong had one of the world’s most effective responses to the pandemic. It kept total case numbers below 15,000 by quickly crushing outbreaks under a strategy of pursuing zero cases. The stakes were high. Being Covid-free is Beijing’s requirement for opening its borders to the city, something Hong Kong has prioritised over opening to the rest of the world. Under the “dynamic zero” strategy, Hongkongers enjoyed long stretches of time largely unencumbered by the pandemic, as long as they didn’t need to travel. Between those stretches, when four waves of Covid hit the city, the government introduced restrictions which were often complicated and harsh, sometimes illogical, and changed frequently. But they worked – until Omicron arrived and the system crumbled. On Thursday more than 6,100 cases were officially recorded. Dr Sarah Ho of the Hospital Authority described a “crisis situation”. Online, Hong Kong clinical virologist Dr Siddharth Sridhar said the hospitals were “sandcastles in a tsunami”. “I’ve worked in healthcare in Hong Kong for a decade. Our public hospitals are always stressed. We buckle every time there’s a flu surge.” The Hospital Authority did not respond to the Guardian’s inquiries. For health experts, the major current concern is elderly people. Hong Kong had early and plentiful access to vaccines, which have been shown to significantly reduce severe infection. But for a range of reasons the immunisation rates in older age groups are alarmingly low. In aged care homes it is about 20%, says Leung. He attributes the low rate to early misinformation feeding vaccine hesitancy, but also Hong Kong’s earlier success, which he says led to both a false sense of comfort and a belief among elderly that they were at higher risk from the vaccine side-effects than from getting Covid-19. This far into the pandemic, many had not sought out updated advice. An insurmountable task? The government had plenty of warning. “The big surprise with Omicron is how predictable it really is,” says Leung. He says daily case numbers may go higher than previous predictions of 30,000, but they need to “flatten the curve”. Leung says the answer is to reduce mobility and mixing among the population to slow down the spread enough to maintain the integrity of the health system. Rumours of a “mainland China style” city-wide lockdown – which were also heavily utilised in other countries including Australia and New Zealand – were ruled out by Lam, on Tuesday, but few people seem to think it’s a concrete promise given how often things have changed. Lockdowns and social restrictions have had a huge impact on lives and businesses. Jason Lowe, president of the Craft Beer Association of Hong Kong, says their revenue has dropped by more than half. “For businesses, we already feel like we’re in a dark tunnel with no light at the end,” he says. “Instead of helping us get out, the government’s ever stricter restrictions and lack of support is more like pushing us further inside and trapping us there.” Prof Ben Cowling, an epidemiologist at the University of Hong Kong, says mild Covid cases should be allowed to stay home. “At the moment the pressure is from not being able to admit and discharge mild cases quickly enough,” Cowling says. “But in a couple of weeks I fear the pressure is going to come from having too many patients with severe Covid and not with the resources to manage them.” The spread has slowed a little. Cases in Hong Kong are doubling every three days compared to every 1.5 to 2 in other countries, but it’s not slow enough. In the meantime the government is still committed to elimination. On Tuesday Lam declared that “surrendering to the virus” was not an option. On Wednesday’s front pages of local pro-Beijing papers Xi Jinping called on her to grasp the “overriding mission” of controlling the outbreak. Having bet the house on prevention, Hong Kong’s authorities are now faced with a potentially insurmountable task. “I’m not sure there was a failure to prepare for this type of scenario as there was a failure to anticipate the potential for this type of scenario,” says Cowling. Additional reporting by Xiaoqian Zhu and Vincent NiStart: Anstruther waterfront Distance: 7 miles (14 miles if not returning by bus) Time: 3-4 hours Total ascent 102 metres Difficulty: Easy. Use OS Explorer 371 map Google map of the route The barman at the Ship Inn beams at me. “We reckon we’re the only pub in Britain with a cricket team whose pitch is the beach right outside,” he says, unfurling his bowling arm towards Scotland’s most unlikely sporting arena. It might feel incongruous, but Fife’s often ignored East Neuk is surprising to a synapse-popping degree: we’re talking caves ravaged by Vikings, resurrected Victorian lidos and villages where it looks like the Hanseatic League just left. Views across the Forth to Edinburgh Castle come with puffins, sea eagles and the occasional whale. This surreal corner of eastern Scotland (neuk literally means corner) was forced into the backwaters by the departure of the railway in the 1960s; the arrival of Thatcherite economics then decimated Fife’s hinterland mining communities. Yes, the impossibly picturesque old fishing villages and big skies have since seduced many a dreamer and artist, but it’s nothing compared with the days when the East Neuk sported Europe’s largest medieval market. Even getting here isn’t easy, as the dual carriageway gives up, along with that railway, at Kirkcaldy. The most spectacular way to continue is on the Fife Coastal Path, a 116-mile epic, designated one of Scotland’s Great Trails, which sweeps from Kincardine-on-Forth in the south-west, right along Fife’s Forth fringes, swallowing up the East Neuk and surging north past St Andrews to join the River Tay for a final flourish west to Newburgh. There are numerous bite-size chunks of the Fife Coastal Path. This stretch is ideal, as its fulcrum is the East Neuk’s most satisfying pub and you miss out the Chain Walk just to the west of Elie, a startling challenge that doesn’t so much set pulses racing as trigger coronaries, with its steep and often slippery ascents and descents. You’re walking against convention walking east to west; but this is the East Neuk, so you’re up against a trickle of walkers rather than a tide. Following the waymarkers west out of Anstruther’s promenade, there is just enough time to hit your stride before the village of Pittenweem. I make a note about it being the quintessential East Neuk village. Later, my teenage daughter and walking companion is more blunt, declaring, “they all look the same”. That sounds like a criticism of the East Neuk villages, but it’s not. Not if you prefer your gables Flemish, your stone walls whitewashed or pastel, admire orange-hued roof tiles and think streets are best cobbled. Pittenweem is quite the postcard, but harsher times always echo in the East Neuk. Just north, off the Fife Coastal Path, we find St Fillan’s Cave signposted. It’s a brutal reminder of the days when attempts to convert Norsemen to Christianity were met with the sharp end of a Viking sword. We find lighter relief just past the park west of Pittenweem. Down to the left, Pittenweem Tidal Pool rests on the edge of a wee beach. I chat to a bather who explains the appeal of this revamped oasis: “I started to swim in the sea, but I was always worried I’d get swept out. Here I feel safe and there’s a real sense of community.” There is definitely a charm to a pool you can peer out from in search of dolphins; recently returned sea eagles and the whales too, who regularly breeze by the East Neuk. Charm, too, sails out through those puffin-populated Forth isles – I make out Tolkien-esque Bass Rock, home to the world’s largest colony of northern gannets. Man has fared far worse than gannets on Bass Rock, the island once serving as a prison: Scotland’s Alcatraz. Among the most notorious inmates were Jacobites condemned for their attempts to usurp the Hanoverians from the British throne in the 17th century and return what they saw as the rightful Stewarts. The Fife Coastal Path constantly vaults you back and forth in time. Next is the brilliantly reborn St Monans Windmill. Information boards explore the days when the windmill helped pump water out of the salt “pans”, stone pools built on the beach, from which salt was extracted – you can still make out the pools. If this stout redoubt hints at resurrection, the village of St Monans teems with life. This is no Cornwall-esque second home-infested fishing village confection: this is the real deal. The fishing fleet churns in and out of the working harbour in all weathers. The East Pier Smokehouse is thriving too, their smoked salmon and cured beetroot-infused fish threatening to relegate the Ship Inn to my second lunch of the day. The final stretch to Elie is the most dramatic, kicking off with St Monans’ 14th-century Auld Kirk, an austere-looking church said to have been built on the site of St Monan’s grave, before you leave the village. We are swept off into a riot of cliffs and dunes peppered with an arch of beaches, man adding his own drama to the natural amphitheatre with a brace of brooding castle ruins. You don’t need restored great halls and costumed guides, not when Newark Castle has all the grandeur and setting of Dunnottar without the tourists – plus a preserved doocot (dovecote to non-Scots speakers). Your imagination has to work harder at Ardross Castle, but this bulwark does boast a farm shop that showcases the East Neuk’s fertile farmland. The early 20th-century Ruby Bay lighthouse finally steers the way forwards in time towards Elie. Just left of the Fife Coastal Path, Lady’s Tower evokes our last ghost, that of Lady Janet Anstruther. She had it forged as a summer house in 1770. Lady Anstruther appears to have been the polar opposite of the Duchess of Argyll, depicted outrageously in the BBC’s recent A Very British Scandal. Legend has it that Lady Anstruther had a bell rung to ward off villagers when she was bathing. I finish this walk joined by a man who embodies the creative and resilient East Neuk. Douglas Clement was a caddie who got so tired of tourists in St Andrews bemoaning the lack of a Fife whisky distillery he built his own – the award-winning Kingsbarns, further along the Fife Coast. “There is something about the East Neuk. It’s hard to put your finger on, a strange sense of the past and the present co-existing,” he smiles, as in the distance the crack of willow on leather rings out across a Scottish beach. The pub Owners Graham and Rachel Bucknall run a tight ship, ably assisted by head chef Mateusz Mayer – this is an 18th-century inn with a celebrated place on the foodie map of Fife, with fish and meat 100% Scottish. Boat-fresh local seafood is the star, such as East Neuk-landed langoustines and lobster. Summer sees seafood barbecues every clement day down by the sands, with a sea view – you don’t get that at Lord’s. Look out for the local ales from St Andrews Brewing Company and newbie Anstruther’s Ovenstone 109. Stone walls, wooden floors and maritime flourishes retain the Ship Inn’s sense of timeless solidity; the cosiness ramped up with an open fire and wood-burning stoves. Stay Four of the half-dozen bedrooms offer sea views. The Admiral Room is the pick: ease hiking-ravaged muscles in the rolltop bath, then enjoy a dram while peering out of the bay window. All bedrooms feature Laura Thomas toiletries, Nespresso machines, Fife’s Tea Lovers’ Company brews and Egyptian cotton bed linen. There is free wifi and docking stations, too. Dogs are welcome in the brace of Seadog rooms (£25 per dog). Doubles from £100, shipinn.scotPick of the week Cat Burglar Charlie Brooker’s latest venture is “a half-witted interactive heist” in the form of a golden-era cartoon – think Black Mirror’s Bandersnatch but with the dystopian misery replaced by cheery knockabout fun. Your job is to navigate a criminal cat, Rowdy, through an audacious attempt to steal the most valuable painting in the world. By answering a series of random multiple choice questions you can either doom or pilot Rowdy to success. It might reflect poorly on this writer’s basic common sense, but it’s actually quite tricky – thankfully, the cartoon itself is beautifully realised, so spending time exploring Cat Burglar’s extensive internal workings is perfectly enjoyable in itself. Netflix, from Tuesday 22 February *** Vikings: Valhalla Canadian drama Vikings gets a sequel – but this time, we’re in the realm of actual events. After the Saint Brice’s Day massacre of 1002 – during which England sought to exterminate all Viking settlers – Denmark’s King Canute swore revenge. Here’s where we join the likes of Harald Sigurdsson (Leo Suter) and his sister Freydís Eiríksdóttir (Frida Gustavsson), as they prepare to rain down vengeance upon perfidious Albion – if they can navigate a path through the religious tensions causing convulsions within this large, volatile army. It’s impressively realised – a history lesson with bonus fighting and shagging. Netflix, from Friday 25 February *** The Walking Dead They’re certainly dragging this out. Not just the final season – of which this is the second and penultimate part – but arguably, the show itself. The post-apocalyptic horror series has been limping towards its endgame for a while now – can it go out on a high note? As we left the gang, a series of cliffhangers involving Carol (Melissa McBride), Judith (Cailey Fleming) and, most notably, Leah (Lynn Collins) were awaiting resolution. But expect further world-building alongside the action as we get inside the internal workings of the Commonwealth. Disney+, from Monday 21 February *** Race: Bubba Wallace How does it feel to be the only full-time Black driver in Nascar racing? Recently, Bubba Wallace found himself at the sharp end of this question after his decision to speak out about racial injustice. This series explores Wallace’s rise and, most urgently, the aftermath of his campaign to have the Confederate flag removed from Nascar circuits. “This puts the ball in the court of anybody who has a problem with this,” he says. Sadly, many fans did have a problem. Another necessary and disturbing insight into the depth of racism in the United States. Netflix, from Tuesday 22 February *** The Proud Family: Louder and Prouder The word “louder” in the title feels deliberate; this animated family comedy maintains a relentless decibel level throughout. But it has plenty to shout about, from the expressive animation to the voice cast – including Lizzo and Tiffany Haddish. The star of the show is Penny Proud (Kyla Pratt), an African American teen whose journey towards adulthood is alternately nurtured and hindered by her overprotective father Oscar (Tommy Davidson). There is a big-hearted universality underlying this show and many of its situations. Disney+, from Wednesday 23 February *** Kindred Spirits More ludicrous and guiltily watchable paranormal investigations from Amy Bruni, Adam Berry and self-styled psychic medium Chip Coffey. The show’s secret is its absolute sincerity – there’s not a hint of an ironic nod or wink to camera here; as far as the hosts are concerned, these phenomena are real and their explorations and solutions equally so. Even if you consider it all to be utter humbug, there’s still a certain amount of pleasure to be found from their wanderings around America’s various creaky old inns and castles. Discovery+, from Thursday 24 February *** Blackout “When the light turns back on, your daughter dies.” From the Walter Presents slate, this gripping Belgian thriller takes a nationwide blackout caused by a sabotaged nuclear reactor as its starting point and extrapolates all manner of mischief – a conspiracy against the government, a high-profile kidnapping and an associated attempt at blackmail. At the heart of it all is Michael Dendoncker (Geert Van Rampelberg), an anti-terrorism cop facing a race against time. Can he get to the bottom of the attack before society starts collapsing around him? All 4, from Friday 25 FebruaryPine martens are to be deployed as wildlife bouncers along the east coast of Scotland and the A9 corridor to halt the northward march of grey squirrels. More than 35 artificial pine marten dens are being installed by Forestry and Land Scotland (FLS) at strategic locations on the grey squirrels’ path of northward migration in an attempt to save the Highland red squirrel populations. Red squirrels have been driven out of most of the British countryside since the introduction of greys in Victorian times, mainly because greys carry the squirrelpox disease, which leaves them unharmed but is fatal to the reds. But recent research has found that the return of the predatory pine marten has reduced grey squirrel populations. Because the native red squirrels and martens evolved alongside each other over thousands of years, the reds appear less affected by martens. In northern England and Scotland, there is a big community effort to control grey squirrels and help the reds survive but last year saw a dramatic expansion in the grey squirrels’ northward range, with animals moving north from Dunkeld to Pitlochry for the first time and spotted west in Aberfeldy and north of the River North Esk in the east. There is a grey squirrel population around Aberdeen, which has been restricted by culling in recent years, but the fear is that northward-scampering greys from Scotland’s central belt will meet the Aberdeen population and rapidly expand, endangering reds across north-east Scotland. “There seems to have been some movement of greys last year linked to a bumper beech mast year and possibly because trappers weren’t out because of Covid,” said Gareth Ventress, an environment forester at FLS. “We need to stop the grey squirrels in their tracks.” The dens are roofed wooden boxes fixed to trees five metres off the ground and filled with wood shavings, providing a secure and cosy nest in which martens can breed safely in spring and shelter in winter, reducing mortality rates for juveniles. If martens nest on the ground, their kits are vulnerable to predation from foxes, and while they can rear young in old buzzard nests, these are often exposed. It is hoped that the dens will increase the population density of pine martens and ensure they are living in areas where they can predate the greys. Pine martens have already returned to the region north of Perth, but dens will encourage them to frequent woods close to the A9 and the railway line north to Inverness, which provides a corridor of scrub and trees along which the greys can expand. “In many ways the A9 corridor is defendable because it’s such a narrow corridor of land, but if you travel along it you notice there is tree cover most of the way up,” said Ventress. Dens will also be installed farther east, around the A90 in Angus, after greys last year crossed the River North Esk into Aberdeenshire. Research from Ireland, Wales and Scotland was once thought to show that pine martens created “a landscape of fear”, driving away grey squirrels. But ecologists have since found that grey squirrels are in fact naive and “fearless”, and that’s what makes them susceptible to predation. The science is supported by real-world examples of resurgent pine martens alongside prospering red squirrels, which have returned to parts of Aberdeenshire where they haven’t been seen for many years. But recent studies have shown that pine martens won’t colonise urban areas, which remain a stronghold for grey squirrels. If the countryside is constantly topped up with new greys from their urban stronghold, the species is likely to rapidly adapt to survive alongside the marten. Another recent study in Ireland found that while martens increase red squirrel populations in native, broadleaf woodlands, the effect is reversed in non-native conifer plantations, where the marten reduces red squirrels. This could be due to the lack of alternative prey and the lack of hiding places for red squirrels in highly simplified landscapes. According to Ventress, the threat to reds from pine martens in conifer plantations may only apply in Ireland, where there are no field voles, the marten’s main prey in Scotland. Irish plantations also tend to be solely sitka spruce, unlike in Scotland where many plantations include native Scots pine and other trees. Ventress added: “Pine martens are not the answer to the grey squirrel threat by any stretch, but they are part of the answer. The key to this pine marten-grey squirrel relationship seems to be pine marten density. With the boxes we can potentially localise some of the pine marten population.” Ensuring grey squirrels don’t move farther north will also help foresters restore and establish native woodland in the Highlands. Grey squirrels strip bark from young trees, causing disease, damaging timber and sometimes killing trees. “Keeping the grey squirrel populations back will help us diversify, and nature and woodland restoration has a better chance,” said Ventress. • This article was amended on 21 February 2022 to note the theory that pine martens created a “landscape of fear” for grey squirrels has been disproven.It is the unspoken promise of parenthood, the deal millions make as their fledglings fly the nest: that in an emergency, they can always come fluttering back. Even if they never have to cash that unwritten cheque, just knowing it’s there can be enough to see them through the wobbly early years of independence. That place is home. It is what gives young adults the confidence to flee a toxic relationship or a dodgy flatshare, knowing they’re not going to end up on the street, or to stick it out in the kind of insecure careers where persistence ultimately pays off. But home isn’t like that for everyone, and shamefully it’s least like that for children parented by the state. Once they turn 16 they’re no longer looked-after children, a euphemism already covering a multitude of sins, but “care leavers”. At best that means staying with a loving foster family until they’re ready to leave, but at worst it means the kind of downhill slide that explains why too many rough sleepers have previously been in care. Almost half of care leavers have mental health issues and more than a third aren’t in education, employment or training between the ages of 19 and 21. Although the state now offers a “personal adviser” to guide them into their 20s, with the best will in the world it’s not going to be like crying on a parental shoulder. And that’s the backdrop to the Welsh government’s brave and imaginative decision this week to trial a universal basic income (UBI) of £1,600 a month – equivalent to an annual salary of just over £19,000 – to care leavers. Brave, because it invites not just predictable tabloid outrage at handing out “money for nothing” but also understandable resentment from workers slogging away at minimum-wage jobs that they don’t enjoy for the same money. But imaginative, because if it works – which will mean coupling that money with the kind of intensive support and guidance that care leavers should frankly be getting anyway – it opens up a much broader debate about the future of welfare. It’s road-testing an idea that will make instinctive sense to most parents, which is that the emotional security money buys is not nothing; indeed, for some, it might actually be everything. A now famous trial of UBI for unemployed people in Finland, originally designed to test whether the carrot of free money was more effective than the stick of sanctions in getting people back into jobs, found only a slight increase in days worked but a much bigger impact on happiness and health. Recipients reported less stress, depression, sadness and loneliness than the control group, plus more confidence in the future. More surprisingly, they also reported higher cognitive skills – things such as the ability to remember, learn and concentrate – and higher levels of trust in their fellow Finns and in public institutions. If buying happiness, focus and trust doesn’t sound like a terribly efficient use of public money then you are not thinking hard enough about how much unhappiness and all its spiralling consequences – from anxiety and depression to drug and alcohol addiction, relationship breakdown, or the lifelong emotional and educational impact on children’s lives of having parents continually pushed to the limit – costs the taxpayer. Or just how much public trust in institutions from the police to public health experts turned out to matter in a pandemic, or how easily the politics of hate feeds off misery and suspicion. What’s interesting about the Finnish findings is that they chime with research from developmental economists suggesting that giving away cold hard cash can be a surprisingly effective way of delivering aid. As the Dutch historian and UBI enthusiast Rutger Bregman has repeatedly argued, the myth that poor people will only blow it on booze and cigarettes is just that: people counting every penny tend to know exactly what they’d do with a bit more, using it strategically and frugally. If anything it’s grinding deprivation that drives humans towards bad choices, and money that helps us make better ones, lifting the fog of panic and exhaustion and helplessness that accompanies poverty and giving recipients the confidence to take risks. The catch for UBI advocates, however, is that the magic of universal basic income may well lie in the last two words, not the first. For many the whole point is the universality, or the dream that free money for everyone will miraculously engender a warm fuzzy feeling of togetherness even in those too wealthy to actually benefit (because for them UBI would be effectively taxed away) while delivering on the Keynesian dream of prosperity buying ever-expanding leisure. But that’s not where the evidence points. The secret sauce seems to be providing people who just can’t see another way out with enough free money to catch their breath and make plans. An extra pittance for everyone regardless of need – which is what every economically realistic proposal for UBI I’ve ever seen ends up apologetically boiling down to, given the exorbitant cost – is the worst of all worlds; not quite enough to be meaningful to those who could really benefit, but still too expensive to be politically plausible. Better to start by funding the existing welfare system properly, recognising that the benefit cuts of the past decade went far too deep and left millions without enough to live on, and then targeting those for whom the security of a basic income could be genuinely life-changing. In San Francisco and Vancouver, there have been small but fascinating pilots involving free cash transfers to homeless people. The success of furlough in keeping people attached to the workplace despite being temporarily out of a job suggests another possible avenue. Most people who lose their jobs aren’t out of work for long, but for those who don’t have savings, even a few months on benefits that are a fraction of their normal salary mean racking up debt that can leave long-term scars. Some kind of time-limited basic income for newly redundant people could bridge that gap, and give people a chance to retrain; it could be useful too in softening the transition to net zero, offering people who lose jobs in dying fossil-fuel industries time to rethink their futures. The possibilities are exciting, but only if we let go of the utopian theory and focus relentlessly on what actually works. It’s not about money for nothing. It’s money for things that might just turn out to be priceless. Gaby Hinsliff is a Guardian columnistIn the wake of racial justice protests following the murder of George Floyd, a wave of Republican lawmakers supported legislation to punish protesters who blocked roads. Now some of those same Republicans are supporting similar tactics from conservative trucker convoys protesting against vaccine mandates. Last year, the Florida governor, Ron DeSantis, signed an anti-rioting law that stiffened penalties for protesters who blocked roads and even gave some legal protection to drivers who ran them over. It went so far that in September a federal judge struck down the law, ruling it unconstitutional. Draft legislation from DeSantis – seen by many as the leading heir to Donald Trump – was even more draconian. He initially sought to extend “stand-your-ground” laws that would have granted legal immunity to drivers claiming to have unintentionally killed or injured protesters disrupting traffic. Yet DeSantis has thrown his support behind conservative trucker convoys using similar tactics to protest against vaccine mandates that for weeks have blocked roads between Canada and the US, stalling trade between the two nations and leading to disruptions to the global supply chain. He also announced Florida’s attorney general would investigate GoFundMe after it dropped the page for donations to Canadian truckers. Nor is he alone. The Texas senator Ted Cruz told Politico he sent a letter to Federal Trade Commission demanding an investigation into GoFundMe. The Ohio congressman Jim Jordan similarly decried GoFundMe. Many Republican politicians have also expressed enthusiasm and support for US truckers seeking to emulate the Canadian protests on US soil. A convoy of truckers is set to begin a protest drive to Washington later this month, in a move some fear could bring the same kind of disruption that has gripped the Canadian capital, Ottawa. The Kentucky senator Rand Paul, who has criticized the disruptive tactics of racial justice protesters in the US, is “all for” the disruption of a trucker convoy. “I hope the truckers do come to America. I hope they clog up cities,” Paul told the Daily Signal, a publication of the conservative thinktank the Heritage Foundation. Paul said: “Civil disobedience is a time-honored tradition in our country, from slavery to civil rights, to you name it. Peaceful protest, clog things up, make people think about the mandates.” In 2020, Paul described a crowd of Black Lives Matter protesters that confronted him in Washington as an “angry mob”, thanking police for escorting him and “literally saving our lives from a crazed mob”. Jared Holt, a researcher of extremism, said the double standard by rightwing politicians was part of a strategy by Republicans to favor seizing any political opportunities to disrupt a Joe Biden presidency, rather than choose to be consistent in ideology . “I think the hypocrisy on display makes evident that this kind rhetoric is best understood as a piece of a broader project and not a hard ideological stance,” said Holt, resident fellow at the Atlantic Council’s Digital Forensic Research Lab, a non-profit that monitors and combats disinformation online. Thirteen states with Republican legislatures have introduced bills offering some level of immunity to drivers for hitting protesters blocking roads, an investigation by the Boston Globe found, with Iowa, Oklahoma and Florida successfully putting those laws on the books. Some of those lawmakers who drafted legislation have expressed support for convoys. Bill Eigel, a Missouri state senator who sponsored a bill to crack down on protesters who block roads and grant some immunity to drivers who hit them, joined other Republican state legislators this month to speak at a rally promoted as a “freedom convoy” to the capitol. The possibility of a US trucker convoy repeating the Canadian protests in America has also captured the imagination of the conservative media and many others on the right in America. Fox News has devoted 15 hours of coverage in the past few weeks, according to Media Matters. In the same span, over a hundred thousand social media accounts have participated in convoy groups, on Facebook and alt-tech platforms like Telegram, in a decentralized effort to organize a protest in the US. Organizers of the most popular trucker convoy group announced plans to meet in Barstow, California, next week and begin their journey to Washington. The Department of Homeland Security this month warned law enforcement agencies that a trucker convoy could be planning to reach Washington by the State of the Union address on 1 March. Holt said the convoys have the potential to be “fairly disrupting, especially on travel and supply chains” but cautioned against parallels to the 6 January attack on the Capitol. “From what I’ve seen so far, I don’t believe a majority of the people who have expressed interest in participating in this are doing so with the express intention of committing acts of violence,” he said. But he added: “That being said, a fair amount of them do subscribe to conspiratorial, far-right, extremist [ideologies]. So the risk is always there.” • The subheading of this article was amended on 18 February 2022 because an earlier version referred to “Ron Paul” when Rand Paul was meant.The second generation of Ikea’s novel Sonos-powered wifi speaker lamp looks a little sleeker than the first, sounds a bit better and comes in new shapes, materials and colour combinations. The idea is the same as for the rest of the Symfonisk range: hide a speaker in a piece of stylish furniture. In true Ikea fashion, the £179 ($169) lamp comes flat-packed, although thankfully only in three parts: the base, the plug and the shade. The base of the lamp is an 18cm-wide fabric-covered cylinder, available in grey/white or black. This contains the speaker. The shade is available in either grey or black and in two styles: fabric, as photographed, or glass, similar to the lamp’s predecessor. The shade and base can be bought separately and mixed and matched. The top of the base has standard lamp fittings. It takes an E27 bulb (not included) and will fit other shades with a 4cm-diameter ring if you don’t like Ikea’s options. Simple setup using your phone The lamp is as easy to set up as the Symfonisk Picture Frame. Download the Sonos app on your Android or iPhone, run the setup routine, tap your phone on the back of the lamp when instructed and connect it to wifi. It operates like any other Sonos speaker, streaming music over wifi – not Bluetooth – from your choice of music service. The system supports practically every major service, including Spotify, Apple Music, Amazon Music and BBC Sounds, plus Apple’s AirPlay 2 and Spotify Connect. The lamp can be used on its own or paired with another for stereo sound. It can also be linked with Sonos’s soundbars for surround sound, or grouped with other Ikea or Sonos speakers for easy multi-room audio. It does not have microphones for Google Assistant or Amazon Alexa, but the speaker can be controlled with all major voice assistants via another smart speaker or your phone. Specifications Base dimensions: 18 x 18 x 28cm Base weight: 2.39kg Connectivity: Wifi, ethernet, AirPlay 2, Spotify Connect Cord length: 200cm Light socket: E27 (screw) Shade ring: 4cm diameter Good sound below 70% volume The second-gen lamp sounds slightly better than its predecessor and similar to the Symfonisk picture frame. But it projects its audio 180 degrees around its base, making it sound less directional than other speakers. Place it against a wall in the middle of a room and it’ll sound the same regardless of where you’re sitting in front of it. Thanks to Sonos’s audio engineering the speaker is well balanced, with a rounded sound that is significantly better than many simpler Bluetooth speakers. Up to about 70% volume it has punchy bass, warm treble and nicely detailed highs. But crank up the volume further and it starts to struggle, with failing bass and over-accentuated treble. It sounds best at 50% or lower, which is more than loud enough for small or medium-sized rooms. But its wide, less directional sound struggles to project the music deeper into big rooms and can’t match the Sonos One or larger speakers. It is compatible with Sonos’s Trueplay auto-tuning system using an iPhone or iPad and has bass, treble and loudness settings to customise the sound manually, too. Sustainability Ikea does not offer a repair service but replacement cords (£7) and other parts are available. It does not contain any recycled material, nor does Ikea publish individual environmental impact assessments. But it offers a recycling scheme for its products and publishes an annual sustainability report. Sonos commits to supporting feature updates through software on its own products for at least five years after it stops selling them, but has a track record of doing so for much longer, including bug and security fixes for its legacy products. The Symfonisk range will receive similar levels of support. Price The Ikea Symfonisk speaker lamp costs £179 ($169.99) with a fabric shade or £199 ($189.99) with a glass shade. For comparison, the Symfonisk wifi bookshelf speaker costs £99, the Symfonisk picture frame costs £199, the Sonos One SL speaker costs £149 and the Sonos One costs £199. Verdict The second-generation Symfonisk speaker lamp is still a good idea well executed: good Sonos sound hidden in a sleeker and better-looking light. With a greater number of colour and shade combinations to pick from, it is even easier to blend the lamp into your decor, as long as you like a the look of a slightly chunky, black or grey fabric-covered lamp base. Sonos’s audio system continues to shine. It’s easy to control, compatible with almost every music streaming service and regularly updated, supported and expanded so your speakers aren’t left outdated. It is a slight shame the audio quality falters at high volume, but for small- or medium-sized rooms it should be loud enough for most at under 70% maximum volume. The light part of the unit is a standard E27 fitting with a manual push-button switch on the base, but you can fit a smart bulb such as Philips Hue for dimming or remote control. If you want a speaker that is less a piece of technology and more an item of functional furniture, the second-gen Ikea Symfonisk speaker lamp is great. Pros: great sound, good-looking, with a range of colour and shade options, easy set up, Sonos control, wide support for music services, can be paired up, optional ethernet, standard E27 bulb socket. Cons: base is quite large for a table lamp, no smart speaker mics, no Bluetooth or line in, no bulb included, can’t maintain music quality above about 70% volume. Other reviews Ikea Symfonisk speaker review: Sonos on the cheap Ikea Symfonisk picture frame review: Sonos wifi speaker hidden by art Sonos One review: the best smart speaker for audiophiles Sonos Move review: brilliant sound now battery-powered Sonos Roam review: the portable speaker you’ll want to use at home too Sonos Arc review: this soundbar sounds simply fantasticIt’s hard to think of anything less amusing than watching someone you love gasp their last breath of life. Yet, in the opening of Other People, film-maker Chris Kelly manages to turn that searing scene into the stuff of scream-out-loud comedy. Like a lot of humor of the darkest hue, success pivots on the juxtaposition between the monumental and the mundane – in this case involving mortality and a mixed-up Taco Bell order. The plot of Kelly’s debut film, which was released in 2016, centers on a struggling and downcast comedy writer (played by Jesse Plemons), who reluctantly returns to the place where he grew up, Sacramento, California, to help his sisters and father care for their cancer-ravaged matriarch (the iridescent Molly Shannon). The opening scene makes her tragic fate clear. The rest of the film chronicles the year-long lead-up. The drama of Other People isn’t only about the mother’s decline but about the son’s thwarted ascent; he’s struggling in his career, losing in his love life – having recently broken up with his boyfriend (played by Zach Woods) – and failing in his fitful attempts to get his father to accept his sexuality. The story mirrors Kelly’s own: he grew up in Sacramento, became a comedy writer – though a far more successful one than his character in the movie, having served, for a time, as the head writer of Saturday Night Live – and he lost his mother to cancer in 2009. So, he clearly knows what he’s talking about. Every detail in the film – from the most improbably funny to the most unflinchingly sad – rings true. I’m better equipped to testify to the veracity of that than I wish I were. Over the last decade, I’ve been through this whole “watching-someone-you-love-die” situation enough times to make my streaming gem selection double as an expert witness testimonial. I’ve seen the four people closest to me through the entire dying process – my father, my best friend, my brother and my mother, in that order. In three of those instances I witnessed the precise moment of their deaths (I missed my mom’s by minutes). And, while I can tell you that there wasn’t a great deal of hilarity in any of these scenarios, Kelly’s eager use of it in his film makes even the most wrenching moments watchable without denying a single stab of the pain that inspired them. His actors show equal skill at balancing hilarity and horror. Plemons uses his usual sphinx-like expression as a subtle tool to indicate the full range of his character’s smothered emotion. In one amazing scene, he ends up in bed with his ex-boyfriend. The result could make cinema history as one of the most sexually awkward scenes ever filmed. Yet, as written by Kelly, and as played by Plemons and Wood, the clumsy interaction has an intimacy and warmth that touches the soul. Shannon, a comedic actor who has always been able to find empathy in even the most humiliating situations, may, at times, seem too good to be true. She could be the most likable dying person ever. Yet her grace never obscures the filo-dough-thick layers of anger and loss inherent in her lot. Even a character who might have seemed shoe-horned into the script finds a sweet place in the pathos. Josie Totah, a trans actor who played male parts during this phase of her career, appears as the beyond-flamboyant brother of Plemons’ best friend. It’s just a cameo but the contours of the characters’ outrageousness speak of a confidence you won’t soon forget. Scene-stealing of that sort fits well in a film where most of the comedy isn’t generated by the lead character. Instead, Plemons plays the hapless observer, brooding or steaming while the other characters struggle with how to respond to the profound sadness of his mother’s situation. Her will to cause as little pain to others as possible makes the sight of her torturous medical treatments sting. As the film unfolds, its title takes on multiple meanings – from “these kinds of horrors happen to other people,” to the notion of otherness itself. In 1981, Martin Amis’ published a novel titled Other People: A Mystery Story. But, the truth is, if you live long enough, similar situations to those in the film will happen to every single one of you. Other People can be streamed on Netflix in the US and the UKVesna Goldsworthy dedicates her third novel to “my friends who, like me, grew up east of that line from Stettin in the Baltic to Trieste in the Adriatic”. Her gloriously vivid tale moves from 1981 to 1990, as the Iron Curtain – along with old Soviet certainties – weakens and falls. Its narrator swaps east for west for love, but struggles to find happiness in either. Milena Urbanska is the daughter of the second most powerful man in an unnamed Russian satellite. The state has “staid manners and a miserable coast”, but hers is a life of Ray-Bans, Yves Saint Laurent jerkins and the latest fridge freezers. The barrier to the west may be porous to the powerful, but the listless Milena guards her own privacy with adolescent rigour. She cocoons her black-clad body in neoclassical mansions and lakeside retreats, and shakes with fury when her essay is called out for nepotistic praise at a school ceremony. After her boyfriend (the owner of “the only LP of Evita this side of the Iron Curtain”) dies in an accident, she asks Daddy for a translation job, numbing her trauma with a succession of maize cultivation studies. When a rare literary conference is announced, she agrees to shadow Jason, a visiting English poet. The man who will change her life arrives in an Aran sweater and plimsolls “the colour of a urine sample”. Jason is glib and charismatic and, drunk on novelty and his handsome, narrow face, Milena falls in love. A few months later she is on a flight to England, where drab skies, mug-strewn bedsits and new threats await. Like her protagonist, Goldsworthy moved to the west in the 1980s, emigrating from Serbia (then part of Yugoslavia) to London to live with her British husband, and working for the BBC before writing memoirs, poetry and now thoughtful, atmospheric novels. She builds her story with wonderfully evocative detail, and as Milena moves from the wary conformity of her homeland to England, bubbles of humour burst through Goldsworthy’s bittersweet brew. On a visit to Jason’s parents’ underheated country pile, his mother wheels out a grimly credible smörgåsbord of burnt brussels sprouts, sulphurous cabbage and “greasy, glistening” dumplings from her many ovens. Goldsworthy gives Milena sharp replies in the face of British pomposity, and merrily punctures the cliches of London romance: in Kensington Gardens, the lovers watch “ducks waddle and defecate around its rim, and adult men play with miniature, remotely controlled sailing boats”. There is escape here, of a kind. Sex with Jason is joyful, and London’s neighbourhood shops offer a comforting sense of community and routine. Babies arrive, “tiny and creased from the pressure of the womb, like two loaves of warm brioche”. In the country, farmhouse-dotted fields stretch wetly “like kelp to an invisible sea”, a lyrical contrast to the war-ravaged land and collective farms of home. But foreboding shadows every finely rendered set piece. It comes from Soviet agents, from the self-centred Jason and from the headstrong, troubled Milena herself. Goldsworthy’s previous novels used a cast of London émigrés to continue the story of Anna Karenina and retell The Great Gatsby. In Iron Curtain, Jason writes a volume of sonnets called The Argonauts, while Milena can be read as a version of Medea, who followed her lover west, and ended her stay with vengeance. By the dawn of the 90s, the great divide that Milena crossed is no more, and scruffy, old-fashioned London is being remade as a financial capital. Even a child of the elite can be marooned as history’s tides turn. Yet, if Iron Curtain is often pessimistic about its lonely heroine’s world, this is no classical tragedy. The pages fly by, and Goldsworthy’s careful scrutiny brings warmth and sympathy to her tale of belonging and betrayal. Tense, brooding and often hilarious, Iron Curtain finds bright sparks as well as bleakness in the cold war’s dying embers. • Iron Curtain is published by Chatto &amp; Windus (£14.99). To order a copy for £13.04 go to guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.The way 15-year-old Russian skater Kamila Valieva was treated by her coach after her two falls in her figure skating routine on Thursday evening was “chilling” and does not inspire any confidence in her entourage, the International Olympic Committee president Thomas Bach has said. In an unusually strong intervention, Bach admitted that he was shocked to see the controversial Russian Olympic Committee coach Eteri Tutberidze berate Valieva as she came off the ice, barking at her “why did you stop fighting?” even though she had been under enormous mental stress ever since her positive drugs test was revealed last week. “I must say I was very disturbed yesterday when I watched the competition on television,” said Bach. “First in her performance, how high the pressure must have been on her. I know from my athlete time a little bit about pressure. But this pressure is beyond my imagination, in particular for a girl of 15 years old. “To see her struggling on the ice, seeing how she tries to compose herself again and finish her programme, you could see in every movement in the body language, you could feel this was an immense mental stress. “But this was not all,” Bach added. “When afterwards I saw how she was received by her closest entourage, with what appeared to be a tremendous coldness, it was chilling to see this. “Rather than giving her comfort, rather than trying to help her, you could feel this chilling atmosphere, this distance. And if you were interpreting the body language, it got even worse because there were even some dismissive gestures I saw on TV.” The gold medal was won by world champion Anna Shcherbakova, who narrowly pipped her Russian compatriot Alexandra Trusova despite a more conservative free skate routine. Both are 17 years old and also coached by Tutberidze. Afterwards, Trusova was visibly upset by the judging but appeared to get little support from Tutberidze – something Bach also spotted. “I am pondering whether you could really be this cold to your athlete,” Bach said. “All of this does not give me much confidence in this closest entourage in Kamila, neither with regard in the past nor in the future.” The World Anti-Doping Agency is now investigating Valieva’s coaches, doctors and other adults around her but Bach admitted that the IOC’s options were “extremely limited”. “We are not the police,” he said. “We can not interrogate. We can not have a formal prosecution procedure and therefore we need the support of governments. We need to reinforce our efforts to speak to governments so they take disciplinary measures regarding entourages.” Valieva was allowed to compete in the women’s event after the court of arbitration for sport ruled against re-imposing a provisional suspension on her. That decision came after a week of media scrutiny that followed the news that she had tested positive for angina drug trimetazidine on 8 February, a day after she helped the ROC win the team event. However Bach accepted that Valieva was unlikely to have taken the banned drug in isolation and stressed it was of “extreme importance” that those around her be properly investigated given her age. On Saturday Tutberidze insisted that her skater was clean but accepted that the situation was “very controversial and difficult”. When asked if Tutberidze had any place in the Olympics, Bach said: “This is why we have asked for the inquiry to shed light on all this. We trust this will come to light and we will not hesitate to implement the appropriate measures. And these will be tough measures.” Bach also signalled that the IOC would look into rules regarding age limits for adult competition, as well as whether minors should face the same doping penalties as senior athletes. But he added “this needs careful deliberation”. The IOC president’s comments provoked an angry response from Russia’s deputy prime minister Dmitry Chernyshenko, who told Inside The Games: “We are deeply disappointed to see an IOC president weave his own fictional narrative on the feelings of our athletes, and then present these publicly as the voice of the IOC. This is frankly inappropriate and wrong.”A key rule that bars people with temporary or fluctuating conditions from getting the disability support pension should be reviewed, a Senate inquiry has found. The Labor-Greens-dominated committee’s report, published on Friday, said the evidence pointed to “serious flaws with the [disability support pension], its underlying policy framework, the way that it is administered, and how applicants are able to access it”. Eligibility for the disability support pension, currently set at $967.50 a fortnight for a single person, was significantly tightened by the Gillard and Abbott governments, meaning thousands of people now find themselves on the lower jobseeker payment. Guardian Australia has reported extensively on how the rules – particularly a requirement that a condition is “fully diagnosed, treated and stabilised” – mean many people are left to survive on the $45-a-day dole, despite Centrelink and job agencies acknowledging they are too sick to work. Among those affected is 65-year-old cervical cancer patient Lynette Penfold, who was denied the pension and forced to live on jobseeker until she was diagnosed as terminal, and George Upjohn, a 29-year-old former pilot who has been left on the dole despite battling brain cancer. In another case revealed by Guardian Australia, Doug Reidy, who developed severe PTSD after the black summer bushfires, had his claim rejected because he could not access mental health services in his regional community, which he needed to be considered “fully treated”. The Senate inquiry report also said the process to apply for the pension was “long, complex and not well understood” – a common complaint among benefit recipients – with the evidence required to make a claim “difficult to obtain and cost-prohibitive”. “The committee heard that the challenges for people with disability navigating this system are varied, and can be exacerbated by their condition, and personal and financial circumstances,” the report found. It recommended the government review the rule that “a condition be ‘fully diagnosed, treated and stabilised’” and how it is “preventing people with conditions that are complex, fluctuating, or deteriorate over time” getting the pension. Under the rules, applicants must score 20 “points” for a particular condition on the “impairment tables”, meaning those with several conditions that might add up to 20 points generally have their claims rejected. The report recommended the government consider reforming the rules to allow people to accumulate 20 points across several impairments. It also called for the department of social services to review the program of support requirement, which has forced thousands of pension applicants to first undertake up to 18 months of job search and training before they can get on to the payment. The inquiry chair, Greens senator Janet Rice, said the report set a “clear blueprint for action by whoever forms government after the election”. “Many of those who’ve been unfairly denied access to the DSP have been forced to wait years. They must not wait any longer,” Rice said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Aside from a commitment to scrap the cashless debit card, federal Labor has been tightlipped about welfare policy ahead of the upcoming election. It is yet to indicate whether it will make changes to the disability support pension or raise the jobseeker rate. Government senators said in additional comments to the report that while they supported consideration of practical improvements to the disability support pension, ensuring the long-term financial sustainability of the social security system was a key focus. Kristin O’Connell from the Antipoverty Centre, who co-authored a joint submission to the inquiry with People with Disability Australia, called out the failure of the report to explicitly call for an increase to the “appallingly low DSP rate”. There are currently about 752,000 people in receipt of the disability support pension. Of the 96,000 people who applied in 2020-21, 59.4% were rejected.With Vladimir Putin’s troops massed on the Ukrainian border, governments in the US and Europe have vowed to retaliate by imposing harsh economic restrictions. The British foreign secretary, Liz Truss, has warned of “the toughest sanctions regime against Russia we have ever had”. Of all the countries threatening economic retaliation, the UK has an outsized ability to inflict damage. There is thought to be more Russian gold in London than in any other city in the world. Not only in the Chelsea mansions that house the families of oligarchs, but on the London Stock Exchange (LSE). Since the 1990s, companies whose shares are traded in Moscow have turned to London to raise money through what are known as secondary listings. They range from state-backed oil and gas producers Rosneft and Gazprom, to state-run banks VTB and Sberbank, to independent mining companies like Norilsk Nickel that have no state ownership. In total, 31 Russian companies are listed on the LSE, with a combined market value of £468bn, according to the data company S&amp;P Global. The companies are not only a crucial part of the Russian economy, they also directly fund a large part of the Russian state. London-listed Russian oil, gas and mining companies paid their government £39bn in taxes in 2020, according to a Guardian analysis of payments to government disclosures. That revenue is hugely important to the Putin regime: Russia spent £41.7bn on its military in 2019, 11.4% of government spending, according to the World Bank’s latest figures. Now those companies are under the spotlight, as legislators in London and Washington ponder what form sanctions should take. A statutory instrument laid before parliament last week has given the UK government the power to impose sanctions on those “carrying on business of economic significance to the government of Russia” as well as companies supportive of the Russian government, and sectors of strategic significance, including energy, mining and financial services. While not every Russian-linked company will be a target for sanctions, the reality is most of the London-listed companies potentially fall within the definition of having economic or strategic significance to the Russian government. A draft US sanctions bill that is thought to have the backing of the White House explicitly names 12 Russian banks as potential targets for sanctions and would also give powers to hit companies in the oil and gas and mining sectors. If carried out, the US threats would represent “massive sanctions at a level we’ve not seen before”, including after Russia’s invasion of Crimea in 2014, said John Smith, a partner at US law firm Morrison and Foerster who led the US Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control (Ofac), the department’s key sanctions enforcement body, until 2018. No companies or individuals have yet been designated, but the new legislation now allows for the speedy designation of a very broad range of individuals and entities. Under the most extreme scenario, companies operating in the UK, US or EU – including most of the world’s major financial institutions – could be forbidden from any transactions with sanctioned entities. That could mean the indefinite suspension of their shares, and an inability to issue new debt or shares in London. Asked whether the UK was likely to impose sanctions that would damage the interests of big British companies, Bernardine Adkins, a partner at the London law firm Gowling WLG, said: “I’ll believe it when I see it.” “The modern way of sanctions tends to be very focused, and they’re not sweeping to hurt the economy,” she added. Even if sanctions are imposed, there can be ways around them. Smith said he expected some “flexibility” in the US approach to the energy sector in particular, given the importance of Russian gas to the EU economy. Governments can take a “facts and circumstances” approach to allow limited licences for work with sanctioned entities. The most obvious companies of economic significance to the Russian government, based on tax take, are Rosneft, Gazprom and Lukoil, who together paid 3.2tn roubles (£31bn) in tax and other payments to the Russian government in 2020. All three are primarily listed on the Moscow Exchange, but have secondary listings in London. A spokesperson for Rosneft, the large oil company run by the former Russian deputy prime minister Igor Sechin, said the company was “a commercial organisation” that had no “political agenda”. The spokesperson highlighted a list of major institutional shareholders ranging from Goldman Sachs and BlackRock in the US to British asset managers such as Schroders and abrdn, and said it made “a notable contribution to the sustainability of the UK energy market”. Gazprom, Norilsk Nickel and Sberbank did not comment. Lukoil and VTB did not respond to requests for comment. Some companies with primary London listings also operate in sectors deemed by the UK government as strategically significant to Russia. The FTSE 100 steelmaker Evraz is incorporated in London but has significant operations in Russia. The company is 29% owned by Roman Abramovich, the Russian owner of Chelsea football club. Lawyers for Abramovich disputed that he or Evraz fitted the criteria for potential designation for sanctions. They added: “It would be ludicrous to suggest that our client has any responsibility or influence over the behaviour of the Russian state.” The London-based aluminium miner En+ Group, which raised $1.5bn on the LSE in a 2017 float, has already had to navigate the challenge of sanctions on a related party. It is part-owned by Oleg Deripaska, a Russian oligarch who has been on the US sanctions list since 2018. En+ managed to escape US sanctions by reducing Deripaska’s ownership to 45% and appointing other directors in a plan devised by Greg Barker, a former UK energy minister and Conservative peer who is the company’s chair. The company is still thought to make monthly reports to Ofac. En+ declined to comment. However, Deripaska has taken legal action to challenge US sanctions. He has denied any wrongdoing and said US allegations against him were based on “false rumour and innuendo”. At their peak in 2007, Russian companies raised $19.7bn on London’s equity markets, according to the data company Dealogic. Roman Borisovich, a former investment banker and founder of the anti-corruption group ClampK, said the London listing is particularly valuable because it gives an “independently verifiable measurement of their capitalisation”. “Traders are more likely to trust the London price than a quote from the Moscow exchange, where you don’t know what the liquidity is like or what market manipulation is there,” he said. “That’s really valuable when you’re looking to raise money by issuing bonds or shares, or enter any other financial transaction.” The possibility of sanctions for London-listed companies poses tricky questions for the London Stock Exchange Group, as well as the City investment bankers, lawyers and accountants who serve them. Russian companies are likely to account for only a small portion of the LSE’s fee income, but it has in the past enthusiastically welcomed Russian money – even going so far as mounting a roadshow to Moscow in 2011 to drum up custom. That mood has changed along with the geopolitics since the Crimea annexation, but Russian companies have still raised an average of $1.8bn a year on the LSE between the 2014 Crimea invasion and 2021, or £14bn in total, according to data from Dealogic. There were five equity capital raises by Russian companies in 2021, dominated by Fix Price, a Russian retailer (albeit incorporated in the British Virgin Islands), which raised $1.8bn. Sanctioned companies can, depending on the details, be suspended from trading and removed from the LSE’s stock market indices – although there is little in the rules on what would happen if suspensions were to last years. The London Stock Exchange Group declined to comment. Whether the UK will clamp down is an open question, says Thomas Mayne, a visiting fellow in the Russia and Eurasia programme at the thinktank Chatham House. “London is open to business and this has produced a two-faced approach to Russia,” he says. “We’re happy for the money to stay here but we’re not happy with its foreign policy priorities. We’ve somehow not made the link.” • This article was amended on 18 February 2022. Owing to an error in the information supplied by Rosneft, an earlier version incorrectly stated that Marshall Wace was a Rosneft shareholder.In the eyes of Antonio Conte, ketchup and mayonnaise are strictly forbidden. Pep Guardiola is supposedly not keen on his squad eating pizza and David Moyes has voiced concerns about chips finding their way into a player’s diet. At Rotherham United, the League One leaders, there is one simple rule at the training ground: mobile phones are banned. “Some lads will definitely have their phones in their toiletry bags but apart from doing a military strip search there is not much I can do on that,” says their affable manager, Paul Warne. “Sometimes I do like to casually walk through their dressing room and just catch someone. I think if they’re not on their phones all the time, they might actually speak to each other, which is quite a nice thing.” Conversation flows with Warne, whether he is discussing dressing up for the Super Bowl, being a big James Bond fan – “although the Timothy Dalton phase was a bit cheesy” – his mother tuning into every Rotherham game on iFollow, comparing the nauseating feeling of wanting his players to succeed to watching your child play the lead role in the school pantomime, or taking his labrador, Chief, for a walk to decompress after a game. “It is a bit of sanity for me, talking to a four-legged friend. I saw something on YouTube the other day saying that when dogs go out for their walk, it is like their social media. They’ll scratch their feet on a bit and that’s like an Instagram shot, they’ll wee on a bit and that’s like a Twitter post, they’ll send something else and that’s like a Facebook thing, and they’ll leave messages for other dogs. So whenever I go out now, because my dog loves to scent on virtually everything he sees, I’m thinking: ‘What a good, sociable dog he is.’ The whole village’s dogs must wait for his next message.” Warne, a qualified teacher and previously the team’s fitness coach, is modest and searingly honest, so much so at times it is hard to remember he is a successful manager – Rotherham are 15 games from what would be his third promotion to the Championship in five years – but there are more serious subjects to broach, too. He tries not to beat himself up as much these days but acknowledges it is easy to say that when things are going well. His team have the Football League’s best defensive record – five goals conceded away from home – and are League One’s top scorers. Keeping the team in the second tier has eluded him, though. “It feels like something around my neck to a certain extent,” he says. “We want to try and work our way up to feeling like we belong in the Championship, which is a big ask, but it isn’t unattainable.” Warne believes management has wiped years off his life and last month had his annual medical “MOT” courtesy of the League Managers Association. “You get your heart scanned, your lungs, you do a fitness test on a treadmill while you’re all ECG’d up, you get your hearing tested, which is probably about my only great attribute … you get your prostate checked, you get everything,” the 48-year-old says, before recalling a game at AFC Wimbledon in August 2019. “I stood up to shout at a player 10 minutes into the game and I just went all wobbly. I thought: ‘Oh my God, I’m going to collapse.’ I had just lost my dad and I was heavily dehydrated. I hadn’t eaten all day. I went for a run in the morning and I remember crying – I probably had some emotive music on as well. I was completely drained. It highlighted the fact that you can go from sitting still to your heart rate being 200 beats per minute in the split of a decision. Some managers don’t eat on a match day. It’s really difficult to eat on a match day but since then I’ve forced myself to drink more and eat something. Stress is definitely a killer and there cannot be many jobs more stressful than a football manager.” Last season was particularly painful, with Rotherham relegated on the final day after conceding an 88th-minute equaliser at Cardiff scored by Marlon Pack, who apologised to Warne for his mis-hit shot that nestled in the opposite corner. Warne fought back tears during an emotional post-match interview. Does he sometimes pine for quieter life? “I think all managers would to a certain extent. They probably won’t admit it because it’s the worse thing to say if you ever want to be employed by a different club, but there are times when I’m on the side of the pitch thinking: ‘What am I doing this for? I’m in absolute purgatory standing here, freezing my chuff off,’ the other manager is abusing you for something, and sometimes you just think: ‘Wow, this is some way to earn a living.’” If anything sums up Warne, it is the heartfelt video call he shared with his players and staff upon promotion in 2020, when he broke down at the end of a series of thank-you messages. He won’t be waxing lyrical on Friday, regardless of the result against second-placed Wigan. “After a game I always shake the hand of every single player and staff member, whether we win 5-0 or lose 5-0; I’ll never change that,” he says. “I thanked them when we got relegated at Cardiff. But you can’t thank them mid-season because as soon as you thank them, they think they have got it sussed.”It is a memorable photograph. Outside the Old Bailey on 14 March 1991 stand the Birmingham Six, free at last after 16 years in prison for a mass murder in which they played no part. At the centre of this happy band, scarf askew and beaming with pleasure and pride, is the man whose diligence as an investigative journalist and later MP has led to their victory in the court of appeal. Now, more than 30 years later, that same man, Chris Mullin, will himself be back at the Old Bailey on 23 February facing an action brought against him under the Terrorism Act of 2000 to make him reveal the sources of his information all those years ago. The Birmingham Six were jailed for life in 1975 for an IRA bomb attack on two pubs the previous year, which killed 21 people and injured more than 200. It was a grim, unforgivable crime and understandably the police were anxious to nail those responsible. They swiftly arrested five men on their way to Ireland for a funeral and a sixth the following day. After days of brutal interrogation, four “confessed”, admissions that were immediately retracted once their violent ordeal ended. The government’s forensic scientist claimed that at least two of them had been in touch with the explosive nitroglycerine. That evidence was discredited by the time of the trial – many household products and notably the pack of cards with which the men had been playing on their train journey before their arrest gave similar results – but the Six were convicted and jailed for life. The late Peter Chippindale, who covered the trial for the Guardian, told his journalist friend Mullin that he felt that the police had got the wrong people. A spark was lit. While working for Granada Television’s World in Action programme, Mullin set about trying to discover the truth by tracking down those really responsible. If it was possible to prove that others had carried out the attack, the Six could be shown to be innocent. Eventually he found the real men involved and interviewed them on the understanding that he would not identify them. In 1986, he published his account, Error of Judgement, and the following year became an MP for Sunderland South and continued to campaign. The Sun noted his persistence thus: “Loony MP backs bomb gang”. Other Irish cases – the Guildford Four, the Maguire Seven, Judith Ward – were also being exposed as miscarriages of justice. At their appeal on that fateful day in 1991, the Six were cleared. Some of them, Billy Power and Paddy Hill, in particular, have since lent their names and energies to free others wrongly convicted. Then in 2018, under pressure from relatives of those killed and the organisation Justice 4 the 21, came a decision to reinvestigate the case. The West Midlands police, a very different crew from the disgraced Serious Crime Squad of the 1970s, embarked on a fresh inquiry. Mullin was asked to surrender all his data: notebooks, manuscripts and so on. He provided the notes of his interview with one of the men, Michael Murray, who was the bomb-maker and who had died 20 years ago, but declined to provide anything that would break his agreement. The police now seek a court order from a judge to force him to comply or face jail. There are precedents. In 1963, Reg Foster, the Daily Sketch’s crime reporter and Brendan Mulholland of the Daily Mail were jailed for contempt of court for three and six months respectively for refusing to reveal the sources for stories about John Vassall, who had been convicted the previous year of being a Soviet spy. At the inquiry into the affair Foster delivered an impassioned speech in which he said: “I have been in journalism for 40 years. From the first I was taught always to respect sources of information.” He added that he had lost many Fleet Street colleagues in the second world war and “I would feel guilty of the greatest possible treachery to them if I were to assist … in this matter.” The Guardian faced its own crisis in the case of the civil servant Sarah Tisdall, who was jailed for six months in 1984 after leaking details to the paper about the arrival of American cruise missiles in Britain. The then editor of the Guardian, the late Peter Preston, was prepared to go to prison to defy a court order to provide material that would identify her, but was advised that it was more likely that an ever-increasing fine would be imposed on the newspaper. He described passing on the information as the “worst day” of his editorship and offered his resignation. While Mullin has the strong support of the National Union of Journalists and from politicians ranging from Labour’s Jack Straw and Charlie Falconer to the Conservatives’ David Davis, he has been called “scum” by relatives of the victims and asked, “How do you sleep at night?” While one has great sympathy for the bereaved, the betrayal of sources – which in this case would be very unlikely to lead to any convictions – is not the path to be taken in any pursuit of justice. Journalists already enjoy little public respect. An Ipsos Mori poll in 2020 put the percentage of people who trust journalists to tell the truth at 23%; only politicians rank lower. Mullin is absolutely right to stand firm – especially at a time when attempts are being made to amend the Official Secrets Act to make punishing whistleblowers easier. If journalists routinely betray sources and break their word why should anyone ever trust them and how will scandals like that of the Birmingham Six – the likes of which continue to this day – ever be uncovered? Duncan Campbell is the former crime correspondent of the GuardianThe prosecution: Sandy Peter loves his bikes; we now have a garage, but he still keeps one in the house When I first met my husband Peter, he lived in a flat and kept a large, powerful motorbike, a Kawasaki Z1, in the hall. Trying to squeeze past it with shopping was a nightmare. Then there was a smaller vintage bike, called a Gilera, in the living room and another huge bike, a Ducati, in the bedroom. I was surrounded by them. We recently bought a house together with a beautiful garage and I thought: great, the bikes will be happy and comfortable there. But then a storm approached. Peter began to get agitated and worried that a branch would crash through the roof and damage the bikes. Before I knew it, the Gilera had snuck into the house again. He said it would only be there for a few days. But after the storm passed it was still there and ended up staying for weeks. A few months later, we got a puppy. It started biting everything – that’s when Peter finally returned the Gilera to the garage. I think the only reason he did it was to protect it from the puppy, not because I wanted it gone. After it disappeared I felt joy. I thought: I’m not going to trip over it or find bits of it in my kitchen. I often say Peter loves his Gilera more than he loves me. He’s had it since he was 16. The two bigger bikes stay in the garage, but once the puppy stops biting, Peter wants to bring the Gilera back into the house. But it creates a mess. I’ve had a lot of stains on our carpets and flooring. One time, Peter hung lights around one of the bikes to make it look like a nice art display, but something happened and he burned a hole in the carpet. We’ve also bought a posh dishwasher – and Peter loves to stick bits of his motorbike into it, which I find alarming. I’m not against Peter having his bikes – we’ve taken several trips with me on the back, and I go to his vintage motorbike shows. But bikes in the house are a hazard. The Gilera really needs to stay in the garage unless there’s a real emergency. The bigger bikes stay out entirely. The defence: Peter Sandy’s paperweight collection is on display; it’s only fair I can bring in one little motorcycle Vintage motorbikes are things of beauty, they make the house a better place. It’s also widely accepted that they work better when you store them in dry, warm places so I really feel they should be allowed in the house. After we bought this house, we learned that a branch from the walnut tree above our garage had once blown off during a gale and crashed through the roof. I really didn’t want that to happen during the storm when the Gilera was in there, so I moved it inside. Sandy wasn’t pleased. She said: “What the heck is this doing in my house?” The Gilera is the only bike I really want inside. It was built in 1973 and it’s a gorgeous little thing. With the Z1, I do admit that it was difficult to walk past in my old place. I remember one time my bag got caught on a hook and split and the shopping went everywhere. But when you’re careful it’s usually not a problem. I’ve also never put any bike parts in the dishwasher that are greasy or oily. There’s actually a lot more grease from a tray you cook chicken on. Sandy’s extensive paperweight collection is displayed in our home – it’s only fair that I’m allowed to bring in a precious little motorcycle. People have preconceived ideas of what should be in houses, and they can be unfair. My wife feels that houses are for “nice” things. Her friends agree with her and gang up on me. But in my eyes, motorbikes have the same status as a work of art. The time I tried to hang lights around the bike was a terrible accident. The lights swung on to the carpet and burned holes in it – but I was attempting to treat the bike as an art display. It’s not true that I love bikes more than I love Sandy. I have told her: “If it came between the Gilera and you, the Gilera would be gone in an instant.” She’s never asked me to get rid of it, though. I think to compromise I can ask Sandy before I need to move a bike inside the house next time, but I can’t promise there won’t be a next time. The jury of Guardian readers Should Peter move his bike out once and for all? The ridiculousness of Peter’s first sentence says it all. Unless they can build an extension for the bikes, the garage should be adapted to make it suitable. To compromise, Sandy should reduce the number of paperweights on display. Alison, 61 When Peter lived alone, he was free to store his bikes wherever he wanted. Now that he and Sandy own a home together, there should be some compromise. Sandy’s paperweights aren’t really a comparison; they aren’t obtrusive and haven’t caused damage to the home. Sam, 33 They clearly love each other, though Sandy has made it clear that she simply doesn’t want the bike in the house (or the dishwasher) for cleanliness and clutter reasons. Perfectly understandable. Michelle, 50 It’s reasonable that Sandy doesn’t want to feel as if she’s living in a garage when there is one outside. Why not trim that tree branch and turn the garage into a shrine for the Gilera and other bikes to really shine? Olivia, 33 Sorry Peter, but you’re guilty. I can’t agree with many of the things you said, not least that bikes “make the house a better place”. Why not develop the garage into a garden house, or even build a small cabin that could serve as a place to not just store but display them as well? Charlie, 44 You be the judge So now you can be the judge, click on the poll below to tell us: should Peter keep his motorbike in the house? We’ll share the results on next week’s You be the judge. The poll is now closed Last week’s result We asked if Paolo’s housemate Ray should stop cooking meat in the kitchen as Paolo is now vegetarian. 96% of you said no – Ray is innocent 4% of you said yes – Ray is guiltyThe return of Leatherface, the Ed Gein-inspired mass murderer who’s never happier than when he’s chainsawing nubile youngsters in half, might not be much of a return for hardcore horror fans (he’s been in at least one film every decade since the 70s, the last as recently as 2017) but in Netflix’s new franchise restarter, he’s back with a particularly modern brand of vengeance. Following in the sluggish footsteps of Michael Myers, who stabbed his way back to relevance in 2018 after we were insisted upon to ignore the mostly heinous Halloween sequels (H20 remains an underrated bright spot) and allow for a clean slate, the Texas Chainsaw Massacre series is going down a similar retcon route. Rather than expecting us to have endured the three direct sequels, the remake, the prequel to that remake and the 3D sequel to the original that had previously tried to ignore the other sequels (and the prequel that then came after), the makers of Texas Chainsaw Massacre only ask that our knowledge be as simple as the back-to-basics title. It has never been a series steeped in particularly complex mythology – a silent lug kills and cuts up outsiders while wearing a mask made of human skin – but the exhausting attempts to resurrect and retell have expanded and confused the universe to a point of exasperated weariness. There’s been a similarly messy route to the screen for this latest iteration – an early Covid shoot, a change of director after production began, rumours of unimpressed test audiences, a big screen release cancelled, a sell-off to Netflix – enough to make one wonder if it’s time to retire, disable and bury the chainsaw for good. But against considerable odds, a very, very low bar has been met and then shuffled over with this mostly effective and incredibly nasty update, a jolting little slasher that should repulse and satisfy those with a suitably depraved idea of what they are clicking into. It is almost 50 years since a group of teens were brutally murdered by Leatherface, a refresher provided by OG narrator John Laroquette in the opening scene, served with a reminder that the massacre was survived by Sally (now played by acclaimed Irish stage actor Olwen Fouéré after Marilyn Burns died in 2014), who has been trying to track down the killer of her friends ever since. Melody (Sarah Yarkin) and Dante (Jacob Latimore) are bullish San Francisco-based Gen Zs, heading south for a business opportunity who have purchased the derelict town of Harlow with the idea of auctioning off retail space and turning it into a hipster haven for those bored of big city life (a local refers to them as “gentri-fuckers”). But on arrival, with Melody’s sister (Eighth Grade breakout Elsie Fisher) and Dante’s girlfriend (Nell Hudson) they encounter a resident who refuses to be turfed out, a former orphanage-runner (Alice Krige) who insists that she still retains the deed for her property and so will not be going anywhere. A stand-off ensues, albeit a short-lived one when the elderly woman collapses, being rushed to hospital with her one mysterious grown-up charge alongside. But when she dies on the journey there, all hell breaks loose. It will not take a series expert to figure out who her grown-up charge turns out to be and what might be on his mind as he returns to the town but it’s a little foggier as to who exactly we should be rooting for as blood and guts hit the fan. The script, from up-and-coming horror writer Chris Thomas Devlin (who has two Seth Rogen-produced films in the offing) views the invading twentysomethings as thoughtlessly disrespectful rather than maliciously so, but makes it clear that theirs is a situation of their own making (they make for an incredibly hard-to-empathise with ensemble). He’s not exactly asking us to cheer Leatherface on as he dispatches them in a variety of disgusting ways but each death is backgrounded with the knowledge that this really didn’t need to happen. Never is this clearer than in a much-ridiculed trailer scene, where a party bus of potential investors decide to film Leatherface on their phone so he can get cancelled, rather than, you know, try to run away. It’s as remarkably stupid as it sounds and the ebulliently vile, shockingly staged carnage that follows feels tailor-made for eye-rolling older viewers, even if some original fans might find the brief lapse into absurdist comedy a little jarring. The limp return of Sally, a shameless piece of post-Halloween remodelling, is mostly a dud, the character never really meaning much to us in the first place, and instead, Devlin tries to give his film heart through Fisher’s troubled sister. But her backstory – a school shooting survivor – and journey – her phobia of guns is overcome in order to take on Leatherface – is in quite astonishingly poor taste, a nasty taste in the mouth that feels closer to NRA propaganda than Texas Chainsaw sequel. It doesn’t help that Fisher is also an unlikely fit, the same out-of-place awkwardness that made her so very perfect in Eighth Grade making her feel simply miscast here. In a breathlessly brutal 83-minute runtime, there’s little time for thinking, probably for the best, given the thinness of the material and some of the mistakes made within it, but first-time director David Blue Garcia finds ample time for suspense, making the most of his unique location and milking just about enough seat-edge frights from the reheated ingredients. It’s staggeringly gory, following on from last year’s equally sadistic Halloween Kills, but also sprightly enough for it not to feel too grim (an attention-grabbing final shock is both horrendous and hilarious). In a franchise that has been close to death for many years, it doesn’t take much for Texas ’22 to shock it back to life. Texas Chainsaw Massacre is now available on NetflixThat is where we will leave the live blog for today. Thanks for following along. Here’s some of what you might have missed today: Prime minister Scott Morrison said the federal government had no power “to prevent or stop” Darwin port sale. The PM also said he fears “the worst” on a potential conflict in Ukraine. Western Australia will lift its hard border on Thursday 3 March, along with reintroducing a series of restrictions. Greens senator Lidia Thorpe accused the government of “colonising” the Aboriginal flag. Independent MP Bob Katter decried the “super sneaky” passing of firearms bill. Queensland premier Annastacia Palaszczuk ordered a wide-ranging probe of Queensland government and public service integrity following continued pressure from former and outgoing public servants over cultural issues. The ACT will ease a number of public health restrictions from 6pm tonight, including density limits and allowing diners to stand while eating and drinking. The Victorian government announced it would impose a levy on property developers to fund social and affordable housing, alongside exempting social housing properties from paying council rates from mid next year. Billionaire businessman Andrew Forrest says the rhetoric coming from federal ministers on China has entered “reds under the bed” scare campaign territory. Earlier today, the Department of Health confirmed that 68 Indigenous people have died of Covid since the pandemic began, with 43 dying this year alone. Dr Luca De Toca from the department told Senate estimates the spike in deaths this year was “associated” with the Omicron outbreak. That’s associated with the Omicron outbreak. The rate of death among the overall number of cases remains lower than among the general population. 77.7% of all eligible Indigenous people in Australia are fully vaccinated, with 82.8% having received at least one dose. But only 45.6% have received their booster. Aaron Morey, from the Chamber of Commerce and Industry WA, was just on ABC discussing the lifting of the state’s hard border and said it was a “relief” that businesses had a firm date for the reopening. To have the date set in stone for 3 March so that our members can now bid for work in other states or other countries and come and go freely from Western Australia is an absolute relief and we believe that the government has put in place appropriate measures around that, around restrictions and we think that’s a necessary trade-off, but it is a feeling of great relief. The WA business community is ready and raring to go. Those businesses that are ready to do work in other states or other countries that need to travel in order to conduct or fulfil their service contracts, to attract workers from elsewhere and to open up some of the supply chains particularly in the bellies of passenger aircraft which is critical for the east-west rail disruptions we have seen. We’re ready to go. Morey added there was a “trade-off” for small businesses having to deal with new restrictions that have come with the border reopening: There is a trade-off in terms of the restrictions that have been introduced. We think the government has got the balance right. There was concern we might go to a four square meter rule. That’s been reserved for the Level 2 settings. We’d like more clarity around when the settings come in, but on the whole, in terms of the starting point that we’ve got in terms of those restrictions, around two square meter, some capacity limits on nightclubs and cinemas and the like, on the whole, we think that the government has struck an appropriate balance. As always, Amanda Meade’s Weekly Beast is a must read, and today’s edition is no different: Along with the opening of the border, McGowan has announced a series of restrictions leading into the reopening date. Density rules and mask mandates for indoors will be introduced, and “level 1” measures will be introduced to the regions, with the 2 square metre rule returning for hospitality and entertainment venues, cultural venues, fitness venues and places of worship. WA premier Mark McGowan has stepped up and announced that the hard border with the rest of the country will fall on Thursday 3 March. McGowan noted a significant step up in the case numbers in the state, and warned that numbers will continue to rise. Interestate arrivals will not need to quarantine if they are tripled-jabbed, and will need to take a RAT at the airport. He says moving ahead with opening the border on 5 February would have been a mistake, opening the state to the Omicron outbreak. He says the Omicron outbreak has “peaked” in the east. He says four weeks of restrictions have “paid dividends,” which has allowed his government to set a date for reopening. In the meantime, the former prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull, has been tweeting a response to the PM’s claims earlier today that the leasing of the Port of Darwin was not in the hands of the federal government: WA premier Mark McGowan has called a press conference, due to begin in 15 mins. There are reports the premier could discuss the state’s hard border, but we’ll have to wait and see. A key rule that bars people with temporary or fluctuating conditions from getting the disability support pension should be reviewed, a Senate inquiry report has found. The Labor/Greens-dominated committee’s report, published on Friday, said the evidence pointed to “serious flaws with the DSP, its underlying policy framework, the way that it is administered, and how applicants are able to access it”. Eligibility for the disability support pension, currently set at $967.50 per fortnight for a single person, was significantly tightened by the Gillard and Abbott governments meaning many thousands of people now find themselves on the much lower jobseeker payment. Guardian Australia has reported extensively on how the rules – particularly a requirement that a person’s condition is “fully diagnosed, treated and stabilised” – means many people, including those with mental health conditions, cancer and chronic illnesses, are left to survive on the $45-a-day dole despite Centrelink and job agencies acknowledging they are too sick to work. The Senate inquiry report said the committee had found the process to apply for the pension – a common complaint among benefit recipients – was also “long, complex and not well understood”, with the evidence required to make a claim “difficult to obtain and cost-prohibitive”. “The committee heard that the challenges for people with disability navigating this system are varied, and can be exacerbated by their condition, and personal and financial circumstances,” the report found. It recommended the government review the rule that “a condition be ‘fully diagnosed, treated and stabilised’” and how it is “preventing people with conditions that are complex, fluctuating, or deteriorate over time” getting the pension. Under the pension rules, applicants must also score “20 points” for a particular condition on the “impairment tables”, which are used to evaluate the severity of a person’s condition. This means those with several conditions that might add up to 20 points or more are still denied the pension, unless one specific disability is considered severe enough. The report recommended the government also “consider reforming” this approach to allow people to accumulate 20 points across several impairments. The inquiry chair and Greens senator, Janet Rice, said: This report sets out a clear blueprint for action by whoever forms government after the election. Many of those who’ve been unfairly denied access to the DSP have been forced to wait years. They must not wait any longer. However, Kristin O’Connell from the Antipoverty Centre, who co-authored a joint submission to the inquiry with People with Disability Australia, said the recommendations were “weak”. She said: There is not even a recommendation to lift the appallingly low DSP rate, which keeps disabled people living well below the poverty line, and for many of us means we have no prospect of ever living a normal life – we’re consigned to poverty until we die. Morrison was asked about the growing threat of a potential Russian invasion of Ukraine, and said his government “fear the worst”: I say again: those who do not denounce the violence that Russia is threatening Ukraine with, well, that leaves me very concerned. And the Chinese government is yet to denounce those threats of violence and I urge them to do so. They seek to play a positive role in global peace. Well, they could immediately denounce the threats of violence that are taking place on behalf of Russia. Would Morrison return the Port of Darwin to Australian ownership if re-elected? The PM again reiterated that the federal government didn’t authorise the lease: It’s a lease, one. But secondly, I’ve always said if we receive advice from our defence and intelligence agencies that is what is necessary to do to protect Australia’s national interest, I would not hesitate. I would not hesitate to do that. But that is not something that’s been advised. I recall it was not at the government’s direction. But I think the defence secretary, Dennis Richardson, at the time, who made some comments about the Port of Darwin and its lease, they were not the views of the Australian government at that time. As I said, the Australian government did not authorise it. It did not approve. It did not have the power to approve it. What we have done after the previous Territory government entered into that lease, what we have done is to tighten the laws, to ensure the federal government would have such authority in the future and pass critical infrastructure laws. Next question: does Morrison think Albanese is anti-Semitic? (This comes after the prime minister earlier today accused Albanese of coming from the “far left” of the Labor party, where, he says, they are critical of Israel.) Morrison: I didn’t say anyone was anti-Semitic this morning. What I said was, and I go back to what Tanya Plibersek herself said in parliament when she accused Israel of being a rogue state and said Ariel Sharon was a war criminal. Senator Sue Lyons just this last week accused Israel of what she said was the crime of apartheid. The thing about Mr Albanese is that he comes from the far left of the Labour party. And that is where these views are held in the Labor party. I have just cited two of them. He is not known are being from the right wing of the Labor party and the people of the right wing of the Labor party will be the first to tell you that. He has been a champion of the left wing of the Labor party his entire political career. And that is where we have seen those views and they are also, I am informed by the Greens as well, we have seen [those] views on these issues. So, nearly half an hour after we were supposed to hear from him, the PM has stepped up for (another) press conference, this time in Darwin. He’s announcing $282m of investment in two major projects – the first is $160m on “capability improvements” and $122m in “maintenance and service” roles. But the first question is on whether Alan Tudge still has his confidence. Scott Morrison says: Alan Tudge has done a fine job of education minister ... [On] the matter that has been raised, a very serious one, which I have taken incredibly seriously, that matter is still in process, with an independent report and further work that is done to advise me. For the first time, Western Australia has recorded more than 200 new cases in one day. There were 202 cases reported overnight, 194 of which were locally acquired and eight of which were “travel related”. But despite the growing case numbers, thankfully no one is in hospital with the virus. Independent MP Bob Katter is very upset the House of Representatives passed the Coalition’s gun trafficking bill on Thursday, after a Labor ambush actually eased the way for the bill to pass in just a quarter of an hour. Katter thinks the bill could have unintended consequences, such as jail time for purchasing a replacement part, such as a swivel or screw online, as sending items interstate may constitute “trafficking”. Katter said: We were given no notice that the bill was coming on. It was super sneaky. If I had been allowed to speak, I would have argued that the bill sets a dangerous precedent of mandatory sentences and that the bill had been introduced with zero consultation. This is the time where the government should be building up our armoury but instead they are doing the complete opposite. It’s unclear whether the government will put the bill to a vote in the Senate in budget week, with just two Senate sitting days left in late March. But if it did, the bill would likely pass easily with Labor support. The Northern Territory has reported 1,027 new cases overnight and one death, a man in his 50s. The death marks the 14th Covid-related death in the NT since the start of the pandemic, with authorities saying the man had underlying health conditions. There are currently 127 patients in hospital with Covid, with 18 requiring oxygen, and one person in intensive care. So why did Albanese repeat the Manchurian Candidate barb, considering his point on uniting the country? I was saying in terms of his position that he’s put forward, the actions that he is doing at the moment, in the words of Dennis Richardson, Australia’s most celebrated public servant when it comes to national security issues – foreign affairs head, defence head, Asio head, ambassador to Washington, our most important ambassador – he has said it only serves the rhetoric of the government, only serves the interests of one country: China, not Australia. And so we’ve moved on to discussions on national security (predictably). Albanese says he wants to “unite the country” and that the PM has shown a capacity for “not telling the truth”: I was part of a government and leader of the government in House of Representatives in Julia Gillard’s government that put the US Marines here, that upgraded our defence relationship with the United States. I was also the infrastructure shadow minister who opposed the sale of the Port of Darwin to a company that was connected with the government of China. We will always stand up for Australia’s interests. That’s why we also opposed the extradition treaty with China this government tried to ram through, and they said we were irresponsible for doing so. I think the national security analysts this week have made their position very, very clear. They have said it’s not in Australia’s interests to look for false distinctions. They have said that both sides of Australian politics have a bipartisan position when it comes to our US alliance, when it comes to China, on Hong Kong, on Taiwan, on the South China Sea, on the treatment of Uyghurs, on Tibet – [on] all of those issues we have a common view and it’s not in Australia’s interest. What I want to do is unite the country. I want to unite the country because unity is strength. What Scott Morrison is trying to do as a desperate political measure is to divide the country. It’s not in Australia’s national interest to have a divided country based on fake news. We know what his own colleagues think about his capacity to not tell the truth. The fact is, his deputy prime minister has said that over a long period of time he’s observed that Scott Morrison is a hypocrite and a liar. I say when it comes to national security, he should listen to what the director general of Asio said this week. He should listen to what no less than the former secretary of the department of foreign affairs, head of Asio, ambassador to Washington, appointed by John Howard – that’s Dennis Richardson’s credentials and he’s made some very strong comments this week. Opposition leader Anthony Albanese has just stepped up for his press conference, beginning by spruiking a $11.6m funding for a healthcare facility in Palmerston. He said: Today’s announcement is about this specific service, it’s a real commitment for a real facility that will make a real difference. And that’s what we’re doing here today. We know that the issue of healthcare – we’ve had a reminder during the pandemic – some said: do you have the right health outcome or the right economic outcome? There was a tension between the two things. In the third year of this pandemic, we know when you don’t get the health outcomes right, the economic outcomes are worse as well. That’s why the rollout of the vaccine should have been delivered far more efficiently. That’s why there should’ve been much better targeting and support, focusing on vulnerable groups, including First Nations people. That’s why the booster, if you rolled out the vaccine earlier, the booster would have been rolled out earlier as well. That is why rapid antigen tests should have been not waited until January before the federal government bothered to put in an order. In so many areas, Scott Morrison’s been too little and too late – [it] has characterised the response. Here are the latest coronavirus numbers from around Australia today, as the country records at least 39 deaths from Covid-19: ACT Deaths: 0 Cases: 561 In hospital: 45 (with two people in ICU) NSW Deaths: 15 Cases: 9,243 In hospital: 1,381 (with 92 people in ICU) NT Deaths: one Cases: 1,027 In hospital: 127 (with one person in ICU) Queensland Deaths: nine Cases: 5,795 In hospital: 384 (with 34 people in ICU) Victoria Deaths: 14 Cases: 6,935 In hospital: 451 (with 64 people in ICU) Western Australia Deaths: 0 Cases: 194 (local) A stoush between Greens senator Lidia Thorpe and Liberal senator Amanda Stoker in Senate estimates today was sparked by the discussion of the government’s decision to secure the copyright to the Aboriginal flag earlier this year. It was revealed that Luritja artist and land rights activist Harold Thomas was paid $13.75m for the copyright, with $5.2m paid to non-Indigenous company WAM Clothing. Thorpe had accused the government of “colonising” and “assimilating” the Aboriginal flag in the process of its acquisition, saying: The people I am bringing voice to in this place are very concerned that our flag has been colonised, given this is the colonisers’ headquarters and they’ve just purchased our flag. Stoker responded by denying the government had colonised the flag, adding that it was now Australian, “just like all Indigenous people”: I want to reassure those people … that we have taken the flag from a situation where it was effectively being privately owned to a situation where, in accordance with the wishes of the Indigenous designer of the flag, it has been put in a position where it is safe, where it is available to all Indigenous Australians. But Thorpe had the final say: I’m being whitesplained. I’m not going to be told by a white senator that I’m an Indigenous Australian, that is insulting. OK, we’ve gone into some new attacks today, with the PM claiming opposition leader Anthony Albanese is “from the socialist left” of Labor, associating him with criticisms of Israel and saying his government would be “the most leftwing-leaning Labor leader since Gough Whitlam”. I believe not only is Anthony Albanese not the right leader for this country, because I don’t think he has the strength on national security that I have demonstrated and my government has demonstrated. The other part that worries me about Anthony Albanese when it comes to national security is that he has or has come from the socialist left of the Labor party – he has always had sympathies with those policies, which have been very hostile. For example, the left of the Labor party and the Greens, they denounce Israel as war criminals. Their own members have accused our government of being a deputy sheriff to the United States, which undermines the genuine partnership we have with the United States. The Labor party is soft on national security and is ... under the most leftwing-leaning Labor leader we have seen since Gough Whitlam. That is not a good form to be strong on national security. My reputation on this is on the record. Next up, Morrison is asked about the sale of the Port of Darwin, an important element to the discussion on China considering it was the current Liberal government that enacted that sale. However, the PM pins the responsibility for that sale on the previous Territory government: Well, the Port of Darwin was sold by the former Territory government here in the Northern Territory. It is not something that the federal government had any power to prevent or stop. And what occurred after that is, because the federal government didn’t have any approving authority or any ability to prevent that sale, I changed the law, as treasurer. I got all the states and territories to agree, as treasurer, that there shouldn’t be the ability for states and territories to sell assets like that in the future. And now they can’t. And I fixed that. And since then, we have kept, with our defence and intelligence agencies, a very close watch on what’s been happening there. And there has been a process under way which I initiated – I announced that when I was up in Darwin some time ago. And that process continues and I can assure you, if there is any action that we need to take that suggests that there is any compromise to national security in that area, then we would certainly take it. The prime minister is giving a doorstep presser in Alice Springs and was sprucing a new friend he made before returning to his favourite topic of the week: Labor’s foreign policy. Scott Morrison said: We’ve got an election coming up, where Australians have to make an important decision about who is best to lead them in these incredibly uncertain times. We’ve got Russian troops amassed on Ukraine’s border. We’ve got coercion on Australia’s interests here in our own region. We’ve got rapidly escalating militarisation in our own region. And I think Australians have to compare and contrast between the government I lead on national security and the alternative. And Labor just doesn’t measure up to the mark of our government when it comes to national security. Labor cut defence spending, they cut funding to the intelligence communities you’re referring to. I tell you what doesn’t help the intelligence community – cutting their funding. We’ve increased their funding. So I am going to make it very clear that if you want to keep Australians safe and if you want a government that’s going to continue to stand up for Australia in an uncertain world, then my government – and myself as prime minister – have the runs on the board. I’d like there to be greater agreement in this area, but the Labor party haven’t measured up, and I don’t think there’s any problem in pointing that out. I’m not gonna set a low bar for bipartisanship. If the Labor party wants to agree with our policies, then they’ve got a lot more work to do, because frankly on this issue they’re weak. So the finance minister, Simon Birmingham, was on the ABC earlier and said he was comfortable with the PM’s escalating language on China. Birmingham took the chance to mention Labor’s cuts to defence spending in the past, saying there was no “room to have grey zones in terms of language”: I think contrast in election campaigns ... [the parties’] track records, what the leaders say, is always an important part. In 2012-13, the Labor government cut defence spending in real terms by more than 10% and drove Australia’s investment in defence to its lowest level as a share of the economy since 1938. We promised that we would lift that and return that to at least 2% of GDP in terms of defence spending. We’ve not only delivered that promise, we’ve exceeded that promise. That has proven to be a good decision given our [international] environment has changed so significantly since 2013. It does concern me that Anthony Albanese fronted up to the National Press Club a couple of weeks ago and said that he thought China should lift the coercive economic actions they’ve taken against some of Australia’s industries. Well, ‘some’ is not good enough. And, again, it’s a contrast in what leaders say and what parties stand for. There’s no room to have grey zones in terms of the language. Australia has to show resolve and firmness, as well as, of course, the willingness as always to sit down and engage. Good afternoon, and a quick thanks to Caitlin Cassidy for her expert work this morning. Mostafa Rachwani with you this afternoon, there’s still much going on so let’s dive in. With that, I will pass you into the capable hands of Mostafa Rachwani, who will keep you informed for the rest of the afternoon. Billionaire businessman Andrew Forrest says the rhetoric coming from federal ministers on China has entered “reds under the bed” scare campaign territory, AAP reports. The prime minister and defence minister have been leading the charge against Labor, accusing the party of being soft on China and labelling opposition leader Anthony Albanese the Communist party’s preferred candidate. Their comments have drawn condemnation from former Asio head Dennis Richardson, who said the federal government was “doing the work of China” by eroding bipartisanship on national security. Forrest on Friday sought to tone down security concerns over China, saying “so-called” threats have come and gone for decades and calling the current rhetoric a “reds under the bed” scare. He told reporters in Canberra: I just say to the political spectrum: calm down, we live in the best country in the world and – by the way – it’s got this great moat around it, a bit hard to attack, and a whole lot of hairy-chested friends. But Scott Morrison refused to back down, saying Labor “doesn’t measure up to the mark”. “Frankly on this issue, they’re weak,” he said. “I’d like there to be greater agreement in this area, but the Labor party haven’t measured up and I don’t think there is any problem in pointing that out. I am not going to set a low bar for bipartisanship.” Welding – as Morrison was pictured doing earlier this morning – does take some time. You can’t rush a weld. Barr says we will be living with the virus “for years” and need to get used to nuances and changes in light of this. In this Omicron wave, more people know more people who have had Covid. It is a very different experience this time around, and clearly the public health measures have been more gradual and nuanced. And there has not been a binary on or off as it was the case with the lockdown. What you’re going to see is that we didn’t have a sharp contraction, we will not have a massive upward [trend] coming out of this way. I think that is going to be the pattern in relation to future waves and new variants, we have been living with us for years. We will have to just get a bit more used to there being nuances and changes from time to time, that aren’t earth shattering, aren’t the end of the world, or freedom day - to move away from all that. That is not pandemic management in the third year, the fourth year, fifth and however long. We are going to be living with this. At this point, it has no end date. ACT chief minister Andrew Barr is holding a media conference in Canberra. He says advice on eased restrictions for the territory announced today is for them to be implemented in stages, in line with Victoria and NSW. New South Wales had spoken with the ACT and Victoria and Queensland through the chief health officer earlier in the week. The timing of their easing was scheduled for next week. I acted on that basis. It’s all happening! A NSW police officer has been charged over an alleged assault and an offence under the Liquor Act, NSW police have confirmed. On Saturday 5 February, officers attached to Camden police area command began an investigation into the alleged assault offences. Following inquiries, a 40-year-old senior constable – attached to Campbelltown police area command – was charged with assault occasioning actual bodily harm, common assault and excluded person re-enter/attempt to re-enter premises. The man is next due to appear at Picton local court on Wednesday 6 April. His employment status remains under review. The ACT has just released its Covid update and, thankfully, no lives have been lost overnight. There have been 561 new Covid cases detected. There are 45 people being treated in hospital, including two people requiring intensive care. This isn’t the PM’s first rodeo as an amateur welder. In fact, he welded for cameras just last December at a visit to Opie Manufacturing in Emu Plains, burning his finger in the process. A reminder of the PM’s response to being “sneered” at for being pictured completing tasks arguably completely irrelevant to his own job: I go into workplaces all the time. People show me how to weld, people show me how to do other things in factories and manufacturing plants. These were trainees and apprentices who wanted to show me what they’re learning on the job. So if people want to sneer at me for that, if they want to sneer at me for other things, like playing the ukulele, fine, they’re sneering at millions of Australians who just get on with their lives and do a great job. A great image of the week that was. Some nice nuanced debate to throw into the mix: A decision on the easing of restrictions in Queensland will be made before the end of February. Queensland’s Covid numbers are in. There have been 5,795 new cases detected overnight and, sadly, nine deaths. There are 384 patients being treated in hospital including 34 requiring intensive care. Wide-scale vaccination has been cited as the reason Queensland’s Covid wave has not been as significant as was projected. CFMEU state secretary Michael Ravbar has welcomed Palaszczuk’s announcement of a probe into Queensland government and public service integrity but said any inquiry must also look at the influence of lobbyists: We have been arguing for years – including at ALP conferences – that lobbyists have far too much influence and access when it comes to state government policy and awarding of major contracts. This problem is in no way confined to one side of politics, but in recent years the Queensland government has allowed the creeping influence of lobbyists to grow to the point where it is a clear and present threat to governance and integrity in this state. Policy and major contracting decisions should not be decided on the size of a person’s chequebook, or the colour of their party membership card. Without major reform to rein in the power and influence of lobbyists any attempt at addressing integrity issues in Queensland is nothing more than window dressing. The government has launched a new national Australia brand – a kangaroo silhouette accompanied by the word “AUSTRALIA”. The tagline is “only in Australia”, the meaning of which I can only guess. Back in Queensland: Following suit with NSW and Victoria, the ACT will ease a number of public health restrictions from 6pm tonight. All density limits will be removed, with no need for businesses to display signage for capacity limits. Diners will be able to stand while eating and drinking, and dancing will be again permitted. Ticketing and preregistration requirements for events will be removed, and employees will be able to return to the workplace upon employee discretion. From Monday, elective surgery will resume and the mandatory quarantine period for unvaccinated international travellers will be reduced to seven days as well as the requirement for online declaration forms. From Friday 25 February face mask restrictions will be eased in some indoor places and exemption requirements for all events will be removed. Check In CBR will still be required at businesses where it is currently mandated, and all businesses are still required to have a Covid-19 safety plan in place. Chief minister Andrew Barr said the past few years had been a “tumultuous time” in the territory: Our case numbers have steadied, and we are cautiously optimistic about the autumn period. While we recognise the situation could change if a new variant of concern emerges or there is a surge in cases, this step is designed to minimise the disruption of Covid-19 on our local businesses when it is safe to do so. The winter months will present increased risks, and the ACT government will join national efforts to prepare for a period where our health system may come under significant strain. Both Scott Morrison and Anthony Albanese are in the Northern Territory, with an eye on the contest in Lingiari where Alice Springs mayor Damien Ryan is contesting for the Country Liberals against Labor’s Marion Scrymgour. Morrison has made two announcements: $22m for Indigenous leadership and governance, including $13.5m for the Australian Indigenous Mentoring Experience; and $282m for defence projects, including the establishment of the regional maintenance centre in Darwin Asked on ABC Alice Springs why voters should pick Ryan, Morrison relied on a series of cliches that “he gets it”, “understands the issues” and can “get things done in government”. When pushed about whether Ryan’s experience was really superior – given Scrymgour is a former minister in the NT government – Morrison said he had shown “commitment to this town in particular” as mayor. Morrison asserted the Coalition was better on national security, law and order, and would help Territorians get a job. He boasted about his partnership with the Gunner government on both Closing the Gap and during the Covid-19 pandemic. Palaszczuk is absolutely buzzing on Elvis – which I can only expect comes from a place of genuine passion for the guy rather than a deflect from the major probe into the culture of her government announced today. The Victorian government has today announced a new Social and Affordable Housing Contribution (SAHC) alongside exempting social housing properties from paying council rates from mid next year. From July 2024, all newly built developments with three dwellings or more and three or more lot subdivisions will contribute 1.75% of the as-if-complete project value to the Social Housing Growth Fund. The change will affect less than 30% of all residential planning permits. Over the first ten years, the SAHC is expected to raise on average about $800 million a year to fund the delivery of an average of up to 1,700 new social and affordable homes each year. The rates reform will be phased in over four years from July 2023 and will only apply to social housing properties. The reform will not apply to affordable housing. Back in Victoria, and treasurer Tim Pallas says the government does not have decriminalising illicit drugs on its agenda following a push from Reason MP Fiona Patten. Sydneysiders are being instructed to avoid driving on the Sydney Harbour Bridge with a police operation currently underway. Still in Queensland, and premier Annastacia Palaszczuk has ordered a wide-ranging probe of Queensland government and public service integrity following continued pressure from former and outgoing public servants over cultural issues. From AAP: The premier has faced sustained questioning about misconduct allegations involving the government, the public service and the state’s four integrity watchdogs. Palaszczuk told AAP in a statement: It is always good to look at things with fresh eyes. The 21st century has brought rapid changes, not least in terms of technology. We need to address that. People deserve a government that is fit for purpose, geared to their needs and focused on them. I welcome this independent review and look forward to Professor Coaldrake’s findings. Coaldrake has been told to focus on systemic issues rather than individual misconduct complaints, with at least two of those under investigation. The Crime and Corruption Commission is probing whether senior public servants in 2021 took a laptop from integrity commissioner Nikola Stepanov’s office and deleted its contents. Stepanov, who’s resigning in July, has also said the government cut her funding and staff, which the premier denies. Palaszczuk also tried to have the integrity commissioner probed by a parliamentary committee for alleged misconduct after she complained about the laptop. Meanwhile, a Queen’s Counsel is probing misconduct claims made by the former state archivist Mike Summerell. He has alleged interference in his role and his reports, potentially leading to parliament being misled. At the same time, three separate reviews are looking at whether the CCC, the Integrity Commissioner and the Office of the Independent Assessor, the local government watchdog, are fit for purpose. Speaking of Victoria, case numbers are in. There have been 6,935 new Covid cases detected overnight, with a string of restrictions set to ease from 6pm amid declining numbers. Sadly, a further 14 lives have been lost overnight. There are 451 people being treated in hospital with the virus including 64 people requiring intensive care. That’s 50 people more than yesterday’s figure, but a slight drop in ICU. In Victoria, all social housing will be exempt from council rates from mid next year, housing minister Richard Wynne has announced. NSW Covid case numbers are in. There have been 9,243 new case numbers overnight as a string of restrictions lift in the state. Sadly, there have been 15 Covid-related deaths. There has been another drop in hospitalisations overnight. There are 1,381 people being treated in hospital including 92 requiring intensive care. Also this morning, AMA president Dr Omar Khorshid was on ABC Breakfast discussing rising case numbers in Western Australia. Khorshid said the expected uptick in cases was finally occurring in the state: As we know, Omicron spreads quickly in communities. Almost a couple of months into our battle with Omicron, we’ve seen low case numbers up to now. We still have no one in hospital and we’ve had a single death, tragically, in a patient who had Omicron but that’s a very different experience a couple of months in than we’ve seen in other states. Modelling on the trajectory of the outbreak is yet to have been released by the WA government, on grounds it’s inaccurate. Khorshid said: It’s baffling everyone that we’ve seen relatively low numbers. I think that points to the effectiveness of extremely high vaccination rates. 95% of people over the age of 12 with two doses, up to almost 99%with a single dose and that puts us in a unique situation worldwide as we start to battle Omicron. Opposition leader Anthony Albanese will be up and about in Darwin today, discussing investment in Aboriginal health services. In Queensland, a 35-year-old man has been missing for more than 13 hours after attempting to help a fisherman who had been knocked over by a wave. Queensland police were called to the scene just after 6pm last night. A number of people went to the aid of the fisherman but the male rescuer failed to return to shore. A land, sea and air search has so far been unsuccessful. This morning, police have been patrolling the shoreline with water police vessels searching the area. Deputy opposition leader Richard Marles was on Today earlier alongside Peter Dutton, discussing Ukraine and the week in parliament. Karl Stefanovic: Richard ... it’s been a big week. The PM labelled you in parliament the Manchurian candidate, you little Chinese spy, you, hey? Marles: (Laughs) Well, obviously not. But I think tossing around patriotism in that way and using it as a political football, I mean ... I’m not particularly hurt by it but it does pay quite a disrespect, I think, to those men and women who we ask to put on a uniform each and every day and to literally put their lives on the line for that very concept. Also this morning, Stuart Roberts appeared on Sunrise. He wasn’t asked about Origin Energy’s decision to shut the Eraring power station but he was asked about unemployment rates remaining low despite more than 450,000 workers being sick or isolated for at least a week. Roberts: These are really encouraging numbers and yes, of course, hours worked were down to the Omicron shock and the fact that more people have been getting more jobs. We can expect things to ramp up very quickly as we get the lifting of restrictions, the opening of international borders and get back to normal. We’ve already got the borders open to those skilled moderate workers and backpackers ... this is all about making sure we get more jobs back, maintain the growth and get that 4.8% figure potentially even down to a number starting with three. Here is the latest from AAP on warnings Russia is on the brink of war with Ukraine, echoed by defence minister Peter Dutton. As the US government warned a Russian invasion could occur in the coming days, Dutton said there were multiple signs this was on the cards. “It’s tragic and we’ll see terrible scenes unfolding,” Dutton told the Nine Network this morning: You would expect that president [Vladimir] Putin, who obviously can’t be taken at his word, is manufacturing some sort of trigger, or is in the process of executing the final stages of his plan to go into Ukraine. The Kremlin has accused Joe Biden of stoking tensions after the US president said Russia was engaged in a “false flag” operation and seeking an excuse to invade. Ukrainian forces and pro-Moscow rebels have already clashed – the two groups traded fire in Ukraine’s east. Dutton said while European leaders had attempted to prevent a conflict in Ukraine, Putin was intent on military action: That really is going to result in the loss of innocent life. We’ve seen it before in eastern Europe, we don’t want it repeated but we live in a very uncertain world. However, the defence minister said Australia had not been asked to provide troops to Ukraine, should there be any military retaliation: This is an issue Nato and Europe need to deal with and those European leaders really need to step up and put the pressure, even more pressure, on Russia to stop them. Meanwhile, the minister for foreign affairs and women, Marise Payne, has today become the longest serving female senator and the longest serving female parliamentarian to serve in a single chamber. She has been a senator for NSW since 1997, and minister for foreign affairs since 2018. More than 70 of Australia’s epidemiologists, GPs and global health and aid organisations have signed an open letter calling on the prime minister to make a Budget commitment to accelerate the global vaccination effort. Their joint letter outlines “grave concern regarding the state of global vaccine inequity” and the opportunity “Australia has to help address this vital issue affecting us all”. It calls on the government to: Commit an additional $250m to the COVAX AMC Facility Use existing partnerships to tackle vaccine hesitancy by committing $50 million from the existing $532m Vaccine Access and Health Security Initiative into addressing vaccine hesitancy in the Indo-Pacific Reduce the chance of future outbreaks, variants and pandemics by committing $100m to the CEPI replenishment CEPI chair Jane Halton said Australia was “dangerously behind” targets to vaccinate the world: Less than 6% of people in low-income countries are fully vaccinated and case numbers are increasing. This not only puts these countries in a perilous position but is a significant threat to Australia. The emergence of Omicron in a region with dire vaccination rates proves, just as Delta did, that when left unchecked, Covid will mutate into more transmissible and deadly forms. Burnet Institute director professor Brendan Crabb said ramping up the global vaccination effort would save lives. 1,582 people died from Covid across Australia in January alone. We cannot simply wait for another variant to arrive and wreak havoc on our lives, our health system, aged care and economy. From Katharine Murphy: Given there is no concrete evidence of significant policy differences between Labor and the Coalition on China – at least none that I’m currently aware of – Morrison and Dutton puffing themselves up like mini-me McCarthyists imperils the national interest. By turning question time into a treason tribunal – staging a daily Judge Judy session to unmask the sleeper agent in our midst – Morrison and Dutton are actively stoking societal anxiety. Given the current climate, that behaviour creates material risk. Victorian crossbench MP Fiona Patten is set to introduce a bill today to state parliament to decriminalise all drugs. Under the bill, Victoria police would issue a mandatory notice and referral to drug education or treatment to people believed to have used a drug of dependence, or to possess a drug of dependence. If they comply, there would be no finding of guilt and no recorded criminal outcome. The Reason Party MP said it would be about “saving lives and reducing harm”: It is about treating drug use as a health issue with a health solution, not a criminal one. Our existing laws are killing innocent people. They’re ruining countless lives … most politicians know that, because the evidence is so strong. A similar approach was adopted in Portugal in 2001. The personal possession of all drugs was decriminalised and health-led approach introduced. Drug-related deaths dropped as a result, as did the number of prisoners sentenced for drug-related offences from 40% to 15%, according to the UK-based Transform Drug Policy Foundation. In Victoria, of the 32,860 drug arrests in the state in the 12 months to September 2021, 26,195, or just on 80%, were for drug use or possession only. That is an average of 72 Victorians every day. Possession or attempted possession is around the sixth most common charge heard in the magistrates court of Victoria, according to the court’s latest annual report. Over at our Ukraine blog, tensions are rising on the Russian border: The energy minister, Angus Taylor, is speaking on RN now, reacting to Origin Energy’s decision to shut the Eraring power station seven years ahead of schedule. Asked why Taylor wasn’t consulted on the company’s decision, he says: That’s a question for Origin, I really don’t know ... that’s a question for him ... we were disappointed by the shortness of the notice ... This is another gap that needs to be filled. Taylor says he has spoken to chief executive Frank Calabria, and expressed his disappointment, however he didn’t receive an answer on why Origin didn’t come to him. We’ve nearly made it through another week, and what a week its been. Caitlin Cassidy here to take you through today’s news, starting in New South Wales and Victoria, with a raft of Covid restrictions to be eased over the next week as case numbers continue to drop in the nation’s most populous states. From 6pm tonight, density limits at hospitality and entertainment venues will be removed in Victoria, dancefloors can reopen and QR code check-ins will no longer be required in a range of settings including schools. In NSW, density limits were scrapped from midnight, QR codes will only remain in large nightclubs and music festivals, and singing and dancing is back on the cards. Premiers Dominic Perrottet and Daniel Andrews have also flagged the recommendation to work from home will be lifted, with masks mandates to be removed in a week’s time. Still in NSW, 13 beaches that were shut yesterday following a fatal shark incident at Little Bay have been reopened. Leading shark scientists have called for calm following the tragic event, encouraging beachgoers not to fear the return to the water but to follow commonsense guidelines like swimming between flags. And fallout continues after the end of an ugly week in parliament that saw national security weaponised by the Coalition with allegations of Labor being soft on China. Former spy chief Dennis Richardson yesterday intervened, saying the Morrison government was serving China’s interests, not Australia’s, by seeking to create false perception of difference between the major parties. Katharine Murphy agrees – writing Morrison and Dutton are puffing themselves up like mini-me McCarthyists. There’s a lot to get into, so let’s dive in.Kumanjayi Walker could have survived being shot the first time by Constable Zachary Rolfe, a court has heard, but the second bullet fired by the police officer likely caused the Warlpiri man’s death. Rolfe is charged with murdering Walker in Yuendumu, a remote community 300km from Alice Springs, on 9 November 2019. He has pleaded not guilty. The court has heard Rolfe shot Walker three times, but the first shot is not subject to any charges. It occurred only moments after Walker stabbed Rolfe with a pair of small scissors and happened while the pair were about a metre apart. The murder charge relates to the second and third shots fired by Rolfe, which the prosecution allege were fired at point-blank range while Walker was being controlled by another officer. Dr Keith Towsey, a trauma surgeon at two Brisbane hospitals, told Rolfe’s trial on Friday that a review of Walker’s injuries showed the second bullet passed from one side of his body to the other. It penetrated Walker’s liver, spleen, a kidney and right lung while doing so, he said, and likely proved fatal. Towsey said that while the injuries caused by the first and third shots were still serious, they were unlikely to have proved fatal if Walker had received hospital treatment. All three shots hit Walker in the torso. Towsey also said the first shot was unlikely to have incapacitated Walker to the extent he would have no longer posed a threat with the scissors, as it would not have diminished the function of his right arm, which had been holding the weapon. Under cross-examination by David Edwardson QC, for Rolfe, Towsey was asked if he had previously been approached by the Northern Territory police or director of public prosecutions to express an opinion about whether the pair of scissors used by Walker could cause a fatal wound. He said he was asked his opinion by an NT police officer, and also emailed a photo of the scissors, but after expressing his opinion he did not provide a formal report. Edwardson called for any record of the communication between Towsey and NT police, including the email containing the photo of the scissors, to be presented to the court. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The prosecutor, Philip Strickland SC, said he was not aware of the police approach to Towsey. Senior Constable Anthony Hawkings, the only direct witness to the shooting of Walker who has appeared at the trial, also continued his evidence on Friday. He was asked about an earlier statement he gave to police about the moment he described as when “the shit hit the fan” – the 2.6-second gap between the first shot and the second shot at a property known as House 511. Hawkings was asked by Strickland about his previous statement where he described a moment seemingly before the second shot was fired when he looked in the doorway to the house. In his statement, he said it appeared Rolfe and Constable Adam Eberl had contained or were containing Walker, and this, along with the fact he was carrying an AR-15 and did not want to get into a “wrestle”, was why he did not enter the property. The prosecution allege Walker no longer posed a threat as the arm that had been carrying the scissors was pinned under his body, and Eberl was on top of him. Hawkings told the court on Friday that because the incident happened so quickly, he could not be sure that when he made that statement he was referring specifically to the time between the first and second shots, or to his general impression of the overall event. Under cross-examination by Edwardson, and after again watching body-worn camera footage of the incident, Hawkings clarified that he did not believe Walker had been contained, even after being shot on the second and third occasions. He also said Walker was still holding the scissors after he had been shot for the third time. The trial continues on Monday.What price, hype? When does publicity turn into crushing expectations that can make Mikaela Shiffrin or Simone Biles develop a sudden case of the yips or withdraw from competition altogether? And is society getting any better at recognizing the humanity of those who walk the high wires of elite sports, where one momentary slip can undo a lifetime of work – if we define their work solely by what happens when people tune into the Olympics every four years? We’re still obsessed with “busts” and those who “choke”. Great athletes’ careers are considered unfulfilled if they don’t win the biggest prizes – even in team sports, where one athlete can only do so much. One 2012 list of biggest disappointments included LeBron James, reasoning that he had never won a championship. Oops. More disturbing is the tendency to apply the “bust” label to people who suffered serious injuries. Greg Oden, the No 1 pick in the 2007 NBA draft, has recognized that he’ll always be known as a “bust” even though his career was derailed not by a lack of skill but by seven knee surgeries. Bobby Hurley is sometimes considered an NBA “bust” rather than someone who was lucky to be alive after a horrific car accident early in his rookie season. A lot of baseball “busts” are pitchers whose arms were worn to death by demanding coaches well before they could reach the major leagues. In some respects, we’re getting better. When we apply the term “GOAT” to Shiffrin or Biles, it means “Greatest of All Time,” not someone who gave away a victory. But this is, of course, the era of social media. Shiffrin has made it known that she appreciates the widespread support she has received during her troubles in China, but she also notices the haters, most of whom are surely compensating for their own shortcomings by tearing down someone who has accomplished so much. Dealing with trolls is a skill she developed well before these Olympics. Patriotism also feeds Olympic pressure. Lindsey Jacobellis was reviled by many Americans after a showboating move at the end of the 2006 snowboardcross final cost her a gold medal. Had such a move occurred in the X Games, it would’ve been seen as just one of those things snowboarders do. But she did it in the jingoistic setting of the Olympics, where fans are far less forgiving. She’s also the GOAT in her sport, but it took an unlikely gold medal this year to make people realize it. The sports world also may not have fully appreciated the strains that top athletes face and given them the support systems they really need. In the combined event on Thursday, Shiffrin set herself up for what would be, under typical circumstances, a surefire win. She finished the downhill with a significant margin over those who were good enough in the slalom to challenge her. But she also gave an interview with NBC, saying it was difficult to shake visions of missing a gate as she had in the giant slalom and the slalom. Her attitude seemed chipper, but are those the words anyone would want to hear from someone whose only true opponent at that point was herself? In recent years, the mental side of sports has moved far beyond fire-and-brimstone halftime speeches. The US women’s soccer team credited much of their success in their breakthrough years to one Colleen Hacker, a psychologist who won over the players with unusual tactics such as duplicating Rocky Balboa’s famed run up a series of concrete steps, drawing both humor and inspiration from what has become a sports cliche. Did any US coach see Shiffrin speak and place a call to someone like Hacker? We don’t know right now, in part because Shiffrin graciously refuses to make excuses. Search social media long enough, and in addition to those who spout their ignorance and hate, you may find people blaming the fake snow at Beijing 2022. Shiffrin says nothing of the sort, demonstrating far greater toughness than supposed tough guys like former MMA fighter Tito Ortiz, who would report to postfight press conferences with a sudden revelation of some phantom injury that kept him from winning. In the case of the Olympics, athletes face greater pressures because the spotlight is so much greater every four years than it is in the rest of their careers. Shiffrin thankfully already has three Olympic medals to show to a public that knows little of her six world championships and three overall World Cup season trophies. She considered retiring after her father’s sudden death in February 2020, and if she had, her career legacy would’ve still been complete. Any medal, any world championship and any World Cup win she receives for the rest of her career just makes it more difficult for any future skier to match what she has done. Such success, though, can make us think all of this is easy. Clearly, it’s not. Many Olympic sports require confidence in being able to deliver clutch performances without error. That’s why we watch so nervously when a Nathan Chen or Simone Biles takes to the ice or beam. Chen has three world championships but fared poorly in the short program in the 2018 Olympics, ruining his chances at the podium despite a stellar free skate. Who watched Chen in Beijing without fretting that one slip of the skate would define his career in the eyes of people who don’t know what else he has accomplished? By comparison, American team sports stars have much more leeway. An interception can always be followed by a touchdown pass. The best basketball players still miss roughly half their shots. Baseball greatness can be defined by 50 home runs over 162 games. In the Olympics, we remember moments, and our minds often drift toward the negative. Dan Jansen’s falls in the 1988 Olympics, just after learning of the death of his sister, may linger in the collective consciousness more than the gold medal he won in 1994. Decathlete Dan O’Brien rebounded from his Olympic trials miscue in 1992 to win gold in 1996, but the former was a shocking result after a media blitz by Reebok featuring him as one half “Dan and Dave,” two favorites for 1992 gold. Star athletes deserve the hype. It builds up their names and stories before we see them in the Olympics. It may even provide them with belated recognition for their accomplishments on stages most casual observers don’t see. But these athletes also deserve support – first, to help them remain calm and confident in pressure-packed environments, and second, to empathize when their quests fall short for any reason we can or can’t find.Western Australia’s hard border will come down on 3 March, as the premier, Mark McGowan, acknowledges that sealing off the state has become “ineffective” in the face of a surging local outbreak. McGowan announced the new border reopening date on Friday, allowing quarantine-free travel for those who have received three vaccine doses. The announcement comes four weeks after McGowan backflipped on his initial promise to ease entry requirements from 5 February due to the spread of Omicron in other jurisdictions and WA’s low booster rate. The state’s reopening will happen nearly 700 days after WA first sealed itself off from other states in April 2020, with its international border remaining tightly controlled since the federal government initially shut Australia’s borders in March 2020. WA had been the last Australian state to succeed in avoiding significant community transmission of Covid. However, local cases have surged in recent days, with a record 194 new local infections reported on Friday. McGowan explained on Friday that the new date had been chosen as daily Covid numbers in eastern states had fallen from their peaks in January and WA’s third dose vaccination rates was increasing. He also acknowledged the inevitable surge in cases from the current outbreak in his state. “I firmly believe saving West Australian lives has been worth every effort over the past two years,” McGowan said. “Eventually there comes a point where the border is ineffective when you get to high case numbers within the state,” he said. “It is plain to see that four weeks of caution has paid dividends. It means it is now far safer to relax our hard border settings,” McGowan said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning From 12.01am on 3 March, travellers who have had three doses of Covid-19 vaccine will be able to enter WA, however they will still have to complete a G2G border pass prior to entry and take a rapid antigen test within 12 hours of arrival. Unvaccinated travellers from interstate will not be able to enter WA. The reopening of the international border will be in line with the federal government’s previously announced plan that is already in place in all other jurisdictions – which requires two doses of Covid vaccine. In WA, unvaccinated returning Australians will have to undergo seven days of hotel quarantine, with a smaller cap of 70 people per week. New mask rules, as well as density and gathering restrictions, will also be introduced ahead of the 3 March reopening, to protect the state’s health system from being overwhelmed by the spread of the Omicron variant. Amber-Jade Sanderson, WA’s health minister, said health authorities were expecting a peak in local infections at the end of March. Modelling predicts this will be 10,000 daily infections. After “peak immunity” is reached in March, the modelling predicted that four people will die each day as a result of ongoing transmission of Covid. From 21 February, masks will be required for indoor settings across the state. In Perth, Peel, South-West, Wheatbelt, Great Southern and the Pilbara, additional settings include a two person per square metre rule that will apply to gyms, hospitality and entertainment venues. Home gatherings will also be limited to 30 people, and outdoor gatherings limited to 200 people in those regions. On Friday, McGowan said “this date [3 March] is locked in and I can’t foresee a situation where it would change”. “I know removing the hard border is a step that some in the community have been looking forward to for some time,” he tweeted. “I note there are also Western Australians who will be apprehensive, but I want them to know – WA is prepared. “We have the supplies, we have the policy settings. We have one of the most vaccinated populations in the world,” he said. McGowan said the notice period “of nearly two weeks gives the community and businesses time to prepare and make plans”, and urged residents not yet boosted to get their third vaccine dose.Retail sales rebounded in January as shoppers returned to the high street after the disruption caused by the Omicron coronavirus variant eased. Official figures showed that sales increased by 1.9% in Great Britain last month, with much of the increase credited to a jump in demand for furniture and DIY tools from households looking to refresh their homes. Petrol and diesel sales also rebounded in January after workers began to return to the office and consumers made more trips to out-of-town shopping centres. Supermarkets, which have experienced booming food sales during the pandemic, suffered a drop in sales to below their pre-pandemic level for the first time, as more people returned to eating out. Online sales also contracted as people ventured out more, triggering a drop in the proportion of purchases on the web to its lowest level since March 2020. The sales uplift was stronger than City economists had forecast, and compared with a 4% fall in the run-up to Christmas, after the Office for National Statistics downgraded its previous estimate of a 3.7% drop in sales. Analysts said, however, that sales were likely to be hit over the coming months and send more shops closer to the edge of bankruptcy, as the cost of living crisis intensifies and the squeeze on wage packets weighs on consumer confidence. Inflation increased to 5.5% in January, driven by a rise in the cost of energy and clothing and footwear. The energy regulator Ofgem has said the cap on household energy will increase in April, sending average bills up by almost £700 a year. Anti-poverty groups and opposition parties have complained that a government rescue package will do little to combat rocketing household bills, higher taxes and more expensive mortgage payments expected over the next year. Rishi Sunak has offered a £150 grant, which will be knocked off council tax bills in England, and a £200 loan in October to offset the rising cost of gas and electricity. Consumer confidence surveys have shown Britons becoming increasingly reluctant to spend their earnings on non-essential items while inflation is increasing. Signals from the Bank of England that it plans to increase the base interest rate further from 0.5% to above 1% has also weighed on consumer sentiment. Shops have reported consumers bargain hunting in response to rising prices, giving a boost to discounters on the high street. Nevertheless, the ONS reported a sharp increase in the value of goods bought in January. Over the three months to the end of January the amount sold increased by 3.1% while sales values rose by 9.9%. Paul Martin, the UK head of retail at KPMG, said: “The retail sector started the year in relatively good health and not facing further Covid restrictions on the ability to trade.” He added, though: “Retailers will be acutely aware that the cost of living squeeze could see consumers scrutinising their spending more over the coming weeks and months, impacting trade. “This picture will be compounded if those who managed to save during the pandemic decide the time isn’t right to spend what they’ve accrued.” Petrol and diesel sales also rebounded in January after workers began to return to the office and consumers made more trips to out-of-town shopping centres. A separate survey of consumer spending found that the new year sparked a surge in spending on holiday bookings. Nationwide building society said that analysis of £200m worth of credit and debit card transactions showed a 379% increase in spending on all types of holidays in January from a year earlier. This included a 408% rise in foreign travel and a 899% boost to spending on cruises. There was also a 26% month-on-month increase in spending on utilities and bills in January compared with December. Spending on utilities and bills was also up by 9% compared with January 2021, Nationwide’s analysis found. Samuel Tombs, the chief UK economist at the consultancy Pantheon Macroeconomics, said that while official figures showed sales volumes above pre-pandemic levels, they were still 0.5% below their average level in the final quarter of 2021, “and the near-term outlook remains overcast”. He said: “Households’ real disposable income looks set to fall by nearly 2% this year, the most since 1977. And while high-income households have amassed considerable savings, we judge they are more likely to splurge them on big-ticket items, such as cars or foreign holidays, than on retail store purchases. “In addition, the below-average level of consumers’ confidence suggests that households will be reluctant to borrow more to smooth out the real income shock, unlike in 2017, when sentiment was higher.”Yoko Ono is one of the biggest names in rock history – and yet her music is frequently overlooked, if not actively ignored. Years of frustration at this state of affairs motivated Death Cab for Cutie frontman Ben Gibbard to helm this tribute album, intended to demonstrate the breadth, charm and brilliance of her output. Gibbard is not the first person to attempt to rescue Ono’s reputation, but the crack team he has assembled to cover her songs – David Byrne, the Flaming Lips, Sharon Van Etten, US Girls, Sudan Archives, Japanese Breakfast – will appeal to listeners previously unaware of the source material. In the same vein, many of the covers make Ono’s strongly idiosyncratic, almost outsider songs more palatable. Sometimes this merely entails exposing the crowd-pleasing loveliness lingering just below the surface, as on Jay Som’s sublime dream-pop rework of Growing Pain. Others iron out some of the essential weirdness: Byrne and Yo La Tengo’s sonorous, barbershop-style version of Who Has Seen the Wind is far less jarring than the hauntingly childlike vocals and Elizabethan-style instrumental of the original. It is only the Flaming Lips that manage to make Ono odder, adding extra trippiness to Mrs Lennon. Whether Ocean Child’s tendency to replace the startling strangeness of Ono’s originals with something easier on the ear is doing her a disservice is debatable: in 2016, she said she thought her “music was beautiful all along”. This album proves there is appeal to her songwriting that goes far beyond her own inimitable presence – but it’s hard not to miss that presence. In fact, it’s impossible not to repeatedly turn Ocean Child off, and instead seek out the originality and uniqueness of the genuine article. Presumably, it’s what Gibbard would want.For something that reminds you by turns of Charlie Kaufman, Wes Anderson, Orwell and Kafka, plus Devs and Dollhouse and half a dozen other sci-fi series and workplace comedy-dramas, Severance (Apple TV+) is an impressively idiosyncratic thing, wholly itself and confident in its mission to make your mind implode. This is ironic, given that the conceit of the show, directed by Ben Stiller, is essentially the bifurcating of brains. At Lumen Industries, data inputter Mark (Adam Scott, quiet inheritor of Tom Hanks’s everyman mantle) and his colleagues on “the severance floor” have all undergone a procedure that separates, absolutely, their work selves (“innies”) from their home selves (“outies”). Their innies input data for eight hours a day, get into the elevator at the end of it and “transition” to outie mode on the way down to the lobby. One has no idea what the other does with its time and any anxieties or burdens carried in either mode do not bleed into the other. It is, supposedly, the work-life balance made flesh. Except, of course, it is a little more complicated than that. Mark underwent the procedure after his wife’s death, to escape the pain of grief for at least half his waking life – although, as his pleasingly sardonic sister says, “I can’t help but feel this isn’t the same as healing”. Perhaps this is true for all of them – a deeply touching friendship between meticulous control freak Irving (John Turturro) and Burt (Christopher Walken) starts to develop in a way that suggests Irving might be hiding from something on the outside – but newcomer Helly (Britt Lower) seems to regret her choice. “Am I livestock?” is one of her first questions when she wakes up on the conference table with no memory. “Did you grow me for food?” Maybe her outie is more of an optimist, but I like to think some things endure between worlds. Helly repeatedly tries to resign – or escape, which on the severance floor seem to be virtually synonymous – only to be thwarted at every turn. In the process, a lot of functional details are explained that might otherwise prey on viewers’ minds. I am not going to enumerate them here, but the thoughtfulness that has gone into building the premise and the careful working out of various points is indicative of the quality of Severance as a whole. As the series unfolds, it doesn’t just pose but considers, unhurriedly and intelligently, profound questions about what makes a self, the existence of free will, the appearance of choice and much, much else. If it weren’t so often so deeply funny at the same time, it would soon plunge you into a smooth-sided pit of existential despair from which you would never emerge. It also, in the innie scenes, manages to skewer the lighter aspects of life under late western capitalism. Competitive colleague Dylan proudly accumulates pointless workplace prizes (a whole cupful of fingersnap toys, a drawerful of hand-drawn caricatures of himself) and is still eager for more. Group photos, bonding games and office parties are approached with the mandated joyfulness that secretly lies at the heart of them all in real life. And then there is the creeping malevolence of Lumen/the corporate US itself. What the company actually does – precisely what data the protagonists are actually spending their days sorting into unnamed files – is unknown. But the signs are not good, given that they are presided over by the unbending, unsmiling – and unsevered – boss Harmony (Patricia Arquette) and her only-too-smiley and equally unsevered assistant, Mr Milchick (Tramell Tillman, turning in an hypnotic and utterly terrifying performance). They revere Lumen’s founder – a monument to whom dominates the building’s lobby. That mystery is set to be unravelled when a man sits down in front of Mark and tells him he is his former colleague and best friend Petey (with no memory transferral between the two worlds, innies, of course, don’t recognise fellow innies when they are on the outside). He has undergone a supposedly impossible re-integration procedure, is on the run and has information on Lumen’s terrible purpose. This reassuringly traditional moment and instantly addictive narrative thread is another prophylactic against falling into the aforementioned pit of despair. Severance looks beautiful and is directed with enormous sensitivity and style by Stiller. His quartet of oddball actors, Arquette (a frequent Stiller collaborator), Turturro, Walken and Tillman, elevate an already shining script and a story that is always a finely calibrated 12 to 15 degrees off kilter, while the everyman quality of Scott throws the whole into perfect relief. It might be slightly slow to get going, but thereafter becomes one to savour.The philosopher Nina Power believes men are under attack. Western society has done away with “the positive dimensions of patriarchy”, that is, “the protective father, the responsible man, the paternalistic attitude that exhibits care and compassion.” In her new book, What Do Men Want?, she expresses the hope that, “following a great deal of bitterness in recent years, men and women can reconcile on the basis of a renewed and greater understanding of one another” and advocates a return to “old values and virtues — honour, loyalty, courage”; rather than being made to feel guilty for their gender privilege, “Boys and men must be allowed to be good, to become better.” These are worthy sentiments, but the underlying premise is doing a lot of heavy lifting. Just how prevalent is “the current demonisation of men”? Have compassion and virtue really been abolished? Are boys not presently allowed to be good? The sweeping, simplistic and vaguely sour tone recalls the handwringing “culture wars” opinion pieces that have proliferated in recent years. They invariably follow a template: an obscure incidence of arguably overzealous identity politicking – usually involving a university campus – is held up as evidence of a deep civilisational malaise. The alarmist register can make for compelling clickbait, but whether it can sustain a serious, book-length work is another matter. To give us a sense of 21st-century male ennui, Power presents a cursory overview of the masculinist online communities known collectively as the “manosphere”. At the relatively respectable end of the spectrum we find Canadian self-help guru Jordan Peterson, whose brand of commonsensical conservatism has helped lots of young men find a sense of direction in their lives. (“Many people, it seems, desire the kind of certainty that comes from someone saying basic things in a stern manner,” she notes.) At the more extreme end are gender separatist groups such as Men Going Their Own Way, and self-styled incels (involuntary celibates). Power argues we should try to understand these communities rather than treating them as pariahs. She invokes the trajectory of notorious “pickup artist” Neil Strauss, who authored a bestselling manual on chatting up women before eventually seeing the error of his ways, to show that redemption is possible. Intriguingly, she suggests the subculture around obsessive self-improvement contains a kernel of radical leftism: “If pro-masculinist books have an appeal … it is in large part because they present an image of an escape from various kinds of depressed, morose types of masculinity in a consumerist, hedonistic society.” In this analysis, the restraint and discipline advocated by, for example, the NoFap movement – which preaches abstinence from masturbation and pornography – is re-conceived as a form of anti-capitalist resistance. After years of febrile identity politics discourse, it can be refreshing to read a writer urging us to come together and put aside our differences. But what does that actually mean? To whom is Power referring when she writes, in an apparent dig at contemporary feminists, that “we should be wary of those who seek to generate resentment by pitting men and women against each other”? Set against her caricaturing of bien-pensant liberalism, Power’s ostensibly reasonable call for compassion feels at best platitudinous, at worst disingenuous or even reactionary: most forms of political struggle involve some measure of conflict between competing groups; to renounce this altogether amounts to a politics of quietism. There is of course something to be said for the idea that cultivating personal virtue can mitigate the apathy and alienation of modern life, but most people already do this – after a fashion. There may indeed be some pockets of misandry here and there, but they hardly amount to a societal “war … against men”. And while many members of incel communities are probably just decent guys who lost their way, enough of them are thoroughly vile for the movement to be of concern. As with so many sallies in the culture wars, there is little substantive insight here – just a simmering animus against a largely imagined enemy. • What Do Men Want? Masculinity and Its Discontents is published by Allen Lane (£18.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Manfred Eicher, visionary founder of Munich’s boundary-busting ECM Records, once described a band led by the Tel Aviv-born, New York-honed trumpeter/composer Avishai Cohen as “one big octopus.” Eicher noticed that Cohen conjures bands in which the participants are individual limbs that react spontaneously within an ineffable group mind, yet never lose their individuality – much like the band-leading methods of Miles Davis, Cohen’s key model. Naked Truth is a barely-40-minute miniature of an album, beautifully executed and steered by the idea that improvising musicians good enough to play any headlong stream of consciousness can reveal a lot more if they sometimes play only a fraction of what they know. In the first lockdown, Cohen focused on tiny fragments of melody that formed the cues of this nine-part improvised suite. When he took them to the studio with longtime allies Yonathan Avishai (piano), Barak Mori (bass) and Ziv Ravitz (drums), leaving out whatever felt superfluous was the rule. Cohen’s soft, perfectly rounded notes, leaning graceful lullabies into Mori’s plummy bass sound, give way to gentle piano ostinatos coaxed by whispering cymbals that build a rising insistence; elegantly classical modulations over mallet rolls resolve in mournful high-pitched horn lines and startlingly nimble runs; almost ceremonial bugle-like calls turn to quivering laments. At the close, Cohen evocatively reads Israeli poet Zelda Schneurson Mishkovsky’s Departure, a cherishing of small miracles within the ostensibly familiar that he’s very good at himself. Listeners all the way from Davis’s muted-trumpet soliloquies on 1960’s Sketches of Spain to Tord Gustavsen’s meticulous 21st-century ensemble jazz (in which every delicate drum hit sounds spontaneous and inevitable) will find plenty they recognise – and more besides – in Cohen’s quietest but maybe boldest adventure. Also out this month Cecil Taylor, the technically awesome, stylistically and temperamentally uncategorisable African American piano virtuoso, died in 2018. Four years later, much of a previously lost November 1973 concert at New York City’s town hall (originally sidelined because one track runs to 88 minutes) has emerged as The Complete, Legendary, Live Return Concert (Oblivion Records), a historic digital-only addition to Taylor’s discography. A brilliant quartet comprising regulars Jimmy Lyons (alto sax), Sirone (bass) and Andrew Cyrille (drums) finds the implacable master in blistering form. UK pianist Kit Downes unveils a terrific acoustic trio of cool fluency and conversational ease (including an oblique view of Jimi Hendrix’s Castles Made of Sand) with bassist Petter Eldh and drummer James Maddren on Vermillion (ECM), New York-based saxophone/drums pairing of Ingrid Laubrock and Tom Rainey step up a gear with the arrival of young bassist Brandon Lopez on No Es La Playa (Intakt), and free-sax legend Evan Parker veers in and out of abstraction and classic themes by Monk and Billy Strayhorn with bassist Dave Green’s trio on Raise Four (Trio Records).Andy Parker has never watched the video of his daughter’s murder. But anyone with an internet connection can find it, view it and share it. In the years since Alison Parker, a 24-year-old TV journalist in Roanoke, Virginia, was shot and killed during a live broadcast in 2015, her father has made it his mission to remove the footage from the social media platforms where it continues to resurface even after being taken down. Volunteers help him flag the content to YouTube and Facebook. He has appealed to the companies directly, testified before the Senate, even filed complaints with federal regulators, alleging the platforms were violating their own terms of service by hosting the videos. After years of pleading his case as a grief-stricken father, Parker now believes a seat in Congress may be his best recourse. “I always wanted to honor her life with action,” Parker said in a recent interview by Zoom, a framed photo of his daughter on a shelf behind him. “I think that is what has compelled me to do this.” He continued: “I had fought this battle as a private citizen as long as I could. The only way to fix it is through congressional action. That’s it.” Parker is seeking the Democratic nomination in Virginia’s newly redrawn fifth Congressional district, now a thumbprint-shaped expanse stretching from the center of the state to its border with North Carolina. The district is currently represented by Congressman Bob Good, a staunch conservative who voted to overturn the results of the 2020 election and has promoted Donald Trump’s “big lie” that widespread fraud cost him the presidency. In a video announcing his candidacy, Parker said he was running “to make the internet safer for kids and for families”. The reel includes images of the Meta CEO, Mark Zuckerberg, and the Amazon founder, Jeff Bezos, while arguing that the economy is tilted against middle-class Americans. “In America today, we’ve got an economy that makes tech billionaires rich enough to go to space, while young people can’t afford to go to college,” he says in the ad. Parker is hopeful he can appeal to a wide cross-section of voters with a unifying message and a platform centered on reforming big tech, a cause that has galvanized lawmakers in both parties. “Republicans, they want their kids to be safe online, too,” he said. “If I could get to Congress,” he added, “I would champion this cause, not just for me, but for all these people who have been harmed.” Alison Parker’s boyfriend, Chris Hurst, also channeled his grief into political activism, winning a seat in the Virginia house of delegates after campaigning as a gun-safety advocate. He served two terms before losing his re-election in a Republican wave last November. Before he was “Alison’s dad”, Andy Parker was a Texas transplant pursuing an acting career in New York. A career change ultimately brought Parker to southern Virginia, where he settled with his wife and children, Alison and Drew, and became involved in local politics. He was working as a talent recruiter for the banking industry when Alison was killed. “If you’ve heard of me,” Parker says in his campaign video, “it’s probably because of what happened on August 26, 2015.” On that day, Alison Parker, an on-air journalist with WDBJ-TV, was fatally shot by a former co-worker while conducting an on-air interview near Roanoke. Cameraman Adam Ward, 27, was also killed. The interview subject, Vicki Gardner, survived, and the gunman, who recorded the shooting and uploaded it to his social media accounts, killed himself. Seemingly overnight, Andy Parker became one of the most prominent advocates of gun control in Virginia, a state with a tragic history of mass shootings and home to the NRA headquarters. For years, Parker lobbied the state legislature to enact gun-safety legislation, sometimes aggressively targeting Republican opponents of those efforts. Activists celebrated a major victory in 2020, when the state’s then-governor, Ralph Northam, a Democrat, signed into law a suite of new gun restrictions that had become a legislative priority in the aftermath of a mass shooting at a municipal building in Virginia Beach that left 12 people dead. A day before Parker spoke to the Guardian, two officers were fatally shot at Bridgewater College in Virginia, just a 10-minute drive from the university where his daughter attended journalism school. “Every mass shooting, it’s just like a gut punch,” he said. “But this one was particularly tough because these are friends. This was close. We have a pandemic of gun violence along with the Covid pandemic. It’s nuts and it’s got to stop.” More recently, Parker has trained his ire on big tech. But he said he hasn’t abandoned his gun-control activism. The issues, he said, go “hand in hand”. Supporting gun-control legislation, he said, made him a target of online trolls and conspiracy theorists claiming his daughter’s killing was faked as part of a plot to seize their firearms. Some of the attacks used edited or doctored footage of her murder. “At one point there were ads running on Alison’s murder,” he said. “How disgusting is that?” He pointed to the revelations provided by the Facebook whistleblower Frances Haugen as proof that tech companies could do more to police the misinformation and hate that proliferate on their platforms. “They have the ability to do it. They have the algorithms. They have the AI to do it,” he said. “But they don’t because they profit from it. They want people to stay engaged and to stay on the site. That’s how they make money.” Parker said he supports some of the bipartisan proposals to rein in big tech. But he believes more needs to be done to hold them accountable. He has called for reforming Section 230 of the Communications Decency Act, which has largely shielded social media platforms from legal liability for content generated by its users. “For all the great things that Facebook and Google have done, bringing people together, they’re also in the process of tearing this country apart,” he said. He also hopes to demystify the process for users by making platforms and regulators like the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) more responsive. If elected, Parker said one of the first things he would do in Congress is push for a hearing with the FTC chair to ask: “What are you doing? You know, these companies are violating their own terms of service, and you’re saying nothing.” Parker filed complaints with the FTC against YouTube and Facebook. But the process has been opaque and disillusioning, he said. Parker, who must first win the Democratic nomination, knows he faces an uphill battle in a district rated safely Republican by political prognosticators. Democrats face historical headwinds this cycle, after a crushing defeat in the Virginia governor’s race last year. But Parker said battles against the NRA and big tech have steeled him for an underdog campaign. He believes there’s enough “buyer’s remorse” in the district to make the race competitive. Days after Good was sworn in, he voted to overturn the results of the 2020 election. The congressman’s embrace of falsehoods and misinformation about the 2020 election and the coronavirus, Parker argued, have contributed to the toxic political environment that had gridlocked Washington. “He is the Marjorie Taylor Green of Virginia and his antics are wearing thin on people,” he said. Good’s office did not respond to multiple requests for comment. When Parker announced his candidacy last month, he braced for the onslaught of trolls and online abuse. But so far, he said the response has been overwhelmingly positive. “Candidates for congressional office don’t have running mates, but I do,” Parker said, his voice catching. “And she will be with me every step of the way.”Pick of the week I, Tonya Its array of comically unreliable narrators make Craig Gillespie’s 2017 biographical drama about disgraced US figure skater Tonya Harding an edgier, wittier proposition than the facts would suggest. Self-proclaimed “redneck” Harding (Margot Robbie) has real talent but lacks the clean-cut presentational skills required to woo the judges. How she ends up accused of plotting an attack on rival Nancy Kerrigan is a tragicomic story of a horrifically pushy mother (the Oscar-winning Allison Janney), domestic abuse – courtesy of husband Jeff (Sebastian Stan) – and one stupendously inept criminal enterprise. Robbie gives it her all as the girl given a terrible hand in life who is determined to make it work. Thursday 24 February, 10pm, BBC Four *** Kimi Steven Soderbergh’s lean, gripping Hitchcockian thriller stars Zoë Kravitz as Angela, a “voice stream interpreter” for an Alexa-style virtual assistant called Kimi. She has become trapped in her (salary-inappropriate) apartment with agoraphobia, as trauma from an assault is exacerbated by Covid lockdowns. But after hearing what she thinks is a murder she pushes herself to go outside to solve the “crime”. Rear Window and The Conversation are clear touchstones but that doesn’t detract from the film’s pleasures. Saturday 19 February, 12.40pm, 8pm, Sky Cinema Premiere *** Kes A classic of British social realism, Ken Loach’s 1969 drama also has a large dose of symbolism in its story of a poor boy and his wild bird. David Bradley’s put-upon working-class teenager Billy is looking at a dismal future stuck on his Barnsley estate, but training a baby kestrel offers him an imaginative freedom unavailable in his school life or at home. The ritual humiliations of a PE lesson and canings by the headmaster show how education without empathy can destroy lives, but a glimpse of hope is offered by the natural world. Saturday 19 February, 9.05pm, Talking Pictures TV *** The Last of the Mohicans The multifaceted Daniel Day-Lewis nails the classic Hollywood hero type in Michael Mann’s sweeping adaptation of James Fenimore Cooper’s romantic adventure novel. Day-Lewis’s noble, hard-running Hawkeye – adopted son of a Mohican – is drawn into the British army’s frontier war against the French and their Huron collaborators, while falling for Madeleine Stowe’s sparky colonel’s daughter. Despite elements of “white saviour” in the plot, and shady historical accuracy, it’s visually arresting stuff, particularly in the chase sequences. Sunday 20 February, 6.55pm, AMC *** The Neon Bible A rare chance to see one of Terence Davies’s less celebrated films – but any film by him is worthy of your time. He takes his poetic, image-led focus on the lives of children to 1940s America with an adaptation of the novel by John Kennedy Toole (of A Confederacy of Dunces fame). It follows Jacob Tierney’s David, whose harsh life in rural Georgia – where Bible Belt religion wields a constrictive power – is brightened by his Aunt Mae. Gena Rowlands is vibrant as the has-been singer with a rebellious streak. Monday 21 February, 2.05am, Film4 *** The Man in the White Suit There’s a distinct touch of Jesus to Alec Guinness in this brilliant 1951 Ealing satire. His wide-eyed, unworldly scientist, Sidney, invents a cloth that never gets dirty and lasts for ever. Of course, this will not do, as the textile industry would become defunct, so an unholy alliance of capital and labour races to prevent him bringing it to the public. Master director Alexander Mackendrick sets the scene with a lightness that belies the tragic beating down of Sidney’s creative impulses – from the musical plops and parps of his lab apparatus to Joan Greenwood’s mellifluous turn as the factory owner’s daughter. Friday 25 February, 1pm, BBC Two *** Bacurau A remote town in Brazil is attacked by trophy hunters in search of human prey in Juliano Dornelles and Kleber Mendonça Filho’s sly modern western, which riffs on 30s horror The Most Dangerous Game. The first sign of something wrong is when the settlement vanishes off online maps, but matters soon turn bloody. Udo Keir is in charge of the braggadocious post-colonial invaders, but he little realises that the good folk of Bacurau, including Sônia Braga’s doctor and Silvero Pereira’s outlaw, have a fierce community spirit and psychotropic drugs on their side. Friday 25 February, 12.45am, Film4NatWest is giving its bankers bigger bonuses this year after the group, still majority-owned by taxpayers, bounced back to a £4bn profit in 2021 as the economy recovered from the coronavirus pandemic. The lender said it had increased its bonus pool to £298m, a 44% increase on a year earlier. Alison Rose, the chief executive of NatWest, said the lender had shown “significant restraint” with its bonus pool compared with the rest of the banking industry, and added that the bank was “acutely aware of the challenges that many people, families and businesses continue to face up and down the country”, amid the cost of living crisis. She said: “We operate in a competitive market and we have to pay fairly and competitively for the skills we have.” Rose said a majority of NatWest’s staff, including its executive team, do not receive bonuses. Rose’s total pay for 2021 was £3.6m, up from £2.6m a year earlier. It came as NatWest reported statutory pre-tax profits of £4bn, a return to profitability after a £351m loss a year earlier, as the bank benefited from the UK’s economic recovery from the pandemic. The bonus pool for 2021 was 3% lower than the £307m for 2019, before the pandemic. Rose added the bonus pool was reduced in 2020 to reflect the bank’s performance during the first year of Covid, when it was loss-making. She said the lender was aware of the cost of living crisis being experienced by its customers, in the face of rising inflation, but said it was “not seeing any signs of strain at the moment” among households and businesses. “We’re not seeing a rise in the number of customers needing specialist help at this time,” Rose said. “But what we are very mindful of is the challenges that may be coming, challenges which customers haven’t faced before.” NatWest tracks the calls made by customers and businesses to its helplines, according to the kind of help required by clients or the level of default, but Rose said there had not been an increase in requests for financial support. “At the moment, customers are worried about rising bills and making a living and dealing with things they have not dealt with before,” she said. Rose said the bank was contacting businesses to see how it could help to plan for and deal with rising interest rates and fluctuations in exchange rates. NatWest said the vast majority of its business customers were still paying back Covid loans as expected. The lender said 7% of the bounce-back loans provided to its customers had been paid back in full, while 90% were paying back on or ahead of schedule. Meanwhile, NatWest said 98% of customers who had received larger loans – of up to £5m – during the pandemic, which were made available through the government’s coronavirus business interruption loan scheme, were paying these back on or ahead of schedule. Bounce-back loans returned to the spotlight in late January after the shock resignation of the Treasury minister Lord Agnew, who accused the government of writing off more than £4bn in fraudulent Covid loans. However, NatWest said it had only provided bounce-back loans to its existing customers and thought there were “very low” levels of fraud among the loans it had distributed. NatWest, which is still majority-owned by the UK government, returned £1.7bn to taxpayers in dividends and share buybacks in 2021. The taxpayer stake in the bank formerly known as Royal Bank of Scotland has reduced to just under 51%, and is expected to move below 50% in the coming months. Rose said it was “in the government’s hands” when ministers would opt to sell down the remaining stake. Earlier in February, NatWest announced it would shut 32 of its branches in England and Wales over the next year – including the RBS branch inside its own headquarters on Bishopsgate in the City of London – as its customers increasingly turn to mobile banking. NatWest said 60% of its retail current account holders now only interact with it digitally, while it has been seeing strong growth in mobile payments and video banking. The bank said decisions about branch closures would be determined by customer behaviour.An emergency Cobra meeting will be held as England and Wales are braced for what is expected to be one of the worst storms in decades, with millions told to stay at home to avoid winds of up to 90mph and the army placed on standby. Ministers and officials will meet on Friday afternoon, after Storm Eunice prompted rare red weather warnings – meaning danger to life – across much of England and Wales. A government spokesperson said: “The minister for the Cabinet Office will chair a COBR this afternoon to discuss the response to Storm Eunice.” The highest alert – meaning a major impact is very likely – was widened shortly before 4am to cover the east of England including London, to run from 10am until 3pm on Friday, due to fears of the storm “causing significant disruption and dangerous conditions due to extremely strong winds”, the Met Office said. The warning covering Greater London, Kent, Surrey, Essex and east Sussex joined an earlier red weather warning starting from 7am along the coastline of Devon, Cornwall and Somerset, as well as the south coast of Wales, due to the combination of high tides, strong winds and storm surge. There is a risk of “flying debris resulting in danger to life” and “damage to buildings and homes, with roofs blown off and power lines brought down” along the coastline of Devon, Cornwall and Somerset as well as the south coast of Wales. The Met Office chief meteorologist, Paul Gundersen, said: “After the impacts from Storm Dudley for many on Wednesday, Storm Eunice will bring damaging gusts in what could be one of the most impactful storms to affect southern and central parts of the UK for a few years.” On media morning rounds on Friday, Hinds said people should take precautions, adding that the army was on “high readiness standby” to help. He told Sky News: “We are strongly encouraging people to take precautions and make sure they stay safe.” He added: “Over the longer term a lot of learning has been done from Storm Arwen, particularly on dealing with welfare issues, staying in touch with people, staying in touch with customers for the [power] networks. “But in the immediate term there are troops on high readiness standby, the Environment Agency on the ground, the networks themselves have to be very much active, and they are. “Weather is unpredictable and it is really important that we all continue … to take those precautions and try to keep everyone safe.” Asked if people could get “cut off” by the storm, Hinds said that was “absolutely a risk”, and the red weather warning indicated a “risk to life and limb”. People have been warned to tie down objects in their gardens and be wary of fierce winds, which could cause trees to topple over and tiles to fly off buildings. “Make sure you follow the advice of local authorities and councils, fasten doors and windows tonight and tomorrow morning and keep your cars locked in garages or away from trees and walls,” said the Met Office forecaster Annie Shuttleworth. “People will see significant delays to travel and power cuts, so you should avoid travelling if you can and stay at home when winds reach the highest speeds.” A Network Rail spokesperson said disruption was “inevitable” and Welsh services would be suspended for the whole day. The railway operator said there would be blanket speed restrictions of 50mph in most places. London North East Railway urged customers with tickets for Friday to travel on Saturday instead or get a refund due to expected disruption and damage. Some airports including Gatwick and Stansted advised customers to check the status of their flights with airlines, as well as allowing plenty of time to travel. Transport for Greater Manchester has asked customers to “please consider whether your journey is essential today and take care if you are out and about”. The operator said Storm Eunice was likely to cause significant disruption from 5am until 9pm. The Met Office also took the unusual step of issuing a severe weather alert with National Highways for strong winds covering the whole of the country’s strategic road network from 6am to 6pm. National Highways said high-sided vehicles and other “vulnerable” vehicles such as caravans and motorbikes could be blown over so should avoid bridges and viaducts. Those travelling between England and Wales faced difficulties with the closing of the M48 Severn Bridge. The service said the A14 Orwell Bridge in Suffolk would be closed in both directions from 4am with the QEII Bridge in Dartford closed from 5am. Serious flooding may take place along the coastlines of the south and west of England as spring tides are expected on Friday morning. It comes after Storm Dudley caused travel disruption and power cuts to parts of the UK on Wednesday. The government’s Cobra emergency committee met on Thursday to discuss the storm response and plan for power cuts. Amber warnings – the second highest alert level – for wind were in place across the whole of England from 5am to 9pm on Friday, while yellow weather warnings – the next level down – for wind and snow were in force for a large part of Scotland where blizzards were predicted and the whole of Northern Ireland. Some councils across the UK are to help shelter homeless people and halt bin collections. In Scotland, a weather warning for snow was in place between 3am and 6pm on Friday, while a wind warning encompasses the south-west Scottish borders, including most of Dumfries and Galloway. Snow was forecast for most of mainland Scotland on Friday, south of Inverness and Fort William.A Swedish gold medallist has said it was “extremely irresponsible” to hold the Winter Olympics in China because of the government’s human rights record. Nils van der Poel, a 25-year-old speedskater, made the comments after returning home from the Beijing event, where officials have been at pains to keep politics and protest out despite diplomatic boycotts. Van der Poel told Sportbladet he had “a very nice experience behind the scenes”, but that the decision to give Beijing the Games was “terrible”. “The Olympic Village was very nice, the Chinese people I met were absolutely amazing,” he said. “The Olympics is a lot, it’s a fantastic sporting event where you unite the world and nations meet. But so did Hitler before invading Poland, and so did Russia before invading Ukraine. “I think it is extremely irresponsible to give it to a country that violates human rights as blatantly as the Chinese regime is doing.” Governments including the US have accused China’s government of conducting a genocide in Xinjiang, through its long campaign of forced assimilation against ethnic minorities, including Muslim Uyghurs. An estimated 1 million people have been detained in mass detention and re-education centres, and the general population has been subjected to acts of religious and cultural suppression, alleged forced labour, and enforced birth control. Several human rights and legal groups have said the actions amount to crimes against humanity. Beijing denies all accusations of human rights abuses, and says its policies are part of anti-terrorism efforts and poverty alleviation programmes. Rights groups had called for widespread boycotts of the Winter Olympics by governments and sponsors. Several nations including the US, UK and Australia staged a diplomatic boycott of the event, while there has been significant focus on athletes’ ability to protest. Human rights advocates had warned athletes about conducting any activism, including making statements, while in Beijing for the Games. The US Nordic skier and former Olympian Noah Hoffman said athletes had a powerful platform, but advised them to stay silent in Beijing. He said: “They can speak out when they get back.” Acts of protest at the Games are generally against the rules set by the International Olympic Committee, which also warned athletes not to protest at the Tokyo summer Games, or face potential punishment. However, there are mounting concerns over the increasing intolerance of protest, dissent or criticism in or against China. Prior to it starting, a Beijing official warned any athlete behaviour that is against the Olympic spirit or Chinese rules or laws would be subject to “certain punishment”. China’s government and Olympic officials have insisted the Games should be free from politics, but when asked at a press conference on Tuesday about human rights issues, committee spokesperson Yan Jiarong dismissed human rights violations among the Uyghur Muslim population as “lies” and insisted Taiwan was part of China. • This article was amended on 18 February 2022. Nils van der Poel is Swedish, not Swiss as an earlier version said.Clean energy companies have asked the federal government “not to get in the way” of the private sector by investing in another publicly owned gas-fired power station to replace Australia’s largest coal-fired plant. Angus Taylor, the energy and emissions reduction minister, said on Friday the government had shown it would “look at all options” to ensure there was enough “dispatchable” capacity in the electricity market after the Eraring coal plant, on the shore of Lake Macquarie in New South Wales, closes from 2025. Origin announced on Thursday it would bring forward the 2880-megawatt plant’s closure from 2032 due to an influx of solar and wind energy making traditional coal plants economically unviable. It had been negotiating with the New South Wales state government for months ahead of the announcement, but Taylor was blindsided, having only been told on Wednesday night. The Nature Conservation Council of NSW estimated Eraring’s early exit could reduce the plant’s lifetime greenhouse gas emissions by up to 87m tonnes, and described it as a “ray of hope for leaving a safe climate for our children”. Taylor said the government would prefer the private sector to build the needed new capacity – likely to be batteries, pumped hydro and gas plants – but left open the possibility it would step in if it was not satisfied. The Morrison government is already spending $600m on a new gas plant at Kurri Kurri in NSW’s Hunter Valley to coincide with the closure of the Liddell coal plant next year. Some analysts believe the gas plant, to be owned and operated by the commonwealth-owned Snowy Hydro Ltd, is not necessary to ensure a reliable electricity supply and have questioned its commercial viability. Kane Thornton, the chief executive of the Clean Energy Council, said Origin’s announcement would prompt companies to immediately reassess electricity investments that did not previously stack up. He said there was a “massive pipeline” of potential renewable energy and battery projects across Australia, but companies felt uncertainty over whether the federal government would intervene in the market and change their viability. “There’s still that uncertainty hanging over the marketplace. It just undermines confidence,” he said. “There is no doubt we can build enough capacity [to replace Eraring]. We just need the government not to get in the way and disrupt the market.” Thornton said the 660MW gas generator being built at Kurri Kurri was “an excellent example where the government had confused the market”. He said in an ideal world the federal government would introduce a national climate and energy policy to guide cleaner investment. He cited the example of the NSW electricity infrastructure roadmap, which passed parliament with multiparty support and is intended to underwrite the construction of 12GW of renewable energy and 2GW of storage. The closure of Eraring, which was built in the early 1980s, was “exactly what is meant to happen”, Thornton said. “We need the coal to come out to create space for more generation to come in. That’s the market behaving as it is intended to.” The Australian Electricity Market Operator said on Thursday that planned additional capacity, including a new battery meant to remove network constraints around Sydney, Newcastle and Wollongong, and accelerated support for transmission links from the NSW government, meant the state would have access to enough electricity generation when Eraring closed. But Taylor said Eraring’s closure could lead to a repeat of a spike in wholesale electricity prices after the Hazelwood coal plant in Victoria shut in 2017. “A gap of this scale, if not addressed, will drive up energy prices,” he said. “Our preference is always for the private sector to make those investments. That’s why we’re encouraging, through national cabinet, a capacity mechanism – again imposed by some. But this is crucial to make sure that we have enough capacity coming into the market. We’ll work with all players to make sure we’ve got that.” In a capacity market, power generators are paid when they can guarantee they can dispatch electricity at specific times. Some in the renewable energy industry believe the payments will artificially prolong the life of coal generators. The national Energy Security Board is working on a design of a capacity market to be presented to federal and state ministers next year. In addition to Kurri Kurri, Taylor said the government was building a multi-billion dollar Snowy 2.0 pumped hydro project, supporting the construction of new transmission links and had dedicated more than $50m to help the development of two privately owned gas developments. But a promised energy plant underwriting program remains in flux, with no contracts signed nearly three years after a shortlist of contenders was announced. The Eraring announcement was the latest in a series of early coal plant closures prompted by the rise of cheaper renewable energy, which now provides more than 30% of grid generation and is forecast to reach at least 69% by 2030. AGL announced last week it would bring forward the closure of the Bayswater generator in NSW from 2035 to no later than 2033, and its brown coal-fired Loy Yang A plant in Victoria from 2048 to no later than 2045. EnergyAustralia’s Yallourn power plant, also in the Latrobe Valley, last year said it would shut in 2028 rather than 2032, while Alinta said its Loy Yang B could stop generating 15 years earlier than scheduled. Aemo underlined the scale of the transformation under way when it released a draft plan for the grid’s future in December. It suggested the country’s coal-fired power plants were likely to shut almost three times as fast as set out in official schedules, and said an optimal future grid would require a ninefold increase in large-scale wind and solar and a trebling of the “firm” capacity that could be dispatched whenever required. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The Australian Energy Council, representing electricity generators, said the earlier closures were significant but not unexpected. “Announcements of closures provide time to adjust and are likely to act as a spur to new investment to meet gaps identified in the market and to meet reliability needs,” the council’s chief executive, Sarah McNamara, said. “We are already seeing new battery proposals, along with pumped hydro and gas peaking plant.” The Greens said if they held the balance of power after the upcoming election they would call for the publicly owned Snowy Hydro corporation to be expanded and repurposed to build more than 25GW of wind, solar and energy storage over the next decade. The party’s leader, Adam Bandt, said under the plan Snowy Hydro would be renamed Clean Energy Australia and given $40bn equity to invest in new generation needed to replace coal. A not-for-profit retail arm, called Power Australia, would sell electricity on a cost-price basis to keep down household and business power bills. “With a massive government-led build of renewables, we can tackle the climate crisis while growing jobs,” Bandt said.A rare red ‘danger to life’ weather warning has been issued for parts of England and Wales with up to 90mph winds expected as Storm Eunice makes landfall. Parts of Scotland have also been affected by snow with more than 70 schools across Aberdeenshire and Moray closed. Millions of people have been told to stay at home, with the army placed on standby to help. If you have been affected by Storm Eunice, we would like to hear from you. We are also interested in hearing from those who are still without power. Though we’d like to hear from you, your safety and security are most important. When recording, or sharing your content with us, please put your welfare and the welfare of others first. Extreme weather events can be very unpredictable and carry very real risks. Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.New York City mayor Eric Adams held a summit with a group of drill rappers on Tuesday night and clarified he doesn’t actually want to ban their music, days after he appeared to blame the music scene for the recent shooting deaths of two young New York rappers and suggested drill videos be pulled from the internet. He now says he wants to work with the artists to address gun violence, amid a period of soul-searching in one of music’s most controversial communities. Drill, named after the Chicago slang word for “kill”, was created in the early 2010s by rappers from some of Chicago’s most neglected neighborhoods, and features lurid stories of gang life – often laced with explicit threats against their rivals – over energetic, ominous instrumentals. The genre is known for its culture of “authenticity”, sometimes taken to an extreme: performers have been known to carry out the violent acts named in their lyrics, sometimes even while streaming on social media. These associations haven’t kept drill’s distinctive style from going mainstream, influencing acts such as Cardi B, Drake and Travis Scott, and spawning spin-off locales around the world, including in London and Paris. Brooklyn drill rapper Maino, who helped organize the meeting with the mayor, posted a short clip of the event on Instagram, showing the rappers gathered around Adams. “I just wanted to create a conversation with the mayor … so he could get a real perspective and a real understanding of what drill rap is and so that we can have some real dialogue and really start to make things happen,” said the rapper in the video. At a press conference on Wednesday, the mayor denied ever calling for a ban on drill music, but said he was concerned about “violent people who are using drill rapping to post who they killed, and then antagonize the people who they are going to kill”. The mayor added that he and those at the meeting “will be rolling out something in the next days to deal with this issue”. Brooklyn is home to a significant drill movement, which combines musical influences from Chicago’s and London’s drill scenes, and became part of the unofficial soundtrack for local Black Lives Matter protests in 2020. But, as with these other urban epicenters, Brooklyn drill has also been marked by bloodshed. The scene reeled when one of its biggest stars, Pop Smoke, was shot and killed during a home invasion in 2020. But this year has already seen three brutal attacks. On 27 January, 22-year-old Brooklyn drill rapper Nas Blixky, real name Nasir Fisher, was shot in the head and left in critical condition. Three days later, on 2 February, an up-and-coming rapper named Tdott Woo, born Tahjay Dobson, was shot and killed outside his home in south-east Brooklyn just hours after signing a record contract. He was also 22. And days after that, an 18-year-old rapper, Chii Wvtzz, AKA Jayquan McKenley, was shot dead outside a recording studio in central Brooklyn. Bleezy DOD, a 27-year-old rapper from Brownsville, a low-income area in Brooklyn, said the shootings have been deeply painful for the community. “People was becoming stars. We dream of taking care of our families, and getting out of here, and it was taken away from them, and that ain’t right,” he said. Bleezy attended the mayoral meeting, which he described as lively and productive. There, he and other drill artists explained to the mayor that their music isn’t inherently violent. “We tried to tell him the genre is all about the beat,” he said. “It has a grime to it, a different type of sound; it gives you a different type of energy. There’s no such thing as drill lyrics.” Two others at Adams’ meeting were Rashid Littlejohn and Jelani Wray, respectively the founder and coordinator of Guns For Grants, a nonprofit that offers college grants to attend Brooklyn’s St Francis College to teens who surrender firearms. The mayor seemed “excited” about the idea, said Littlejohn, who hopes that the initiative could become a model for future city legislation. Littlejohn, the former director of a Brooklyn after-school program, said he decided to start the program after a group of teens in his program were arrested for weapons possession while filming a drill music video, and feels “conflicted” about the drill scene. “I’m all for creativity, expressing where you come from, expressing your story and what goes on in your neighborhood,” he said. “But I do think that over the last ten years, drill rap has kind of taken a turn to be what we in the culture call ‘too authentic’, you know, where it’s not just music, when we’re talking about real names, real lives, real people who are being affected by not just the music, but what’s happening outside and in the streets.” Jabari Evans, an academic and rapper originally from Chicago, now an assistant professor of race and media at the University of South Carolina, came to understand the roots of drill music while working with young people on Chicago’s South Side. “Many of these youths have been sort of shut out of systems that should be there to help them become better individuals, but instead we have these individuals left to their own devices,” he said. In Chicago throughout the 2010s, the violence coupled with the visibility of drill artists “created a level of panic in the city for local politicians”, said Evans. The city under Rahm Emanuel’s mayorship tried to stamp out drill music, strong-arming venues into dropping drill performances and even setting up a police division to surveil drill artists – efforts that Eric Adams should regard with caution, he said. In Bleezy’s view, the music isn’t the cause of violence, but in many cases an escape from it. “We’re all in poverty, so nobody has opportunities. The pandemic hit, everybody feels left out. In these projects, these houses of people are all bunched up to four corners. Everything’s segregated off. We already feel like we have no outlets and no way out, so our only hope is the music.”I live in a small town called Golden, in a valley bottom between two mountain ranges in Canada. I’m retired, and apart from my dog, Toby, I live alone. I lead a pretty quiet life, especially since the pandemic. On Sunday 3 October last year, I went to bed as usual at about 9.30pm. The next thing I remember is waking up at 11.30 to the sound of Toby barking like mad. It was his protective bark: “Something’s out there!” So I quickly got up. Almost immediately there was an explosion, and everything was covered in plasterboard and debris. I was terrified. There was a massive hole in the ceiling above my bed. At first I thought a tree had fallen on the house, but I looked out of the window and there was no tree there. I was so agitated that I was kind of vibrating. I decided to call the police. I told the dispatcher that something had come through my ceiling and I had no idea what. Then I went back into the bedroom and flipped back the pillow. A lump of rock was there. The policeman arrived quickly – he had also heard an explosion. Some workers had been blasting through the mountains for the Trans-Canada highway and the policeman thought maybe they’d got carried away with their explosives that night, and I’d caught a bit of debris. He called up the team. They said they hadn’t been working with explosives that night, but had seen a big light in the sky and heard a boom. He hung up and said, “I think you’ve got a meteorite.” We looked at the piece of dark black rock, a little bigger than a fist, nestled between the two pillows. It had crashed straight through my roof, into my bedroom, right next to where my head had been. When the policeman left, I began to realise how lucky I was. I kept thinking, did this really happen? I made a tea and tried to calm down. At about 5am I managed to sleep. I hadn’t thought about meteorites much until this happened. In the past when I’ve gone camping, I’ve loved sitting around the fire and looking at the stars. It was exciting to see a falling star streak across the sky. Those, I now know, are very high up. Mine exploded about 18km above Earth, which is very close. I’ve read that you have a one in a trillion chance of being hit by a meteorite. After my story was in the local newspaper, things got a bit crazy. I’ve had all sorts of messages, friend requests on Facebook and people wanting interviews. One man came to my door, twice, trying to get a bargain on the meteorite – apparently meteorites such as mine are very valuable, because it’s intact and uncontaminated by human touch. Most times, meteorites are found on Earth only after they’ve been weathered for years, so it is harder for scientists to learn about the places they travelled through. But mine is fresh from outer space. The day after the meteorite hit, I put it into a plastic bag so that it wouldn’t get contaminated. Then the University of Western Ontario came to collect it – after a few months of research they’re going to give it back. I’d like to take it to local schools and universities, tell the story to kids. I got the hole in my roof fixed pretty quickly because heavy rain was on the way. My room is back to normal, with my bed in the same place as before. I’m lucky not to have had lasting effects from the experience, no post-traumatic stress. One time an explosion on TV really caught me, but apart from that I feel fine – thankful, even. The experience has made me want to be more generous to people while I’m still alive. Toby has also recovered, but then again he’s just such a good-natured dog. All the fuss has made me feel protective towards the meteorite. People make money by chopping them into pieces to be sold as jewellery, but I feel this thing that is billions of years old found its way into my bed, and I want to protect it. If I do sell it, I want to find a good home where it will be put on display. • As told to Felix Bazalgette Do you have an experience to share? Email experience@theguardian.comMy earliest reading memory When I was six, I went with my mother and sister to India for the first time, to visit relatives. Here I discovered comics. My cousins were obsessed with Archie comics, which I didn’t really understand but found very readable. My masa gave me my first ever Spider-Man comic on that trip, a classic tale featuring the Green Goblin. I read it over and over again, the entire six weeks we were there. My favourite book growing up My mum used to take me to the library every two weeks: she had a Mills &amp; Boon addiction to feed. I had free rein of the library and I worked my way through every single movie tie-in novelisation I could find, as well as expanded universe Star Wars and Star Trek books. I think my most treasured book was The Karate Kid Part III. The books that changed me as a teenager On my weekly trips to Calamity Comics in Harrow town centre I would sit at the back of the shop, reading Spider-Man comics. Peter Parker is me. I am Peter Parker. Which means I could be Spider-Man. Those comic books made me feel less alone. The writer who changed my mind On my 21st birthday, the singer Deedar Zaman, then the frontman of my favourite band, Asian Dub Foundation, gave me a copy of James Baldwin’s The Fire Next Time and it changed my life. Asian Dub Foundation had already introduced me to so many different movements and people by then, from Udham Singh to the Naxalite movement to the Bradford 12 to the case of Satpal Ram, and my anger and interest were growing. Then Baldwin wrote: “Do I really want to be integrated into a burning house?” in a letter to his nephew and I knew I had to read everything he’d written. His simmering moral fury, the elegance of his prose, the complex compound sentences that were wise and world-weary and hopeful: they were everything to me. The book that made me want to be a writer Zadie Smith’s White Teeth had a huge impact. On the surface, it was a book about people I was familiar with, in a part of London I grew up in, using the language of my friends. And then she wrote: “There was England, a gigantic mirror, and there was Irie without reflection”, and I knew I had stories of my own to tell. White Teeth was many things, but my sense of it at the time was that it was so funny. I was a student of sitcom, and White Teeth showed me how to be funny on the page. The author I came back to The rapper I didn’t really appreciate at the time but revisited as an adult is Jay-Z. The flow, the timing, the metaphors, the sense of humour, the storytelling and that warm chuckle. The book I reread I read Hanif Kureishi’s The Buddha of Suburbia again recently and I still love it. As a teenager, it made me feel seen and more OK with how much of an outsider I felt, and really made me understand my place in the world. Rereading it now, I find it’s filled with mischief and joy and moments of silliness, and ridiculous characters who walk the line between pathetic and absurd. It’s one of the funniest books ever written. The book I could never read again Frank Miller’s The Dark Knight Returns was a seminal piece of work. It was the blueprint for so much that came after it, from how we viewed a superhero’s place in society through to dark, gritty films like Christopher Nolan’s Batman trilogy. However, I cannot help but draw a line between Miller’s Batman and the hooded bat-like “hero” of his grossly Islamophobic book, Holy Terror. The book I discovered later in life I read Wide Sargasso Sea by Jean Rhys on holiday, and couldn’t understand why it had taken me so long to get to it. The books I am currently reading I am enjoying Samira Ahmed’s new run of Ms Marvel comics. Roopa Farooki’s jaw-dropping memoir, Everything Is True, about being a junior doctor in the first six weeks of the pandemic, is brave and powerful. I am also reading Pankaj Mishra’s novel, Run and Hide, a satirical look at finance bros. My comfort read During a recent period of grief, when I lost someone close to me who was as big a rap head as I was, I found myself rereading Hanif Abdurraqib’s Go Ahead in the Rain, about A Tribe Called Quest. The book is haunted by Phife Dawg, a former member who died in 2016; the way Hanif talks about him and to him made me feel closer to my cousin. • Nikesh Shukla’s Brown Baby: A Memoir of Race, Family and Home is published by Bluebird (£16.99). To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Peter Jackson recently reignited passionate awe with The Beatles: Get Back: his epic, intimate eight-hour TV re-edit of Michael Lindsay-Hogg’s documentary footage for Let It Be, about the recording of the Beatles’ 1970 album. The centrepiece has been released as a standalone event in cinemas – initially in large-format Imax, but now also in conventional theatres. This is the legendary and mysteriously intended rooftop concert, in which the band (with guest keyboardist Billy Preston) played atop the Apple offices in Savile Row, London, in the freezing cold, for stunned or curious observers who had clambered on to the neighbouring roofs, and for the cheerful crowds below. The cameras captured the event, and the amazing 60s faces of Londoners at street level and up there on the roof: some looking bored, like the indifferent onlookers at Calvary depicted in Jan Van Eyck’s Crucifixion and Last Judgement. Most hilariously, there are also the nonplussed coppers – one with a Blakey/Hitler moustache – intent on shutting the whole thing down, who were cheekily being stalled down in reception for as long as possible. A few people ask “Why?” Who were the Beatles performing to, and for? It’s a good question, and this film is unmissable despite, or because of the fact, there is no answer. Did they want to get back to their rock’n’roll roots? Not exactly. This was a public concert that was exalted, way above the public, which most of the public couldn’t see (the band don’t even peep over the roof’s edge to wave). In that pre-social-media age, word didn’t really get out until it was all over. Did the Beatles really, in their hearts, believe that this would kickstart a new live profile for the band? Or was this their unacknowledged and poignant farewell? This engrossing film is a time capsule of London itself – the faces not so very different from those you would see in the 40s or 50s. (How quaint to hear about Tucson, Arizona, and California in cloudy Britain – which doesn’t here look particularly transformed by the 60s flower power revolution.) And for those of us in the post-Beatles age there is something very moving in the idea of those crowds in January 1969, casually taking for granted living in a world where all four Beatles are still alive, still together and still making music. • The Beatles: Get Back – The Rooftop Concert is released on 18 February in cinemas.Last summer I got a tattoo on my forearm. It was a frame from a Chris Ware graphic novel showing a nervous man cringing in shock from the noise of a telephone, represented by the word “RING” in huge red script. It was the first of my tattoos to involve any colour, the rest all being black line-drawings. When I woke the morning after I looked down and saw, rather than the familiar image, a nightmarish, enormous smudge of angry red that covered 8in of my arm. In my half-asleep state this sight put the fear of God into me and I leapt out of bed, mind racing. For a minute or so, before I could unravel the bandage and investigate the area properly, I believed that something had gone terribly wrong and I was now to have an entirely red forearm for the rest of my life. I did panic, admittedly, but then something surprising happened – I rapidly reconciled myself to this new life I was to lead with a red arm. I even managed to laugh. It wasn’t that I would enjoy looking at the hideous mess, but rather that I thought I would easily come to enjoy its presence in my life, even though it was a mistake. Why? Because it would have been my mistake, something that happened to me and only me. It would have been a part of my one, unreproducible life. Soon I managed to clean myself properly, carefully removing the layers of co-mingling sweated-off red ink and blood that had become trapped and spread beneath my bandage. I was relieved to be looking at this image I love so much, beautifully rendered. And yet to the Melanie Phillipses of this world, that image would be just as repellent to look at as my insane red hellscape tattoo. Phillips revealed in a column last week that the sight of tattoos makes her feel physically ill. She feels that the contemporary normalisation of the tattoo – an intervention once reserved in our culture for sailors, carnival folk and criminals – reveals a crisis going on in secular society. Phillips has attracted plenty of mockery for her take, but it’s a familiar, if hysterically expressed, opinion. Plenty of people, young and old, have expressed prurient disapproval of my tattoos. Usually they are either annoyed that I don’t have some wonderfully meaningful reason for each of them or they ask if I’ll regret it on my wedding day. Admittedly, I have not done much to avoid these criticisms, given my array of dazzlingly pointless tattoos. I have 13 of them now, and rather than an aesthetic grand plan, they form a haphazard collection of unrelated, impulsive doodles. Personally I like the casual vibe the whole nutty array gives off, perhaps because in a way I actually agree completely with Melanie Phillips: my tattoos are a kind of undermining of the sanctity of my body. It’s just that we have exactly diverging perspectives on the nature of this nihilistic desecration. For years my body was a site of constant and violent conflict. When I wasn’t hurting, starving, or loathing it, I was in a fugue state of denial that it had nothing to do with “me” – whatever “me” was. It was just some abstracted mistake to cope with. Yet it mattered to me enormously, as did its aesthetic pristineness – the very quality I would eventually come to violate with my tattoos. I am anecdotally aware of many people who have purposefully used tattoos as a way to reclaim their traumatised bodies, choosing the locations of their scars or areas of the body they once particularly hated. It was far less intentional than this for me, but in the eight years since I started getting tattoos I have repaired my relationship with my body. I don’t jump for joy at the sight of myself naked, but nor do I feel any resentment or ill will toward it. I enjoy the things my body does for me. I thank it for withstanding its years in the wilderness of my neglect and cruelty, for persisting so I can now run without stopping in shame over my ineptitude, and have sex without second-guessing how I am being viewed, and view a new foreign place in terms of how much I will enjoy to traversing it all on foot. I know how lucky I am to be able to do these things and how lucky I am to finally feel gratitude for them. I also know how fleeting these abilities of mine are. Indeed, this is part of why I am able to value them. Even in a healthy, lucky, long life, we start out dependent on others and eventually die that way too. No matter what our physical capabilities, or our level of fitness or beauty, the years in which we enjoy our bodies at their peak condition are always going to be vanishingly, harrowingly few in the grand scheme of things. For me, my silly, ill-considered, multiple tattoos are one way to acknowledge this tragi-comic reality – that, unbelievable as it may seem, this body, which is often submerged in pleasure and activity, is also marching me towards death. It’s absurd, it’s unbearable, it’s an irresolvable agony that is best addressed by a £50 permanent doodle of a pissed Mickey Mouse waving a bottle of hooch, which will eventually join me in the grave. Megan Nolan is an Irish writer based in LondonIf any evidence was needed to prove European clubs are increasingly looking to Major League Soccer for talent, it came in the January transfer window. No fewer than 33 players left North American soccer’s top flight to head across the Atlantic with two of those players (Daryl Dike and Ricardo Pepi) entering the list for the top five most expensive transfers in MLS history. Bundesliga club Augsburg made Pepi their club-record signing while Dike joined West Brom. Teenager Kevin Paredes left DC United for Wolfsburg, James Sands signed for Rangers on loan from New York City FC and George Bello joined Arminia Bielefeld, having made his breakthrough at Atlanta United. Even after the January transfer window closed, Arsenal completed a deal that will see US men’s national team goalkeeper Matt Turner move to London this summer. Each will hope to follow the precedent set by the likes of Alphonso Davies, Weston McKennie and Tyler Adams, who all used MLS as a springboard to top European clubs. All this business marks a fundamental shift in MLS. Once derided as a ‘retirement league’ due to the number of ageing stars lured to Canada and the United States by the promise of one last bumper pay cheque, the competition is now more concerned with producing, or at least harnessing, stars of the future. Far from being a retirement league, MLS is now a development league. This hasn’t happened by accident. A greater emphasis has been placed on youth development in the post-David Beckham era. The reliance on the college game for homegrown talent has been systematically eased. MLS has brought youth development in-house with a new youth-focused division, MLS Next, set to start play this year. The idea is that a more holistic network of more than 130 clubs will aid mobility between the levels of North American soccer for the best players. Some clubs have already created a youth academy industry for themselves. Pepi certainly wasn’t the first graduate shipped to Europe by FC Dallas who have earned a reputation as American soccer’s most productive club when it comes to youth. Other clubs have followed FC Dallas’ lead. The New York Red Bulls boast a highly productive academy that has forged the likes of Adams, Duncan and Caden Clark while the Philadelphia Union have sent Brendan Aaronson and Mark McKenzie to Europe in recent times. In the past, scouts would explore American soccer in the hope of unearthing a gem. Now, scouts expect to find such jewels. MLS is producing young players tailor-made for the modern game. For decades, American soccer prioritised athletic ability over all else. US teams were known for working hard and giving it their all, but as the sport started to value technical ability over physical capacity it became clear a change in approach was required. There may still be some vestiges of the old prejudices and preconceptions left over, but those in the know recognise how North American soccer’s conveyer belt is rolling off players in a very different mould than was the case even 10 years ago. The current talent pool is deep with dynamic ball-players. It’s no coincidence that American youngsters are now more attractive to European clubs than ever before. In terms of the product on the pitch, it’s debatable whether or not MLS’s convoluted transfer rules and general structure has helped or hindered the league. It does, however, help give many young players their start in the professional game. Academy graduates are afforded opportunities they wouldn’t receive in other leagues. By constructing a division led by top-level players, like Javier Hernandez and Carlos Vela, underpinned by academy prospects, MLS has, perhaps inadvertently, created the ideal environment for youth development. Of course, MLS clubs still spend money on big-name signings. Toronto FC haven’t long landed Italy attacker Lorenzo Insigne on a four-year contract worth a reported league-record $15m-a-year. Before Insigne’s signing, Hernandez and Vela were the highest-paid players in the league, each taking home $6m or more a-year. Gonzalo Higuain, Alejandro Pozuelo and Josef Martinez also currently play in MLS. But there is no denying the increased emphasis on youth across MLS. For American and Canadian soccer, the 2026 World Cup, which will be hosted across the two nations and Mexico, is a guiding light and is almost certainly a motivating force behind the youth drive on both sides of the border. If Canada and the USA perform well at Qatar 2022 and the 2026 World Cup, their success will have its roots in the academies of their shared top-flight. The relationship between MLS and US Soccer has been too cosy for the liking of many who believe the two organisations would benefit from a greater degree of separation, but their union is now bearing fruit in the young players coming through the system. Last month didn’t happen by accident and there may be many more months like it in the future.The hack Suffer from cystic acne? Try rubbing a raw potato on your skin to ease the inflammation. The promise Here’s the theory doing the rounds on TikTok: potatoes contain vitamin C, an antioxidant which some studies show could reduces inflammation, and salicylic acid, a common drying/exfoliating ingredient in spot-care. Does a potato contain enough of each ingredient to soothe your skin? The test I don’t have acne, but my monthly hormonal spots have excellent timekeeping – enter two test subjects on my chin. Some TikTokers have taped tiny chunks of potato to their faces overnight, which I dutifully try using surgical tape, but I just wind up with a reaction to the tape. And, come morning, the tape has come off, and the spot is unchanged. The next day, I just rubbed the raw potato on to the other spot, like you would a dab-on blemish treatment. The verdict I wanted this to work because it’s a cheap, easy hack and I feel like potatoes have been maligned since the no-carb era. Sadly, it didn’t work for me. If painful spots are a recurring issue, try Murad Blemish Control Rapid Relief Spot Treatment (£21), or consider seeing a specialist for a targeted action plan. Unfortunately, spuds just don’t cut it.A doctor who was stabbed nine times in a random, unprovoked attack has said he feels a “sense of connection” with his attacker, whom he told in court: “I am not upset or angry with you.” Dr Adam Towler, a former trauma specialist from Bristol, drew praise from a judge who described his response to his disturbing attack in 2019 as “extraordinary”. Towler, who develops medical software, was stabbed repeatedly by then 17-year-old Chanz Maximen, including with a blow that missed his heart by two centimetres. Maximen knocked on Towler’s door and shone a light through his letterbox, leading the doctor to think a prank was being played; when he opened the door, Maximen pulled him into the road and stabbed him. Maximen was jailed for life with a minimum term of 12 years on Wednesday, but his motive for the attack is still not fully understood. As is customary, a victim impact statement was read at the sentencing hearing – but the tone of Towler’s missive has turned heads with its forgiving and philosophical nature. “To begin, I want to say that I am not upset or angry with you,” Towler said. “I don’t think you owe me an apology or anything, but I do want you to know what it’s like for me.” Judge William Hart described Towler’s statement as “extraordinary”, saying: “Whether it is the effect of intellect, or faith, or kindness and understanding, I don’t know. “If it is the consequence of intellect, I admire it. If it is the consequence of faith, I envy it.” Expanding on the thoughts behind the statement on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme on Friday, Towler said: “The fact we’re here talking today, I got lucky. I’m living a quite normal life, a comfortable life. My immediate outlook is rather more comfortable than Chanz Maximen’s position. “I guess also in some odd way I felt a sense of connection with him. He and I were two individuals connected in this event. I haven’t been able to speak to him … “But I don’t feel angry with him. What happened, happened. Neither of us can unwind the clocks on those events so now I have the rest of my life before me and he does, too.” Towler added: “No one knows what he thought, what he does think, no one knows whether he will be judged safe to return to society but his whole life turned on that event. “Prior to this, there was no mental history, he was on a good course and that may be difficult for him. I know it’s certainly difficult for his family who have supported him with great tenacity and loyalty through the legal process.” He said it would be “cool” if his approach helped others to think differently. “If the approach stimulates a thought in some other people, perhaps gives them some tools to think differently about a difficult situation they’re experiencing, then that’s cool. I think in these situations, there’s no right, so go with it,” he said. During the attack, Towler said Maximen had said “you killed the girl”, a phrase that he has never explained and that meant nothing to the victim or investigators. Sentencing him for the stabbing and two more random attacks carried out in Bristol in the following weeks, the judge said: “There is no logical explanation for any of your offending other than that you are a highly dangerous young man with a wholly distorted view of life and appropriate conduct.”Two major storms in a week may have come as a shock, but trouble has been brewing for some time. The Pacific around the equator is in the throes of La Niña, when the seas turn cooler than normal towards South America. Even though thousands of miles away, La Niña often brings a wet and windy end to winter in the UK, with a powerful jet stream driving depressions across the Atlantic. And as the core of the jet stream powered to more than 200mph this week, Storm Eunice rapidly exploded into a ferocious storm. Not only that, but the vortex of winds whirling around in the stratosphere high above the Arctic are unusually strong this winter, helping drive westerly weather across the Atlantic. When will it all end? The signs are that windy, wet weather could last into March before La Niña weakens and the polar vortex decays. Looking on the bright side, the wet westerly winds are boosting water supplies in many parts of the UK, where it had been unusually dry, and wind power generation has surged this week. And despite the battering from storms, this winter has also been mild over much of the country.One of Samuel Beckett’s most celebrated plays, Endgame can seem unapproachably austere in its depiction of a living hell. In Danya Taymor’s vibrant new production, the abstraction of four characters trapped in a room after some unspecified catastrophe has new resonance: there is a suggestion of environmental destruction – or perhaps the aftermath of a pandemic. And uncared-for elderly couple, Nell (Gina Moxley) and Nagg (Seán McGinley) are confined to grey dustbins, in even greyer uniforms, living on scraps of biscuits. Their son, the blind Hamm (Frankie Boyle) and his endlessly put-upon carer-servant, Clov (Robert Sheehan) enact a series of daily routines and rituals that are repeated to the point of exhaustion. As Clov struggles up a ladder to the high windows of Sabine Dargent’s wide-angled set, he describes what he sees in the world outside: nothing, zero, the same as before, same as every day. The ocean’s tides have stopped and there is “no more nature”. Within the room, “something is taking its course” – something which, if Hamm tries hard enough to remember a distant past, might even mean something. Sitting paralysed in his armchair, wrapped in blankets, Hamm is played by Boyle with arch weariness and absurd flashes of actorly hauteur. His portrayal of Hamm is more sympathetic than usual; occasionally he seems almost fond of the boyish Clov. Sheehan’s deft timing and easy physical comedy keep the tone buoyant. Frustrated rather than angry, Clov comments on his own performance with relish: “This is what is called making an exit.” All four actors emphasise the dialogue’s mordantly comic tone, paying minute attention to timbre of voice and flickers of facial expression, Moxley in particular. Her question to Nagg, “Have you anything else to say to me?” is both touchingly hopeful and knowingly hopeless. Even the most often-quoted exchanges seem fresh, as when Clov hangs over Nagg’s dustbin to see if he’s still alive. “He’s crying,” he reports. “Then he’s living,” comes Hamm’s rapid-fire response. Together this beautifully directed ensemble make Beckett’s influential portrayal of nihilism moving and unexpectedly invigorating. Gate theatre, Dublin, until 26 March.A UN nuclear taskforce has promised to prioritise safety as it launches a review of controversial plans by Japan to release more than 1m tonnes of contaminated water into the ocean from the wrecked Fukushima Daiichi nuclear plant. Japan’s government announced last April that it had decided to release the water over several decades into the Pacific Ocean, despite strong opposition from local fishers and neighbouring China and South Korea. Lydie Evrard, the deputy director general of the International Atomic Energy Agency [IAEA], speaking after a team of experts visited the plant to collect water samples, said on Friday: “We listen very carefully to local people’s concerns and the inspection is designed to provide answers about safety in a transparent manner.” . The controversy comes almost 11 years after a magnitude 9.0 earthquake triggered a huge tsunami that killed more than 18,000 people along Japan’s north-east coast. Tsunami waves crashed into Fukushima Daiichi, knocking out its backup electricity supply, triggering meltdowns in three of its reactors and sending large quantities of radiation into the atmosphere. More than 150,000 people were forced to flee their homes, and evacuation orders in communities closest to the plant have only recently been partially lifted. The Tokyo Electric Power company (Tepco) says its treatment technology can remove all radioactive materials from water except tritium, which is harmless in small amounts. It said the gradual release of the water, diluted with seawater, would not pose a threat to human health or the marine environment. In 2020, however, Greenpeace said the water still contained contaminants beside tritium and would have to be treated again. The wastewater is being stored in about 1,000 tanks that officials say need to be removed so the plant can be decommissioned, an operation expected to take several decades. The tanks are expected to reach their capacity of 1.37m tonnes this summer. The liquid includes water used to cool the damaged reactors, as well as rain and groundwater that seeps into the area. Shaun Burnie, a senior nuclear specialist for Greenpeace East Asia, said he did not believe the IAEA would fully investigate and address safety and environmental concerns in its report. Noting that the agency had welcomed the discharge option when it was announced last year, Burnie said: “The IAEA is not an independent agency in nuclear affairs – under statute its mission is to promote nuclear power. It has sought to justify radioactive marine pollution as having no impact and safe. But the IAEA is incapable of protecting the environment, human health or human rights from radiation risks – that’s not its job. “The IAEA taskforce should be investigating the root cause of the contaminated water crisis and exploring the option of long-term storage and the best available processing technology as an alternative to the deliberate contamination of the Pacific.” The IAEA team, which includes experts from South Korea and China, will report its findings at the end of April. South Korea, which has yet to lift an import ban on Fukushima seafood introduced in 2013, has said that discharging the water would pose a “grave threat” to the marine environment. Pacific peoples have challenged Japan to prove the water is safe by dumping it in Tokyo. Local fishers also oppose the water’s release, saying it would undo a decade’s work to rebuild their industry and reassure nervous consumers their seafood is safe. Junichi Matsumoto, a Tepco official overseeing management of the treated water, said the utility was prioritising safety and the effect on the Fukushima region’s reputation. “Ensuring transparency and objectivity is crucial to the project,” he said this week. “We hope to further improve the objectivity and transparency of the process based on the review.”Good morning. Donald Trump and his two eldest children have been ordered by a New York judge to sit for a civil deposition in the deepening investigation over alleged fraud in the valuation of assets belonging to his family business. Judge Arthur Engoron ordered Trump, Donald Jr and Ivanka to comply with subpoenas issued by the New York state attorney general, Letitia James, intensifying the former president’s legal woes in a week in which his accounting firm cut ties with him after a decade. Trump must testify within 21 days and submit “documents and information” within a fortnight. Responding to the ruling, he accused James’s office of “doing everything within their corrupt discretion to interfere with [his] business relationships and with the political process” and labeled the ruling a “witch-hunt”. The case is running parallel to a criminal investigation, conducted by James with the Manhattan district attorney Alvin Bragg, into Trump accounts. Testifying could risk Trump potentially implicating himself. Could Trump plead the fifth? It would be tricky: his criminal defense lawyer says it would be front-page news and would make it impossible to pick a jury. Additionally, Trump has previously mocked the practice, saying: “If you’re innocent, why are you taking the fifth amendment?” What’s next? Trump is likely to appeal against the decision ordering him to comply with the subpoena. Republicans who opposed racial justice protests hope truckers ‘clog up’ US cities Republicans who legislated against the disruption caused by racial justice protests following George Floyd’s murder have come out in favour of similar tactics used by conservative trucker convoys opposing public health rules. The Florida governor, Ron DeSantis, last year signed an anti-rioting law that included giving a degree of legal protection to drivers who ran over protesters. A federal judge struck down the law in September, ruling it unconstitutional. But now, DeSantis has thrown his weight behind the Canadian truckers, whose protests against a vaccine mandate are causing disruptions to the global supply chain. Meanwhile, the Kentucky senator Rand Paul, who was opposed to the tactics used by racial justice protesters, has said he is “all for” the disruption caused by the convoy. “I hope the truckers do come to America. I hope they clog up cities,” he said. Who else has backed the convoy? Ted Cruz has demanded an investigation into GoFundMe after it deleted the page for donations to Canadian truckers, as did DeSantis. The Ohio congressman Jim Jordan also criticized the platform. How should the double standard be understood? This rhetoric is Republicans seizing any opportunity to attack Joe Biden – rather than being part of a “hard ideological stance”, said Jared Holt, an extremism researcher. Berkeley may have to slash admissions after neighborhood group complains The University of California, Berkeley may be forced to cut its new admissions by about a third after a local neighborhood group pushed back against the environmental impact of its expansion plan. Save Berkeley’s Neighborhoods successfully argued the college was in breach of a major environmental law by failing to account for increases in the trash, traffic and noise that would accompany the plan. The university is asking California’s supreme court to intervene. In the university’s environmental impact study for the new construction, it argued rising enrolment had had “no significant environmental impacts” in previous years, but a county judge disagreed in August. Save Berkeley’s Neighborhoods also argued that a lack of housing had meant students had pushed into the city, affecting housing. What has the challenge achieved? The university will send out 5,100 fewer admission letters than planned next month, missing out on $57m in tuition fees over the 2022-23 academic year. What do critics say? They argue the California Environmental Quality Act is being used as a pretext to block necessary housing and infrastructure. In other news … Ukraine and Russia have accused each other of shelling and other ceasefire violations as tensions continued to grow. The accusations, coming from Ukrainian government forces and Russian-backed rebels in the country’s east, involved both sides claiming there were incidents of mortar fire on Friday. Almost half of bald eagles tested across the US exhibit signs of chronic lead exposure, according to a study. Harmful levels of toxic lead were found in the bones of 46% of bald eagles in 38 states. A court in India has sentenced 38 people to death for a series of bombings in 2008 that killed 56 and wounded 200 in Ahmedabad, Gujarat state. It is the first time so many death sentences have been handed out in a single case. Stat of the day: millennials in 2019 were poorer than people of a similar age in any year from 1989 to 2007 In a brutal comparison revealing distorted views of wealth, the freelance journalist Laura Martin points out that while a survey in 2018 found that 53% of US millennials expected to become a millionaire at some point in their lifetime, millennials in 2019 were less wealthy than people their age in any year from 1989 to 2007. Don’t miss this: is this the answer to our productivity crisis? When the pandemic hit and remote working began, freelance writer Sam Wolfson was hit with a productivity crisis. Procrastination meant that tasks that would take him a few hours in the office ended up seeping into his early mornings and evenings. So he started using Focusmate, a site that uses accountability to keep you working on the task at hand, which he says “saved” him. Wolfson speaks to the site’s creator about the psychology behind it. Last Thing: Robert Pattinson was told to change his ‘absolutely atrocious’ Batman voice Robert Pattinson tried to add his personal touch to Batman by giving the character a different voice, but was asked to stop because it was “absolutely atrocious”. “Everyone does this kind of gruff, gravelly thing, and I’m like, ‘I’m going to do the opposite, I’m gonna go really whispery’,” Pattinson said. “I tried to do it for the first two weeks, and it just looked absolutely atrocious, and they told me to stop doing it.” Sign up First Thing is delivered to thousands of inboxes every weekday. If you’re not already signed up, subscribe now. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.comThe books of James Joyce, along with Middlemarch and War and Peace, were among the titles that many vowed to read when the UK was plunged into its first coronavirus lockdown. Almost two years later, we now know that most of us filled all that time indoors with Netflix and Zoom quizzes rather than catching up on lengthy classics (apart from the author David Mitchell, who did read Ulysses in 2020). But with this month marking the centenary of Ulysses and 140 years since Joyce’s birth, perhaps now really is the time to familiarise or re-familiarise yourself with the influential modernist writer. The entry point Dubliners, a collection of frank, direct short stories that find moments of epiphany amid ordinary Irish life, was published in 1914 after nearly a decade of setbacks and censorship. The Dead, the story of a Christmas feast, is its finale and crowning glory. Complete with singsongs, political arguments and annoying drunken guests, its bittersweet apprehension of the fragility of celebration amid the passing of time has never been surpassed. The autobiographical one “Once upon a time and a very good time it was there was a moocow coming down along the road …” In the opening pages of A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man, a consciousness flexes and expands before our eyes. The language develops along with the young Stephen Dedalus as he begins to process his surroundings, from the mysteries of adult relationships to the brutal hierarchies of school. Joyce’s groundbreaking first novel goes on to follow his fictional alter ego as he grapples with the constrictions of Catholicism, family and social convention, and sets in motion his overwhelming need to escape his homeland and create something new. If you only read one “Apart from everything that you could possibly imagine, nothing much happens in Ulysses,” wrote Anne Enright in her recent celebration of its centenary. A young man and an older one wander Dublin, their paths repeatedly crossing, and a woman lies in bed thinking, on 16 June 1904. Each section pushes at least one new style of telling to the limits, as the narration flits from mind to mind. It is still revolutionary today, as well as being knotty, funny, humane and endlessly rewarding. If you’re in a rush “I prefer the poetry” would be a madly contrarian position, but the slim volumes Chamber Music and Pomes Penyeach will give you snatches of Joyce in seconds. They provide a fascinating angle on his literary development and showcase his musicality, moving from traditional romantic swoons to a fragile, sincere beauty. Pomes Penyeach was my own gateway to Joyce, after my dad, never usually a spontaneous present giver, left a copy in my room when I was 12. The delicate fragments sparked my interest in the oversized paperback of Ulysses that loomed over the Len Deightons and Le Carrés on his bookshelf. Now we always have something to talk about. The one to give a miss Stephen Hero, an earlier, more traditionally realistic treatment of the material that became Portrait of the Artist, was rescued by Joyce’s sister after he threw it on the fire. As an unfinished novel, it has an unimprovable last line – “He remained behind gazing into the canal near the feet of the body, looking at a fragment of paper on which was …” – but today it’s one for the scholars. The one to cheat a bit with Joyce teased that his “big long wide high deep dense prosework” Finnegans Wake, 17 years in the writing, would “keep the critics busy for 300 years”. If you read the final words, “A way a lone a last a loved a long the”, then turn back to page one – “rivverrun, past Eve and Adam’s, from swerve of shore to bend of bay …” – you are swept around again. It’s a Freudian family psychodrama crossed with the fall of man, taking in the history of Ireland, myths, legends, jokes, shame, desire, sin, cycles of time, death, chaos and resurrection. Ulysses tracked a single day; Finnegans Wake, a single night. Governed by dream logic, it’s written in a dream language built out of multilingual puns, compounds and nonsense words: more than 600 dense pages of the stuff. Joyce said you should simply read aloud if you get stuck, but if that doesn’t work you could try A Shorter Finnegans Wake, abridged by Joyce superfan Anthony Burgess. Burgess’s friendly interjections, illuminating what’s going on, give the reader the confidence to wander alone and to stir in personal preoccupations and associations. For more than any other book, perhaps, Finnegans Wake is created afresh each time – as Joyce put it: “I give readers the opportunity to supplement what they read with their own imagination.” It’s always a Work in Progress, to use the original title; we all dream the Wake.Environmentalists in Montana called it the “death watch”. Following years of financial losses one of the handful of remaining coal-fired power plants in the state appeared doomed, its likely fate offering a small but noteworthy victory in the effort to avoid disastrous climate change. But then a bitcoin mining company stepped in to resurrect it. The Hardin generating station, a 115-megawatt coal plant located a dozen miles from the historic site of the famous battle of Little Big Horn in southern Montana, was slated for closure in 2018 due to a lack of customers only to somehow limp on, operating on just 46 days in 2020. “We were just waiting for this thing to die,” said Anne Hedges, co-director of the Montana Environmental Information Center. “They were struggling and looking to close. It was on the brink. And then this cryptocurrency company came along.” In a deal struck in late 2020, Marathon, a bitcoin “mining” company, became the sole recipient of the power station’s electricity. It established an elongated data center on 20 acres of land beside the facility that is packed with more than 30,000 Antminer S19 units, a specialized computer that mines for bitcoin. Such thirst for power is common in crypto – globally bitcoin mining consumes more electricity than Norway, a country of 5.3 million people. As the bitcoin miners moved in last year, Hardin roared back to life. In the first nine months of 2021 alone, the plant’s boilers fired up on 236 separate days. Planet-heating emissions from the burning of Hardin’s coal soared too, with 187,000 tons of carbon dioxide emitted in the second quarter of last year, more than 5000% more than was expelled in the same period in 2020. In the third quarter, a further 206,000 tons of CO2 was emitted, a 905% increase on 2020, Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) data shows. Hardin was operating at “near full capacity”, Marathon said in a December update, with the data center producing around 34 bitcoin on 1 December. “I was horrified to see it all happen, it was a terrible turn of events,” said Hedges, who took to visiting the plant and photographing the new data center as it took shape, fans perched on its roof to help cool the humming computer hardware. “This isn’t helping old ladies from freezing to death, it’s to enrich a few people while destroying our climate for all of us. If you’re concerned about climate change you should have nothing to do with cryptocurrency, it’s a disaster for the climate.” Hardin is part of a wave of America’s “zombie” fossil fuel plants that have been brought back from the dead by cryptocurrency companies looking to feed the insatiable energy demands of their mining operations. China, formerly the epicenter of the bitcoin industry, effectively banished around half of the world’s currency miners last year and the resulting search for cheap power has seen companies eye struggling US power stations. In 2020, a mothballed coal plant in upstate New York was converted to run on gas and power a large-scale bitcoin mining operation, a move that owner Greenidge Generation said is “bringing a piece of the world’s digital future” to the state. Eric Adams, the new New York City mayor who said he would accept his first paycheck in bitcoin, last week criticised the environmental impact of crypto mining. Meanwhile, in western Pennsylvania, thousands of bitcoin mining computers have been packed in shipping containers alongside the Scrubgrass plant, which burns waste coal and was set to close before pivoting to bitcoin. And in Kentucky, a new bitcoin facility is being built next to the Big Rivers Electric Corporation, which owns and operates four coal-fired power plants. This tactic, crypto firms argue, generates local jobs – Kentucky aimed to lure currency miners by passing a law that exempts them from an electricity sales tax – and uses up excess power without straining the grid for homes and businesses. But critics point out that the enormous electricity consumption needed to sustain the virtual currency is fueling the climate crisis and now threatens a partial resurrection of coal in the US. “Coal and natural gas power plants used for crypto mining that would otherwise be sunsetting as we decarbonize adds yet more carbon to the atmosphere in an era when we should be cutting such emissions,” said Benjamin Jones, a specialist in natural resource economics at the University of New Mexico. “Crypto’s continued or expanding use of fossil fuel sourced electricity imposes significant environmental economic costs on society.” Jones said it is “troubling” to see that bitcoin’s already huge energy consumption is increasing and that most of this is coming from fossil fuels, despite some efforts by mining companies to increase the amount of clean energy they use – Marathon, the company that draws power from Hardin, has struck a separate agreement in Texas to take power from a wind farm. Even some early champions of bitcoin have balked at its energy use, with Elon Musk last year halting Tesla’s use of the crypto currency because, he said, the electric vehicle company is “concerned about rapidly increasing use of fossil fuels for bitcoin mining and transactions, especially coal, which has the worst emissions of any fuel”. Uber, the ride-hailing service, has said it won’t accept crypto payments until the climate impacts are reduced. A little more than a decade ago, it was possible to mine bitcoins with a single computer at home, using a negligible amount of electricity. The ultimate supply of bitcoins was limited and new bitcoins were awarded to those who could help validate transactions – the miners. The process of validation essentially involves playing a giant guessing game that gets more difficult the more miners participate. As interest in bitcoin has soared, fast, powerful computers, packed in warehouses, now have a better chance of winning the guessing game and being rewarded with several bitcoins, which are currently worth around $42,000 each. This race for bitcoin wealth gobbles up an enormous amount of electricity – around 0.5% of total global consumption. The energy used to mine bitcoin every 60 seconds would be enough to power the average American household for 17 years, while the annual electricity consumption for mining would be able to power all kettles used to boil water for tea in the UK for 28 years. While this usage has been criticized by climate activists, bitcoin miners claim it should be put in a different context. Fred Thiel, chief executive of Marathon, said that the movement of physical goods around the world, and even the use of washing machines in the US, uses more energy than bitcoin. “I understand the desire for some people to point bitcoin mining as the big bad boy, but on a comparison with every other industry out there, it’s insignificant,” he said in an interview. Thiel likens bitcoin mining to the transactions processed in data centers by companies such as Amazon and Google and claimed that the industry is moving quickly towards renewable energy – Marathon plans to phase out its use of coal next year – after finding its options were limited when miners had to quickly shift away from China. “Go back to 2020, renewable companies weren’t offering energy to bitcoin miners,” said Thiel. “Very few people wanted to even deal with bitcoin miners in the energy world. And so bitcoin miners spent time looking for stranded assets. And so the only way for us to mine was to find stranded energy, which we did in finding the Hardin plant.” It remains to be seen if bitcoin will make a significant move away from fossil fuels, but in the meantime it will likely come under increasing scrutiny over its appetite for fossil fuel-powered electricity. “We simply don’t know how emissions from bitcoin mining will look in five to 10 years,” said Jones, the University of New Mexico professor. “It seems likely, though, it will to continue to be a major consumer of energy going forward.”Why will I love it? The rubber plant, or Ficus elastica, serves all the looks without needing lots of attention. Its leaves are top tier glossy and firm, making them both attractive and hardy. Light or shade? Bright indirect light to low light. Where should I put it? In your front room on the floor, a side table or plant stand. Wherever you can admire its beauty and dust those leaves regularly. (Note: it is toxic to cats and dogs.) How do I keep it alive? This species is very easy to care for. You might want to mist the leaves in summer as they can be prone to drying. Clean the leaves gently with tepid water and a damp sponge to remove any dust – this improves the plant’s ability to photosynthesise; there is no need to use leaf shine. Avoid draughts or sudden drops in temperature below 12C. Did you know… In its natural habitat it can grow up to almost 30 metres; indoors it reaches a more manageable three metres. These are plants of enduring longevity, surviving 25 to 50 years indoors or several hundred years in the wild.Great news for Star Trek fans, though perhaps not hardcore “Trekkers”. The long-running sci-fi saga is returning to the big screen with a fourth episode featuring Chris Pine’s Captain Kirk and Zachary Quinto’s Spock, along with the duo’s various Starship Enterprise crewmates. Simon Pegg’s Scotty, Zoe Saldana’s Uhura, Karl Urban’s Bones and John Cho’s Sulu are all tipped to return for a movie to be directed by WandaVision’s Matt Shakman, provided deals can be done with agents. According to Variety, Paramount hopes the project could be shooting by the end of this year. The only question is why the studio didn’t get this one zooming past the moon a lot earlier. Justin Lin’s Star Trek Beyond (the third film in the rebooted series) may have struggled at the box office in 2016, certainly for such an expensive, high-profile effort. And let’s not forget how much some fans hated 2013’s Star Trek Into Darkness. But generally, the series and its cast have been well-received by critics and audiences. So why plan another film now, especially as Star Trek hardly needs the big screen to thrive in the era of streaming? Small screen spin-offs such as Picard and Star Trek: Discovery have found their audiences, while Paramount was so nervous about making a fourth instalment that it reportedly carried out market research into whether fans really wanted to see Pine and Quinto back on the bridge (luckily, they did). Three years ago, an attempt to bring back the series floundered when the studio was unable to strike a deal with Chris Hemsworth to reprise his brief cameo as Kirk’s dad from 2009’s Star Trek, which suggests the men in suits didn’t believe a new episode could work without parachuting in a star name best known for an entirely different franchise (in Hemsworth’s case, the Marvel Cinematic Universe). But perhaps Paramount has finally worked out how fortunate it is to have a film series that could easily be at the beginning of its run rather than the end. The genius of JJ Abrams’ 2009 Star Trek (much to the chagrin of certain fans, who didn’t want time travel involved) was that it completely rebooted the timeline, giving the series permission to go in any direction it saw fit. If Kirk and co wanted their next adventure to be a psychedelic journey to the home-planet of the Tribbles in the company of those dodgy aliens from the (racially insensitive) Next Generation episode Code of Honor, they could do so without any worries about damaging the legacy of previous shows and movies. By comparison with Star Wars, the possibilities are endless. Abrams himself managed to foul up the most recent Star Wars film, largely because he couldn’t work out how to make it interesting without cannibalising all the good stuff from George Lucas’s original trilogy – despite that tale having already been told. From a storytelling point of view, Star Trek finds itself in a much better place, with its main participants conceivably right at the beginning of their adventures. To end up in anything like such a positive position, Star Wars would have to completely recast Luke Skywalker, Han Solo and Princess Leia, and find them something to do other than defeat Darth Vader and blow up various Death Stars. This will almost certainly happen one day, but it would go down about as well as a Disney+ spin-off about Jar Jar Binks if producers were to try it right now. Trekkers, of course, detest that Abrams rebooted Star Trek to make it more like Star Wars. Gone are the plotlines dealing with philosophical questions about the nature of mankind and its place in the universe. In their place are madcap space battles and helter-skelter sprints through alien jungles. It turns out that granting film-makers the freedom to boldly go where no screenwriter had gone before made for some of the greatest space-opera set pieces in modern cinema. Meanwhile, the Star Wars franchise (despite the brilliant Mandalorian) continues to underestimate fans’ appetite for fresh stories set a long time ago in that galaxy far, far away. The Book of Boba Fett is just the latest example of producers dredging up characters that should have been left to get digested by the sarlacc. We can only hope that Patty Jenkins’ forthcoming Rogue Squadron will learn from that show’s many mistakes. So let’s welcome back Star Trek, and hope those fee negotiations go well. If this isn’t a saga whose moment has come, my name’s Nurse Chapel.In the jaw-dropping saga of disgraced health-tech entrepreneur Elizabeth Holmes, there was one aspect that attracted most of the public’s attention: her voice. Despite lying about her “revolutionary” pin-prick blood test technology that failed to work, then duping her patients with false diagnoses (she was convicted of four counts of defrauding investors earlier this year) it was her appearance – the Steve Jobs-esque black turtleneck jumpers and signature red lipstick – and her deep baritone, masculine-affected voice that people really zoned in on. So when The Dropout, the TV adaptation of Holmes’s life story – based on Rebecca Jarvis’s 2019 podcast of the same name – was first announced with Amanda Seyfried in the lead role, the internet was abuzz. Would Seyfried do “the voice”? Yes, as it turns out. But while this vocal affectation might have been a joke to social media, to Melissa, who has worked in the upper management of a big tech company for the past 20 years, it’s something that rings true. “I have absolutely lived that,” Melissa – who, like all the women in tech interviewed for this article, asked for anonymity – says. “When I want to be heard at my work, I have to talk slower and deeper. If you hit too high of a pitch, they [the men] don’t hear you. If I don’t think my voice will be listened to, I’ll call a male colleague, one of my allies, prior to the meeting and say: ‘Hey, I’m going to ping you in the background, say this when I tell you to.’ They’ll be my voice.” With the news agenda for the past decade being full of the ethically dubious behaviour of some of the male leaders of the tech world, scant attention has been paid to the women in the industry, who make up just 19% of the tech workforce in the UK. The same is true reflected in pop culture. While the Tech Bro villain is now a well-worn trope in everything from the recent Matrix reboot to Succession and the video game send-up Free Guy, and we’ve had multiple portrayals of Steve Jobs, Bill Gates and Mark Zuckerberg, there’s been hardly any representation of women in tech on the small screen. With a smattering of comedy roles of women working lower down the tech chain (the brilliantly sarky Dobby from Peep Show or blagger Jen from The IT Crowd) to women actually making power moves in the industry (riot grrrl programmer Cameron in Halt and Catch Fire or whistleblower coder Nanette in the Black Mirror episode USS Callister), stories of women in tech have historically been as rare as a female CEO in Palo Alto. However, this year, TV’s gaze is finally turning to the female power-players of Silicon Valley. Alongside The Dropout, dramatisations of Sheryl Sandberg’s role as COO of Facebook (to be played by Claire Foy in Doomsday Machine) and Arianna Huffington’s position on the board at Uber (Uma Thurman, in Showtime’s Super Pumped) will hit the screen later in 2022. The onscreen depiction of these highly ambitious – some say ruthless – women will be drawn from the books that have inspired the series: Sandberg is “a master manager and delegator … who felt she was put on this planet to scale organisations” (from Sheera Frenkel and Cecilia Kang’s An Ugly Truth: Inside Facebook’s Battle for Domination); while Huffington leads with “charm and persuasiveness” (as per Super Pumped’s author, Mike Isaac). But do these representations reflect what it’s really like for women working in Big Tech? Ex-Spotify employee Simone explains: “I think what links these women – and most women in the industry – is that you’ve got to be smart, strategic and driven, as it’s a very tough environment. “The big six [Facebook, Amazon, Netflix, Alphabet, Amazon and Microsoft] are where everyone wants to work and the returns are huge – you get a big salary and with all the equity … I feel like working in tech is the new banking, especially with all the shares – if you join a startup at the right time you can make millions.” Therese, who works for Facebook (now rebranded Meta), agrees: “There are unbelievable benefits to working at Facebook, the salary for starters. But really, I’m interested in being part of something that’s connected to the future, however potentially damaging that future might be. There’s something very interesting about being part of that conversation.” It has taken so long to tell the women’s stories, Simone believes, for the simple fact that it’s still an anomaly for women to be high up in big tech companies. Someone such as Holmes is a “unicorn” in a double meaning: both in the tech sense (her company Theranos became a startup with a potential valuation of $1bn); and because, as a female founder, she was as rare as the mythical beast. Her ability to talk the talk was proved by her – mainly older, male – investors, who included Rupert Murdoch, Larry Ellison and George Schultz, elevating her to a role few women have ever experienced in the industry. “I’m not exactly sure why there are so few female founders,” Simone wonders. “But in this culture it’s all about risk. Building a product is a risk, joining a startup is a risk and maybe as women we want more safety in our careers?” Slogans such as “Move fast – break things!” and “Be brave!” line the walls at Facebook but, in reality, women are rarely permitted to exhibit those types of behaviour. To be seen as impulsive or demanding perfection as a man in big tech is to be lauded – creative genius at work here! – but they’re often seen as negative qualities in a woman, who would be thought of as unreliable and branded “bossy”. In Simone’s experience, even in Spotify – a company founded in Sweden, where there is a big push for gender equality – women are still fighting to get a look in higher up the chain: “In most of the inner circles, it’s still always men who are CEO or CFO, and the token woman is head of HR or chief of operations. Women aren’t decision-making on company strategy or direction, they’re in nurturing, people-facing roles. Even Arianna [Huffington] came into Uber to clean up culture and operations.” “Oh fuck, yes, it’s still a total boys’ club,” says Melissa. “The worst are the men who think they’re enlightened but when it comes down to it they’re not. It’s not my job to teach you how to be the good guy. Go and get training! Go and figure out your own unconscious bias!” After #MeToo, there seems to have been a concerted effort by tech companies to put women in higher positions. This can sometimes come across as “female-washing” of problematic brands, says Francesca Sobande, a lecturer in digital media studies at Cardiff University. “That’s not to suggest that I think the appointment of women in certain roles in big tech is solely based on their gender identity in any way, but I do think that organisations are hyper-aware of what it means when a woman becomes a figurehead of a company that is typically associated with male-dominated spaces.” We have seen this on TV, she adds, through storylines such as Shiv Roy in Succession, brought in to chair a Waystar Royco conference to soothe shareholders’ worries about the company’s sexual misconduct issues, or when she obsequiously tries to be an ally to Gerri over those dick pics sent by her brother Roman, in what’s really a bid to take him down instead. “[In] a show like Succession there is a risk sometimes that these sorts of conversations overlook the agency of women,” says Sobande. “A character like Shiv knows exactly what she’s doing when she’s making certain decisions that relate to the optics of gender and power. “It’s important when thinking about these things to always acknowledge the agency of women within this, and what it means for a woman to sometimes knowingly participate in or be complicit in these types of power dynamics that oppress other women.” This oppression of other women is seen offscreen, too, Therese says: “I’ve definitely experienced women trying to emulate the men of Silicon Valley. I’ve seen some terrible things, and it can really crush you.” Therese remembers one senior woman who was manipulative and “should not have been in power”. “If I’m being kind about it, it was probably her reaction to the highly competitive system. The pressure of being constantly reviewed in the six-monthly 360 reviews – where overtime is encouraged and your bonus is based on it – it starts to affect how you feel about yourself, as a person, and it affects everything. It starts to influence your feelings about your self-identity and self-worth. It’s a massively, massively entrenched system.” What is telling in previous TV representations of women in tech, says Sobande, is what is overlooked, from the fact that these stories are all solely focused on white women to them not including “a critique of the power dynamics and the often oppressive capitalist structure that they’re implicated in”. For those few “unicorns’’ who make it through to the top in Silicon Valley, it might feel like a hollow victory, given the accusations that many of these companies are entrenched in ethically questionable behaviour – manipulating users’ emotions; allowing conspiracy theories to spread – in the name of profit. Sobande adds: “In some pop culture portrayals we see confusion for a representation of any woman in a position of power with it symbolising some form of feminism. With these upcoming series, I’m intrigued to what extent we’re going to see this ‘girlboss’ narrative coming through, and whether or not there’s going to be [an implication of] a feminist sentiment to any of what is depicted.” Simone also wonders if we can ever square the dichotomy of working for certain corporations that appear to be morally bankrupt yet claim to empower women: “I’m so interested to see Doomsday Machine because of the juxtaposition of Facebook’s morals and Sheryl [Sandberg]’s heavy messaging about women ‘leaning in’ [the concept at the centre of Sandberg’s bestselling 2013 nonfiction book]. I want to get into her psyche about how you balance those two things: promoting women but in a company that does so much destruction. But it’s not just her. I think sometimes women are the ones who are expected to be the ethical ones in the industry. “I’m fascinated by it.” As are those of us outside big tech, too. Some names have been changed. The Dropout airs from 3 March on Disney+ in the UK and Hulu in the US. Super Pumped airs in the US from 27 February on Showtime, with a UK broadcaster still TBC.Are we doing enough – or even the right things – to combat antisemitism? The latest report from the Community Security Trust (CST) records the highest ever annual total of anti-Jewish hate incidents, 24% above the previous peak reached in 2019. Politicians and government officials haven’t ignored the problem – far from it. But, despite their efforts, the number of antisemitic incidents continues to rise, British Jews have become more fearful and the appearance of antisemitism itself reveals depths of ignorance and confusion. One element that makes this so difficult is the strange mix of consensus and controversy that marks public debate on the subject. The consensus lies at Westminster. Both the home secretary, Priti Patel, and her Labour shadow, Yvette Cooper, responded to the CST report with expressions of alarm and a call to action. At a moment when racism, so central to the culture wars that divide our public sphere, usually provokes disagreement, antisemitism unites the political class as little else. Unity in the face of antisemitism is remarkable in another sense. Forty years ago, Margaret Thatcher’s government was indifferent when the Board of Deputies of British Jews proposed erecting a Holocaust memorial on the parliamentary estate. It had nothing to do with Britain, according to the foreign secretary, Lord Carrington. Today by contrast, education about the Holocaust and its memorialisation are widely seen as a remedy for antisemitism. All three main political parties are committed to building a Holocaust memorial next to parliament. The Holocaust is the only compulsory subject in the history national curriculum for pupils aged 13 to 14 and the government funds visits to Poland so schoolchildren can learn lessons from Auschwitz. Reassurance and support for the Jewish community extends further. The government provides financial support for security at synagogues and schools. In 2016, Britain was the first country to adopt the controversial International Holocaust Remembrance Alliance’s ( IHRA) working definition of antisemitism. The education secretary, Nadhim Zahawi, like his predecessor, has declared his determination to work tirelessly to push universities to adopt and use the document. Antisemitism seems to be one sort of racism that the government is ready to address. Yet the consensus at Westminster reveals only one part of the picture. There is turbulence elsewhere. Although the Labour party has sought to tackle antisemitism, deep divisions remain in some constituency parties. At the same time, the focus of the campaign against antisemitism has shifted from Labour to the universities. Some universities hold out against government pressure to adopt the IHRA working definition. Jewish students and their allies welcome its adoption as vindication and protection in face of antisemitism on campus. Other students and staff, usually on the left and usually sympathetic to the Palestinians’ campaign for equality and justice, see the working definition as a threat to political and academic freedoms. In addition to these overtly political conflicts, allegations of antisemitism erupt in an astonishing variety of locations, from the stands of Tottenham Hotspur to the Royal Court theatre. So what can we do better? One frequent misconception is that the problem we face is one of antisemites. Of course, there are such people, and some carry a violent threat – but in Britain they are a minority, as the important work of the Institute for Jewish Policy Research shows. Presented with eight antisemitic statements, just 0.1% of those surveyed agreed with all eight. The problem is that antisemitism is a diffuse phenomenon. The same survey found that 30% of respondents agreed with at least one of the antisemitic statements. Antisemitism is part of the culture in which we all live and through which we make sense of the world. It is best conceived of as a reservoir of stereotypes and narratives, which accumulate over time, and from which people draw with ease, whether they intend to or not. This is why we find antisemitism expressed from positions right across the political spectrum and across society. For the most part our problem is antisemitism, not antisemites. In order to combat antisemitism effectively a wide range of groups and individuals need to recognise how they are susceptible to it. And this is one reason why the current focus on the Holocaust as a vehicle for antisemitism education should be reconsidered. Despite the effort that goes into Holocaust education, recent research by UCL’s Centre for Holocaust Education shows an alarming level of ignorance among students of what antisemitism is. We should not be surprised. There is a vast disjuncture between the Holocaust – the state-sanctioned murder of 6 million Jews – and the sort of everyday antisemitism experienced in Britain today. There are many excellent reasons to promote knowledge about the Holocaust and to foster the memory of its victims, but we must find better ways to educate about antisemitism. Jews need allies as they combat antisemitism. Here the picture is mixed. Jewish communal organisations have been successful in securing support among the political class. This is good, but it is not enough. More needs to be done, and not only by Jews, to build bridges between the struggle against anti-Jewish racism and other anti-racist campaigns. The CST collaborates with Tell Mama, which addresses anti-Muslim hatred, and together, they produced a booklet for all victims of hate crime. Several Jewish organisations have shown principled support for refugees in the face of the government’s nationality and borders bill. These are initiatives to build on. The CST report states that the landscape of UK-based antisemitism in 2021 is “largely defined by responses to conflict in Israel and Palestine”. Support for Palestinians within the left, among non-Jewish minorities and in universities, too often runs alongside indifference to antisemitism, especially when the political class is seen to be quick to respond to anti-Jewish racism. Where it exists, there is an urgent need to challenge this damaging blindspot. In this context, the preoccupation of the government and Jewish communal bodies with the IHRA working definition is counter-productive. The working definition has become tainted by its repeated abuse. Too often it is used to tarnish opinions that are deeply unwelcome to most Israel-supporting Jews, but which are not antisemitic. It leads many to argue that the IHRA working definition is more a device to protect Israel from criticism than a device to protect Jews from antisemitism. In the face of this scepticism, the Jerusalem Declaration on Antisemitism, published a year ago (and to which I contributed) can make a valuable contribution. The declaration provides clarity on when criticism of Israel and anti-Zionism lapses into antisemitism, and it aligns the struggle against antisemitism with anti-racism more broadly. It was developed by a group of leading scholars and meets a growing challenge: to provide clear guidance on how to identify and fight antisemitism while protecting free expression. Despite being anathematised by those who would like the IHRA working definition to enjoy a monopoly position, the Jerusalem Declaration can contribute to building the widest possible coalition against antisemitism. Over the past 30 years, Jewish people have become increasingly prepared to speak out against antisemitism. This welcome and historic development owes something to the wider context of anti-racist activism, which established new norms from which Jews have taken inspiration. At the same time, the earnest response from senior politicians and civil servants has fallen short. One route to further progress will be to repair the frayed connections between the struggle against antisemitism and anti-racist politics more broadly. David Feldman is the director of the Birkbeck Institute for the Study of AntisemitismThis week a peer-reviewed study confirmed what many have suspected for years: major oil companies are not fully backing up their clean energy talk with action. Now the PR and advertising firms that have been creating the industry’s greenwashing strategies for decades face a reckoning over whether they will continue serving big oil. The study compared the rhetoric and actions on climate and clean energy from 2009 to 2020 from the world’s four largest oil companies – ExxonMobil, Chevron, Shell and BP. Writing in the journal Plos One, researchers from Tohoku University and Kyoto University in Japan conclude that the companies are not, in fact, transitioning their business models to clean energy. “The magnitude of investments and actions does not match discourse,” they write. “Until actions and investment behavior are brought into alignment with discourse, accusations of greenwashing appear well-founded.” Although this isn’t the first time that oil companies have been accused of overstating their climate bona fides, it has never been set out quite so comprehensively, according to environmental sociologist Dr Robert Brulle at Brown University. “This is the first robust, empirical, peer-reviewed analysis of the activities – of the speech, business plans, and the actual investment patterns – of the major oil companies regarding their support or opposition to the transition to a sustainable society,” he says. Brulle says PR firms and advertising agencies that have created campaigns around the oil firms’ net-zero claims are now on notice. “There’s no plausible deniability that they are unaware of the activities of these companies after this paper has been published,” he says. “This paper clearly shows that these companies aren’t walking the talk.” That forces the hand of PR firms such as Edelman – which made headlines late last year for making big climate pledges while also working for oil majors like Exxon and Shell – and trade groups such as the American Fuel and Petrochemical Manufacturers, which have a reputation for blocking climate policy. At a company meeting in December, the firm’s chief executive, Richard Edelman, told employees that the company would not walk away from fossil-fuel clients, but that it would “reject projects that delay progress toward a future with net-zero greenhouse gas emissions”. In the face of this week’s report, it would be hard to say that any oil major meets that standard. Casey Norton, a spokesperson for Exxon, said: “ExxonMobil has long acknowledged that climate change is real and poses serious risks. In addition to our substantial investments in next generation technologies, ExxonMobil also advocates for responsible climate-related policies.” “These claims of investments in clean energy are yet another case of words not matching actions,” Gregory Trencher, one of the study’s authors, says. Trencher notes that Exxon invested only 0.23% of its total capital expenditure in low-carbon energy production and development from 2010 to 2018, and that the company stated in an April 2021 energy and carbon summary report that it does not invest in renewables. As for acknowledging climate science, Trencher says that makes up “only a small part of our study – specifically, it is but one of 25 indicators studied”. Edelman did not reply to a request for comment by press time. Neither did the PR firm WPP, which has done extensive work for BP and Chevron. The New York Times’ T Brand Studio, which has created campaigns for both Exxon and Shell amplifying their net-zero claims, also declined to comment on how this study might play into that work. The Washington Post also declined to respond to questions about whether its WP Creative Group would continue to create campaigns for Chevron, Shell or the American Petroleum Institute, in light of such extensive documentation that previous campaigns were misleading. According to Brulle, it’s unlikely that PR and advertising firms will be able to serve the fossil-fuel industry as they have in the past. “It doesn’t seem to me that they have the room to do that any more,” he said. “They would have to basically engage in bad-faith advertising and greenwashing to continue to support these organizations as actually engaging in climate action.” The greenwashing study comes just a week after House Democrats Katie Porter and Raúl Grijalva sent letters to six PR firms asking for more details on their work for fossil fuel companies, particularly with respect to campaigns that misled the public on climate change. The House oversight committee has indicated that it will also question PR firms as part of its investigation into climate disinformation. Meanwhile, ExxonMobil is due back in court in Massachusetts early next month to fight charges that it defrauded residents of that state on climate. Similar fraud charges have been leveled at all of the oil majors via an ever-growing list of cases, including those filed in Minnesota, the District of Columbia, Delaware and Vermont. But Christine Arena, a former Edelman vice-president who now runs her own social impact production company Generous Films, says climate fraud can’t happen without the help of the PR and advertising industry. “PR and ad firms are central players in what we look at as the influence industry,” she says. “There’s a lot of money spent, and emphasis on external facing advertising, marketing, and promotion that helps prop up the fossil fuel industry’s social license to operate and give the world a sense that, to quote API, ‘We’re on it.’ We don’t need regulation. We’re good corporate actors.” Brulle says the media should also take note of this study, especially when an oil company chief executive makes a claim around their company’s climate commitments. “Good, critical reporting would have to challenge the statements of these fossil fuel companies,” he says.A California lawmaker wants to increase the allowance that people released from prison receive to cover basic needs for the first time in nearly 50 years. Sydney Kamlager, a state senator representing Los Angeles, is introducing legislation Friday to bump up the “gate money” – funds that people released from state prisons are given – from $200 to nearly $2,600. “This is really about making sure that when people get out, we are not perpetuating a cycle of economic violence,” said Kamlager, whose office exclusively shared with the Guardian plans to introduce the new bill. “We have got to stop legislating poverty.” This is the first major effort to increase gate money in recent memory. The roughly 600,000 people released from federal and state prisons each year are usually offered a pittance – if anything – to buy a bus ticket home, or a first meal, clothing and toiletries. California currently provides a debit card loaded with at most $200, though people serving short sentences receive even less. It already offers more than other states, an investigation by the Marshall Project found. Colorado, Texas, Florida and some other states provide $100 and Louisiana and Alabama offer just $10. California last increased the amount of gate money it offers in 1973 when $200 could cover a month’s rent. “Now that money is simply insufficient to survive,” said Samual Nathaniel Brown, the co-founder of the Anti-Violence Safety and Accountability Project. When Brown was released in December after being incarcerated for 24 years, the first thing he bought was a meal for his wife, his two daughters, his sister and his niece. It was a way to thank them for their love and support throughout his imprisonment. They got Korean barbecue, and the bill was about $140. “And there went my gate money,” he said. Brown considers himself blessed that his family picked him up from prison, and he has been able to depend on them after his release. For those without people to lean on, the $200 can be a taunt – or a sign to simply give up, he said. Re-entering society after years or decades behind bars can be rough, with scarce housing and job opportunities available for people with a criminal record. Parole requirements, obligations to family, outstanding debts and health needs stack up quickly, and can be a steep hill to climb. More and broader reforms are required, said Kamlager and the activists she is working with – including of the low wages paid for exploitative prison labor. But upping gate money is also urgently necessary, she said. People often enter prison impoverished and are being thrown into poverty upon release, Kamlager said. The system “perpetuates a fall deeper into desperation for folks who have just been released”, she added. Kamlager is proposing increasing the allowance to $2,590 after consulting with federal data on the cost of food and housing, and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) Living Wage Calculator, to find the average monthly expenses for a single adult with no children in 2021. Starting in 2024, the bill specifies that the allowance should also be adjusted annually to account for inflation. Kamlager pushed to introduce the bill on Friday, which is the last day to broach new bills during this legislative cycle. It costs California more than $8,800 to keep someone incarcerated each month, the senator noted – and increasing gate money allowance would cost the state less than pushing those just released back into the prison system. Kamlager said she decided to introduce the legislation after receiving a letter from an incarcerated person, asking, “How do you expect any of us to make it if we’re getting out with just $200?”. “It struck a chord,” she said “In 2022, when the price for a gallon of gas in Los Angeles is almost $5, it is unconscionable that the state of California still gives just $200 in allowance for folks who are getting out of prison,” she added. Experts view a person’s first 72 hours after release as a vulnerable, crucial time that can determine whether or not they end up back in prison, said Amika Mota, the policy director for the Sister Warriors Freedom Coalition, a group that is working with Kamlager’s office on the bill. In a criminal justice system that purports to uphold public safety, providing a pittance to people when they are released is “counterproductive public safety”, Brown added. “Not having enough money, it makes people think ‘I need to do something fast.’ And that’s the same type of thinking that led most women and men to prison to begin with.” For mothers leaving incarceration, $2,600 could offer a chance at finding secure housing and reuniting with their children, Mota said. Amid the pandemic, when re-entry after release has been especially perilous and chaotic for many, a pilot program by the nonprofit Center for Employment Opportunities (CEO) has been distributing $2,750 in cash assistance to people leaving prisons all over the US. An early evaluation found that participants were able to use the funds to buy food, pay for transportation and contribute to caring for families. Some participants said the money helped lift them out of homelessness. Meanwhile, Rasheed Stanley-Lockheart, a reentry director for the Ahimsa Collective, a restorative justice non-profit said, “I’ve seen guys come out holding that $200 in their hand, and it’s almost like they don’t know what to do with it because they’re scared.” “We need much more than that to survive,” he said.Until recently, the US-born freestyle skier Eileen Gu – or Gu Ailing as she is known in China – was one of the rising numbers of Chinese Americans straddling the two countries. They are comfortable operating between the two cultures and systems, taking pride in their heritage as well as their upbringing. Gu, now 18, was born in San Francisco to an American father and a Chinese mother. She’s a big fan of Chinese dumplings and, every summer, she flew back to Beijing to attend cram school for mathematics. “When I’m in China, I’m Chinese and when I go to America, I’m American,” she once said. But as the geopolitical mood between China and America began to shift, Gu was also caught in the middle between nationalism, identity and loyalty on both sides of the Pacific. While she was lauded in China, for which she has won three Olympic medals, she was denounced by a Fox News analyst as “ungrateful”, saying that her “reverse migration” was “shameful”. In 2019, Gu switched her sport allegiance from the US to China. She said at the time: “The opportunity to help inspire millions of young people where my mum was born, during the 2022 Beijing Olympic Winter Games is a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to help promote the sport I love.” Since early this year, questions have repeatedly been raised about her citizenship. China does not recognise dual-nationals, and under Rule 41 of the Olympic charter, Gu must be a Chinese citizen in order to compete for the country. And if this is the case, analysts say, she would not be able to retain a US passport simultaneously. In recent months, as Beijing doubles down its promotion of Chinese identity, it has required its broadcasters to scrutinise the citizenships of celebrities who are active in mainland China. This move has resulted in some high-profile actors renouncing their non-Chinese nationalities. Gu has always dodged the question about her citizenship in public. In response to a Guardian question about her critics, she replied: “I’m an 18-year-old out here living my best life. I’m not going to waste my time trying to placate people who are uneducated, and don’t experience the gratitude and love I have on a daily basis.” Her answer won her rounds of applause on Chinese social media. Nationalists praised Gu for her ability to speak both languages fluently and for showing her standout intellect so elegantly. The official China Daily newspaper said her response to her critics should be given “full marks”. In China, Gu is a symbol of national pride and the face of almost a dozen brands and products. They range from China Mobile and Bank of China to the US brand Victoria’s Secret, which has a big ambition in a gigantic consumer market. She’s also a regular name discussed on the social media platform Weibo, with adoring commenters calling her an “ice-snow female goddess”. But despite the outpouring of adulation in China, Gu is also walking a fine line and her future remains uncertain in the country she now represents. Last week, Hu Xijin, a recently retired editor in chief of the influential nationalist tabloid Global Times warned Chinese media to tone down their praise for Gu because it was still unclear which country she would like to associate with when she was older. “China’s national honour and credibility should not be put at stake in the case of Gu Ailing,” Hu wrote, adding that although she saw herself as Chinese and American, the reality may not turn out to be the way she wished as the bilateral relations between China and the US continued to deteriorate. Robert Daly, the director of the Kissinger Institute on China and the United States at the Woodrow Wilson Centre in Washington, agreed. Daly said Hu’s warning represented a growing strand of thinking in both China and the US that it was increasingly common for those with dual heritage to feel pressured into taking a side. “For many years, a large number of Chinese Americans have been free to move back and forth between both countries, benefiting both and benefiting from both without consequences,” said Daly. “But the ground has shifted under their feet.” Daly said Gu’s saga could have been a simple story when the framing of the bilateral relations was dominated by “engagement”: an American athlete who decided to move to China and won Olympic medals. But instead, the question of her citizenship has become a subject of sensitivity in the current geopolitical climate. “And Gu’s silence caused suspicion,” Daly said. “This Olympics should have put the contribution of Chinese American athletes like Gu under the spotlight – to highlight their role as a bridge to both nations, but unfortunately it has turned out to be otherwise.”From Zorro’s mask to Rocky’s shorts, and from Madonna’s conical bra to Ringo Starr’s papal attire in the 1975 musical Lisztomania, some of the many costumes that have stitched together the worlds of film and fashion have gone on show in a Madrid exhibition overseen by Jean Paul Gaultier. The enfant terrible of French fashion, now silver-haired and a couple of months shy of 70, says the idea is to look at how the two creative spheres have fed and influenced each other while simultaneously serving as mirrors of social, sexual and cultural change. His show, simply titled Cine y Moda (Cinema and Fashion), is a joint project between La Cinémathèque Française and Spain’s La Caixa Foundation. In five thematic sections and through 100 garments, 90 film clips and 125 posters, stills, sketches and photographs, male and female archetypes are constructed, celebrated, questioned and deconstructed. “I think that fashion shows represent life and society – and the evolution of society – and so does cinema,” Gaultier said at the launch on Thursday. “In this exhibition you can see how, little by little, fashion and film reflect what’s going on in society and how the world is evolving. You can see what’s going on and how men and women are evolving.” Two films occupy a central place in the show’s examination of the interplay between the two art forms. The first is Jacques Becker’s 1945 melodrama Falbalas, also known as Paris Frills. Set in a couture house, the film inspired Gaultier to enter the world of fashion when he saw it at the age of 13. The second is Who Are You, Polly Maggoo?, William Klein’s fashion industry satire from 1966. Most of the items on display will be rather more familiar to visitors. The costume Christopher Reeve wore in Superman IV is there, as is Dolph Lundgren’s minimal, belty He-Man get-up from Masters of the Universe. The dress, jacket and pumps worn by Sharon Stone in Basic Instinct’s infamous interrogation scene put in an appearance, and so does the famous conical bra Gaultier designed for Madonna’s Blonde Ambition tour. The designer’s explanation, printed alongside the bra, speaks for itself: “My conical breasts are almost an erotic aggression and paradoxically an armature that protects her at the same time; it is a woman who ‘harasses’ with her breasts.” The show also takes in Gaultier’s collaborations with directors as diverse as Pedro Almodóvar and Luc Besson. The Frenchman said he had been a fan of Almodóvar long before the director suggested they work together. “He showed women and La Movida [Spain’s post-Franco 1980s counter-cultural movement] and that spirit of freedom that we also saw in Paris,” said Gaultier. “He showed women not as objects but as strong women with character, like Rossy de Palma and Victoria Abril.” His influence on the look of Besson’s The Fifth Element is illustrated by his sketches for the costumes worn by Bruce Willis and Chris Tucker. Elsewhere are dresses worn by Catherine Deneuve and Fanny Ardant in François Ozon’s 8 Women, a cockerel-adorned biker jacket that pays homage to Marlon Brando’s iconic original from The Wild One, and Gaultier’s take on Alex’s bowler hat and overalls from A Clockwork Orange. Elisa Durán, deputy general director of La Caixa Foundation, described the exhibition as a celebration of the symbiosis between two artistic worlds. “This is about the attraction that fashion’s always held for cinema, and about the attraction that the cinema’s always held for fashion,” she said. “This world of models and shows and the creations of great designers has been a source of inspiration for cinema almost since its origins.” Gaultier, whose passion for film and fashion remains boundless, said his celluloid escapades had been both enjoyable and instructive. “The first thing I learned was that I could never make a film because it’s such a difficult job,” he said. “Even if you have a visual or aesthetic sense, you have to direct the actors and worry about the story.” Cine y Moda is at the CaixaForum in Madrid until 5 June 2022Aston Villa will expect to beat a Watford side adrift in the relegation zone and without a win in 11 matches. Roy Hodgson’s side have also rather alarmingly failed to score in their past four matches, the last three of which Hodgson has presided over. No new manager bounce to speak of, then, but Ismaïla Sarr’s rest after the Africa Cup of Nations and his hoped-for return to the starting lineup may give Villa’s Emiliano Martínez a challenge. Villa have been inconsistent all season and Steven Gerrard will surely want them to flex their superior quality to pick up a much-needed win. They are unlikely to drop as low as a fight to save their season but Villa should be aiming higher than current form has them. Graham Searles Saturday 3pm Venue Villa Park Last season n/a Referee Robert Jones This season G7 Y21 R0 3 cards/game Odds H 11-17 A 5-1 D 3-1 ASTON VILLA Subs from Steer, Sinisalo, Carney Chukwuemeka, Archer, Young, Smith, Olsen, Hause, Bailey, Trezeguet, Douglas Luiz Doubtful None Injured Traoré (hamstring, 26 Feb), Nakamba (knee, Apr) Suspended Konsa (last of two) Discipline Y51 R2 Form LLDWDL Leading scorers Ramsey, Watkins 5 WATFORD Subs from Elliot, Bachmann, Fletcher, Gosling, Hernández, Pedro, Kabasele, Rose, Sema, Sierralta, Louza, Masina, Ngakia, Troost-Ekong, Baah, Etebo, Kalu, Kucka Doubtful Etebo (hamstring) Injured Nkoulou (hamstring, Mar) Suspended None Discipline Y42 R2 Form LDLDLL Leading scorer Dennis 8Today in a nutshell: Norway set a record gold medal haul as the fallout from the way Kamila Valieva’s coaching team treated her continues Next up: There is bobsleigh, ice hockey and curling still to come today. On Saturday, Team GB will win their first medal of these Games – but will it be silver or gold? Eileen Gu of China wrote a new chapter of Olympic history by soaring to a third medal at these Games. The 18-year-old won gold in the freeski halfpipe final, adding to her big air gold and slopestyle silver to complete an unprecedented hat-trick. Canada filled out the podium as the defending Olympic champion, Cassie Sharpe, won silver three points clear of teammate Rachael Karker. “It has been two straight weeks of the most intense highs and lows I’ve ever experienced in my life,” said Gu, who became the youngest person to win three individual medals in the history of the Winter Olympics. “It has changed my life forever.” In the men’s ski cross it was Switzerland who took two medals. Ryan Regez grabbed a lead early and never let go. Teammate Alex Fiva finished second and Sergey Ridzik of the Russian Olympic Committee (ROC) took bronze. Sean Ingle described yesterday’s figure skating final as chaotic and cruel. A tearful Kamila Valieva slipped to fourth, Anna Shcherbakova quietly won gold and runner-up Alexandra Trusova wept and shouted at her coaches as ROC sealed a one-two. Kaori Sakamoto took bronze for Japan. Perhaps the least edifying sight of the entire Beijing Games, after all the pressure that has been heaped on Valieva’s shoulders, was her coach, Eteri Tutberidze, barking in her ear after the 15-year-old had fallen twice during her routine. “Why did you let it go?” she demanded. “Explain to me, why. Why did you stop fighting? You let it go after that axel. Why?” For once, the International Olympic Committee (IOC) president Thomas Bach has broken his unwritten rule of absolute diplomacy at all times, describing the scenes after the event as “chilling”. Sean Ingle has more on Bach’s words here. Also speaking out was Sweden’s speed skating gold medallist Nils van der Poel. Back home from Beijing, he told Sportbladet: “The Olympic Village was very nice, the Chinese people I met were absolutely amazing. The Olympics is a lot, it’s a fantastic sporting event where you unite the world and nations meet. But so did Hitler before invading Poland, and so did Russia before invading Ukraine. I think it is extremely irresponsible to give it to a country that violates human rights as blatantly as the Chinese regime is doing.” Belgium meanwhile have easily got the best speed skating uniform, but it hasn’t delivered them many medals. Mathias Voste couldn’t add today to Hanne Desmet’s bronze in the women’s 1000m earlier in the Games, finishing 27th in the men’s event. Team GB’s Cornelius Kersten came ninth as Dutchman Thomas Krol won gold. Finland are guaranteed a silver medal at worst in the men’s ice hockey. Over the years they have had two silvers and four bronzes, but they’ve never won gold. They beat Slovakia 2-0 in today’s early semi-final, while defending champions ROC will play Sweden to decide who faces them this evening. Things you might have missed Unfortunately you might have missed the women’s 12.5km mass start biathlon – they bought it forward from tomorrow due to an adverse weather report and I failed to notice – my apologies. Justine Braisaz-Bouchet of France didn’t miss – she held off a twin Norwegian threat to take gold. “In the first weeks of the Olympics I did not have the equipment or the shape, I don’t know what happened, why I was so slow on the track, but I dealt with it,” Braisaz-Bouchet said afterwards. “Today I was very serene and calm.” Nobody could hold off Johannes Thingnes Bø though, who won the men’s mass start for his fifth medal of the Games for Norway – including just the four golds. It was his nation’s 15th gold medal in Beijing, a new record for a country at a Winter Games – overtaking the 14 won by Germany and Norway in 2018, and Canada in 2010. You might also like to read: How China citizenship debate clouded Eileen Gu’s Olympics Not just snow: what’s the secret to Norway’s Winter Games success? Mikaela Shiffrin’s two weeks of pain don’t detract from lifetime of greatness The briefing’s picture of late yesterday You are looking at Team GB’s first – and still possibly only – medallists of the Beijing Games. An 8-4 victory over the USA in last night’s curling semi-final ensures at least a silver for skip Bruce Mouat and his team. They play Sweden for gold tomorrow, while Canada picked up the bronze today. What to look out for next Times are all in local Beijing time. For Sydney it is +3 hours, for London it is -8 hours, for New York it is -13 hours and San Francisco is -16 hours. Later today – Friday 18 February 8pm and 9.30pm Bobsleigh – it is the first and second heats of the two-woman bobsleigh variety 8.05pm Curling – the women’s semi-finals: Great Britain v Sweden and Japan v Switzerland – 🥌 9.10pm Ice hockey – the second semi-final between ROC and Sweden 🏒 Tomorrow – Saturday 19 February 9.30am-10.25am Freestyle skiing – the men’s freeski halfpipe final 🥇 9.30am-11.05am and 8pm-9.30pm Bobsleigh – heats in the men’s 4-man in the morning session, the 2-women’s event has the final two heats in the evening 🥇 11am-12.46pm Alpine skiing – it is the mixed team parallel event as the final set of races on the slopes. Should be great fun. 🥇 2pm Cross-country skiing – the men’s 50km mass start free 🥇 2.05pm and 8.05pm Curling – A medal for Team GB at last! Great Britain and Sweden’s men will play for gold; the women who lose this evening’s semi-finals play for their bronze in the evening 🥇🥉 3pm-5pm Speed skating – the semi-finals first and then the finals in both the men’s and women’s mass start final 🥇 5pm Biathlon – the women do the 12.5km mass start race 🥇 7pm Figure skating – the pair skating free skating 🥇 9.10pm Ice Hockey – the bronze medal play-off for the men 🥉 Full Winter Olympics schedule | Results, sport by sport | Medal table How things stand Here’s what the emoji table looked like at 6.15pm Beijing time … 1 🇳🇴 Norway 🥇 15 🥈 8 🥉 11 total: 34 2 🇩🇪 Germany 🥇 10 🥈 7 🥉 5 total: 22 3 🇺🇸 United States 🥇 8 🥈 8 🥉 5 total: 21 4 🇨🇳 China 🥇 8 🥈 4 🥉 2 total: 14 5= 🇳🇱 Netherlands 🥇 7 🥈 5 🥉 4 total: 16 5= 🇸🇪 Sweden 🥇 7 🥈 5 🥉 4 total: 16 7 🇨🇭 Switzerland 🥇 7 🥈 2 🥉 5 total: 14 8 🇦🇹 Austria 🥇 6 🥈 7 🥉 4 total: 17 9 ◻️ Not Russia 🥇 5* 🥈 9 🥉 13 total: 27 10 🇫🇷 France 🥇 5 🥈 7 🥉 2 total: 14 Selected others 11 🇨🇦 Canada 🥇 4 🥈 7 🥉 13 total: 24 17 🇦🇺 Australia 🥇 1 🥈 2 🥉 1 total: 4 18 🇳🇿 New Zealand 🥇 1 🥈 1 🥉 0 total: 2 - 🇬🇧 Great Britain 🥇 🥌? 🥈 🥌? 🥉 0 total: 1 [*this total includes the team figure skating gold, which the IOC has said will “not be sorted out during this Games”] The last word I must say I was very disturbed yesterday when I watched the competition on television. First in [Kamila Valieva’s] performance, how high the pressure must have been on her. To see her struggling on the ice. But this was not all. When afterwards I saw how she was received by her closest entourage, with what appeared to be a tremendous coldness … Rather than giving her comfort, rather than trying to help her, you could feel this chilling atmosphere, this distance. And if you were interpreting the body language, it got even worse because there were even some dismissive gestures I saw on TV. – Thomas Bach, IOC presidentStorm Eunice has been forecast to be the worst storm to hit the UK for more than 30 years. Schools and businesses have been closed, and householders have been warned to batten down the hatches. But what happens if it damages your property? Will my insurance cover storm damage? Buildings insurance policies usually state that they will cover financial loss caused by storm damage – but companies have been known to argue over what constitutes a storm. Last year Guardian Money dealt with a case where an insurer refused to pay to repair a leaking roof damaged during Storm Christoph. The Financial Ombudsman Service says these type of disputes are among the main complaints it gets about unpaid storm damage claims. The Association of British Insurers says a storm is a period of violent weather defined as: Wind speeds with gusts of at least 48 knots (55mph) – equivalent to 10 on the Beaufort scale or; Torrential rainfall at a rate of at least 25mm an hour or; Snow to a depth of at least 1ft (30 cm) in 24 hours or; Hail of such intensity that it causes damage to hard surfaces or breaks glass. Your insurer may have this definition in its policy or may apply its own rules. If the weather in your area does not meet the criteria, it will turn down your claim. How do I claim? As soon as you can, you need to tell your insurer that your property has been damaged and you want to make a claim. Most insurers have 24-hour helplines and they should be geared up to deal with the fallout from the storm, as forecasters have been talking about it for days. Speak to the insurer before arranging urgent repairs or somewhere to stay. It may have emergency repair teams to send out but, if not, your policy may cover getting the work done. Tell your insurer that this work needs doing, and make sure you get receipts to submit as you may be able to get the money back from your policy. When it is safe to, inspect your property properly and make a list of all of the damage. Take photos and keep anything you can in case you need to show the insurer evidence to back up your claim. What will be covered? This will depend on your policy. If you have buildings cover, this will pay out for damage to your home – it will cover the cost of replacing items and getting things fixed. It is also likely to cover accommodation costs if you are unable to stay in your property because of the damage. How much it will pay out will depend on the level of cover you have bought, and what excess you chose – this is the sum you pay towards any work. What cover it offers for things such as garden sheds will depend on the individual policy. Your possessions will be covered by contents insurance. You may have included garden furniture and bikes on this policy – if you haven’t, then you won’t be able to claim if these are damaged. Contents cover often offers the option to protect everything in your freezer – if you bought this and have a power cut, remember to tot up and photograph everything you have to throw out. What about my car? If your car is hit by a tree or debris blowing around, it will be covered if you have a comprehensive insurance policy – as most drivers do. A third-party policy will not cover storm damage. The insurer Zurich says during November’s Storm Arwen claims for this type of damage increased by 17%. However, it said storm-related claims were more often for crashes – during Arwen claims for road traffic accidents were up by 35%. So if you are leaving the house, drive carefully. What if part of my house damages someone else’s property? If your neighbour’s car is damaged by tiles falling from your roof you may be liable – but they will have to show that you are at fault. If your roof was already in a bad state of repair they may be able to claim against you. The legal liability element of your home insurance should cover this.One of the most eye-catching moments of this year’s Super Bowl – alongside the all-time classic half-time show and cutaway shots to the mind-bogglingly massive, intestine-shaped “infinity screen” pulsing away at LA’s SoFi Stadium – was the first glimpse of Amazon’s new Lord of the Rings: The Rings of Power series. You may be aware of it, given it has been five years in the making and its first season cost a shade under the GDP of Tonga. Those who aren’t will surely be very soon, thanks to an exhaustive marketing blitz that will whirr for the next seven months until the show’s release. The teaser trailer that launched at the Super Bowl was designed to be the centrepiece of this marketing campaign; a place in the most highly coveted advertising window on the planet, beamed into over 100m households in the US, as well as the rest of (Middle) Earth via YouTube. In terms of attracting eyeballs, Amazon’s gambit was a success: 257m people around the world watched the teaser in the first 24 hours after its release. Dig a little deeper though – or rather scroll down to the comments section of that YouTube video – and things look dramatically less rosy. There you’ll find variations on the same quote, incorrectly attributed to Tolkien, posted over and over again, in Russian and Czech, Portuguese and Polish: “Evil is unable to create anything new. It can only distort and destroy what has been invented or created by the forces of good”. This “comment bomb” is designed to drown out any praise or even general discussion, and seems to have done the trick: at the time of writing, 68,000 people have commented on the video and pretty much all of them are that same damning quote. (Until recently they would largely have expressed their disappointment through the ‘dislike’ button, but YouTube no longer reveals the number of people who engage with its thumbs-down feature publicly.) But just what are the commenters angry about? Amazon’s much-criticised labour practices, perhaps, or Jeff Bezos’ foray into billionaire space tourism? No, the complaints largely seem to be about the trailer itself: its gleaming CGI-ishness, changes to Tolkien’s original story, minor details to sigils, dwarves and the like and – most pointedly – the fact that it seems a pale imitation of Peter Jackson’s much loved (and still fairly recent in the memory) adaptation. Such fan revolts seem to have become the norm in recent years, with releases that fail to live up to viewers’ lofty expectations leading to high-profile backlash. We’ve seen calls to reshoot anticlimactic endings of massive TV franchises. We’ve seen users bombard Rotten Tomatoes with negative film reviews. And we’ve seen a couple of fan revolts prove successful, with Paramount re-designing Sonic the Hedgehog to make him look less like a “nightmarish experiment in avant garde taxidermy”, and Warner Bros releasing the glowering four-hour ‘Snyder cut’ of Justice League as a corrective to Joss Whedon’s widely loathed version of the film. Even so, this Lord of the Rings rebellion seems quite unprecedented. These fans – or at least a faction of them – seem to be rebelling against the entire product, something that feels far harder to correct than gussying up a misshapen hedgehog. Can Amazon win them back onside before September – or will LOTR be DOA? • This article was amended on 21 February 2022 to reflect that a quote was inaccurately attributed to Tolkien. If you want to read the complete version of this newsletter please subscribe to receive The Guide in your inbox every Friday.Brighton will want to bounce back quickly after a tough loss to Manchester United against dead-last Burnley. Always easier said than done against Sean Dyche’s side but especially so considering wins are desperately needed now to save their hides. Their last and only victory came in October and with Tottenham, Leicester and Chelsea up in their next four games, the time must be now. Write off Burnley at your peril, though, as they have scrimped, scrapped and scraped through five seasons so far. Graham Potter’s side need to avoid complacency at all costs. Graham Searles Saturday 3pm Venue Amex Stadium Last season Brighton 0 Burnley 0 Referee Kevin Friend This season G9 Y48 R1 5.44 cards/game Odds H 3-4 A 21-4 D 3-1 BRIGHTON Subs from Steele, McGill, Alzate, Ferguson, March, Trossard, Veltman, Caicedo, Offiah, Lallana, Welbeck Doubtful None Injured Sarmiento (hamstring, 26 Feb), Mwepu (hamstring, unknown) Suspended Dunk (one match) Discipline Y42 R2 Form WDDDWL Leading scorer Maupay 8 BURNLEY Subs from Hennessey, Norris, Bardsley, Thomas, Collins, Cork, Lennon, Lowton, Stephens, Long, Weghorst Doubtful Weghorst (hip) Injured Gudmundsson (appendicitis, 23 Feb), Taylor (ankle, 23 Feb), Vydra (hernia, Mar) Suspended None Discipline Y39 R0 Form LLDDDL Leading scorer Cornet 6It won’t prevent cancer, rejuvenate ageing skin or arrest global warming but coleslaw is nonetheless a “miracle food”. Crunchy and wet, creamy and fresh, sweet and savoury, the subject of this month’s How to eat – the series identifying how best to enjoy Britain’s favourite foods – delivers rare complexity in every mouthful. It is also one of the few salads that works with hot dishes, the mayonnaise greasing the wheels of that gastronomic interaction. Little wonder that Dutch koolsla, originally a way of dressing raw cabbage to make it palatable, not only survived its 18th-century journey to the US but with adjustments (swapping vinaigrette for mayonnaise), was re-exported to global acclaim. It is the American, mayo-based variety of coleslaw that HTE will focus on here. Not because it is better than its drier, oil-dressed or fat-free cousins that flourish everywhere from El Salvador to Russia, but because, were HTE to delve into all those variations and unpack the explosion in “Asian inspired” slaws, this entry would make War and Peace look like a pamphlet. So what should US-style coleslaw consist of? How is it best deployed? And what should the prison sentence be if you add pineapple to it? HTE is here to adjudicate. Components and ratios Coleslaw presents an established formula for perfection which, at the same time, allows a degree of responsible self-expression. Yet frequently we ruin it. After combining cabbage and mayo, you are free to improvise within rational boundaries – boundaries that the world repeatedly oversteps. In coleslaw as in life, an irrational desire to assert creative agency trumps all. You know putting pomegranate, bacon or broccoli stalks in coleslaw is a terrible idea, but you do it anyway. A similar instinct encourages people to give coleslaw a coronation chicken makeover (curry powder, raisins), insert strident acidic notes (capers, gherkins, jalapeños) and, most egregiously of all, fold in fruit and texturally jarring nuts. It is possible to successfully combine apple and fennel, or beetroot, carrot and blood orange – but in a salad. Not shredded into coleslaw. Binding such ingredients together in mayonnaise sets you on the road to disaster. Similarly, there is no place in coleslaw for: grated cheese (a gummy presence in what should be coleslaw’s cleanly interlocking cogs); radishes or fennel (too assertive, will hog the limelight); celeriac (you are not making remoulade); or cucumber, tomatoes and bell peppers (this is not an opportunity to clear out the soggy, festering bottom of the salad drawer). Meanwhile, raw broccoli, cauliflower and sprouts bring a certain worthy, leathery, cattle-feed quality to a dish that should land with a sparkling zing. Note: coleslaw must not be drowned in mayonnaise. This is not mayonnaise soup. Pre-packaged versions in which thin, sad strands of carrot and onion swim hidden in sweet gloop are depressing and illogical. Mayonnaise is the more expensive ingredient. Using vinegar to further season the coleslaw is at best ill-advised and regularly a calamity. See also: coleslaws sweetened (vandalised) with honey or given over to a domineering blue cheese dressing. The cabbage question There is a school of thought that coleslaw is not coleslaw without cabbage. That is correct. It started life as a cabbage dish. More importantly, without that cabbage (green preferably, red acceptable), coleslaw lacks much of the crunch, thickness and mineral tang that makeas it so refreshing and physically satisfying. Into a shredded mound of that base ingredient – shred everything*, no dicing – add red onion and carrot (both essential), and a little celery if the mood takes you. Feel free to loosen the mayo with sour cream or yoghurt to freshen it. If you like a subtle sheen of heat (heat that platforms fellow ingredients rather than shouting over them), add a dab of mustard or a little finely chopped red chilli. Remember to season, season and season again. *Possessed of some misguided puritanical zeal, coleslaw’s militant wing insist this must be done by hand. In fact, prepping coleslaw is one of the best uses for a food processor. Accompaniments As well as that creamy lubrication, coleslaw provides crunch and fresh flavours that are a source of pleasure in themselves and a palate cleanser when eaten with moderately greasy foods. Where, for example, would bready Romana-style pizza, buttery jacket potatoes or barbecued meats be without coleslaw’s moist, multifunctional intervention? As the late restaurateur Wilber Shirley put it in Holy Smoke: The Big Book of North Carolina Barbecue: “I won’t even sell someone a barbecue unless they get coleslaw. If they want a barbecue and they don’t want coleslaw, there’s something wrong with that person. It all goes together.” There is a man who would appreciate how conveniently coleslaw drapes itself over a hotdog or, between mouthfuls of carbs, punctuates a plate of fries. Coleslaw is constantly shape-shifting, through its many dimensions of texture and flavour, to offer multiple points of inflection and cohesion in different environments. For example, in its fresh vitality it can add a reviving pep to a platter of cured meats or a burger – both dense with funky, savoury flavours – while, conversely, coleslaw’s vibrant flavours can lift an otherwise bland piece of leftover roast chicken or, in its vegetal spritz, both complement and offset lasagne. Though on the plate, lasagne’s cheese and coleslaw’s mayo may seem to have an utterly different outlook, they are momentarily united by their overlapping similarities (fat, basically). Coleslaw is also one of the great sandwich fillings. It is divine nestling atop ridged salt and vinegar crisps on sliced white bread (randomly moistening certain crisps but leaving others deliciously rigid), and will bring a crucial layer of texture, moisture and flavour to sandwiches as diverse as roast beef and tinned tuna. Without wishing to dazzle you with the glamorous details of HTE’s private life, it is a big fan of the 15-second hummus wrap. Take one packet wrap, warm it draped over the toaster, spread with hummus and a generous dollop of any leftover coleslaw you have lying around. It will drip everywhere, over fingers, wrists, plate, worktop, but it is nonetheless quick-turnaround, no-lunch-break food of the gods. You barely need to chew. Slaw-breakers As a loose, bendable rule (HTE must be mellowing in its old age), coleslaw works best as a foil to proteins and carbs. That protein may be fat-slicked in some way, the presence of fat forming a common bond between the protein and the coleslaw. But coleslaw works far less well in conjunction with overtly fatty and rich foods, where, instead of offering a lively, contrasting raw veg energy, its mayo seems to cohere with all the other fats on the plate to create a dead-weight implosion – a heavy slog of a meal, rather than an enthusiastic sprint. Quiche and coleslaw is a one-note case in point, as is omelette or frittata with slaw. A cheese pasty will, conspicuously, fail to achieve a light-stepping grace if you add coleslaw. This collision is most profound, however, with cheese itself. In a sandwich or on a cheeseboard, the two appear to be natural bedfellows, but – much like the effect of ice-cream on chocolate – coleslaw seems to inhibit cheese from breaking down in your mouth. Normally, cheddar almost melts into a fudgy consistency. But the temperature and lip-coating glossiness of coleslaw throws up an awkward, unyielding, cool-fatty barrier between you and the cheese. It sits in your mouth like a waxy lump. So, coleslaw: how do you eat yours?The Goodbye Coast by Joe Ide (Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson, £16.99) Joe Ide’s first series featured the Sherlock Holmes-like Isaiah Quintabe. Now comes a contemporary reimagining of Raymond Chandler’s private eye, Philip Marlowe. Ide’s creation shares a name, a job description and a location with his literary progenitor, but has a deal more backstory – including a failed police career and a complicated relationship with his LAPD veteran father – and a deal less alcohol (although Dad makes up for that). When obnoxious film star Kendra Jones hires him, he assumes it’s to solve the murder of her director husband, shot dead some weeks earlier on the beach in Malibu, but she wants him to find and return her 17-year-old stepdaughter. Cody, who believes that Kendra had her father killed, refuses to come home; the truth, of course, is far less straightforward and a lot more dangerous. To complicate matters further, Marlowe falls for a desperate mother whose young son has been kidnapped by his father … The shift away from Chandler’s tight first-person focus risks diluting the whole, but The Goodbye Coast is a terrific read – pacy, with tension, pathos, wonderful descriptions of LA and some lovely one-liners. Even the Darkest Night by Javier Cercas, translated by Anne McLean (MacLehose, £16.99) Award-winning Spanish author Cercas turns his hand to crime fiction in a mystery with its roots in the civil war. Even the Darkest Night is the first in what promises to be an excellent series, featuring Melchor Marín, a criminal who, inspired by a desire to discover who killed his mother, joins the police force by dint of hard graft and doctored paperwork. To escape the glare of publicity after foiling a terrorist attack in Barcelona, he is relocated to the Catalan backwater of Terra Alta where, four years later, the police department finds itself in the media spotlight after a local businessman and his wife are tortured to death. Sections alternate between past and present – the backstory here does a lot of heavy lifting – as Marín, thwarted in his attempts to solve the case, redoubles his efforts with tragic consequences. History casts a long shadow over this tale of political and personal loyalties and the various means by which justice – of a kind – may be achieved. Notes on an Execution by Danya Kukafka (Phoenix, £16.99) In the introductory note to her second novel, Kukafka makes the point that “average men become interesting when they start hurting women” – our fascination with serial killers such as Ted Bundy allows these men to steal not only their female victims’ lives but their narratives, and causes us to overlook what is lost to family and community when women are murdered. A fictional attempt to remedy this, Notes on an Execution is a masterful slow burn of a novel. The narrative of the killer, an inadequate individual who has made bad choices and is hours away from death by lethal injection in a Texas prison, is rendered in the second person, with a level of success that is vanishingly rare. His tale is balanced by the stories of his mother, his former sister-in-law, and the female detective who succeeds in catching him: a poignant, beautifully written and necessarily uncomfortable read. The House of Ashes by Stuart Neville (Zaffre, £14.99) More uber-toxic masculinity here, this time in rural Northern Ireland. Neville’s latest is a grim tale of abuse past and present, split between the former inhabitants of the titular farmhouse – a brutal father and two sons (“the Daddies”) who keep women (“the Mummies”) captive and cowed – and the current occupants. Ex-social worker Sara, whose world, policed by controlling husband Damien, is shrinking by the day, has started to see bloodstains on the kitchen flagstones; then elderly, dishevelled Mary Jackson appears at the door, claiming the house is hers and asking about missing children. Chapters alternate between Mary’s nightmarish upbringing – the “missing children” are the ghosts of those who did not survive the cruelty and neglect – and Sara’s attempts to escape her increasingly trammelled existence. Eventually, their fledgling friendship, beautifully drawn, offers each woman a glimmer of hope. Whatever Gets You Through the Night by Charlie Higson (Little, Brown, £14.99) Rather more upbeat, and with far better weather, is Charlie Higson’s return to crime fiction for grownups. Robert McIntyre (not his real name) has come to Corfu in order to rescue 15-year-old Lauren from a paedophile who operates under the cover of an elite tennis training programme that is perilously close to a cult, but it’s not easy. Lauren’s dad has arrived on the island and keeps getting in the way; the kid is busy cooking up her own escape attempt; and other impediments include a drug dealers’ turf war, Albanian gangsters, a psychotic bodyguard and a bunch of rich teenage brats out for kicks. It’s loud, bright, fast and funny – a perfect read for a dreary month.The Plimsoll is a pub down a side road in Finsbury Park, north London, doing an ebullient trade serving burgers and more, that knows exactly what it is. It is not remotely a gastropub. It isn’t a shiny-floored, exorcised former boozer with its heart dragged out, replaced with heavily styled guinea fowl on white china and gelato of the day, Noble Isle hand soap, piles of neatly folded Egyptian cotton hand towels and a soothing George Ezra compilation floating into the private dining room. There are hundreds of pubs like this across Britain and although they’re very handy for anyone wanting a “civilised” meal with “the guys”, I’m not sure these same diners would appreciate the Plimsoll. Or understand why tables in this not-gastropub are currently like gold dust, meaning they’d most likely settle for a table for two at 9.15pm sometime midweek, late March, only to find the menu is scallop bhuna fried pizza, or liver with colcannon, served on your great-gran’s best yet mismatched crockery, in a rather dark, brazenly “pubby” old pub, heaving with the ghosts of its past as an old-school drinking den, but now with Sonic Youth blaring out. Or they might turn up on a weekend or an Arsenal match day, to find there’s a very limited menu. At this point, some customers may become livid and bewildered, the two main emotions behind almost all Yelp.com restaurant reviews. Why would I send people there who’d be irked by what it isn’t? Especially as I do not want the table shortage to become sillier. There was a point when a large slice of freshly made ricotta cheesecake – firm, New York-Italian style, slightly salty, compelling and served with a tiny ramekin of rhubarb – arrived and, as I picked up a spoon, Kate Bush’s Running Up That Hill began to play. It was the most undiluted, multi-sensory, unadulterated fun I have had since 2020. The Plimsoll is now in the hands of chefs Jamie Allan and Ed McIlroy, who, before this project, ran a well-loved semi-permanent pop-up called Four Legs at the Compton Arms in north London. Here, the pair became food-scene-famous for serving a very good Dexter cheeseburger – a glossy, slightly sloppy, cheesy, gherkin-blessed but certainly not salad-spoiled burger. It takes a lot to impress the food scene with a burger these days, but Allan and Mcllroy did, as well as with bowls of soft, deep-fried salad potatoes with fresh aioli, plates of almost blackened pork chipolatas, mince and tatties and then delicate plates of scallop escabeche, or a luxurious Middlesbrough-style parmo (chicken parmigiana) laden with cheese. All this nostalgia, simplicity and brazen oddness would be a catastrophe if the pair couldn’t cook: it works because they are brilliant. Allan is formerly of Hill &amp; Szrok in Broadway market and McIlroy was at the well-respected Bao; over two years at the Compton Arms they have honed a skill for pleasing the hungry. There’s a quiet finesse in their work that is streets ahead of pub food; so within this mismatched, single-sheet menu – which changes daily – expect a humble bowl of crisps served with a slick, pink pool of fresh cod’s roe. Or a plate of breaded, deep-fried herring perched on rough-cut baguette with a precise watercress mayo. We ordered slip sole with shiitake, not quite expecting to receive the whole fish served with a buttery, earthy sauce rich with ’shroom and sweet rhubarb. The Plimsoll pulls you from St John to Ynyshir to Saturday lunch at Pearl Beach in Saint Tropez, yet somehow you’re in the Queen Vic and it’s being cooked by men who resemble members of the early 70s, Rod Stewart-era band Faces. Service is incredibly good, prompt and knowledgable, which lifts the whole experience from pub to something beyond. But this all said, tables are tight, so expect to be there for a good time, but not a long time. If I’d had longer, I’d have lingered over a plate of aged comte, a bowl of the whiskey pudding and perhaps another bowl of the spuds and fancy garlic mayo. However it was Wednesday, the Plimsoll was mobbed and they wanted my 5.30pm table back. I have to respect any restaurant that kicks me out – pen in hand, daft dangly earrings jangling as I finish my cheesecake – as they already have enough customers. No three-hour tasting menus and “would you like a tour of the kitchens?” for the men from Four Legs. They’re full and don’t need my feedback and I love it. Four Legs at The Plimsoll 52 St Thomas’s Road, London N4; (no phone). Open Mon-Fri 3-11pm, Sat &amp; Sun noon-midnight. About £45 a head, plus drinks and service.In this Booker-nominated fable, a robot stands in a shop window waiting for a human family to claim her. Klara is an Artificial Friend, or AF, who runs on solar power and has been created as a companion for lonely children – her role is part sibling, part childminder. Klara has a rare aptitude among AFs for observing human emotions, and learns to read sadness, anger and joy in the faces of the people she sees in the street. Watching what appears to be a reunion of two friends, she remarks to the shop manager: “They seem so happy … But it’s strange because they also seem upset.” Klara, who is the narrator of Ishiguro’s eighth novel, is spotted by a 14-year-old girl, Josie, who brings her mother to the shop and begs to buy her. Once installed in the family home, Klara learns that Josie is chronically ill with a sickness that killed her sister, and that her role will require considerably more than companionship. New York voice actor Sura Siu adopts a convincingly subdued tone to convey Klara’s android status. The language, and Siu’s reading of it, is spare and childlike, poignantly capturing Klara’s instinctive goodness and desire for connection. The book shares themes with the author’s 2005 novel Never Let Me Go: both have a vision of a future that feels uncomfortably close to the present, and both feature an artificially created protagonist who, in Klara’s case, is more human than the flesh-and-blood individuals she was created to serve. • Klara and the Sun is available on Faber, 10hr 16min Further listening The Push Ashley Audrain, Penguin, 8hr 38min Marin Ireland reads this tense psychological thriller about the dark side of motherhood. Putting the Rabbit in the Hat Brian Cox, Quercus, 11hr 40min The actor best known as Succession’s Logan Roy reads his irreverent memoir charting a long career on stage and screen.Following his remarkable performance in the TV adaptation of Edward St Aubyn’s autobiographical series Patrick Melrose, it feels fitting that Benedict Cumberbatch should provide the narration for the author’s 10th novel. Double Blind follows a group of thirtysomething professionals, all dedicated in different ways to the advancement of ideas; among them is Francis, a botanist overseeing the rewilding of a country estate in Sussex, and his new girlfriend, Olivia, a biologist with a keen interest in epigenetics. There’s also Olivia’s best friend, Lucy, whom we meet boarding a plane from America to run a new venture capital firm, and who has just rejected a marriage proposal from her mega-rich boyfriend; and Lucy’s new employer, Hunter, a tech entrepreneur and hedge fund billionaire who owns a ranch called Apocalypse Now. Meanwhile, Olivia’s psychotherapist father, Martin, is treating a man with schizophrenia who has a secret connection to the family. Cumberbatch glides smoothly between these intertwined narratives, breathing life into the characters and revelling in the flashes of caustic wit. He also makes impressively light work of the protagonists’ rambling interior monologues on such subjects as immunology, ecology, bioethics and neuroscience; these passages can be stodgy on the page but are more digestible in audio. Deploying various accents and voices, the actor also has fun with St Aubyn’s peripheral figures, from the comically sinister Vatican priest trying to pull off an outlandish business deal to Hunter’s cocaine-addled sidekick Saul who “had always spoken rapidly but on that [day] he was sprinting to the next full stop like an athlete trying to break a record”. • Double Blind is available from Penguin Audio, 7hr 46min. Further listening 12 Bytes Jeanette Winterson, Penguin Audio, 8hr 59min The Oranges Are Not the Only Fruit author reads her variously wry, reflective and caustic essays looking at the impact of artificial intelligence. Small Town Girl Donna McLean, Hodder &amp; Stoughton, 6hr 30min McLean, a former anti-war protester, narrates her moving memoir documenting how she was duped into a relationship with an undercover police officer.Across 8 frailest 1 FALTERS (anag &amp;Lit) 9 venial VEN 
<i>AL 10 tutted TUT(u)/TED 11 airheads AIR  ADS 12 whee W  E 13 exhibitors EX + HIB  S 15 Asterix ASTER + XI (rev) 16 screens SCREE + N(orth)/S(outh) 18 hand-me-down H(ennes)/AND/M(auritz)/(vulture)E/DOWN 19 echo EC  O 20 aspirate AS/PI/ATE 22 melons ELON (Musk) in S/M (rev) 23 divest DIVE/ST(reet) 24 openness 0  NESS Down 1 draughtsmanship DRAUGHTS/MAN’S/HIP 2 hit the headlines HIT THE HEAD + LINES 3 readme file R(oyal)E(ngineers)/MADE(anag)/FILE 4 attache TA (rev) + TACHE 5 over (l)OVER(s) 6 insect repellent IN/SECT/LEPER(rev)/LENT 7 Mandarin Chinese IN ANARCHISM NEED (anag) 14 back number marXISm or lENINism 17 foxtrot FOX TROT [Nato alphabet: E=echo, F=foxtrot] 21 arty (p)ARTY     </i>A weather phenomenon known as a sting jet similar to the one seen during the Great Storm of 1987 could form on Friday as Storm Eunice takes hold, scientists have warned. The Met Office has warned that the weather phenomenon could cause “significant damage and risk to life”. But what is a sting jet? Matt Priestley, a research scientist at the University of Exeter looking at storm tracks and extratropical cyclones, said they were small areas of very intense winds within a storm’s cyclone that were hard to predict. “They’re generally about 10 to 20 kilometres wide and are generated by specific instabilities within the flight lines of storms and cause very high wind speeds. “They’re not a feature of all storms. They’re often just a feature of the most intense ones like Storm Eunice. The fact that they are such small scale but can have such high wind speeds makes forecasting them very, very difficult.” The Great Storm of 1987, which claimed 18 lives, was the most famous example of a sting jet forming, Priestley said. “That storm had a sting jet and it uprooted millions of trees. Sting jets cause a big intensity increase compared to the rest of the cycle so they can cause a lot of extra damage very quickly like they did in 1987.” Sting jets can cause a phenomenon whereby a narrow area of land is hit by very intense winds, which could reach 100mph or more, but 30 miles away there may be much slower wind speeds associated with a normal storm, of about 60-70mph. This means the damage from a sting jet can be very localised. They usually only last for about three or four hours, whereas the main storm may last a lot longer. Storm Eunice looks as if it has the features that could create a sting jet. Priestley said: “There has not been a storm this intense for 10 or 15 years.” The jets get their name from their resemblance to the sting in a scorpion’s tail, the Met Office said. They can be spotted as they develop on satellite images, where the end of the so-called cold conveyor is marked by a hook-shaped cloud with a point at the end. Dr Peter Inness, a meteorologist at the University of Reading, said a strong jet stream could “act like a production line for storms, generating a new storm every day or two”. He added: “Eunice looks like it may be able to produce a sting jet, a narrow, focused region of extremely strong winds embedded within the larger area of strong winds and lasting just a few hours.” He said two red warnings for wind in a single winter was unusual for the UK, as it was more typical to get one every two or three years.Hervé Mombo Kinga, the pro-democracy activist and celebrated blogger who spent 17 months in jail for insulting the Gabonese president, Ali Bongo Ondimba, was not impressed when he saw the pictures of the leader limping up the stairs of France’s presidential palace. Kinga, who died last week at 47 after contracting Covid, was infuriated by the episode – widely shared in the west African country of Gabon, despite the embarrassment it caused the president, whose family has held power for more than five decades. Using a walking stick and supported by an aide, Bongo lost his balance at the top of the Élysée stairs. He was caught by the French president, Emmanuel Macron. In a six-minute video on social media, Kinga fumed at Macron for what he saw as the French leader’s endorsement of Bongo, whose disputed re-election in 2016 by a slim margin was marked by violence. “Emmanuel Macron, we are effectively at war,” said Kinga, angry about the mending of relations between his homeland and its former colonial ruler. Kinga was a vociferous critic of the Bongo regime, posting videos under the pseudonym “Matricule 001” or resistance soldier 001. Kinga’s health had deteriorated after the harsh conditions of his detention, according to his lawyer, Anges Kevin Nzigou. He was hospitalised in January and contracted Covid, which “became more severe, particularly because of his state of health”, Nzigou says. Kinga had just become a father for the second time. “Mr Kinga was an unwavering defender of human rights in Gabon and led his fight without hatred or resentment, despite the obstacles he faced. It is this [that] made him an emblematic figure in the fight for freedoms in Gabon,” Nzigou says. Kinga had been left penniless after the authorities destroyed his business, a cybercafe in the capital Libreville, and could not afford healthcare. A crowdfunding campaign was launched to help, but the intervention came too late. Céline Assaf Boustani, president of the Human Rights Foundation (HRF), says: “Armed with just a camera, Hervé dedicated his life to exposing the harsh reality of life under the Bongo regime in Gabon. “Hervé was insightful and courageous, and his death is a tremendous loss to the Gabonese people struggling against poverty and government repression.” Gabonese opposition leader Jean Ping was among those who paid tribute online. He hailed “the courageous fight he led for Gabon”. Others called Kinga a “freedom fighter” whose death was a “big loss” for young people. “Sick, weakened, continually persecuted, he refused to leave Gabon. A righteous man died today,” said one tweet. “Your death saddens us. But the seed you sowed in us has become a hope that nourishes and inspires us every day,” read another. Kinga started making videos in 2015, “criticising repression, injustices, poor public services and deleterious living conditions for ordinary Gabonese citizens under dictator Ali Bongo’s regime”, says the HRF. He supported Jean Ping in 2016. Dozens of people lost their lives in the post-election violence. Omar Bongo, the current president’s father, governed from 1967 until his death in 2009, when his son took over after a contested election. Kinga was among more than a dozen activists arrested in demonstrations in August 2017, a year after the election. He was held for 17 months, partially in solitary confinement, and charged with “insulting the head of state” and “participating in propaganda that disturbs the public order”. “He was kept with very limited light and air coming from a small opening in the ceiling, making it impossible to ascertain whether it was day or night. Through this opening, rather than through the door, Kinga received his minimal food ration. Although detainees are usually allowed three meals per day, Kinga was only given food once per day,” according to a 2019 HRF petition submitted to the UN, appealing Kinga’s imprisonment. “This food ration was thrown over the wall to him, as if he were an animal. He was unable to shower and lacked access to any toilet facilities; instead, he was forced to relieve himself in a plastic bag in his cell. Kinga was not provided [with] a mattress and was relegated to sleeping on the floor, although he could not properly lie down in the painfully small cell.” Released in February 2019, Kinga was particularly critical of the government’s response to the Covid-19 pandemic. In his last video posted, Kinga said: “If you think about it, we are armed: we have words, resistance, boycotting, and disobedience. I will be the first to encourage this type of fight.”PAI Capital was under the impression it was heading in the right direction. The private equity firm had heard that David Sullivan wanted out of West Ham and, after having an opening offer of £300m for the club turned down in November 2020, was preparing its next move. There was reason for cautious optimism. PAI, founded by the Azerbaijani businessman Nasib Piriyev, had been invited for talks at Sullivan’s Essex mansion before making its first bid and had gone away feeling positive. There were discussions about figures, about life at the London Stadium, and the overriding sense was that a deal was there to be done with West Ham’s majority shareholder, who has experienced plenty of ups and downs since buying the club with David Gold in January 2010. Yet it is not easy purchasing a football club. PAI returned with a £400m offer last February but Sullivan had become less welcoming. The 72-year-old would dismiss PAI as “property people” when its interest became public last summer and had caught it off guard by privately telling it he had given exclusivity to a Czech billionaire. Enter Daniel Kretinsky, swooping in just as PAI was pondering where to go next last October. His deal was approaching the final stages when news of his interest in purchasing a significant stake broke a day after West Ham had knocked Manchester City out of the Carabao Cup. Negotiations with Kretinsky were smooth and there was a new voice at the table after the 46-year‑old became the second‑largest shareholder by purchasing a 27% stake in November. Three months on, the question is what comes next. West Ham are battling for fourth place, could win the Europa League and are on the rise under the shrewd management of David Moyes. The controversy over Kurt Zouma kicking his cat has been an unwanted distraction but they go into Saturday’s game at home to Newcastle full of optimism. It is a far cry from the days when supporters bristled about the move to the London Stadium and accused Gold, Sullivan and Karren Brady, the vice-chair, of broken promises about investment in the team. Yet breaking the Premier League’s glass ceiling is far from straightforward. Champions League qualification is up for grabs but West Ham do not have as much depth as Arsenal, Manchester United and Tottenham, and must now also consider Wolves as contenders. Moyes’s squad is light and West Ham spent January trying to strengthen, with a striker and centre-back their priorities. It was a trying window. With clubs reluctant to sell, West Ham grasped for solutions. Club-record bids for Benfica’s Darwin Núñez and Leeds United’s Kalvin Phillips and Raphinha were turned down. Frustration mounted when the deadline passed without anyone coming in and, although Moyes is famously picky, the attention usually falls on one figure when West Ham struggle to make signings: Sullivan. Yet although Sullivan, himself a billionaire, remains the most powerful figure at the club, it is no longer just about him. Kretinsky has altered the landscape. He should increase their spending power and his arrival could ultimately spell the end of the Sullivan and Gold era. According to documents submitted to Companies House in November, Kretinsky has an option for a full takeover. The papers revealed that there is a put and call option agreement between Sullivan, 1890 holdings a.s, the holding company used by Kretinsky to buy his shares, and EP Investment Sarl, Kretinsky’s investment company. The deal gave Sullivan the right to sell his shares to Kretinsky at a set price, and Kretinsky has the option to buy Sullivan’s shares. The price cannot change and other shareholders can be included in the deal under the same terms, though the option exists only for a certain period. There is no guarantee Kretinsky will increase his stake. The co-owner of Sparta Prague could decide to hold back. He has not taken full control of Sparta since buying a 40% stake in 2004. Kretinsky is known as the “Czech Sphinx” because of his inscrutable business style and his intentions remain unknown. Kretinsky declined to comment. “We have come to support the club but – so as to manage supporters’ expectations – that doesn’t mean big spending in the January transfer window,” he wrote in the Evening Standard in November. “Gradual evolution is, in my opinion, the most healthy way to build a strong club.” The message was about patience and tallies with Moyes’s approach. West Ham were in a relegation battle two seasons ago. Their rise was unexpected. Gold and Sullivan have fought many fires since buying the club – relegation in 2011, leaving Upton Park in 2016, protests at the London Stadium – and one theory is that they would be able to leave with their heads high if they sold with the team on the up. Club insiders, though, have repeatedly insisted that Kretinsky’s arrival will not automatically lead to Gold and Sullivan leaving. Sullivan has become less involved in recruitment in recent years, but he loves working in football and it is understood that he will look to buy a smaller club if he sells West Ham. The feeling is that he does not intend to leave, though there are no guarantees that will remain the case. Kretinsky, a qualified lawyer who has a number of other investments, including stakes in Royal Mail, Sainsbury’s and France’s Le Monde newspaper, is not the only person who has shown an interest in buying West Ham. Reports of bids have captured the fanbase’s imagination in the past. The relationship between the board and supporters plummeted when West Ham toiled after moving to Stratford and campaigns to force out Sullivan and Gold grew at the start of 2020, protests before home games against Everton and Southampton laying bare the unrest. At that stage, with the pandemic yet to force football behind closed doors, it seemed that West Ham were a broken club. Sullivan was downbeat. Supporters were constantly on the verge of erupting and although Moyes led his side to safety during Project Restart, the beginning of the 2020-21 season brought more discontent when Grady Diangana was sold to West Brom. The heat was on after the departure of Diangana, a popular academy player, and it was not long before news emerged of a US consortium having bids of £350m and £400m turned down. The asking price, Sullivan said, was much higher. Yet others were interested and PAI explored the possibility of buying the club. Piriyev, who supports West Ham, had begun to put plans together with his business partners. Part of the discussions centred on the London Stadium, which West Ham rent from the London Legacy Development Corporation for £3m a year. PAI felt that the Queen Elizabeth Olympic Park was underutilised and a burden on taxpayers, so it decided that one of the key facets to its bid would be trying to taking control of the stadium. That part of the plan would lead to Sullivan’s “property people” jibe. After a while he came to feel that PAI’s proposals lacked credibility. Initially, though, discussions between the two parties were productive. When Sullivan invited PAI to his home, according to sources he said that he knew his time at the club could be up and that supporters would love anyone who bought the stadium. PAI’s representatives left feeling “buoyed up”. Sullivan had said his valuation of the club tended to rise and fall based on how well West Ham were playing, but PAI was under the impression that £450m would be enough. On 25 November, PAI’s first offer came in: £300m. Sullivan dismissed it as “almost laughable”. By then, West Ham were starting to motor on the pitch. Moyes had transformed the team, who were driven on by Declan Rice in midfield, and European football suddenly felt a realistic target. PAI, though, was undeterred. In December 2020 Andy Mollett, the club’s chief finance officer, gave access to West Ham’s data room. PAI was able to examine the finances and returned with a £400m offer two months later. Sullivan would publicly describe it as “derisory”. By then PAI had unwittingly entered into a PR war. It announced that the former West Ham players Tony Cottee, Rio Ferdinand and Anton Ferdinand were on board but the communication around the bid came to feel naive. Supporters grew suspicious and, in any case, Kretinsky was talking to the club in secret. When PAI returned with another offer of £275m for a 51% controlling stake in September 2021, in their view valuing the club at almost £600m, time was running out. The process with Kretinsky was smoother. Sullivan has always been open to investors coming on board. PAI did not want him to remain as the majority shareholder, because its influence would have been diluted, but Kretinsky has taken a more pragmatic approach. Talks between Sullivan and the Czech took place in secret and lasted about nine months. He attended West Ham’s 4-1 win over Leicester last August and was welcomed into the fold after securing a deal worth about £180m-£200m. The agreement, believed to value West Ham at £700m, saw Kretinsky and his colleague Pavel Horsky appointed to the board. It reduced Sullivan’s shareholding from 51.5% to 38.8%, Gold’s by 10% to 25.1% and Tripp Smith’s by 2% to 8%, with the number of shares in the hands of other investors falling from 3.4% to 1.1%. But what comes next? Gold, 85, has become less involved. Sullivan has spoken about letting his sons, Jack and Dave Jr, take charge. Nothing is off the table and any prospect of a full takeover by Kretinsky is complicated by the anti-embarrassment clause in the rental agreement for the London Stadium, which states that Sullivan and Gold have to pay a 20% penalty to the taxpayer if the club is sold for more than £300m before March 2023. Perhaps Sullivan and Gold will leave as soon as that clause no longer applies. The LLDC has written to West Ham to ask whether the payment is already due after new shares were issued following Kretinsky’s investment. The LLDC wants to see the details of the deal. West Ham declined to comment. It is another complication, particularly as the relationship between West Ham and the LLDC has not always been easy. It has improved in recent years – the stadium’s capacity has risen to 62,000 and the squaring off of the stands behind the goal has made it look less like an athletics venue – but West Ham were intrigued when PAI announced it had reached a provisional agreement with the LLDC to take over the running of the stadium last August. West Ham had assumed they would be approached first were the stadium to change hands. Five and a half years after moving in, the stadium still poses challenges. For the LLDC, there is value in being able to host concerts and Major League Baseball matches, and there is a concession agreement with UK Athletics to consider. Its supporters argue that it brings a spotlight to London and point out that the Olympic legacy has helped to regenerate east London. Yet the stadium runs at a loss, with the public purse propping it up. The naming rights remain unsold and there is a question about what works best for taxpayers. There have been suggestions that West Ham will look into taking control of the stadium. The LLDC is open to all options, whether selling the stadium or renegotiating the terms of West Ham’s lease, although both parties insist nothing is imminent. There is no sense of urgency. The lease is generous for West Ham and they are starting to enjoy themselves in Stratford. Moyes has brought stability and the appointment of Rob Newman as head of recruitment is a positive step. Newman, who was highly respected at Manchester City, works closely with Moyes and has focused on improving the scouting setup. Yet West Ham, who could struggle to keep Rice if they finish outside the top four, have a long way to go. Money talks loudest at the highest level. Sullivan and Gold know how hard it is to break the established order. Eventually they could ask themselves whether it is worth the hassle. They stand to make a huge profit on their investment if they walk away and, with Kretinsky on board, West Ham could be about to open a new chapter. • This article was amended on 21 February 2022 to clarify details about the final bid for West Ham made by PAI Capital.A burning ship carrying almost 4,000 cars – including 1,100 Porsches – has been drifting in the mid-Atlantic after the vessel’s 22 crew members were evacuated, the Portuguese navy has said. The ship Felicity Ace, which was carrying a number of Volkswagen Group vehicles from Germany to the US, caught fire near the Azores on Wednesday evening, a VW spokesperson said on Friday. None of the crew members evacuated on Wednesday were hurt, Portugal’s navy said. About 1,100 cars were on board, according to a Porsche spokesperson. Audi said some of its vehicles were also on the specialised car-transport vessel but did not state how many. An internal email from Volkswagen US said the ship was carrying 3,965 vehicles of the VW, Porsche, Audi and Lamborghini brands, the German newspaper Handelsblatt reported. An automotive enthusiast website, The Drive, reported the ship was carrying 189 Bentleys. The luxury British carmaker is owned by Volkswagen. Volkswagen did not confirm the number of cars and said it was awaiting further information. A picture shared by the Portuguese maritime authority on its website on Wednesday showed clouds of smoke billowing from the ship. Felicity Ace was travelling from Emden,where Volkswagen has a factory, to Davisville, Rhode Island, according to the website Marine Traffic. The fire is active but under control, the captain of the port of Horta on the Azorean island of Faial told the Portuguese news agency Lusa on Thursday night. Azorean authorities were not immediately available for comment.Recently, while out for drinks and sharing plates, a friend reached over and took a sip of my cocktail. There are key parts of this anecdote that still, two years into the push–pull of pandemic guidance, strike nervousness into me. They include the words “dinner”, “friend”, “sharing plates”, not to mention the thought of a bathroom where there’s nice soap but the water from the tap still comes out cold and for some reason there’s no dainty way of opening the door once you’ve washed your hands, so you just have to grab the door handle with your newly washed hand, which seems to instantly negate the point of washing the hands. But the crucial information here is that I had a very nice negroni in front of me, and they wanted to try it, so they took the glass and raised it to their lips and took a sip. In 2019, I would not have minded. That’s because All This hadn’t happened, and I considered myself fairly normal. This is no longer true. I have forgotten how to talk to anyone. How to greet people. How to meet new people. How to sit in an office. A lot of people forgot how to talk back to me, too. Restrictions are easing up, but people aren’t necessarily doing the same. So I spoke to some experts to get some guidance. Gossiping If you were on any local Facebook groups over the various lockdowns, you will know that, deliriously starved of day-to-day gossip, people became obsessed with the comings and goings of their neighbours, reporting whether they wore a mask and gloves to put the bins out, or how many Amazon parcels they were getting every day. This is because, lightweight as it is, gossip is vital. “Gossip is social currency,” says Jessica Barrett, an editor at Grazia, the gossipiest magazine in the biz. “If you have some, you hold power.” Recently, it’s been hard to know what to do – and how hard to go – with gossip, but Barrett has some guidelines. “There are three things you need to consider when it comes to gossiping IRL: who’s it about; who told you (and are you allowed to relay it); and how far you want to go when it comes to the details – as in, how will it affect them? The perfect piece of gossip won’t damage someone’s relationship, say, but will be entertaining enough to keep you chatting for an entire round of drinks.” Gossiping about friends can be a bit of a minefield, she says: “Some people don’t want to do it, and others can’t be trusted not to feed back as soon as they get on the bus home” – but that’s why celebrities still play such a vital role in society. “Love Island unites us all every summer for good reason: we love talking shit about people we think we know inside and out.” If you still don’t trust yourself to gossip properly about people you know, try having an opinion about, say, Julia Fox. Shaking hands We all more-or-less understand how Covid spreads, now. It’s in the air, right? It’s sort of … around? And that all that panicked hand-washing we did from March 2020 onwards was hygienic, sure, but not entirely effective. Has that made handshaking any less fraught? No. Despite my best efforts, shaking hands isn’t going to go away for ever, so it makes sense to relearn how to do it in a way that makes everyone involved feel secure. “Everyone is comfortable doing different things,” William Hanson, etiquette coach and co-host of the Help, I Sexted My Boss podcast, tells me. “I personally am fine with a handshake – we are more informed now about Covid, and people are not maybe quite as touch-phobic as they were at the start – but if you are not comfortable shaking hands, then I would say you need to be proactive in giving a contactless greeting.” This can be anything from an elbow bump or a namaste or a regal wave, but fundamentally, if you don’t want to do a handshake, you have to be first to fire. If you do? Old rules still apply. “Imagine you’re going into a fruit bowl, you’re going to squeeze a peach or nectarine to see if it’s ripe,” Hanson explains. “That’s the sort of strength you want to use.” Stone fruit season doesn’t really kick in until August, so you might just have to practise this one on actual hands. Eating in public There was always something mildly embarrassing about eating on the go – “Yes, correct,” your meal deal seems to announce, “I, an adult person who is nominally in charge of myself and legally allowed to vote, mistimed my meals so badly that I have to eat a sandwich between the next three stops on the train” – but the additional hurdle of the mask, and the intricate dance you have to do to eat through it (unhook one side, bite, re-hook, chew; repeat), has made public consumption the refuge of the desperate. “There are two types of people in the world: those who feel seething rage when a stranger three seats away eats a samosa, and the rest of us who have better things to do,” says Justin Myers, who dissects this magazine’s blind date column every week on his Guyliner website. “If anything, I’d hope the pandemic might inspire scolds to give empathy a go: we all get hungry; we’re all short on time; it might be someone’s only chance of a seat all day. Respect the commitment of someone chewing a tuna mayo baguette behind a surgical mask – the resulting trapped cloud of bad breath will far outlast your mild inconvenience.” Making small talk For some people, small talk is an effortless social tool that helps warm up the cold gap between two people when left alone abruptly at a party, or makes the time go faster when for some reason your card is taking ages to be accepted at the till (“There’s money on it, mate! Ha, ha, ha!”). For others (me) it is not, and they have to make a deliberate effort to get small talk going, something that’s become harder and harder without practice. It’s been a good run, but abruptly asking, “Did you get Covid, then?” to people you haven’t seen for 18 months is no longer a cool small talk starter. (One of my party go-tos – “Have you ever seen anyone break a bone?” – remains effective, though.) The key to small talk is the same now as it was when you were also hopeless at it, pre-March 2020: ask questions, ideally open-ended ones, but don’t pepper them in as if you’re trying to figure out their mother’s maiden name, their national insurance number, and the street they grew up on. If you’re really stuck, try, “What incident led to you having to have a ‘special assembly’ at your school?” Nobody in this country can resist answering that question. Apologising I have found that, with my rusted-up social skills, I have had to apologise fairly often since the world reopened. But though the frequency of apologising has changed, the fundamentals remain the same. That is, saying “Sorry you were offended” or just, “Soz” doesn’t quite cut it. In 2012, Prof Beth Polin of the Eastern Kentucky University co-authored a paper called The Art of the Apology, which specified that a good apology includes at least one of the following six components: 1. An expression of regret (the actual “I’m sorry” bit); 2. An explanation (but, importantly, not a justification); 3. An acknowledgment of responsibility; 4. A declaration of repentance; 5. An offer of repair; and 6. A request for forgiveness. Sadly, the glowering feeling of “being a toddler forced to apologise because you have frightfully misbehaved” never really goes away. Sharing food, or indeed drink Etiquette expert Hanson is reassuringly outraged by my negroni story, but responds with an idea of how to respond next time this happens with something so gloriously passively aggressive that it makes me feel as if he’s walked over and slapped me sharply – but not unlovingly! – in the face. “If we were out and I said, ‘Oh, my gin and tonic’s delicious,’ and you said, ‘Oh, can I have a sip?’ I would say, ‘Of course – let me order you one,’ and beckon the waiter over as nicely as I could.” Myers is slightly less elegantly vicious, but still enforces boundaries. “Sharing food can be a bonding experience – an opportunity to explore the farthest reaches of a menu together, especially with tapas or meze – but Covid has exposed our previous cleanliness hypocrisy. We’d demand five-star hygiene ratings from restaurants, but then spend the entire meal sticking unwashed hands into each other’s dinner.” If you want a nibble of someone else’s plate, “you should wait to be asked”, but do think how much you actually want to try their pasta. “Consider a fork in your pie or a bite of your burger to be their tongue in your mouth,” Myers says. “If you’re unwilling to accept their saliva, everybody’s mouths and hands need to stay on their own side of the table.” Flirting Flirting is fun, isn’t it – adding a flicker of electricity to what is often a normal, even banal conversation (“No way one of your top three biscuits is a digestive, sorry! No!”) – but it’s been hard to do in the last two years. First, when it was basically illegal to touch people’s arms in a significant way, and second, since we’ve all been released, there’s been a feral edge to it. “Historically, flirting felt fun and pleasantly aimless, a sport that prioritised taking part over the podium,” Myers laments. “Now, after so much time lost, people are reluctant to waste it; if they don’t feel an instant connection, they scoot on, in search of someone to tick their boxes.” Annie Lord, a dating columnist for Vogue and contributor to the Guardian, treats flirting like a contact sport. “Touch works as well – obviously after you’ve assessed they’d be comfortable with that,” she says. “But like a little shove when they make an annoying joke or nudging them when you’re both leaning at the bar waiting for drinks, it warms things up.” Another thing worth bringing back is “looking at people”, something that feels especially intense in a post-mask world. “The sort of thing that works on me is intense eye contact,” Lord says. “It makes me go all shy and giggly, and I start playing with my hair. It feels as if they’re seeing who you really are. It makes you feel special. Since the pandemic, I’ve felt this even more because we went for such long periods without anyone looking at us, without being noticed.” Taking public transport People acting bizarrely on public transport is a cherished tradition in this country, and something I think we lost sight of during the first few lockdowns. Recently, I was on a bus that turned its engine off because a woman was shouting at the driver so much, and I was oddly soothed by the interruption: it felt like normality again. Public transport is a place where people can be their most authentic selves, so I am loth to enforce any particular rules over it, but it’s worth using this space to remind people to wear masks if the service demands it and – because I can’t believe how often this happens, still – have your payment method ready before you set foot on the bus or towards the barrier. How do some of you not know this yet? How? Saying no to things All of that said: is it still OK to be anxious about the outside world? After absorbing months and months of messaging saying that it’s a place that can hurt you: yes, a bit. I, for one, have been guilty of using, “Sorry mate, can’t: pandemic” as an excuse not to go to things I didn’t want to go to anyway, and it’s still a fairly useful get-out, but – as with a lot of these new social rules – playing it by ear and leaning into what you’re comfortable with is key. If there’s a new variant doing the rounds, feel free to welch on dinner. If there’s a mask-less bowling party happening and you don’t feel great about putting your fingers in there, don’t. And if someone tries to drink your negroni, then pull it away from them. They’ll look like fools, not you. We’re still feeling out what society looks like in a post-vaccine world, but saying, “No thanks – not for me!” is still a fairly vital part of it.The death of a newborn baby with Lassa fever in Luton is a grim reminder of the global threat posed by deadly infectious diseases. Three cases have been confirmed in England – the first time the acute viral illness normally only seen in west Africa has emerged in the UK for 13 years. This weekend, officials from the UK Health Security Agency are closely monitoring hundreds of people identified as potential contacts of the three cases. The Guardian has learned many of these individuals will continue to be monitored for the rest of the month and into March. The NHS is also performing risk assessments of staff and patients who were in the same areas as the Lassa fever patients in Luton and Dunstable University hospital and Addenbrooke’s hospital in Cambridge. Although most people with the disease will make a full recovery, severe illness can occur in some and one in every 100 infected will die. No further cases have been identified to date. But global health experts say the return of Lassa fever – at a time when the UK is still fighting off another deadly infectious disease, Covid-19 – is a sign of worse things to come. “The three confirmed cases of the potentially deadly Lassa fever in the UK, now very sadly including one death, are a stark reminder of our interconnected world and the need to continue to invest in outbreak preparedness and response efforts,” said Dr Melanie Saville, the director of vaccine development at the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations (CEPI). Globally, the number of people contracting infectious diseases such as Lassa fever, the harms they can cause and their abilities to move rapidly from one side of the world to the other are growing – and for a variety of reasons, according to Saville. “Emerging infectious diseases are increasing in prevalence, severity and spread as a result of climate change, global transportation and human encroachment into previously isolated areas,” she said. The growing threat posed by deadly infectious diseases, Saville said, underlines the “urgent need for vaccines”. CEPI is now advancing the development of six Lassa fever vaccines. Three of these – developed by Inovio Pharmaceuticals, the International Aids Vaccine Initiative (IAVI), and Themis Bioscience – are the first in the world to enter clinical trials. The ultimate goal, Saville said, was to produce a licensed Lassa vaccine for routine immunisation. To enable this to happen, the largest-ever Lassa fever study, called Enable, has been launched to provide a more accurate assessment of the incidence of Lassa fever infections in west Africa. More than 20,000 people are being recruited to take part in the study, which will provide key information to help guide future late-stage Lassa vaccine clinical trials and potential vaccination strategies following licensure of a product. Some scientists have raised concerns that lessons have not been learned from Covid-19 about the need to properly fund the development of vaccines for other deadly infectious diseases. Prof Dame Sarah Gilbert, one of the creators of the Oxford/AstraZeneca vaccine, warned in October her team was struggling to raise the money needed to develop vaccines against diseases including Lassa fever. “We’ve actually gone backwards in terms of the work we’re doing on development of vaccines for the outbreak pathogens before the pandemic,” she said. “It’s just really slowed right down. Trying to get that moving again is really difficult and the funding still isn’t there to move that on.” That message might slowly be getting through. This week, the UK government said research into vaccines against deadly infectious diseases would be backed by a new £10m fund. The UK Vaccine Network will provide grants for 22 projects aimed at tackling severe illnesses in low- and middle-income countries. They include £498,000 to DIOSynVax to develop its vaccine against Lassa fever, Ebola and Marburg virus disease. The real hope, though, according to Saville, is the development of a vaccine that could be prepared for use against a new disease that has not yet emerged, such as a new member of the Lassa fever’s Arenaviridae viral family. Recognising that new viruses from this family could emerge in the future with greater transmissibility and/or fatality rates, experts are already using the work on the Lassa vaccine to guide the creation of a prototypic vaccine for use against the Arenaviridae family. “The idea here is that this prototype vaccine could be ready to be pulled off the shelf and swiftly adapted next time a novel Arenaviridae virus emerges,” said Saville. “That way, we don’t lose valuable time creating a new vaccine from scratch.” The good news is, for now at least, Lassa fever poses very little risk to people in the UK and is nowhere near as dangerous as Covid-19, which has killed 160,000 in the UK the past two years. “Lassa fever is a serious infection, but is nothing like as infectious as Covid-19,” said Dr Michael Head, a senior research fellow in global health at the University of Southampton. “Previous studies have estimated the R number of Lassa to be roughly between 1.0 and 1.6. The original wild-type coronavirus at the start of this pandemic had an R number of about 3, and the variants have become increasingly infectious. “Of course, any Lassa cases within the UK are of concern. However, we won’t be seeing transmission anything like the scale we have with the Covid-19 pandemic, and the risks to the wider public are very low.”Six African countries – Egypt, Kenya, Nigeria, Senegal, South Africa and Tunisia – will be the first on the continent to receive the technology needed to produce their own mRNA vaccines from a scheme headed by the World Health Organization. The groundbreaking project aims to assist low- and middle-income countries in manufacturing mRNA vaccines at scale and according to international standards, with the aim of ending much of the reliance of African countries on vaccine manufacturers outside the continent. The announcement comes in the same week that BioNTech, which produces the Pfizer vaccine for Covid-19 – itself an mRNA vaccine – announced it planned to deliver factory facilities built out of shipping containers to several African countries to allow the Pfizer vaccine to be produced on the continent. Primarily set up to address the Covid-19 pandemic, the global mRNA hub has the potential to expand manufacturing capacity for other vaccines and products, such as insulin to treat diabetes, cancer medicines and, potentially, vaccines for diseases such as malaria, tuberculosis and HIV. The WHO established its global mRNA technology transfer hub after vaccine hoarding by wealthy countries – and problems with supply from India, as companies prioritised sales to governments that could pay the highest price – meant low- and middle-income countries were pushed to the back of the queue for Covid-19 vaccines. The scheme’s ultimate goal is to spread capacity for national and regional production to all health technologies. While the BioNTech initiative was welcomed for potentially shortening the supply chain of the Pfizer vaccine to Africa, it was also criticised for not sharing technological knowhow, which the WHO project will go some way towards redressing. “No other event like the Covid-19 pandemic has shown that reliance on a few companies to supply global public goods is limiting, and dangerous,” said the WHO chief, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, announcing the first recipients of the technology on Friday after visiting the hub in South Africa last week. “The hub will be not just for South Africa, it’s for Africa, Africa and the whole world, because the spokes will be distributed all over the world.” “The best way to address health emergencies and reach universal health coverage is to significantly increase the capacity of all regions to manufacture the health products they need.” “We expect clinical trials [in South Africa] to start in the fourth quarter of this year, with approval expected in 2024, but this process can be sped up, [and] there are other options that the hub is exploring. Tedros added that the benefits of this initiative would “extend far beyond Covid-19, by creating a platform for vaccines against other diseases including malaria, tuberculosis and even cancer. So this is a strategic investment, not just for Covid, but for all the major health problems that we face”. Tedros has repeatedly called for equitable access to vaccines in order to beat the pandemic, and rails against the way wealthy nations have hoarded doses, leaving Africa lagging behind other continents in the global vaccination effort. He pointed out on Friday that 116 countries globally were still off-track for the target of vaccinating 70% of the population by the middle of this year, while 80% of the population of Africa was yet to receive a single dose. Currently only 1% of the vaccines used in Africa are produced on the continent of about 1.3 billion people. The WHO said it would work with the six countries to develop a roadmap of training and support so they could start producing vaccines as soon as possible. Training will begin in March. The South African hub is already producing mRNA vaccines at laboratory scale and is scaling up towards commercial scale. The South African president, Cyril Ramaphosa, said Friday’s announcement “means mutual respect, mutual recognition of what we can all bring to the party, investment in our economies, infrastructure investment and, in many ways, giving back to the continent”. The French president, Emmanuel Macron, said supporting African health sovereignty was one of the key goals of starting up local production, “to empower regions and countries to fend for themselves, during crises, and in peacetime”. Ramaphosa said on Friday that the global vaccine distribution scheme Covax and vaccines alliance Gavi should commit themselves to buying vaccines from local manufacturing hubs. “The lack of a market for vaccines produced in Africa is something that should be concerning to all of us. Organisations such as Covax and Gavi need to commit to buying vaccines from local manufacturers instead of going outside of those hubs that have been set up,” Ramaphosa said.One of Europe’s most-wanted drug lords, a Belgian with a master’s degree in criminology, has been arrested in Switzerland after two years on the run. Flor Bressers, 35, nicknamed “the finger cutter”, has been sought since 2020 when he was given a four-year jail sentence for kidnapping, slashing with a razor and beating a Dutch florist who failed to smuggle drugs past UK customs. He was prosecuted previously in 2010 in Limburg for allegedly cutting off the finger of a Dutch criminal with pruning shears. He was acquitted for lack of evidence, but the alleged incident earned him his nickname. Bressers has been linked via numerous cases to a narcotics gang operating in Antwerp believed to have smuggled tonnes of cocaine from South America to Europe. He was on both a Belgian and Europol most-wanted list for kidnapping, illegal restraint and hostage-taking and participation in a criminal organisation. It was thought Bressers had been hiding in South Africa but he was arrested in Zurich where he was found with his partner and child. The Belgian authorities have requested his extradition. Kristof Aerts, a spokesman for prosecutors in Antwerp, said Bressers was linked to ongoing judicial investigations in Antwerp, West Flanders and East Flanders. He said: “Serious organised crime is the common thread here. These include investigations into the international trafficking of drugs in which the violence was committed. “Last night, the fugitive was arrested in Switzerland. The arrest, carried out by special units and with the help of other Swiss police forces, is the result of an intensive manhunt that lasted several months.” Experts have warned that the extreme violence of the drug cartels operating in Mexico and Colombia has been exported to Europe in recent years. Earlier this month, prosecutors in Amsterdam said recreational drug users should reflect on the discovery of a soundproofed torture chamber in Wouwse Plantage in Brabant, in the Netherlands. In the shipping container, detectives had found a refashioned dentist’s chair, with straps for tying arms and legs, finger clamps, scalpels, claw hammers, pliers, loppers, pruning shears, gas burners, tie wraps and duct tape.Storm Eunice is battering parts of the UK, felling trees and scattering roof tiles as forecasters warn of a “significant threat to life”. But is it caused by climate breakdown, and can we expect an increase in such disruptive storms? Where has the storm come from? Eunice brewed in the central Atlantic and was spun up from the Azores towards Europe by the jet stream. Is it a particularly bad storm? Yes, gusts of up to 110mph have been recorded at the Needles lighthouse on the Isle of Wight. This has exceeded the prediction of 90mph winds, and is just under the record 120mph winds that hit during the devastating storm of 1987, during which 18 people died in one day. The Met Office says Eunice has the potential to be the worst storm since then. A rare red alert has been issued by the Met Office, with people asked to stay at home if they can. The government has convened Cobra to discuss response to the likely devastation ahead. Prof Hannah Cloke, a professor of hydrology at the University of Reading, said: “The Met Office red and amber warnings for high winds should not be taken lightly. Red means you need to act now because there is an imminent danger to life. Everyone who lives or works in those areas should be battening down the hatches, literally in some cases, to prevent people from being killed and injured and to protect your homes and businesses. “Let us be clear what this means. Winds of 70mph will uproot trees, which can block roads and crush cars or buildings. They can pick up roof tiles and hurl them around. If you are hit by one of those you will be seriously hurt or killed. Wind that strong will sweep people and vehicles off streets, and topple electricity lines. Do not take any chances. Stay inside.” There is talk of a deadly ‘sting jet’ coming with the storm, but what is that? Met Office scientists have said one of these can form. Matt Priestley, a research scientist at the University of Exeter, looking at storm tracks and extratropical cyclones, said they were small areas of very intense winds within a storm’s cyclone that were hard to predict. “They are generally about 10-20km wide and are generated by specific instabilities within the flight lines of storms and cause very high wind speeds. “They’re not a feature of all storms. They’re often just a feature of the most intense ones like Storm Eunice. The fact that they are such small scale but can have such high wind speeds makes forecasting them very, very difficult.” Is Eunice linked to climate breakdown? Michael Dukes, a forecaster at MetDesk, said it could be. He explained: “Although it is hard to pinpoint climate change as a reason for individual severe weather events, climate models do indicate an increase in these type of storms as the earth continues to slowly warm. So this is very much in line with what climate scientists have been warning us about for a number of years now.” While there is dispute between scientists over whether the storms themselves are likely to increase and become stronger, most agree that the climate crisis will make their impacts worse. The German climatologist Friederike Otto, who leads the pioneering World Weather Attribution service on whether droughts, big storms or heatwaves were made more likely by the climate emergency, said there was “very little evidence that winds in these winter storms have gotten stronger with climate change”. She said: “Nevertheless the damages of winter storms have gotten worse because of human-caused climate change for two reasons: one, the rainfall associated with these winter storms has become more intense, and many studies link this clearly to climate change; and two, because of sea-level rise, storm surges are higher and thus more damaging than they would otherwise be.” Richard Allan, a professor of climate science at the University of Reading, said: “Once-in-a-decade storms like Eunice are certain to batter the British Isles in the future but there is no compelling evidence that they will become more frequent or potent in terms of wind speeds. “Yet with more intense rainfall and higher sea levels as human-caused climate change continues to heat the planet, flooding from coastal storm surges and prolonged deluges will worsen still further when these rare, explosive storms hit us in a warmer world.”Exhibition of the week Surrealism Beyond Borders An ambitious attempt to see surrealism not just as something that happened in Paris, Belgium and Spain but as a global movement with branches from Egypt to Mexico. • Tate Modern, London, 24 February to 29 August. Also showing A Century of the Artist’s Studio: 1920-2020 How artists create their own caves of creativity, from Picasso to Walead Beshty and Kerry James Marshall. • Whitechapel Art Gallery, London, 24 February to 29 June. Carlo Crivelli: Shadows on the Sky This very likeble Renaissance artist who filled his paintings with fruit, regardless of the occasion, gets a show at a gallery usually dedicated to the contemporary. • Ikon Gallery, Birmingham, 23 February to 29 May. David Nash: Full Circle The sculptor shows his drawings and watercolours of trees and nature. • Yorkshire Sculpture Park, 19 February to 5 June. Keith Cunningham: The Cloud of Witness Damien Hirst exhibits macabre and melancholy works by a lesser-known School of London painter. • Newport Street Gallery, London, until 21 August. Image of the week After a five-year, £68m renovation, the exceptional and prized 1970s building housing the majestic and abundant Burrell Collection in Pollok Country Park, Glasgow, is now more spacious and visitor-friendly – but at a cost to its original design, argues Rowan Moore in the Observer. “In important ways it’s better than before,” he writes, “but it has become a little more normal.” Read the full review here. What we learned Daniel Lismore is a living sculpture Graphic designer Klaus Staeck’s posters attacked car culture French art inspired Disney animators Tate Britain’s “unequivocally offensive” Whistler mural will have new work alongside it … … while references to Van Gogh’s mental health in souvenirs at a London’s Courtauld Gallery have drawn criticism Landmark postage stamp designer David Gentlemen has been recognised with a set in his honour The LensCulture Art photography awards 2022 push boundaries “I don’t want to have my life in control. I never go to the studio,” says artist Marina Abramović Empty shops could be studios for the next Bacon or Hirst, says the Whitechapel Gallery’s director Nigerian artist Ekene Stanley Emecheta removes skin colour and boundaries from his paintings Masterpiece of the week The Death of Eurydice by Niccolò dell’Abate, c 1552-71 While the poet Orpheus hypnotises wild beasts with his lyre, his wife, Eurydice, is chased by a shepherd called Aristaeus, gets bitten by a snake, and dies. The ancient myth of Eurydice’s death, and its eerie aftermath when Orpheus tries to save her from Hades, anticipates the surrealists with its imagery of desire, death and the underworld. Its most beautiful modern telling is Jean Cocteau’s film Orphée. This painting is a kind of prehistory of Cocteau’s vision since it shows how the myth of Orpheus came to France: Niccolò dell’Abate was one of a group of Italian artists employed by the French monarchy at Fontainebleau, who injected a sensual classicism into French culture. In truth, we see the figures here as a parade of cavorting bodies and barely notice the story against the vast, blue, dreamy landscape. • National Gallery, London Don’t forget To follow us on Twitter: @GdnArtandDesign. Sign up to the Art Weekly newsletter If you don’t already receive our regular roundup of art and design news via email, please sign up here. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.comAs you know, Oliver Dowden laments threats to all British statues – indeed, this week found the Conservative chairman in Washington DC, making a speech about such things to an American thinktank. As a keen student of his joined-up theories, I’ve always looked forward to the day Oliver feels ready to give us his speech on the disgraceful 2012 removal of the Jimmy Savile statue from Glasgow’s Scotstoun leisure centre. Have we not got to live with our history? Debate it, yes, question it, yes – but ultimately preserve every handcarved wooden statue of a paedo in whatever family setting happens to boast one. In the meantime, according to Dowden, woke ideology is putting the west at risk from countries such as Russia, even though Russians are so woke they have whole parks of torn-down statuary, featuring figures whose historical legacy they didn’t feel particularly minded to debate or live with when they were yanking them off the plinths. Absolute snowflakes. I can’t remember whether the Tory chairman does street name culture-warring yet – only a matter of time, obviously – but he could certainly salute the tailors of London’s Savile Row for sticking with the name, no matter the vicious jibes about bespoke shellsuits that it doubtless drew from the wokerati of the time. And Oliver could also take issue with the users of the Scarborough footpath who no longer wished it to be known as Savile’s View, to say nothing of the local council which stripped Savile of the freedom of Scarborough. The monstrous television presenter’s ability to make use of said freedom was arguably limited at the time, given he was dead, but it was widely felt the act was symbolic and respectful of the victims. Forty odd miles away in York this week, the issue raises itself once more in the wake of Prince Andrew’s decision to agree a multimillion-dollar settlement with a woman he has “no recollection” of meeting, not even when she was a trafficked minor, and not even when there’s a photo of him with his arm round her which also features convicted child sex trafficker Ghislaine Maxwell – a photo that was probably snapped by dead paedophile Jeffrey Epstein. According to the settlement statement, “Prince Andrew regrets his association with Epstein”. Which is weird, because when Emily Maitlis asked his HRH if he did, he honked: “No, still not … and the reason being that the people that I met and the opportunities that I was given to learn … were actually very useful.” Well quite. You don’t throw the baby out with the bathwater, and you don’t throw the Dummies Guide to Business out with the international child sex trafficker. In fact, you don’t even throw out the international child sex trafficker. Anyway. For whatever reason, the city of York is mulling its ties with the Duke thereof, with councillors declaring they will seek to revoke Prince Andrew’s honorary freedom of their city at the next full council meeting. Excitingly for Dowden’s speechwriters, this is not an isolated incident. Mid and East Antrim council will hold a debate in June on the renaming of Prince Andrew Way in Carrickfergus, though Prince Andrew Park and Prince Andrew Gardens in south Belfast both look to be getting away with it as things stand. By chance, a couple of weeks ago I read in the Shropshire Star about the residents of a Telford street who are also mulling a name change. Where once they were pleased or simply indifferent to live on Prince Andrew Drive, there are now differences of opinion among residents. Some feel that it’s time to freshen things up. “We think it should change,” said one, who was planning to write to the council. Others were more of the Dowden persuasion. “We don’t agree with what he might have done,” another neighbour told the paper, “but you can’t keep changing things. You can’t erase history. He’s still part of the royal family.” A further resident speculated that it wouldn’t make any difference. “I couldn’t be doing with the hassle of changing my address on everything,” she added. That in some ways feels most relatably British – the weary understanding that your street is named after some out-and-out shit, set against the full spectrum bureaucratic horror show of attempting to do something about it. It’s the absolute knowledge that what should be relatively simple will pretty soon involve someone very nice at the post office explaining to you that while your street might have a new name, you’re going to have to pay for a redirection of mail from your own home, to your own home, as technically the mapping software hasn’t caught up. Next: the bank. By the time you’re into your second hour of robot chat assistant with Yodel you’re very much at the stage of “Fine! I give in! I have always lived in Harold Shipman Row, and I always will! Restore factory settings and leave me to my fuming.” As one of the residents of Prince Andrew Drive commented tartly: “There’s another street near here called Sussex Close. I wouldn’t want to live there either!” Well now. That feels sufficiently generalised as to open a whole other can of worms. Could the entire county of Sussex suffer a kind of genre-killing, at the remote hands of two Montecito residents whose Spotify podcast has been taken into special measures? Given the deep-set establishment resistance to changing literally anything at all in the country if it relates to slavers and princes and other people who’ve “suffered enough”, we could be nearing the phase where it’s simpler for the Duke of York to hang on to his titles and York-based honours and so on, and for York itself to rebrand as something else entirely. Giuffre, say, or Maitlis. For now, it all remains very unclear. The fact is, we simply don’t KNOW what we’re allowed to feel about any of our local community environments unless some politician who lives in London tells us – ideally while he’s twatting about in Washington. Washington DC, that is – not Washington Tyne and Wear, which might well wish to consider the unfortunate associations with some of the most shameless opportunists in the world. Marina Hyde is a Guardian columnist An evening with Marina Hyde and John Crace: Join in person or online Join Marina Hyde and John Crace live in Kings Place, looking back at the latest events in Westminster. On Monday 7 March, 8pm GMT | 9pm CET | 12pm PST | 3pm EST. Book tickets hereI just adore skiing. Not the part where you throw yourself down mountains – I’m hopeless at that, it’s genetic, I’m just not posh enough. No, I’m here purely for the aesthetic. The vibe. Cosy quilting and furry ear muffs; Bond-baddie polo necks and cartoonish moon boots. Skiing is a moodboard of all the good bits of winter. Crunchy snow, invigorating crisp air, hot chocolate, the promise of longer days and fresh adventure. I love the first bit of winter, until the end of December. In those months the world is fairy-lit and gingerbread scented and I can wish merry Christmas to the nice man in the post office and feel like I’m in the Downton Abbey festive special, except for it being Ed Sheeran on the radio instead of Christmas carols. January and February are a different story. These are the depths of the rubbish part of winter, to be trudged through while feeling listless. But while most of us are waiting grumpily at the bus stop with cold toes, trying not to get splashed by noxious puddle water and feeling vaguely cross that it’s still dark all the time, the ski people are snugly padded and rosy-cheeked and wearing sunglasses. Ski people make winter look fabulous – and I want in. Which is where faux-ski fashion comes in. Faux-ski is like après ski but without the eye-watering expense of an actual ski holiday. Faux-ski – wearing ski jackets and snow boots and Alpine knitwear, but for real life – is this season’s breakout outerwear trend. The 1% already wear their plush Moncler or Perfect Moment quilting out to brunch in Mayfair on chilly days, the pricey ski jacket having taken over where the fur coat left off, a decade or two ago, among the jet set. That arctic white does set off a Verbier tan beautifully, it must be said. But this is different, because faux-ski is for everyone. Now that the kind of North Face quilted jackets that were once reserved for hiking expeditions are standard dog-walking attire, the rise of ski stuff as a fashion trend is the logical next step in jazzing up your coat game. Faux-ski is way more fun than the generic dark-Puffa-with-trackpants look that is still all around us. The high collars that keep out windchill on the slopes bring a dash of Audrey Hepburn elegance. Belted quilted jackets – practical for skiing because they stop snow from sliding up your back if you fall on your bum – have a Y2K snow bunny vibe, which is very this season. (At the time of writing, there were some bargain Isabel Marant Etoile “Dilys” ski jackets to be had in the Net-a-Porter sale.) Chevrons and high-shine metallics are as effective for getting noticed in real life as they are for getting spotted by mountain rescue. Moon boots – and the thigh-hugging, bootcut trousers that work with them – are very Paris Hilton, which as you will be aware of by now is once again A Good Thing, however baffling that might seem. Even balaclavas (also known as ski masks) have been all over TikTok, and starring in Zara window displays, recently. Doubling as a face covering, the balaclava is a practical pandemic winter accessory. There is one more accessory you need. Not goggles, but attitude. For which, feel free to channel Lady Gaga in her blood-red snowsuit in the House of Gucci movie, downing an alfresco espresso and rapping a spoon against her cup like a judge with a gavel. Nail that, and you are a bona fide skiing champ. It’s easy when you know how.Iam two mouthfuls into my avocado toast when I realise what it is about Nicôle Lecky, the actor, writer and singer-songwriter at the centre of BBC Three’s new musical drama Mood, that has her so tipped for stardom. She’s cool. Not just in the conventional, strong-looks-and-swagger way, or because her affable yet direct personality makes her uniquely easy to connect with (“Nobody is too old for Ibiza,” she offers when I share my latest holiday anxiety). But it’s in the forensic way she talks about her work, detailed but never dispassionate – the sign of an artist in full control of their vision. For Mood – based on Superhoe, her 2019 one-woman stage play – Lecky is very much in charge. She plays the lead. The script is hers. Many of the lyrics are hers (and usually sung by her, too). It’s executive produced by her, and nearly every character is one she has performed in the stage version. When we meet for breakfast in London, she’s on her way to the editing suite. “We started shooting in March. The cast and choreographer have all finished and moved on,” she says. “But I’m still here.” Mood joins a stellar roster of television shows adapted from plays whose inspiration comes from their creator’s life: Michaela Coel’s Chewing Gum, Phoebe Waller-Bridge’s Fleabag, Sophie Willan’s Alma’s Not Normal. It’s set in the diverse, working-class communities of east London where Lecky grew up. “But I always say [Mood] is more observational than autobiographical,” she says. Lecky plays Sasha, a 25-year-old mixed-race singer and rapper who is going nowhere. She can’t get over her ex, and spends most of her day smoking weed and scrolling through his Instagram. When her mum eventually throws her out, she has to find a way to fend for herself. She meets Carly, a glamorous influencer who promises to show her how to make it big. But the online game is far more complex than she could have imagined, taking her on an exploration of sex work, self-expression and the weighty impact of social media on young women. Unlike Fleabag, Chewing Gum et al, Mood is not a comedy. You might smile at the witty one-liners that she rhymes atop a rich soundtrack drawn from genres from disco to grime (“Cancel culture in my own home!” she raps, when her family kicks her out). But in the first two episodes there’s drugs, poverty, unemployment, racism and sex work – all dealt with without veering into moral panic, judgement or glamorisation. Unlike Sasha, who is surrounded by people who don’t take her talent seriously, Lecky says she’s “had many great mentors and supporters” throughout her career. As a child, she was “into everything artsy. I wanted to dance, I wanted to sing, I wanted to do drama. I was drawing a lot.” She excelled in choir and singing lessons, and was signed by a theatrical agent by 18, around the time she joined a youth theatre. Her bright academic record meant she was accepted to King’s College for war studies, but the demands of the course meant she couldn’t act on the side. She dropped out, heading to drama school instead. She was writing throughout – short stories, plays, poems. She won a place on a BBC scheme and ended up writing for the EastEnders spin-off E20 as a teenager. “But I had no notion of how somebody like myself would become a writer. I knew I was always writing, but I just didn’t think I could make money from it.” It was only after she left drama school that Lecky’s focus turned back to writing. “When I got my writing agent, I was like: ‘Here are all these scripts I’ve written.’ There was a body of work that was unseen, because it’s what I loved to do.” Happily, Lecky says her family have always been supportive, which she recognises is not always the case for working-class creatives, and that she no longer needs to pick between her passions. “I feel more empowered now, much more than when I was trying to pay my rent. A lot of the time you audition for stuff and you don’t even fucking want it, but you’re just like: ‘I need to eat.’” The realities of money and identity are at the heart of Mood. We see how characters experience similar things differently due to race, economics or mental health. In one scene, Sasha visits her friend – who is Black – and is joined by her white roommate as she laughs about the “free the nipple” movement on Instagram: “You posh girls,” says Sasha’s pal. “If we did that, everyone would be chatting shit.” To create the script, Lecky interviewed dozens of women involved in online sex work. She has consistently said in interviews that she is pro-sex work and sex-worker rights. But the real-life stories she heard didn’t fall neatly into either side of the debate. “I think that’s why, with this show, I’ve tried to look at the nuance,” she says. “I met one woman who came across very happy, and acted like she loved all of it. But later she levelled with me that there were things about it that bothered her. She makes shitloads of money, though.” There were other stories she came across, which she found herself disturbed by. “I formed connections with people I was talking to, particularly the younger girls. I was really fearful for one because she was doing it in secret. “I said to her the first time she did it: ‘What did you buy?’ She said: ‘I bought weave bundles.’ That sent me. I thought there was something quite innocent about it. Her Instagram was flawless, stunted out. I just thought: “At that age, I don’t remember being 18 and feeling a pressure that I had to look like I had all this money. Why would you have that much money?” Did she find there was a split in how women perceived sex work, along generational, class or even racial lines? “Not generationally, as everyone I spoke to was under 35. But there can be a split, culturally, in terms of what your upbringing is and what you’re exposed to sexually and politically. Where I grew up in east London, there was a lot of sex-shaming in secondary schools. I think back to school years and think how fucking hard you have it as a teenage girl.” Lecky was wary of passing judgment on any of the stories her interviewees shared with her. “If somebody tells me something, I take them at their word because how can I tell a grown woman that she isn’t empowered? Who am I to define somebody else’s liberation? Even that 18-year-old girl, in my head, I’m going: ‘When she’s my age [Lecky is 31], she’s going to regret this.’ But maybe she won’t, maybe that’s my internalised [misogyny]. There are a lot of people grinding for their jobs and getting far less money – so who’s happier?” I tell Lecky that we share some background – I grew up in a neighbouring working-class, ethnically diverse borough – and I recognised many of the small details, from the slang to the shots of the Docklands Light Railway (most shows opt for the tube). She smiles. “Specificity is my thing. I didn’t want [Mood to feel] general, because I’d done so much research.” Does she feel the burden of representation when she writes about these marginalised groups, especially ones so close to home? “I don’t actually feel that pressure, interestingly. These are people from my experience and I love my community. I see it more as a positive, as inspiration. I can’t get everything right. I’m OK with that.” Lecky says getting to this point has been a journey. She recalls coming off stage after performances of Superhoe and meeting audience members in tears. “They would come up to me afterwards and tell me secrets, maybe they’d sofa-surfed and slept with the guy whose sofa it was for free rent. It was really sad because it was like they were carrying this shame. I’m like: “That’s not your shame to bear. Someone’s been exploiting you.” When adapting the show into the scripts needed for Mood, Lecky would feel bad for having to cut those stories. But soon enough she learned it simply wasn’t possible for one writer to do it all. “You are one person. You can’t represent your whole community. I’m like: ‘You lot who are commissioners, commission more people from the community who have different experiences.’ It’s not for me to do that. That’s not me resisting, that’s me going: ‘I want to inspire everybody around me. Everybody should feel like they can tell whatever story, and equally people going: ‘It’s autobiographical, it’s your story,’ I say: “No, it’s not, it’s just one story I want to tell.” As she packs her bag to leave we discuss the upcoming premiere for Mood. Perhaps it’s local pride but I suddenly have a great desire for her to have the best time. “I hope you’re going to buy a new outfit,” I say, imagining the fun of shopping. She replies, laughing: “Why, do you not like what I’m wearing?” She departs, smiling at the parting banter. “Yep,” I think, “she’s cool.” Mood begins 1 March on BBC ThreeChelsea have little time to bask in their Club World Cup triumph as they kick off a pivotal week with a trip to Crystal Palace. Thomas Tuchel may opt to rest players before the Champions League tussle with Lille on Tuesday followed by the Carabao Cup final against Liverpool next Sunday. Tuchel will definitely be without Mason Mount, who sustained an ankle injury against Palmeiras, but Reece James could return from a 10-game absence with a thigh problem. Palace are winless in five games and their hopes of ending that sequence are hindered by Conor Gallagher being ineligible to play against his parent club. Stephen Hollis Saturday 3pm Venue Selhurst Park Last season Crystal Palace 1 Chelsea 4 Referee David Coote This season G14 Y63 R2 4.64 cards/game Odds H 5-1 A 7-10 D 3-1 CRYSTAL PALACE Subs from Butland, Matthews, Milivojevic, Mateta, Benteke, Kelly, Banks, Hannam, Riedewald, Rak-Sakyi, Clyne, McArthur, Tomkins, Eze Doubtful None Injured Ferguson (hamstring, Apr) Unavailable Gallagher (loan terms) Suspended None Discipline Y43 R1 Form WLDLDD Leading scorer Gallagher 7 CHELSEA Subs from Bettinelli, Bergstrom, Hudson-Odoi, Simons, Sarr, Hall, Hudson-Odoi, Vale, Loftus-Cheek, Barkley, Saúl, Werner, James Doubtful James (thigh) Injured Mount (ankle, 27 Feb), Chilwell (knee, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y39 R1 Form WDDLDW Leading scorer Mount 7It is not suitable viewing for people with a fear of flying but a YouTube outlet that livestreams aircraft has become one of the unexpected hits of Storm Eunice. Big Jet TV has built up a steady audience over the last six years by livestreaming aircraft movements but its biggest audiences come during storms, when its cameras are set up on the perimeter of airports and broadcast for hours. On Friday, the channel hit a record 200,000 concurrent live viewers for its stream of planes struggling to land in strong winds at Heathrow airport – more than usually watch many British rolling news television channels. The host often praises the pilots and ground teams for their hard work and expertise in landing the aircraft safely in difficult conditions, while viewers’ hearts must go out to those onboard. A significant part of Big Jet TV’s appeal is its founder and host, Jerry Dyer, who has built up a cult audience online for his unfiltered excitable commentary. Watching the channel is the transport equivalent of tuning into Sky Sports’ longrunning Soccer Saturday programme – except rather than having a retired footballer enthusiastically reporting a goal, viewers are treated to Dyer screeching with delight when a pilot pulls off a challenging landing. As one wobbling Air Algiers flight approached the Heathrow runway on Friday morning, Dyer shouted over the wind and made predictions about whether the aircraft would have to abandon its approach and make a “go-around”. “I think this guy’s gonna struggle. He’s all over the place. Here we go, here we go. Easy, easy. He’s down!” he cried. Occasionally, he lapsed into political commentary such as when welcoming an Aeroflot Boeing 777: “Next in from Moscow, let’s give a big warm welcome – or whichever side of the fence you’re on – to the Russians, ladies and gentlemen!” He told viewers that the storm was the ultimate test of pilots’ abilities: “They’ve been through all these scenarios in the simulators. British Airways train their pilots hard and they do try their best to simulate these conditions. But it’s like anything simulated: you’re all in a nice clean, stable environment and you can have a cup of coffee with you. “Inside that cockpit is massively intense. You’ve got the non-flying pilot reading out all the parameters, the altitude, the speed, all that kind of thing. You’ve got the pilot who’s trying to control the aircraft, manipulating the throttle, getting kicked around by the wind. When the winds are very intense you’re literally flying sideways … A big load of props has to go to these pilots and all the other people who are working in the industry as well.” Big Jet TV is a full-time operation for Dyer, supported by financial contributions from members who pay for access to extra streams. The two-person media business is supported by the director of operations, Gilly Prestwood, an early fan of Dyer’s streams who now provides technical support and keeps the broadcast on the road. While mainstream news outlets – which often use Big Jet TV’s clips – try to contextualise the storm and offer coverage from across the country, Dyer maintains his livestreaming for hours: “Oh, they’ve got a big one coming, oh it’s a freighter. Oh mate, I can hear that coming over the bushes. That was crazy, man.” Spotting an Air China cargo flight from Beijing coming in, he dubs it the “testkit express”, explaining that up to five planes a day have been flying in since the start of the pandemic delivering medical supplies to the UK. But he returns swiftly back to the main appeal of providing commentary on whether pilots can land their enormous planes in the most difficult conditions: “Fair play to this pilot, easy son, easy son. Go on, go, go, drop it, drop it, yeah, nicely done.”Thirty years ago percussionist Tim Williams formed a new-music group in Manchester. Williams has remained the artistic director of Psappha ever since, but later this year steps down from his role, so the group’s current tour is both a celebration of its 30th birthday and an extended farewell to its founder. The list of Psappha’s commissions from both established and fledgling composers over its history is prodigious and, characteristically, the programme it is touring also includes a brand new work. Like a number of Simon Holt’s recent pieces, The Sower, for alto flute, cello, piano and cimbalom, is inspired by the poetry of Antonio Machado, in this case by a text found on a bronze plaque in the Andalusian town of Baeza, where Machado taught French between 1912 and 1919. Holt’s 20-minute single movement is threaded through with long solo lines for the flute and the cello, to which the other instruments add flurries of commentary or combine with them to create passages of machine-like insistence. The sound of the cimbalom sometimes blends into that of the piano but more often adds its own distinctive twang to the textures. It’s a piece that seems by turns elegiac and hopeful, full of the crisp, vivid instrumental detail that is so typical of Holt’s music. Williams and the pianist Benjamin Powell also took on The Axe Manual, Harrison Birtwistle’s 2001 workout for piano and a vast array of percussion, in which the two protagonists are either locked in musical combat or into manic toccatas. The technical challenges these confrontations throw up are immense but this was a performance of fabulous assurance. And between these substantial scores were two works that came out of Psappha’s scheme to foster composers at the starts of their careers: Joanna Ward’s Translucent, for a solo cellist (Jennifer Langridge), who has to hum, sing and shriek as well as play her instrument; and Ninfea Cruttwell-Reade’s Three Etudes for Piano and Flowerpots, in which the tuned ceramics produce sounds somewhere between a Javanese gamelan and John Cage’s prepared piano. • At Imperial College London, 10 March. Then touring.A teenager has denied the murder of 12-year-old Ava White but admitted possessing a knife. The schoolgirl was fatally stabbed in the neck after a Christmas lights switch-on in Liverpool city centre on 25 November. A 14-year-old boy, who cannot be named for legal reasons, appeared via video link at Liverpool crown court on Friday charged with her murder. He admitted possessing an offensive weapon, a knife, in Church Alley, Liverpool, on 25 November. About a dozen members of Ava’s family were in court for the hearing, which lasted about half an hour, and some were in tears as the teenager entered his pleas. The judge, Mrs Justice Yip, told the defendant: “Your trial is going to take place in May, starting 9 May.” The case is expected to last three weeks. Ava, who has been described as “popular” and “bright”, was assaulted in the city centre just after 8.30pm. She was taken to Alder Hey Children’s hospital after paramedics arrived but died a short time later. After her death her father, Robert Martin, said the family was “completely devastated and heartbroken”. Hundreds of people attended a vigil held in her memory a week after her death. Family, friends and others gathered in Church Street, close to where the attack happened, to pay tribute to her. Hundreds of balloons, some in the shape of the letter A, were released at the start of the vigil. The Radio City tower was lit up blue in memory of the schoolgirl. Imagine by John Lennon was performed by Astrid Smith as hundreds held up glowsticks and phones to light up the city centre in Ava’s memory. Three other boys were also arrested in connection with Ava’s death. A Merseyside police spokesperson said a 16-year-old boy was released on bail, a 14-year-old was released under investigation and no further action was taken against a 13-year-old.Eddie Howe has admitted he cannot be certain that Kieran Trippier will play again this season after the England right-back underwent surgery on a broken bone in a foot on Thursday. Trippier has excelled in a Newcastle shirt since arriving from Atlético Madrid for £12m early last month and his manager described the absence as “a big blow” to the team’s struggle against relegation. “The operation went well, which was good news, but I don’t know how long he’s going to be out,” said Howe. “We hope to have him back before the end of the season but it’s obviously a significant injury which is a blow to us because he was performing so well. We’re going to have to see how his early rehab goes. “Sadly, we’re going to miss his leadership skills on the pitch and everything that he was delivering for us. Kieran’s scored two goals in the last two games [the wins against Everton and Aston Villa] which have been defining moments for us but we’re confident we have enough quality in the squad to cover for his absence.” Whereas some injured players prefer to separate themselves from teammates while they recover, Howe is confident Trippier will continue to prove a galvanising presence in the dressing room. “The players here find Kieran an inspirational figure and that won’t change,” he said. “He won’t be on the pitch but he will still be around them at the training ground.” Howe has remained close to Trippier since signing him for Burnley earlier in his career and is impressed by the defender’s maturation in recent years. “I can’t compliment Kieran enough on everything he’s achieved,” he said. “Having known the young Kieran I realise he’s changed and developed many facets of his personality.” A run of three straight wins before Saturday’s lunchtime visit to West Ham has lifted Newcastle one place and four points clear of the bottom three but Howe’s side were forced to travel to London by road after their planned charter flight was cancelled.Newcastle may not have landed any huge names during the January transfer window but their investment in a handful of experienced Premier League performers has had the desired effect. Three successive wins has lifted them out of the relegation zone and they could move seven points clear of the bottom three if they chalk up a fourth for the first time since the 2017/18 season. A trip to the London Stadium poses the sternest test of their resurgence under Eddie Howe – even if West Ham have not been totally convincing of late – especially with Kieran Trippier out with a broken foot. Stephen Hollis Saturday 12.30pm BT Sport 1 Venue London Stadium Last season West Ham 0 Newcastle 2 Referee Chris Kavanagh This season G11 Y45 R2 4.27 cards/game Odds H 8-11 A 22-5 D 3-1 WEST HAM Subs from Areola, Randolph, Ashby, Oko-Flex, Baptiste, Alese, Longelo, Johnson, Vlasic, Yarmolenko, Kral, Perkins, Fredericks, Noble, Diop, Kral Doubtful None Injured Masuaku (knee, unknown), Ogbonna (knee, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y31 R2 Form WWLLWD Leading scorers Antonio, Bowen 8 NEWCASTLE Subs from Darlow, Lascelles, Dummett, Longstaff, Bruno Guimarães, Murphy, Almirón, Gayle, De Bolle Doubtful None Injured Fernández (thigh, Mar), Manquillo (ankle, Mar), Wilson (thigh, Apr), Trippier (foot, May), Ritchie (knee, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y64 R2 Form LDDWWW Leading scorer Wilson 6A common criticism of pop music today is that it is too dominated by technology. Vocals are smoothed into perfect pitch and drums or synths come from presets, the end result being that too many songs sound almost the same. They are lacking humanity, those critics say – literally brainless. For Raw Data Feel, their superb new album, Everything Everything have gone further still, “abandoning the human brain”, says singer Jonathan Higgs, in favour of artificial intelligence. “Not until we were about halfway through,” he elaborates over a cuppa in a Manchester bar. “But, yeah, that’s exactly what we did.” The singer was fascinated to read about how AI was being used to create poetry. “That’s one step away from what I do,” he thought. Curious, he used social media to ask people working in machine learning to get in touch. The most intriguing reply came from Mark Hanslip, a musician and researcher at the University of York’s Contemporary Music Research Centre. Higgs asked: “If I send you the data, can you feed it into your machine?” Because Higgs’ lyrics tend to mix what he describes as “cold technology, modern toxicity, ancient myths and an element of prophecy”, he gave Hanslip an array of such raw data, drawn from extremes of human existence. “I wanted something really corporate, so I gave him LinkedIn’s terms and conditions,” he says. “Then I wanted something completely opposite, which was Beowulf, one of the oldest English poems.” The “dangerous, toxic, modern stuff” came courtesy of 400,000 comments from the internet forum 4chan, downloaded as a block. “Then I threw Confucius in as well, for a philosophical veneer.” The process took an age, during which time Higgs sent Hanslip various prompts to give the gizmo. “And after all this it spat out reams and reams of nonsense,” Higgs chuckles. Songwriters (or any of us) can rest easy: human creativity isn’t about to be totally replaced by machines. In the end, Higgs estimates that AI provided only about 5% of the finished lyrics, but it did contribute a song title, (Software Greatman), plus imagery for artwork and videos, and did enough to get a songwriting credit. “Confusingly, we named it after one of the protagonists in the songs,” grins bassist/keyboardist Jeremy Pritchard. “So it’s called Kevin.” This engaging mix of intellectual curiosity and playfulness has made the Manchester-based foursome one of the UK’s premier art-rock bands, with five Top 40 albums (three of them Top 5) and a fanbase big enough to fill the 10,000-capacity Alexandra Palace. In person, they are not cold androids with their heads stuck in VR, though. Our hour-long conversation is peppered with laughter and self-mockery. Pritchard says that he and drummer Mike Spearman are “particularly luddite” and admits: “I haven’t turned my laptop on for a year, and it’s from 2012.” Higgs reveals that tour bus activities tend to revolve around hanging out watching films of clothed chimpanzees rather than exploring new technology. He thinks the metaverse – a parallel space for online living, much trumpeted by Mark Zuckerberg – is “not particularly good” and as for cryptocurrency or NFTs, they are “mainly awful”. Granted, they do pepper conversation with phrases such as “cultural theory” or “maximalism”. Otherwise it’s hard to reconcile the two amiable chaps (Spearman and guitar/keyboardist Alex Robertshaw are elsewhere) with their regular depiction in the press as “geeks” or “nerd-rockers”. “Would you call David Bowie a geek?” Higgs asks, reasonably. “Or Brian Eno?” “Eno gets called a boffin,” sniggers Pritchard, prompting Higgs to further consider. “The bands that get given that label are Devo, Buggles and Kraftwerk,” he grins. “All of whom we love! And we do wear boiler suits and listen to Kraftwerk. So, er, yes.” Pritchard prefers to think of Everything Everything in terms of something Graham Coxon once said about Blur. “He said there’s ‘high street Blur’ – Parklife – and ‘backstreet Blur’, the druggy, scuzzy side, and the two sides are far apart. I see our band like that. On the face of it we’re a gurning party band in brightly coloured clothes, and then there’s this more considered underbelly.” When Everything Everything formed in 2006, shortly after Higgs and Pritchard met on a popular-music-and-recording course at Salford University, naming the band after a Radiohead lyric, they were – briefly – like any other group. They played guitars because they were into the Futureheads and it was the quickest way of getting gigs in pubs. Initially, they performed in jeans and T-shirts. “But we never really clicked as one of those bands visually,” Higgs says. So, as synths came in, they developed a “utilitarian aesthetic like Kraftwerk or Devo. When we’re in the dressing room putting the garb on, we can feel the transformation.” Even then they thought outside the box. I remind them of an early manifesto by initial member Alex Niven (who left to become, of course, an academic): “To take contemporary R&amp;B and pop music and fashion a vaguely Futurist project out of it, a détournement of sorts of an oversaturated media culture into something idealistic and expansive.” Higgs chuckles at the language – “That’s exactly why we got called geeks or nerds!” – but admits: “That’s sort of how it was. We were excited by areas of music that we weren’t really allowed to go [into]. Like, we loved Destiny’s Child, but we’re not Black American women, so there’s no way we could sound like that. But we tried and instead something else came out.” If anything, 2010’s Mercury-nominated debut, Man Alive, contained too many ideas for its own good. “It gave us about 12 possible directions, none of which we really took,” Pritchard says. “But we were trying to avoid cliches and over the course of the albums we refined the sound and focus.” They hit form in 2015 with Get to Heaven and the Mercury-nominated A Fever Dream in 2017, a terrific dystopian double whammy that respectively anticipate and ponder a world of populism, Trump and Brexit. “We’ve consistently been ahead of the times without meaning to be, really,” Higgs says, describing how Reddit message boards gave him a sense of a forthcoming political sea change, which fed into Get to Heaven. “I think we’re living through an era of revolution because of what the internet has done to us. After Brexit I knew Trump was coming but I was singing more about that type of thing, the fear that fuels it and the rise of the charlatan in general. I actually had in mind a more competent [Nigel] Farage.” Higgs calls 2020’s pre-pandemic Re-Animator “an album about recovery, made before the bad thing happened” but says he’s now done with “documenting what the Tories are up to or that kind of bollocks. I knew it would be crap when they got in but I don’t want to listen to someone telling me that now.” Instead, Raw Data Feel is, ironically, their most human and personal album, full of beautiful songs reminiscent of Talk Talk, A-ha or Peter Gabriel and rich in empathy and emotion. Some of this reflects changes in band members’ lives – new relationships or parenthood. Others are as dystopian as ever, but less explicitly. Higgs says that AI and the character of Kevin was in part “this idea of a runaway kid that was dreaming of a magical power that could take him out of his life, which is how I was feeling” and also a “proxy to talk about some areas I wasn’t that happy talking about”. The first single, Bad Friday, about a victim of violence on a night out, is based on an amalgamation of real incidents. “I do know exactly what happened, but I don’t want to deal with it,” Higgs says. “It’s a recurring theme, sort of retracting that part of my memory.” Similarly, the sublime, New Order-like Jennifer seems to reference domestic violence and a suicide attempt. Higgs calls it “the most honest song I’ve ever written” and he explains that the gorgeous chorus (“the pain in the end is all in your memory”) is his way of “kinda trying to reassure someone else”. Another standout, Metroland is Burning, is a rebellious fantasy about wanting to burn down the indoor theme park once housed in the Metrocentre in Gateshead – “Not the place there now, the one in my head from when I was a teenager” – but Leviathan is a tender goodbye from a mother to a child, and there are references to love and hope. If there’s an overarching theme, it’s that however bad things are, we can get through. “I thought: why am I spending my energy and emotion on this external man [Trump], 5,000 miles away, when I can think about what’s good about life?” Higgs says. “And try to make my life not so shit when everything is falling apart. I think a lot of people will feel the same. It feels like a fresh start.” • Raw Data Feel is released on 20 May on Infinity Industries/AWAL. Bad Friday is out now.Donald Trump’s bad luck continues. On Thursday afternoon, Arthur Engoron, a Manhattan judge, gave the thumbs up to subpoenas issued to Trump, favorite child Ivanka, and Donald Trump Jr, by Tish James, New York’s attorney general. The court’s ruling follows a decision by Trump’s accountants to walk away from the one-term president and disavow years of financial statements issued by his company. Much as the Trump trio tried, they could not shut down James’s investigation into the Trump Organization’s business practices, which could lead to a civil suit by James. Unlike a criminal prosecution, a civil action comes with a lower burden of proof for the government. At the same time, civil lawsuits can drag on – like right into 2024. Barring a stay, Trump and his two children have been ordered to appear at deposition within 21 days. If they tell the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, who knows what liability may result? On the other hand, if they invoke their right to remain silent, they will probably be portrayed as criminals. “You see, the mob takes the fifth,” Trump observed on the campaign trail in 2016. “If you’re innocent, why are you taking the fifth amendment?” Time sure flies. And if the Trump family refuses to appear at deposition or simply stays mum when grilled, they risk being charged with contempt, a distinction presently held by Steve Bannon, Trump’s White House counselor and 2016 campaign guru. At this moment, Trump must be sweating while his lenders have to be shaking their collective heads. How much is Trump worth and how bad can things get are no longer hypothetical issues. In the absence of operative financial statements, restructurings and bank-called defaults have spilled into the realm of the real. As one Trump insider confided: “Hey, this might be serious. Could Donald Trump [and his business] be screwed? I don’t know, but I’m not as confident as I once was in saying, ‘No’.” Meanwhile, 2024 Republican presidential aspirants are likely stifling a collective smirk. Trump’s legal woes stand to broaden the Republican party’s presidential field, and for some it is downright personal. For Mike Pence, Trump’s hapless vice-president, these recent developments may well trigger a sense of schadenfreude. It wasn’t that long ago when Trump’s loyalists came with makeshift gallows for Pence as they stormed the Capitol, and Trump said nothing to deter the mob. Instead, he demanded loyalty from his No 2. As for Ron DeSantis, Florida’s governor, Trump’s troubles could not come at a better time. Trump has all but called DeSantis a coward for refusing to say whether he was vaccinated. Beyond that, Florida’s recent per capita Covid mortality rate is the seventh highest in the US, and DeSantis is having a hard time denouncing neo-Nazi violence. “So what I’m going to say is these people, these Democrats who are trying to use this as some type of political issue to try to smear me as if I had something to do with that,” the Sunshine state governor declared. “We’re not playing their game.” To be sure, Trump’s Maga base would stick with him through thick-and-thin. The party’s deep-pocketed donors are a different story. Trump may have delivered them a trove of tax cuts and ambassadorships, but he’s emotionally draining. Beyond that, his antics in the run-up to the 2020 Georgia runoff elections cost the Republicans control of the Senate. There are reasons Mitch McConnell rejects Trump’s lie that the election was stolen and is seeking to bypass the 45th president. Thursday’s ruling was scathing. At one point, the court concluded that the attorney general had uncovered “copious evidence of possible financial fraud”. Elsewhere, the judge excoriated Trump &amp; Co for their flight to fantasy and fiction, invoking Alice in Wonderland, 1984 and Kellyanne Conway all in a single sentence. “The idea that an accounting firm’s announcement that no one should rely on a decade’s worth of financial statements that it issued based on numbers submitted by an entity somehow exonerates that entity and renders an investigation into its past practices moot is reminiscent of Lewis Carroll (‘When I use a word, Humpty Dumpty said ... it means just what I chose it to mean – neither more nor less’); George Orwell (‘War is peace, freedom is slavery, ignorance is strength’); and ‘alternative facts.’” In the past, Trump managed to weather storms surrounding his finances and credibility. Trump University did not stop the ex-reality show host’s political ascent. What happens next remains to be seen. Right now, Joe Biden’s poll numbers are in the low 40s, inflation is on the loose, and Nancy Pelosi is poised to lose the speaker’s gavel. Against that tableau, Trump poses a distraction from Republican ambitions, an unwelcome detour from anticipated outcome. Lloyd Green is an attorney in New York. He was opposition research counsel to George HW Bush’s 1988 campaign and served in the Department of Justice from 1990 to 1992The Six Nations organisers have claimed they are not currently planning to admit South Africa to the championship despite continued suggestions the Springboks want to join the competition after 2025. Organisers have always been publicly lukewarm to the idea of expansion but after it emerged that South Africa had put the southern hemisphere’s governing body, Sanzaar, on notice that they were exploring the option of joining the Six Nations, they have released a statement insisting they “are not entertaining any discussion” over expansion. They have also moved to quash the idea that South Africa are set to replace Italy as opposed to join the existing six teams in a seven-nation competition. Given Italy would have to agree to being removed from the competition that was always an unlikely proposition even in the face of an astronomical financial offer. The statement stops short of ruling out South Africa ever joining the championship but spells out that the current priority is the restructuring of the global calendar and the remodelling of the July and November international windows. Key meetings will take place next month over a revamped global competition to be held every two years from 2024. “Six Nations Rugby, comprising the six unions and federations and CVC, wish to confirm that they are not entertaining any discussion nor developing any plans to add or replace any participating union,” read the statement. “All its energy is focused on the current strategic discussions regarding the July and November international windows and structure of the global season, and to ensure a positive outcome for the development of the game.” Meanwhile, England’s former assistant John Mitchell will square off against Eddie Jones’s side later this year as well as at the 2023 World Cup after he was appointed to Japan’s coaching staff. Mitchell left Jones’s team abruptly last summer, three months after signing a contract extension, before joining Wasps. He denied a falling-out with Jones precipitated his departure, insisting instead that the drain of international rugby was proving too much. He will join up with his fellow New Zealander Jamie Joseph as a defence coach on a part-time basis, maintaining his role with Wasps. Japan have been drawn in the same World Cup pool as England and are due at Twickenham in November. “This is a great opportunity to add value to Japan winning Test matches through growing their defence and understanding how it plays a critical part in the way we want to attack,” said Mitchell.Mimi Webb is proof that social media really can make a career. After her heartbreak ballads blew up on TikTok during the pandemic, she has risen through the ranks to become something of a breakout star, landing on the BBC Sound of 2022 shortlist. When she makes mention of TikTok tonight, the whole room erupts: it is the reason why so many teens have fallen for her internet-era takes on love and loss. Webb is a self-confessed fan of Emeli Sandé and Sam Smith, and her blueprint is clear: big radio-friendly ballads peppered with Gen-Z references. Good Without, the weepy viral sensation that she saves until the show’s close, is executed flawlessly, while new song House on Fire ups the tempo with a healthy measure of spice, as she sweetly threatens arson in a fit of lovelorn revenge. It’s the kind of hyperbolic good humour that turns her fans wild: the song has only just been released but they’ve all heard the previews on TikTok and scream the words back into each other’s phones with glee. In between these gems, though, the evening starts to plod. Webb is a slick, professional performer. Her voice, a strong and husky alto-soprano, is one of true star potential, and her mega-watt smile remains undimmed as she paces the stage like it’s a treadmill. But she sticks devoutly to a well-rehearsed formula, trading spontaneous sincerity for an arsenal of cliches. Her shouts of “Hands up!”, “How we doing?” and “Stay hydrated!” are as unimaginative as many of her songs. On Lonely in Love, she demands for the millionth time for the crowd to “Sing with me!”, but the stadium chorus is pitched far too high, well out of the reach of her now-silent audience. It appears to shake her, a brief crack in an otherwise perfect veneer. As an artist who speaks to the most intimate of emotions, Webb clearly has heart. But her lack of vulnerability on stage suggests that she may still be holding her audience at arm’s length – almost as if she was looking at them through a screen. • At O2 Academy, Liverpool, 18 February, then touring.This fixture means goals, and usually for Jürgen Klopp’s side. There have been 72 scored in 19 Premier League meetings between the teams with Liverpool grabbing 53 of them, including at least four in five of the past nine meetings. Mohamed Salah is one goal shy of becoming the 10th player to score 150 goals for Liverpool in all competitions and the team needs three more to reach 100 for the season. Norwich have scored the fewest away goals in the Premier League this term. Andy Hunter Saturday 3pm Venue Anfield Last season n/a Referee Mike Dean This season G16 Y53 R1 3.38 cards/game Odds H 1-8 A 28-1 D 19-2 LIVERPOOL Subs from Kelleher, Adrián, Pitaluga, Gomez, Matip, Tsimikas, Milner, Oxlade-Chamberlain, Jones, Thiago, Elliott, Mané, Minamino, Origi Doubtful None Injured Jota (ankle, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y31 R1 Form LDWWWW Leading scorer Salah 16 NORWICH Subs from McGovern, Byram, Tzolis, Williams, Dowell, Gibbs, Rowe, Giannoulis, Zimmermann, Normann, Kabak Doubtful None Injured Sørensen (knee, 25 Feb), Krul (shoulder, Mar), Rupp (hamstring, Mar), Omobamidele (back, unknown), Idah (knee, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y40 R1 Form LLWWDL Leading scorer Pukki 6Brandon Brown was not an especially fearsome stock car driver, nor did he figure as the sort to crack open sport’s Pandora’s box entering last October’s Sparks 300 – a race in Nascar’s mid-tier Xfinity series. In most cases a mid-pack qualifying position would not bode well. But at Talladega Speedway, a crash-happy oval circuit where anything can happen, the best drivers are the ones who survive the carnage. And after two multi-car pile ups, Brown assumed a narrow lead with 13 laps to go. A final accident two laps later that took out seven cars sealed his first Xfinity series triumph in 114 tries. With night falling on the Alabama circuit, the 28-year-old Virginia native emerged from his Chevrolet Camaro machine in a daze for the post-race TV interview. As he breathlessly thanked his sponsors and revisited his driving tactics, some in Talladega’s packed crowd began chanting “Fuck Joe Biden” loud and clear enough to come across Brown’s microphone. Desperate to keep the interview going with her producers unable to bleep the background noise, NBC Sports reporter Kelli Stavast tried to Jedi mind trick her viewers. “You can hear the chants from the crowd – Let’s go, Brandon,” she said. Since then, Let’s Go Brandon has gone from awkward TV moment to harmless meme to conservative dog whistle on par with Maga hats and OK hand gestures – a way of insulting the president without triggering censorship. It adorns lawn signs and bumper stickers. One guy said it directly to Biden last Christmastime as the president and first lady were taking calls into Norad’s Santa tracker from the Eisenhower Executive Office Building. Another guy got kicked off a flight this week for having Let’s Go Brandon writ small on his facemask. As the slogan exacerbates the deepening political divide in the country, Brown has so far struggled in his attempts to ride the median. Brown laughed off the Let’s Go Brandon cheers initially, then went silent when it morphed into something more sinister. Finally, in a December New York Times interview, he expressed a wish to distance himself from the now politically charged slogan, not wanting to cost his family-run team hundreds of thousands in potential sponsorship support. “If they’re going to use my name,” Brown, a Republican, said of his fellow conservatives, “I’d like for it to be productive.” In a subsequent Newsweek op-ed titled My Name Is Brandon, he described himself as a driver “in the passenger seat of my own viral moment,” albeit a squarely middle-class one with a lot of thoughts about inflation affecting prices at the pump. (“I buy more gas than most,” he quipped.) Still, he was quick to assure readers that he wasn’t “going to tell anyone how to vote” or had any “interest in leading some political fight.” But then just before the new year, Brown appeared to quickly abandon those ideals for a two-season, eight-figure sponsorship pact with LGBcoin.io, a cryptocurrency that’s literally short for Let’s Go Brandon. The announcement unveiling Brandon’s red, white and blue repainted car called him “truly America’s driver.” But as with most things crypto, the wealth infusion – a lifeline for a family-run racing operation that came close to closing its doors – disappeared as quickly as it arrived. But instead of a cyber raider or a pyramid scheme it was Nascar president Steve Phelps who pumped the brakes on the deal out of a desire to unseat the sport from any politics on either side of the aisle, lest it turn off the new fans the sport urgently seeks. And then the invisible hand of the crypto market dealt the finishing blow. After achieving a peak liquidity pool value of $6.5m at the start of the year, the coin crashed and burned. It is now worth close to zero. The lost funding puts Brown back in the position of having to cobble together sponsors, an effort that will be obvious in the varying paint schemes and decals that adorn his car this year – beginning with the Saturday race that undercards Sunday’s Daytona 500. And Brown, who starts from the back of the pack yet again, will have his work cut out for himself throughout the season in the hustle for patronage. The Original Larry’s Hard Lemonade, a sponsor on Brown’s Talladega-winning car, dropped him in response to the bitcoin deal. “All money is not good money,” company founder Vic Reynolds cautioned in a farewell statement. Politically motivated sponsorship might seem toxic now, making it easier for Phelps to drop the hammer on Brown, but precedent suggests it’s only a matter of time before they have it both ways. Not only have drivers raced machines with Bush-Cheney and Trump-Pence livery in the recent past, but it wasn’t even two years ago that Bubba Wallace raced a Black Lives Matter car on the way to leading a campaign to banish displays of the confederate flag from the sport – although the organisation didn’t pay him for that exposure. Sponsorship dollars are hard enough to chase down in this economy. If anything, Brown may have unwittingly stumbled upon an untapped market: political zealots. If his efforts to exploit them continue to get struck down, don’t be surprised if this becomes the movement that emerges in response to Wallace’s progressive push on the way to Nascar becoming the next front in the raging culture wars – and here at least those zealots have a point. With everyone from the former president to mom-and-pops cashing in on the Let’s Go Brandon craze, it seems the only one who isn’t making much money off of this is the guy who inspired the whole thing –and arguably deserves to profit most. For now, though, Brown seems content not to push the issue while continuing the hustle for sponsorship. But, really, there’s no telling how soon he could find himself facing back inside a conference room with another would-be supporter with real money and right-wing ideology. At that point he’ll have to decide whether selling out is worth his soul and his sport’s, leaving the lid on Pandora’s box well in the dust.When Simon Rogan and his family moved to Cumbria in 2002, the Lake District was famed for many reasons but food was not top of the menu. Visitors came in droves for the hills, rather than the haute cuisine. Twenty years later their feted village restaurant, L’Enclume, is at the centre of a “mind-blowing” culinary renaissance that has led some diners to compare Cumbria to international foodie havens such as Paris, San Sebastián and Copenhagen. The comparisons are not so outlandish: Cumbria now has more Michelin stars than any other UK county, and L’Enclume this week became the first restaurant outside London or Berkshire to win the coveted three stars. Not bad for the land of mint cake and spicy sausage. “This is a cluster in a world-class landscape. It is not just nationally significant but it’s globally significant,” said Thom Hetherington, an industry judge and chief executive of the Northern Restaurant and Bar show in Manchester. L’Enclume, housed in a 13th-century former blacksmith’s in the ancient village of Cartmel, on the southern tip of the Lake District, focuses on seasonal “farm-to-fork” dining, using only produce from Rogan’s nearby 4.8-hectare (12-acre) farm and other local providers. A day after its third Michelin star was announced, the champagne corks have been cleared away and quiet chatter fills the small dining room of oak beams and low ceilings. Guests wait months for a seat in Rogan’s restaurant, where a 10-course lunch menu costs £100. By this weekend, L’Enclume is expected to be fully booked until 2023. “We’re not the only ones who are fully booked – all the restaurants are in the Lake District,” said Rogan, adding that the local hospitality industry had “exploded” since restaurants reopened after the pandemic. This is partly explained, he said, by the region shrugging off hackneyed stereotypes about northern cuisine – bread and dripping, chips and gravy – and becoming a gastronomic counterweight to London. A new breed of visitor has discovered, or rediscovered, the Lakes during lockdown: the young, free-spending millennial. This younger generation of diner has helped shift a “lazy” perception of the north and its grub: “There has been this ‘grim up north, nothing really happens up there’ attitude but Covid has smashed that out of the park,” Rogan said. Cumbria now has one star for every 48,000 people, compared with one for every 98,000 in London. The Dog and Gun inn, a family-run gastropub in the village of Skelton, near Penrith, was the latest to be added to the list this week. Hetherington, a judge in the annual National Restaurant Awards, said the density of world-class restaurants in Cumbria was “mind-blowing” and that northern England was now “starting to punch above its weight” as a culinary destination. “You look at affluent, international, serious foodies travelling all over the world and they want to go to Tokyo or Paris and San Sebastián or Copenhagen. For me, the Lake District is absolutely at that level,” he said. “If you went back 20, 25 years there was certainly some truth in the idea that the food scene in the north of England was significantly lagging behind London,” he added. “I think that has not only levelled up, but it’s almost tipped in the north’s favour now.” Last year’s National Restaurant Awards said four out of five of the UK’s best restaurants were in northern England, while four of the top five gastropubs were in Yorkshire and Lancashire. Rogan, who now has five Michelin stars to his name, ascribes the north’s success in part to the ever-growing British appetite for sustainable, locally sourced produce and increasingly “savvy” local farmers, whom he says have “really upped their game” in recent years. Top chefs are also drawn to the region in search of a better quality of life and more affordable property. Two of Rogan’s proteges, Tom Barnes and Paul Burgalières, were lured to work in sleepy Cartmel (population: 4,000) from one of the world’s stellar restaurants, Geranium in Copenhagen. Rogan, who joins the UK’s small pantheon of three-star chefs, who include his former mentor Marco Pierre White, said the accolade was “a dream come true” – but that he was “gutted” his Windermere restaurant, Henrock, had missed out. He is confident, however, that more awards will follow. “There’s other places knocking on the door and sleeping giants that are waking up,” he said. “Every chef or operator wants a piece of it and it’s attracting incredible talent to the county now. I do see a lot more Michelin stars.”Caroline Flack’s mother has said she cannot properly come to terms with her daughter’s death while questions remain over the Metropolitan police decision to charge the TV star with assault. The police watchdog has instructed Scotland Yard to review a complaint that the Love Island and X Factor presenter was treated differently by the force when she was facing prosecution for assaulting her boyfriend because she was a celebrity. Christine Flack believes the police decision to press ahead with charging her daughter over the incident – rather than giving her a caution as prosecutors advised initially – contributed to her taking her own life at her home in London on 15 February 2020. “I can’t get her back,” Flack said in an interview with the Guardian. “I just want the police to come out and say: we really shouldn’t have gone back to the Crown Prosecution Service, there wasn’t enough to charge her. I don’t want anything from them other than to say they got it wrong.” Flack, who first complained to the Met a month after Caroline’s death, said she cannot relent in her fight to clear her daughter’s name. “Carrie wasn’t an abuser. I can’t give up because people are still writing that now, two years after her death. It needs someone in authority to come out and say that wasn’t true,” she said. “You just can’t put her to rest properly with all that negativity round her. You think about it every day. I find myself apologising for her, and I shouldn’t.” The TV host was arrested in December 2019 and charged with attacking her boyfriend, Lewis Burton, with a lamp at their home in Islington, north London. She had pleaded not guilty, having previously told police that she accidentally hit Burton with a phone while he slept. She killed herself two months later, days before the start of what her mother later called a “show trial”, since Burton had said he did not support a prosecution. Last March, the Met told Christine Flack it was satisfied the service provided by the officer who made the decision to charge Caroline was acceptable. But in August, after she asked the Independent Office for Police Conduct (IOPC) to review the case, it directed the Met to reinvestigate one element of her complaint: whether the decision was in line with standard practice, “and to establish if there was any difference in the way in which the process had been followed in this case on account of a person’s celebrity”. Flack said she worried that negative coverage by the tabloid press, which had long critically scrutinised her daughter’s love life, and abusive social media posts could have affected the police’s judgment. An inquest into the TV host’s death in 2020 heard that she had self-harmed at the scene of the alleged assault and was taken to hospital for a psychiatric assessment but deemed fit for police interview. “The police could see she tried to commit suicide that night,” her mother said. “She had hurt herself before and as a teenager attempted suicide.” A coroner ruled the presenter had taken her own life because she knew she was facing prosecution and feared the negative publicity the trial would attract. “She couldn’t get over that people might find out that she was actually vulnerable,” Flack added. “She did hide it really well.” Flack said the unanswered questions about her daughter’s prosecution aggravated her grief. “I don’t sleep,” she said. “I don’t want to sound sorry for myself but I can cope with things because I take tablets from the doctor. And I’m frightened to stop taking those because I think it all becomes a bit real then.” She added that she dreaded receiving monthly updates from the Met about the ongoing investigation. “Your stomach goes over,” she said. “Although I want answers, you’re frightened to look because you think well it’s just gonna be: ‘Oh, there was nothing wrong.’” Despite their ongoing trauma, Flack, who lives in Norwich, said her family was able to remember Caroline warmly on the second anniversary of her death on Tuesday. Together with her eldest daughter, Lizzie, her son Paul and Caroline’s twin, Jody, she visited Caroline’s memorial bench in Norfolk. “It was pouring with rain and windy. And Lizzie looked at me and said: ‘Mum, Carrie wouldn’t have come, would she?’ And I said: ‘No, she’d have made some excuse.’ We just laughed.” In a statement confirming the reinvestigation of one element of Christine Flack’s complaint earlier this week, the Met said: “Our thoughts and sympathies remain with Caroline’s family.” In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org.As a wine writer, you might imagine that I enjoy being handed the wine list at restaurants, but, like many of you, I suspect, I usually groan inwardly. Finding a wine that everyone will enjoy and that goes with everything you’re eating is a tall order, and even if you spot one that you think will do the job, you still have to hope that everyone will be as willing as you are to pay for it. Mind you, it’s often not a bad plan simply to order the cheapest wine on the list in any restaurant that cares about the quality of its wine offering, because it will probably be more than decent. I remember once going to the three Michelin-starred Michel Bras in France to find a local wine listed at just €15 (about £12.50), an object lesson to other restaurants that take themselves far too seriously. My approach is simple: I almost always order something I don’t recognise or haven’t tried, because that’s one of the best ways of discovering new wines and getting the chance – which you don’t have at tastings – to try them with food. You can mitigate the risk by ordering by the glass, although many restaurants, including The Old Pharmacy in Bruton, Somerset, where I discovered the delicious L’Abrunet Negre in today’s pick, will give you a sip to try. And do get over the idea that sommeliers are out to fleece you: most will be delighted to make a recommendation, and it’s up to you to indicate what style of wine you like and what you can afford. A lot of wines in the more interesting new restaurants these days are natural, so you also need to disabuse yourself of the idea that they’re all funky and weird. A few will be, sure, but most aren’t. As with food, it’s more a question of what your previous experience is. Wines such as the Chilean La Patagua in today’s pick might look unfamiliar because they’re unfiltered, but they are really delicious. Again, ask your server if you’re uncertain. If you haven’t tried natural wine before, just say so, and ask for something that’s not too scary. I really don’t think people have enough conversations about wine in restaurants – maybe because they’re nervous about appearing to lack knowledge – but being in a good restaurant or wine bar is a brilliant way to learn. Finally, look out for older vintages on any list. Supermarkets by and large sell the most recent vintage, but good restaurants and pubs will often pick up odd bottles and bin ends for customers who they know will appreciate them. Be one of them. Four bottles you might find on a wine list La Patagua 2021 £9 lola.co.uk, £9.05 Les Caves de Pyrène, 14.5%. Mouthwateringly delicious, slightly hazy semillon from Chile, unusually. A perfect wine bar white. Domaine d’Escausses Gaillac Cuvée des Drilles 2019 £10.90 Joseph Barnes Wines, 13.5%. Dryish, with a bitter cherry twist, this south-western French red is a classic bistro wine that would be as good with charcuterie as with steak frîtes. Frisach L’Abrunet Negre Terra Alta 2020 £14 littlewine.co, £14.40 Uncharted Wines, 13.5%. Joyous, juicy Catalan red, a blend of garnacha and carinena, that would be a great match for tapas. Domaine de la Semellerie Chinon Rosé 2020 £11.99 Virgin Wines, 12.5%. Even at this time of year, you get the odd sunny day that cries out for a glass of rosé, and this light, pretty one from the Loire totally hits the spot. • For more by Fiona Beckett, go to matchingfoodandwine.com‘The Premier League is known as the top league in the world so it’s definitely going to be a lot tougher,” Michael Olise said in his first interview as a Crystal Palace player. “But nothing I’m not ready for, so …” Seven months on, the versatile forward whose dazzling array of skills briefly graced the academies of Arsenal, Chelsea and Manchester City has shown he is back where he belongs. Olise’s return of two goals and three assists from the 314 Premier League minutes he had played for Palace by the start of January meant that with a goal contribution every 63 minutes, the 20-year-old was the division’s most productive player. His instant success at Selhurst Park has come as no surprise to Sean Conlon, who first met him when Olise was playing for his local side Hayes in west London at the age of seven. “He’s always been someone who scores goals because his control is so good and he is thinking so many steps ahead of everyone else,” Conlon says. “Michael also has so much variety in his technique that allows him to see the picture and means he is able to make the decision on what is the most appropriate finish.” Conlon had just left Chelsea as a coach and was working as a scout for QPR but was so impressed that he recommended Olise to his former employers. “Michael was also training with Arsenal at the time because before you move into the under-nines, you’re allowed to train with multiple teams,” he says. “But he probably lived closer to Chelsea and they obviously have a great academy so he ended up signing for them.” While at Chelsea Olise also received individual training from Conlon’s company We Make Footballers, which specialises in developing players between the ages of three and 12, and turned out for his grassroots team. “I’ve always said that from the age of nine Michael has been the best player for his age in the country,” Conlon says. “He’s always been very graceful and elegant in the way that he moves. But it was when he went into the academy setup at Chelsea that his technique began to shine and all of his ability on the ball started coming through. And then as he has got older his football IQ developed so he answered almost every question that was asked of him.” Although Olise always appeared destined for success, his departure from Chelsea at 14 – described as “a mutual decision” by Conlon – was a reminder that there are never guarantees in football. Having spent a few weeks travelling to Manchester to train with City, he went six months without a club. “Sometimes people don’t think about it being hard for players who are supremely talented because that can also come with its own difficulties,” Conlon says. “It’s not been a perfect journey for Michael but I think that has benefited him. Coming out of Chelsea at that age has given him that resilience and desire to succeed.” Before joining Reading, where he made close to 70 Championship appearances and was crowned EFL Young Player of the Season last year, Olise played in several showcase games that Conlon had arranged. “We had all the scouts from clubs in London watching and everyone was just in disbelief about how good Michael was,” he says. “I videoed those games and I need to get them off the hard drive … I’ve taken one of them to the shop because I was like: ‘Oh my God, there’s gold on these!’” Patrick Vieira has carefully managed Olise’s integration into the Palace first team, having seen off interest from City and others to sign him for £8m in the summer after activating the release clause. “He’s making huge progress from when he arrived to six months after – I think he’s a different player,” Vieira said last week. Olise has made only five Premier League starts but cemented his status as a fans’ favourite with a goal and an assist at their local rivals Millwall in a heated FA Cup third-round tie during which he taunted home supporters after being struck by a bottle as he prepared to take a corner. “I remember when Michael came down to play for my seven-a-side team at Alperton goals,” Conlon says. “It was full of semi-pro players who were so aggressive. Michael came and, at the age of 14, he was the best player. And because of his character, everyone liked him and respected him. He might be a little bit quiet but he’s humble and very polite. I’ve heard some of his teammates referring to him as the rock star. He has got something very unique about his persona.” Judging by the cool celebration after another brilliant goal against Hartlepool in the Cup fourth round, Olise has found his swagger in south London. Conlon also coached Liverpool’s Harvey Elliott and Olise’s younger brother Richard – a promising right-back who has been a regular for Chelsea Under-18s this season – and recently introduced a scholarship named after the Olise brothers that provides two young players from Hayes with free coaching sessions. “When he signed for Palace I spoke to his dad and they were just so grateful for the situation,” he says. Olise’s father is from Nigeria and his mother’s heritage means that Olise is eligible to play for France and Algeria as well as England. His only international appearances have been for France at the 2019 Toulon under-age tournament and Conlon is intrigued to see which country Olise ends up representing. “I would imagine that there could be quite a few options for him in the end. Michael takes his football very seriously and knows where he wants to get to.”I wish I could have a better relationship with my grandmother. She has been recognised as a difficult person, a liar and highly critical for as long as I remember. She pits family members against each other, picks fights, says what she wants. If we act offended, she gets defensive and tries to make us believe we misunderstood. She has lived a difficult life; my grandfather was always cheating on her, and left her with no money. She built her own life from scratch, gave my aunt money after her divorce, and welcomed me in her house after I was kicked out of my own. I try to act grateful, but the best I can do is help her financially, as spending time with her kills me inside, and can leave me enraged to a point that’s unhealthy. We all more or less avoid her. I visit once a week. She’s in her early 80s, smart and in good health, doesn’t require any assistance, but her memory isn’t the best. She has started socialising with women in her neighbourhood, but still finds fault in every little thing her new “friends” do. I know this isn’t the life she wanted. I’d like to have a loving relationship where we’d see each other more often, but what I really want is for her to be different. What can I do? As you say, unfortunately you can’t turn her into the magical grandmother you want. If she is like this now, I wonder what she was really like when she was younger. I often think how unfair it is that we compare “difficult” older members of the family with younger members. It’s not a level playing field. That said, your grandmother sounds very trying and does have to own her current behaviour. What stops you being like the rest of the family and avoiding her? I went to psychotherapist Arabella Russell, who said sometimes members of the family “hold” all the bad behaviour for the others – ie, as long as we are complaining about “grumpy Aunt Mary or Uncle John”, we can avoid looking at other aspects, such as our own part in things. I’d heard about this being done to children, but have to admit I never thought about it happening in the other direction. Russell and I both wondered why you feel you have to fix it. “It seems as if you can’t quite pull away from [the situation],” said Russell. She reminded me that “every criticism is an unmet need”. I paused on that for a while. Russell added: “Your grandmother has felt abandoned her whole life and finds others’ happiness very hard. You seem to understand that, but how much of this is your own pain and the fear of where you may end up?” Do you see anything of yourself in her? “You can only change the way you are around your grandmother,” said Russell, “but I wondered if there’s a critical voice in you thinking, ‘If I get on better with her, will I get on better with the more difficult [or, I would say, needy] parts of me?’” We both noted your mother “kicked you out” when you were young. That must have been hard. Maybe you felt abandoned, too. I wonder if that part of your life might be worth exploring. Look at what you can practically do with regard to your grandmother: a change to your visits, which may lessen the impact? Visiting more frequently, but for less time, may help. Could you do something together that doesn’t involve talking? Ultimately, however, if this continues to hurt you to the point it “kills you inside”, you need to ask yourself: why am I doing this? • Every week Annalisa Barbieri addresses a family-related problem sent in by a reader. If you would like advice from Annalisa on a family matter, please send your problem to ask.annalisa@theguardian.com. Annalisa regrets she cannot enter into personal correspondence. Submissions are subject to our terms and conditions. • Conversations With Annalisa Barbieri, a new podcast series, is available here. • Comments on this piece are premoderated to ensure the discussion remains on the topics raised by the article. Please be aware that there may be a short delay in comments appearing on the site.The first and last word on this RSC production has to be on its dazzling design. Set in a high-concept Messina inspired by Afrofuturism and sci-fi, it comes with a wardrobe and stage set that will have any audience member’s eyes on stalks. There are gold fountains, silver frocks and stupendous white afros. Each costume and set change outdoes the one before it. It is what you might expect if Baz Luhrmann adapted Much Ado About Nothing into a lavish theatrical romcom. A space-age backdrop gives the impression that we are aboard the Starship Enterprise, the cast like inhabitants of a newly discovered faraway planet. There are twists of Black Panther too along with The Lion King and Nasa-inspired 1970s designs of Pierre Cardin. The director is Roy Alexander Weise but this is not so much his production as that of the costume designer, Melissa Simon-Hartman, and the set designer, Jemima Robinson. On looks alone this would get the full five stars, but the show as a whole skitters too much on its shimmering surfaces. The central gender switch works well: Don Pedro is now Pedra (Ann Ogbomo), a princess who woos Hero (Taya Ming) on behalf of Claudio (Mohammed Mansaray) and then flirts with Beatrice (Akiya Henry). The suggestion is that in this universe there are no gendered preferences in romance and marriage. But the pace and performances seem out of kilter; it begins on a high-octane note with Pedra, Claudio and Benedick swooping from the ceiling on ropes wearing coloured capes and looking like futuristic superheroes – high energy with a great dollop of kitsch. A shimmering set-piece is built around the masquerade ball. “Good evening, Messina. Are you having a good time tonight?” croons a singer clad head to foot in gold. The music, composed by Mobo award-nominated Femi Temowo, takes us from Afrobeat to soul and reggae. It is all super-cool but begins to take on the look and feel of a pop video or an advert for high-end vodka. Several performances lack depth and subtlety, with lines declaimed rather than felt. At over three hours, it begins to plod. There is not enough shock and psychic violence in Claudio’s public shaming of Hero when he wrongly accuses her of pre-marital sex, and Hero’s surprise reappearance at the end, having been proclaimed dead, does not bring the emotional uplift that it should. A Christmas panto energy begins to creep into the second half, too, with cartoonish overacting between a gender-reversed Dogberry (Karen Henthorn) and her motley crew. Michael Balogun withdrew from the role of Benedick last week and his understudy, Luke Wilson, is one of the strongest forces in this cast (Balogun’s own breakthrough performance came in Death of England: Delroy as an understudy after Giles Terera pulled out). Wilson brings mischief and likability to his part, opposite Henry’s flamboyant and minxish Beatrice. They are good sparring partners in their witty skirmishes but lack romantic energy. So do Hero and Claudio, which keeps us at arm’s length from the emotional drama of this play and all its near-tragic moments. What stays in the mind is the breathtaking aesthetics. Simon-Hartman and Robinson deserve an Olivier, and every other accolade going. Royal Shakespeare theatre, Stratford-upon-Avon, until 12 March.It is the TV drama that has divided its viewers. Hailed by some as a brutally accurate depiction of the realities of working in an NHS maternity unit, This Is Going to Hurt has been denounced by others as misogynistic and insulting to women giving birth. Now the actor who plays an exhausted and stressed female junior doctor in the show has rejected criticism of the BBC series set on an NHS obstetrics and gynaecology ward. Ambika Mod – who plays the part of Shruti, considered by some viewers as the drama’s most compelling character – said she had received “many lovely messages from people saying you’ve portrayed the NHS so accurately – that’s really rewarding because it’s what we set out to do”. The seven-part drama is based on the bestselling memoir by Adam Kay, who spent six years as an NHS doctor, regularly taking life-and-death decisions while exhausted by 97-hour working weeks. Billed by the BBC as “comedy-drama”, it graphically depicts caesarean sections, placentas, body fluids and chaos in the hospital’s “brats and twats” department. The lead male doctor is played by Ben Whishaw. Mod said she was aware of claims that the series depicted birth as traumatic and women as disempowered and dysfunctional, but “we were as respectful towards women as we possibly could be”. Shruti was a “complex female character” and the production team had included many women, she said. Mod researched the role by talking to junior doctors to find out how the job affects them “socially, emotionally, mentally”. A lot of viewers had been grateful that the drama “showed childbirth as it actually is – because it is brutal, it is messy, and it is gory. And that’s not something we’ve seen on television before,” she said. “It’s important we engage with reality. The NHS is one of the greatest things about this country, and we need to protect it.” Some viewers have said the drama relegates female patients to “slabs of meat” who play no part in decisions about delivering their babies or receiving treatment. Milli Hill, author of the Positive Birth Book, said Kay’s book was “blatantly disrespectful towards women. It sums up the misogyny that’s baked into maternity care – the idea that any woman who thinks she can control labour or plan for labour is an idiot, basically.” Hill, who had only watched the first episode of the series when she spoke to the Guardian, said it had been “really triggering” for some viewers. “What women are objecting to, from the messages people are sending me, is women’s trauma being played for laughs,” she said. Hill said that the drama was “all about [Kay], how hard it is for him. You’re not seeing anything of the women’s stories, you just see them as body parts in the background. It shouldn’t be him who’s the hero at the centre of the story, it should be the women who get to tell their version of events.” She added: “There is no excuse for a woman to be traumatised by childbirth. And yet the more it’s beamed into our living rooms like that, the more it becomes a vicious circle. I’ve had loads of pregnant women getting in touch with me, saying is that what it’s going to be like? They’re absolutely terrified.” Some pregnant women said on social media that they had been advised by their midwives not to watch the series. Community midwife Rachael Dewey tweeted that the show “demeans women’s experiences/bodies and has dramatised attitudes we’re trying to move away from in midwifery/obs and gynaecology. Calling obs and gynae ‘Brats and twats’ – just sums it up really … It’s not representative of respectful maternity care and how birthing women should be portrayed.” But Juliet Pearce, director of nursing midwifery at the Isle of Wight NHS trust, said the show was “hilarious and heartbreaking” and a “reminder of the human emotions behind every tired, scared and fallible healthcare professional”. Jess Phillips, the Labour MP for Birmingham Yardley and an advocate for women’s rights, said she loved Kay’s book, which she had read on the recommendation of a midwife friend, and had begun watching the TV series. Kay “shows the strain doctors are under, and a system that’s creaking and cracking”, she said. Her own experience of giving birth in an NHS hospital had negatives “but I also felt completely supported by the amazing staff”. In a statement, Edward Morris, president of the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists, said the drama “exposes the harsh realities that healthcare professionals can face when they work in the field of obstetrics and gynaecology in the NHS”. He added: “The show also explores what happens when birth complications arise, or when things go wrong which can be very upsetting to watch … The traumatic scenes of the programme can be difficult for women and their families as it shows experiences of pregnant women who have had poor birth outcomes. “We want to reassure women that the NHS is still one of the safest places to give birth in the world.”Dozens of schools in Philadelphia are suffering from lead contamination in their water lines, an environmental report has found, potentially exposing tens of thousands of students to toxins proven to cause learning and behavioral issues as well as health problems including damage to internal organs. The Philadelphia school board disputes the findings of the study by PennPirg (Pennsylvania public interest research group), insisting that systems are in place to prevent students and staff drinking contaminated water, and that any outlet found with lead in excess of acceptable limits is immediately shut down. But the study’s authors say that the data it has reviewed so far is “just the tip of the iceberg” of the problem across the school district of almost 200,000 students, and is calling for the replacement of every drinking fountain with water bottle filling stations, and filtration systems to be installed in kitchens and other facilities where water is used for consumption. “Philadelphia’s children deserve safe drinking water, especially at the schools where they go each day to learn and play. As this data shows, it is critical that Philadelphia decision-makers take immediate action to get the lead out,” the study says. PennPirg reviewed data reported by the school district under a 2017 law that requires lead testing on every campus at least every five years, and for the results to be made publicly available. But the group said that by the start of this month, four years into the cycle, only 29% of the district’s 323 schools had posted information online, covering drinking fountains, kitchen faucets, hydration stations and sinks in classrooms and bathrooms. From a review of that data, the study found, 61% of the 1,932 outlets tested showed lead contamination greater than one part per billion, and that of the 65 schools for which data was available, 98% had at least one outlet with contamination in excess of that level. One outlet at the Tanner G Duckrey public school, a pre-K to 8th grade campus in north Philadelphia, showed levels of lead at 8,768ppb. The long-running dirty water crisis in Flint, Michigan, brought new scrutiny of levels of water contamination nationwide, and Joe Biden’s administration has promised to make the issue a priority, announcing ambitious plans in December to replace 100% of lead pipes in homes across the country. “The science on lead is settled – there is no safe level of exposure and it is time to remove this risk to support thriving people and vibrant communities,” the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) administrator, Michael S Regan, said in a statement at the time. But critics noted there was no plan to reduce the existing “acceptable” level of lead in water from a Donald Trump-era rule of 15ppb, and that no timeline was announced for the pipe replacement. Additionally, they feared that economically deprived areas and those with high populations of racial minorities would be overlooked. “Children, especially those in the pre-K to seven-year-old age range, and particularly children of color and those from low-wealth communities, are among those most vulnerable to environmental toxins and exposures of all kinds,’” said Jerry Roseman, director of environmental science and occupational safety and health for the Philadelphia federation of teachers. “Substandard conditions in many school spaces continue to exist and to present health risks to students, as well as staff; ensuring that adequate, accessible and lead-free drinking water is readily available to all students and other school occupants is an absolute bottom line requirement for every school in Philadelphia.” In a statement to ABC News, the Philadelphia school district said the study was “not an accurate reflection of the water quality that students and staff in our district are accessing each and every day. “In the event that a water outlet tests at or above 10ppb, the city of Philadelphia’s required threshold for school drinking water, the outlet is immediately shut down. “The district closes these outlets, both because it is required under city and EPA regulations, and to prevent students or staff from using or ingesting contaminated water.”Prince Harry “does not feel safe” when he is visiting the UK, a place that “is, and always will be, his home”, his legal team have told the high court. His desire to return to see family and friends was emphasised on the first day of a legal hearing related to his claim over the Home Office’s decision not to allow him to pay for police protection for himself and his family while in the UK. The Duke of Sussex wants to bring his children to visit from the US, but he and his family are “unable to return to his home” because it is too dangerous, a legal representative has previously said. Ahead of a main hearing, the Royal Courts of Justice were told on Friday that both sides agreed “on the vast majority” of proposals that some matters concerning arrangements for the security of public figures in the UK, including royals, should remain confidential. Referring to the duke’s claim over the Home Office decision, Shaheed Fatima QC, said: “This claim is about the fact that the claimant does not feel safe when he is in the UK given the security arrangements that were applied to him in June 2021 and will continue to be applied to him if he returns. “And, of course, it should go without saying that he wants to come back: to see family and friends and to continue to support the charities that are so close to his heart. Most of all, this is, and always will be, his home.” Prince Harry lost his taxpayer-funded police protection when he and Meghan, the Duchess of Sussex, stepped back from royal duties in 2020. The couple privately fund their security in the US, where they now live. His concerns follow an incident in London in 2021, when he returned to the UK for the unveiling of a statue of his late mother, Diana, Princess of Wales, and his car was reportedly chased by photographers. The grounds on which the Home Office will seek to reject the prince’s claim also emerged on Friday in a skeleton argument that was circulated. It argues that personal protective security for the prince is still considered by UK authorities on a “case-by-case basis” due to his “exceptional status”. This depends on the reason for his presence in Britain and the functions he carries out when present. They also argue that the prince failed to appreciate the role of the Home Office and the Royal and VIP executive committee (RAVEC), a taskforce of civil servants and Scotland Yard officers, “as the expert, and democratically accountable, decision-maker” on matters of protective security. A ruling by the judge is expected at a later date after the request on Friday for certain details, including witness statements, to remain confidential.Southampton are reaping the rewards for keeping faith with Ralph Hasenhüttl after a sluggish start to the season. One defeat in their past 10 matches in all competitions has lifted them into the top half of the Premier League and through to the fifth round of the FA Cup. They will provide a stern test for Frank Lampard’s side, especially considering Southampton have lost only once at home all season while Everton are without an away win since August. Everton’s prospects are not helped by Demarai Gray, Abdoulaye Doucouré, Tom Davies, Yerry Mina, Ben Godfrey and Fabian Delph still being sidelined by injury. Stephen Hollis Saturday 3pm Venue St Mary’s Stadium Last season Southampton 2 Everton 0 Referee Andy Madley This season G9 Y18 R2 2.22 cards/game Odds H 11-10 A 13-5 D 13-5 SOUTHAMPTON Subs from Caballero, Lewis, Stephens, Long, A Armstrong, Small, Valery, Walcott, Djenepo, Smallbone, Redmond, Livramento, Diallo Doubtful Redmond (ankle) Injured Tella (groin, 25 Feb), McCarthy (hamstring, unknown), Lyanco (hamstring, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y47 R2 Form DWLDWD Leading scorers Adams, Broja, Ward-Prowse 6 EVERTON Subs from Begovic, Tyrer, Lonergan, Patterson, Mykolenko, Branthwaite, Gbamin, El Ghazi, Gomes, Townsend, Alli, Dobbin, Tosun, Onyango, Rondón, Astley Doubtful None Injured Gray (hip, 26 Feb), Doucouré (groin, 26 Feb), Davies (hamstring, Mar), Delph (thigh, Mar), Godfrey (hamstring, Mar), Mina (quadriceps, Apr) Suspended None Discipline Y45 R1 Form DLLLLW Leading scorer Gray 5Princes Andrew and Charles will be joining the cast of the London Dungeon this weekend to take guests to the tourist attraction’s so-called “Traitors’ Gate”. In the wake of Andrew settling the sexual assault case filed against him by Virginia Giuffre, and cash-for-honours allegations linked to Charles’s charity, actors playing the duke and future king will escort visitors onboard the Dungeon’s Tyrant Boat Ride. They will first be taken to “face King Henry VIII’s royal wrath” at the Tower of London – marking the first time the Dungeon has sentenced modern figures to the tower. According to a release by the South Bank attraction, guests on the ride would usually join Anne Boleyn on her final journey along the Thames to Traitors’ Gate after being sentenced by Henry VIII. On the journey, they “meet their fate while facing intense darkness, choppy waters, scurries of rats and the foul stench of sewage – but for this weekend only London’s darkest history has been given a modern twist”. A spokesperson for the London Dungeon said: “If we can learn anything from history, it’s that very naughty princes should be sent straight to the tower. In the absence of Her Majesty, the London Dungeon has taken it upon itself to task Henry VIII, a monarch famous for his liberal use of the tower, to teach these two a valuable lesson.” It is not the first time the London Dungeon has drawn inspiration from rolling news coverage. Last month, as Sue Gray’s report was handed to the government, it mocked up images of Boris Johnson awaiting his fate in the dock of its courtroom. “The London Dungeon’s judge channels her inner Sue Gray and puts the prime minister in the dock at the famous South Bank attraction – will Partygate banish him to join the rollcall of the Dungeon’s most nefarious characters?” it asked at the time.This week I had my first nightmare about war. In the dream, I woke up to find that Russia had attacked my home city of Kyiv: there was no internet connection, and no way of finding out what had happened. I had this dream on Wednesday, the night on which – according to western intelligence – Russia was most likely to begin its attack on Ukraine. Over the last few months, we Ukrainians have of course considered various scenarios and contingency plans, but mainly we have kept calm. But when the US, the UK and dozens of other states evacuated their embassies from the capital, it felt different. News headlines this week have said Russia’s advance will begin with an attack on Kyiv. That makes sense. If Moscow wants to gain control of our country, it will want to fracture the calm and resolve of a political, media and business elite which, for the last few years, has lived a perfectly normal European life without needing to think too much about the war miles away on our borders in the Donbas region. Our president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, declared that Wednesday – the supposed day of attack – should be a national day of unity. TV channels (largely owned by oligarchs and the president’s opponents) showed live programmes featuring familiar faces from across the networks. Some people mocked the whole idea, but for me it worked. Ukraine’s predicted “dire day”, in fact, felt like a holiday: my Facebook feed was full of hearts in our national colours, wishing for peace. But that was largely illusory. Already a reported 150,000 Russian troops have been deployed on our border – and another pontoon bridge for military vehicles has been built in Belarus, close to Ukraine, where military drills have been taking place. Two government banks and the defence ministry say they have experienced the most severe cyber-attacks of their kind and have put the blame on Russia for them. Thankfully, they managed to defend themselves. Our army is on high alert, but for the rest of the population, everything connected to this possible incursion forms the backdrop to what is still a kind of ordinary life. This week, as well as filing a dispatch from the frontline, appearing on a TV station, participating in a briefing with US officials and calming down my own family, I have been discussing the launch of a project on public health and a translated Japanese poetry book on Chernobyl, scheduled for publication in the spring. It feels incongruous to be doing the work I would normally do, but it’s how everyone I know is coping. We are not cancelling anything. Fear is inevitable, but panic feels pointless. This refusal to change our lives is not born out of stubbornness or carelessness, nor fatalism or distrust of western sources. We know that what is to come may be long-lasting, and we need to preserve normality and conserve our strength. In a best-case scenario, the threat alerts could be moved each week. In the worst, a full-scale military incursion could occur and fighting could last for months or years. Ukraine is about two-and-a-half times larger than the UK. The terrain is difficult: even a formidable force like Russia can’t take it overnight. And 57% of Ukrainians say they are ready to resist – that number is growing, too. My experience of reporting on the Donbas conflict in the south-east of our country tells me that the Russian strategy of accusing Ukraine of fictional crimes may well continue. Today, Denis Pushilin, the head of the self-proclaimed Donetsk People’s Republic, announced a mass evacuation of its citizens to Russia as he believed Ukraine was planning an attack. Later, Russian media reported a major blast in the rebel-held city of Donetsk. Ukraine vehemently denies this. At the start of the week, the Russian parliament called on Putin to recognise the independence of the Donetsk and Luhansk People’s Republics, widely seen as being governed by Kremlin proxies, which he has so far been reluctant to do formally. If Russia did go ahead, it would have dire consequences for the Minsk accords – the peace agreement signed in 2014-15. The full-scale military action would focus on the Donbas, but chaos would be triggered all over the country. Yesterday, on the seventh anniversary of the Minsk accords and as the UN security council discussed the issue and the US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, challenged Russia to make an unequivocal statement that it would not invade, artillery shells reportedly hit at least 30 towns on the Ukrainian government-controlled side of the Donbas, damaging a nursery and wounding three people. Predictably, Russians at the UN accused Ukraine of the attack. The west was quick to call the shelling a “false flag”, condemning an operation that seemed an attempt to provide some spurious basis for a Russian attack. But in future, since countries like the US and the UK have already pulled out their observers, there will be fewer eyes on the ground to provide verified data of any such aggression. So what will happen now? That depends not just on Putin’s decision-making (and it’s worth remembering that although a tactician, he is no mean strategist), but also deterrence, and the scale of the response from Ukraine and the rest of the world. The lesson we can take from the occupation of Crimea and Donbas in 2014 was that the perception of weakness only made things worse. To stop Russia, Ukrainians must show, for as long as possible, that we are unconquerable. The start of a full-scale war might not be as obvious as a dramatic visual attack on Kyiv, or the advance of Russian tanks along the border. Instead, as we are already seeing with mass evacuations, it is those millions of Ukrainians residing in the Donbas who suffer first and suffer most. Compared with that, the uncertainty and fear we feel in Kyiv is something we just have to live with. Nataliya Gumenyuk is a Ukrainian journalist specialising in foreign affairs and conflict reporting and author of Lost Island: Tales from the Occupied CrimeaAlexander Lukashenko may join Vladimir Putin at strategic nuclear drills, one day after offering to host nuclear weapons in Belarus to “defend our country”. The annual strategic Grom drills of nuclear-capable missiles will take place on Saturday “under the supervision of Russian armed forces supreme commander-in-chief, Vladimir Putin”, Russia’s defence ministry has said in a statement. “Ballistic and cruise missiles will be launched in its course.” Western countries remain concerned over Russia’s troop buildup on the Ukraine border. Russia has deployed up to 30,000 soldiers, tanks, artillery and ballistic missile systems to Belarus for joint exercises. At a Kremlin summit on Friday, Putin said that he and Lukashenko, who met the Russian president at a much closer proximity than German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, this week, would be attending a “major military cooperation event” on Saturday. “We’re going to be at an interesting event tomorrow,” Lukashenko said while discussing ongoing military exercises. “And we’ll be participating,” Putin interjected. “We’ll actively take part.” The Kremlin did not confirm whether they meant the nuclear drills, saying only: “If they decide to be there together, then they will be there together.” The surprise announcement came as the two men were expected to discuss the fate of the Russian troops sent to the Allied Resolve military training exercises concluding on Saturday. Western officials have warned that the military drills in Belarus could be cover for preparations for an invasion of Ukraine and a possible attack on Kyiv. Another option is that Russia could leave its troops in Belarus, creating a permanent threat on Ukraine’s border. Satellite imagery has shown Russian armour and artillery within miles of the Belarus border with Ukraine, and western officials have pointed out unusual military activity such as the construction of a pontoon bridge over the Pripyat river in the Chernobyl exclusion zone. The Russian-backed separatist states in east Ukraine on Friday announced a mass evacuation, stoking fears that Moscow is seeking a pretext to launch an intervention. Russian officials have pledged that the troops will leave Belarus after the exercises conclude. But in contradictory remarks, Lukashenko on Thursday said: “If it makes sense to keep Russian troops here, we will keep them as long as necessary. I emphasise once again: this is our territory and this decision is up to us.” The two men did not address questions of whether the troops would leave after 19 February. But Putin did say that the “active phase of [the exercises] will last in Belarus until 20 February,” perhaps indicating that a withdrawal would not take place immediately. Lukashenko also said that he would be ready to host Russian nuclear weapons “in order to defend our territory”. He has also said he wants to obtain Russian Iskander missile systems that could deliver strikes against countries in Europe. Moscow has so far agreed to neither. Permanently stationing Russian troops in the country would be a controversial decision in Belarus. Many Belarusians, even supporters of Lukashenko, do not want to see further integration with Russia and would view a large Russian military presence as an occupation. Lukashenko has resisted efforts to integrate his economy and politics with Russia under a union state plan but increasingly needs Russia’s financial and diplomatic support in his own standoff with the west. The Russian troops in Belarus are some of the most concerning to western analysts because they have been sent thousands of miles from Russia’s eastern military district. Thomas Bullock, a senior analyst at the defence intelligence provider Janes, said that the troops were among the Russian units that would have to withdraw in order for Russia to meaningfully decrease tensions. “You want to see those long-distance journeys being pulled back,” he said. Rochan Consulting has estimated that Russia has sent 50-70% of the eastern military district’s combat potential to Belarus. Units include armour, artillery, Spetsnaz special forces, engineering brigades, Iskander ballistic missile battalions, SU-35 fighters, paratroopers and anti-aircraft systems. Western governments had warned that Russia was planning to hold the strategic nuclear drills this month, rather than in late summer as is customary. The Russian drills would “involve forces and hardware belonging to the aerospace forces, the southern military district, the strategic missile forces, the northern fleet, and the Black Sea fleet”, the defence ministry said. The Kremlin spokesperson Dmitry Peskov said that Putin would take part in the exercise from a defence ministry operations centre. “Even test launches of this type are impossible without the head of state,” he told reporters. “You all know about his famed ‘black briefcase’, ‘the red button’ and so on.” The exercise would “check the preparedness of military commands and crews of missile systems, warships and strategic bombers to accomplish their missions and at verifying the reliability of weapons of strategic nuclear and conventional forces”, the ministry said.Orange blossom is a flavour that polarises: either you love it or you can’t stand it. For me, it brings a delicate, floral lightness to desserts, especially really creamy ones such as cheesecakes, but I understand that a heavy hand can turn things a little sickly – medicinal, even. The strength of orange blossom water varies between brands, so start with one tablespoon, taste and work your way up from there. Orange blossom, ricotta and walnut cheesecake Prep 20 min Cook 95 min Chill 4 hr+ Serves 10-12 For the base 150g walnuts 160g digestives 80g unsalted butter, melted For the filling 500g ricotta, at room temperature 340g cream cheese, at room temperature 200g caster sugar Zest of 1 orange 1½ tbsp orange blossom water A pinch of salt 3 large eggs For the topping 75g sugar Juice of 1 orange 1 tsp orange blossom water (add more to taste) 1 tsp vanilla extract, or vanilla bean paste Heat the oven to 180C (160 fan)/350F/gas 4. Line the base of a 20cm springform or loose-bottomed cake tin and lightly grease the sides. Put the walnuts in a large saucepan and toast on medium-high heat, shaking frequently, until they start to brown and smell nutty. Tip the digestives and 50g of the walnuts into a food processor (save the rest of the nuts for the topping). Blitz until fine, then pour into a bowl and stir in the melted butter, coating the crumbs evenly. Tip into the base of the lined cake tin, pressing down firmly, then bake for 10 minutes. Remove from the oven and set aside. Once cool, wrap the tin tightly in two layers of strong tinfoil, making sure it comes up the sides of the tin. To make the filling, whip the ricotta in a food processor or with an electric whisk until smooth and creamy. Add the cream cheese, sugar and orange zest, beating again until combined, then stir in the orange blossom water and salt. Add the eggs, mix until just incorporated, then pour the batter over the biscuit base in the tin. Put the tin in a large, deep roasting tray and fill with hot water to come roughly halfway up the sides. Bake for 60-70 minutes, until the edges are set but there is still a slight jiggle in the middle. Turn off the oven, and leave to cool inside it for about an hour with the door ajar. Once cool, chill in the fridge for at least four hours, or overnight. Meanwhile, make the topping. Put all the ingredients in a small saucepan, bring to boil, then leave to bubble for two to three minutes, until it looks syrupy. Roughly chop the remaining 100g toasted walnuts. Take the pan off the heat and stir in the walnuts so they’re evenly coated. Decorate the chilled cheesecake with the topping, slice and serve. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from OcadoAs a Cumbrian, it’s almost surreal that the area has become a foodie magnet – chefs are going to live there because its restaurants are turning into the best in the world. In the 1980s, when I was growing up, eating out in Carlisle was a special occasion. You did it on your birthday and would get taken to Wimpy or the local Italian for garlic bread, spaghetti and a baked lasagne. The poshest places would be inside hotels, which were quite terrifying for working-class people like my family. You might go for your gran’s wedding anniversary, and you’d have a Florida cocktail and chicken breast – it was plain food. In the late 80s and early 90s, pubs in the countryside moved into food because they couldn’t live off beer profits as people didn’t drink and drive any more. That’s when we started going out more, but then it would be gammon with a slice of pineapple and chips, scampi in a basket and Sunday lunch. It makes me proud that everyone has started to turn up now and see Cumbria. Simon Rogan, whose restaurant L’Enclume has just won three Michelin stars, had the foresight to go to south Cumbria, and what he’s done is very metropolitan: a market garden and micro-nursery and bringing the ideas you usually find floating around Soho to the north. Cumbria has certainly become savvier at selling its amazing produce – for years we just accepted that we made incredible sausages, pies and cheese. When I go into Fortnum &amp; Mason now, Cumbrian things are front and centre, and I love that. You see Cumberland sausages on the menu in the best restaurants, and Cumbria is full to the brim with people living on the side of a mountain making exemplary honey. It’s become rather cool. There are now some really good places up near Carlisle, like Pentonbridge Inn and the Hidden River Cafe at Longtown, and there are lots of amazing places off the beaten track to be discovered. The Yan in Grasmere is a beautiful farm in the middle of nowhere: it’s not fancy but it’s hearty and the chef makes a Cumberland sausage platter that I absolutely love. I swear by Henrock in Bowness-on-Windermere: the scenery is incredible and they’ve spent millions on the art in the gardens. I had the “zero fashioned” cocktail, which was made with caramelised banana skins and caramelised banana syrup, grilled fillet of pollack with curried cauliflower and roast shrimp and lemongrass, and a chocolate, raspberry and peanut tart, which was amazing. Cumbrians have been swept up into this world. I’m not saying they don’t raise an eyebrow, but they’re up for it.You needn’t be a Hollywood expert to be familiar with the movie motif of a flag fluttering on a conquered planet far away. But as real-life space exploration is an increasingly global collaboration, isn’t it time Earth had its own flag? I asked Oskar Pernefeldt, Swedish founder of the International Flag of Planet Earth Organization, which campaigns for his Earth flag to be adopted. Hi Oskar! Tell me more about the flag you’ve designed. I know it’s blue – presumably for water because we’re the blue planet? Yes, it’s blue, and in its centre are seven connected rings forming a flower, which represents life on Earth and how we’re all connected, and our challenges are shared. Is that how flags work? Someone makes one and then a nation says, “OK, sure.” Kind of. Usually people design a flag and then propose it to someone – like to a newly formed nation. But how will we – the world – show our agreement? Please, no more referendums. Our hope is for it to be unofficially recognised. Like the rainbow flag, which was proposed in 1978. That didn’t have a client – it was just a flag that informally became adopted by enough people until it became a symbol of the LGBTQ+ community. And there is a practical use: like how on a drop-down menu with countries represented by their flags, there’s no image for global. I can see how it might lend itself to protest movements. I’ve already seen it at climate demonstrations, and it’s been on refugee boats in the Mediterranean. I come from a flag enthusiast’s perspective and I just saw a gap in the flag system. I could totally see other planets having a flag, too. Why do you love flags so much? I always considered myself flag neutral, maybe even flag avoidant if it’s getting a bit too nationalistic. But that’s why I love flags. People attach so many emotions to them. And when you study them, you can see what a country wants to represent. So you might see in a symbolic description of a flag that red stands for the bloodshed in the creation of the country. And then there are the different customs and schools of thought. One convention is not using typography – yet Saudi Arabia and South Korea do. Another is that a child should be able to draw it. But that’s not the case with Wales. Why do neighbouring countries often have similar colours? It’s a shared culture thing. So a lot of flags in the Middle East use what’s called the pan-Arab colour scheme: Kuwait, Iraq and Palestine all have white, red, green and black. The pan-Slavic colours, used in the Balkans, are red, white and blue. If I was commissioning one for the Republic of Coco, I’d be tempted to strike out on my own. Anyone done a purple flag? Presumably, Prince. I’ve only seen it once – the Scouts. I don’t know why I’m surprised there is so much meaning. Symbols have power, it’s why we argue about them. And I suppose if we get rid of old symbols, we need new ones in their place. That’s exactly why I proposed it. Maybe people don’t feel an emotional connection to their home country, but they see themselves as global citizens. But, given the state we’re in and the challenges we face, I think we need a symbol to rally around.The UK has been a world leader in free coronavirus testing throughout the pandemic. On an average day it runs around 300,000 PCR (polymerase chain reaction) tests, and about a million people take LFTs (lateral flow tests), at no charge to the individual. These tests have provided surveillance data for new variants, and allowed infected people to rapidly isolate, protecting others from infection. Testing has also reduced anxiety among those returning to work or school environments through knowing that those sharing their space were testing regularly. As we move towards the government’s “Living with Covid-19” strategy, it is expected that widespread access to free testing will be removed, or at least greatly reduced. Some will celebrate the freedom from having to check their infection status, while others are likely to have anxiety and concerns given that there are still considerable community transmission levels. Without access to free testing – and without public health guidance to test often – some may also feel pressured to continue to work when unwell. Management of sickness in the workplace will need consideration. The advantages include cost-saving and a move towards “normalisation” of living with Covid-19. Testing at the levels we witnessed during the pandemic is not sustainable indefinitely. Of more concern is how removing or limiting free testing will affect the number of people staying home when infected to reduce the spread. It will also affect whether we will have sufficient early warning of changes in infection patterns, for example detecting the emergence of new variants of concern. These warnings are essential to mitigate future waves of infection. A more sensible approach would be to make free tests available in particular situations, such as when visiting hospitals or care facilities and for staff working in environments where being infectious could have serious consequences. Indeed, this is more appropriate than mandatory vaccination for healthcare staff, given that the vaccine does not always prevent infection. Population surveillance for emerging variants and to gauge overall levels of community infection can also be done through wastewater testing. As the virus passes through our body and is excreted, it can be detected at testing points in the sewer system. The Environmental Monitoring for Health Protection programme, part of NHS Test and Trace, has been doing this to map emerging spikes of infection, and gathering genomic sequence data to identify variants of interest or concern. This also provides anonymised evaluation of Covid levels in communities – no one has to submit to testing individually. I hope that we will see a tailored approach to testing in the future, rather than an all or nothing approach. We need to cautiously ease ourselves into living a relatively normal life with Covid. I would not rush into these final release measures until March, ideally when case numbers decline even further, and when we are emerging from winter. I would encourage further testing, but in a targeted manner to protect those with extreme vulnerability, and encourage surveillance through wastewater testing so that we can have early warning of changes in the situation. The removal of legal isolation requirements is a reasonable progression, but hopefully it will still be supported by guidance to isolate. This needs to stipulate that those feeling unwell should avoid crowds, educational, social or workplace mixing and employers should support those who withdraw from mixing while unwell. Given the lack of incentives for those on low pay or zero-hours contracts to stay home though, I suspect many will continue with work and potentially put others at risk. We have to ask: how big is this risk? Given the sheer number of Omicron infections, most of the population is probably now protected (until a new variant emerges). So I doubt we will see a huge upturn in infections. However, we will probably see a slower decline in cases than we would with stronger policy. Changes to guidance and testing should wait until March, when we are more likely to open windows and start to be outside more. I urge caution. Let’s not rush into a full release again and keep doing all we can to keep people as safe as possible. Sally Cutler is professor in medical microbiology at the University of East LondonMillions experienced severe disruption as record-breaking winds from Storm Eunice caused death and injury, huge structural damage, transport chaos and widespread power cuts. Four people were confirmed to have died in the UK and Ireland by Friday evening. The Met Office said a wind speed of up to 122mph was recorded at the Needles on the Isle of Wight on Friday, provisionally the highest ever in England, and described the storm as the worst since the Burns’ Day storm 32 years ago in which 47 people died. About a third of the UK population – about 20 million people – were told to stay at home as the Met Office imposed two rare red warnings for much of southern England, south Wales and London. The disruption closed thousands of schools and businesses. About 435,000 homes were left without power early on Friday evening. Hundreds of train services and flights were cancelled, and major roads closed. A woman in her 30s was killed when a tree fell on a car in Haringey, north London, while a council employee in his 60s was killed by a falling tree in County Wexford, south-east Ireland, as he worked during the storm. Later, Merseyside police said a man in his 50s had died in Netherton after debris struck the windscreen of a vehicle he was travelling in. Hampshire constabulary also confirmed that a man in his 20s died when the car he was travelling in hit a tree. A second man is being treated for serious injuries in hospital. Five people have died in mainland Europe after the storm made landfall there, including a 79-year-old British man in the Belgian city of Ypres. Buildings ranging from the lifeboat station at Sennen on the western tip of Cornwall to the Millennium Dome in London sustained damage. About 1,000 people were evacuated from the Dome as panels were ripped off by the storm. The top of a church spire in Wells, Somerset, was toppled by gusts and a tower at Grain power station in Kent appeared to have collapsed. A beloved tree on a square in Bude, north Cornwall, crashed to the ground, one of many hundreds across southern Britain that fell, blocking roads and bringing down power lines. The UK government’s Cobra civil contingencies committee met to discuss the response and the army was standing by. The London fire brigade and the South Central ambulance service NHS foundation trust declared major incidents. Before Friday, the strongest gust recorded in England was 118mph at Gwennap Head in Cornwall on 15 December 1979. As well as the 122mph gust on the Isle of Wight, there were blasts of 70-80mph widely across southern Britain. Tom Morgan, a meteorologist at the Met Office, said better storm tracking and messaging than for the Burns’ Day storm and for the great storm of 1987 meant that people had been better prepared for Storm Eunice. He said: “It’s been highly publicised and that has meant people have been aware of it. Hopefully, people heeded the warnings and didn’t travel.” Eunice brought many transport services to a standstill. Trains were cancelled throughout Wales and in other areas, with 50mph speed restrictions in many places. Services into London stations, including Waterloo and later Euston, were suspended for parts of the day. With police and motoring organisations warning drivers to stay at home, the two Severn crossings into Wales were closed – the first time they have ever both been shut because of wind at the same time. The Humber and Dartford Bridge crossings were also closed for periods. Many roads, including a motorway, were blocked by fallen trees. Ferry services across the Channel and Irish Sea were suspended as the storm whipped up high waves. The port of Dover announced it was closed “in the interests of customer and staff safety”, meaning no ferries could operate between Dover and Calais. Hundreds of flights were cancelled by British Airways and others, and some arrivals were diverted or took several attempts to land at Heathrow and Gatwick airports in high winds. The Energy Network Association said at 4pm the network companies had reconnected more than 711,000 customers, but about 435,000 customers were still without power. The Environment Agency issued 10 severe flood warnings – eight along the Severn and two along the Wye – meaning there was a danger to life, as well as dozens of flood warnings and more than 100 flood alerts. Though the high tides came and went without serious flooding, the agency warned that homes could still be at risk in the coming days. Sports matches and shows were cancelled and some holidaymakers, including in Newquay, north Cornwall, had to evacuate or retreat inland. Some people hoping to hunker down with a takeaway during the storm were also disappointed. Deliveroo, JustEat and UberEats paused deliveries in affected areas, including London, Wales and parts of the south-east and west, owing to fears for the safety of their riders. More windy weather on Saturday could affect cleanup efforts in the aftermath of Storm Eunice, the Met Office said. “The winds themselves could cause minor disruption, but given the expected impact from Storm Eunice on Friday, these conditions on Saturday may hamper any clear-up operations.” • This article was amended on 19 February 2022 to change the spelling of Burns’ Day.These Beijing Games may yet have a golden finale for Britain. After a barren opening fortnight, where the questions become more pointed by the day, Team GB’s women curlers on Friday joined their male counterparts in an Olympic final after a wild and glorious 12-11 semi-final victory over Sweden, which was only secured after an extra end. All four women were heroes, especially as they had to recover from going 4-0 down in the opening end. But Eve Muirhead’s remarkable final shot to score four in the ninth end, with Team GB 8-7 down, will live especially long in the memory. While the Swedes recovered sufficiently to level the match at 11-11 on the 10th end, Britain then had the hammer (the final throw), and subsequently converted to seal a famous win. They will now play Japan, who beat Switzerland 8-6, in the final in the early hours of Sunday morning. After victory was confirmed another member of the British quartet, Vicky Wright, did her own jig of delight. During the pandemic she was a Covid nurse helping to save the nation. Now she was helping doing the same for Team GB’s medal fortunes. “I was a full-time nurse up until 2019 and I went part-time just one day a week,” she explained. “But when the pandemic hit, I went back to work full-time. We couldn’t train, we couldn’t do anything, and I trained as a nurse for a reason. So straight back to work full-time and when training started back up, in September, October, I tailored back my work. “I have still worked the whole way through, just one day a week, a bit of free time. I finished on 6 January. I did nights over Christmas. I had Christmas off this year and worked Christmas Eve.” Her attitude to curling is impressively balanced too. “I find myself very lucky that I have the best of both worlds,” she explained. “If I am having a bad day on ice, I will go into work and really get a perspective that my life is actually OK and there are a lot of people worse off than I am. If I am having a bad day at work, I have curling to focus on. I find it keeps me really grounded.” As the dust settled Team GB’s head coach, David Murdoch, could only marvel at what he had seen from his women’s team on the ice – a performance that was even more remarkable given at one point they were struggling to qualify for these Games. “It’s been an incredible journey,” he said. “We didn’t get qualification from last year’s world championships. We adopted a completely new approach. The athletes bought into a squad system. They fought their hearts out. We selected this team and since then we’ve seen a European Championship win, Olympic qualification, and now we’re in the Olympic final.” He also paid tribute to Muirhead, who has now guaranteed that she will do better than Sochi in 2014 when she helped Team GB take bronze. “She’s a warrior, Eve,” said Murdoch. “She’s fought through four Olympics. She’s going to get another medal and a chance to win a gold medal. She’s been through a lot. She keeps coming out and keeps fighting and teams find her tough to beat. That showed the grit and resilience that Eve and the team has. “And to come back from 4-0 down was unbelievable. Statistically that was almost gone.” Asked how the team had revived itself, Murdoch puffed his cheeks out. “We were shell-shocked with that first end,” Murdoch added. “Eve came and spoke to me and and I just said: one end at a time. And we did that. We got the three back and that gave us such a lift.” Meanwhile Muirhead, who had lost her previous two Olympic semi-finals, could not stop smiling. “Third time lucky,” she said. “It’s such a team game out there and all week we’ve really dug so deep and not just at this event. “From the whole season, working as a squad of nine and then the Olympic qualifier. I’m pretty speechless right now, but what a moment. It sounds amazing to say we’re in an Olympic final.”Hermès, the French luxury goods maker, is opening three new factories as it struggles to keep up with demand for its £5,000-plus Birkin and Kelly handbags. The company said on Friday it planned to open new leather goods factories in the French towns of Louviers, Sormonne and Riom before 2024 in order to increase and speed up its production of the expensive bags. It has also recently opened its first leather-working school to train more craftspeople in the art of handbag making. The company, which already has more than 4,300 leather workers on its staff, said it was hiring more than 400 artisans each year. However, Hermès said it needed far more to keep up with demand for its handbags, which has jumped during the Covid pandemic as soaring stock markets have left the world’s richest people with a lot more disposable income. The bags have become must-have collectibles for the super-rich and celebrities, including Victoria Beckham, Katie Holmes, Rita Ora and Kelly Brook, with some women owning hundreds of the most sought-after designs. Rare Hermès bags have also proven extremely popular at auction, with some selling for almost £300,000. “We are facing high demand, and we have a product that is very handcrafted,” the executive chairman of Hermès, Axel Dumas, said. “It takes 15 hours [to create] an Hermès bag. Even if there’s a lot of demand, I’m not going to start doing them in 13 hours to raise production.” Dumas said there was often a long waiting list for the bags. “Contrary to what people may think, we’re always very sad when we have to say no to our customers, because we don’t have that.” He ruled out raising prices. The lack of handbag stock led to a 5.4% drop in fourth-quarter sales at its leather goods and saddlery division, which accounts for almost half of total sales. The news sent Hermès shares down 7% on Friday, before recovering slightly to a 5% decline, which was still its biggest one-day fall since 2016. Overall sales rose to €2.38bn in the three months to December, with American and Chinese shoppers driving strong growth, but were below analyst forecasts of €2.53bn. The slow growth at Hermès contrasts with an acceleration at other luxury groups such as LVMH Moët Hennessy Louis Vuitton, the world’s largest luxury label, and the Gucci owner, Kering, which have posted much better-than-expected results.Lewis Hamilton has issued a bullish statement of intent for his return to Formula One this year. Hamilton was speaking publicly for the first time since he was controversially denied the world championship in last season’s finale in Abu Dhabi. The seven-time champion insisted he “refused to be defined” by the adversity and that the experience only spurred him on to come back stronger than ever, despite briefly losing his faith in the sport. Hamilton endured crushing disappointment when set to take his eighth title in Abu Dhabi only for an intervention by the race director, Michael Masi. The Australian’s improvisation of safety car rules gave Red Bull’s Max Verstappen a crucial advantage and the Dutchman went on to win and take his first championship. Hamilton’s Mercedes team launched their new car the W13 on Friday and the 37-year-old, having retreated from the public eye and social media for the entire close season amid speculation that he would retire from F1, came back in sprightly, good cheer, clearly fired up for the new campaign, his 16th in the sport. Hamilton admitted it had been a “difficult time” post Abu Dhabi and that he had dealt with it by switching off from F1 and spending time with his extended family, while controversy raged around what had happened. During the winter his team principal, Toto Wolff, said the driver had been disillusioned with F1. “I always see that through these experiences you can turn that emotion into strength and power and that is what I am doing,” Hamilton said. “If you think what you saw at the end of last year was my best, wait until you see this year. “Ultimately this is the sport I have loved my whole life [but] there was a moment where I had lost a little bit of faith with the system. But I am generally a very determined person. I thought whilst moments like this might define others’ careers, I refuse to let this define mine. So I focused on being the best I could be and coming back stronger.” On Thursday F1’s governing body, the FIA, announced it had dismissed Masi from his position as race director and were instituting changes to prevent a repeat of the events in Abu Dhabi. It has not published its report into the race but that it has felt the need for structural adjustments presents a strong indication that what happened in Abu Dhabi did not follow its own regulations. Hamilton welcomed the FIA’s actions, but pointedly noted that they were no compensation for the impact the events had on him. “Whilst we can’t change the past – nothing will ever be able to change the way and I how I felt at the time, and how I feel about the situation – it’s good to see the FIA is taking steps to make improvements,” he said. “Accountability is key, we have to use this moment to make sure this never happens to anyone else in the sport ever again.” Hamilton and Verstappen had engaged in a fascinating nip-and-tuck battle across all 22 races last season, with the pair clashing on track repeatedly. Their relationship remained largely respectful despite the ferocity of their title fight. Hamilton congratulated Verstappen immediately after the race in Abu Dhabi and insisted that going into the new season he bore no ill-will toward the Dutchman for the manner in which he secured his first title. “This has nothing to do with Max,” Hamilton said. “Max did everything a driver would do given the opportunity he was given. He is a great competitor and we will go into another battle like we did last year and conduct ourselves and grow from our races and experiences last year. “I have no issues with him, I don’t hold any grudges with anybody. I don’t think that is a good thing to carry round with you, I don’t have anything over my shoulder holding me back. I am not letting that experience be one of those.” Wolff, who said he had not been concerned that Hamilton would opt not to come back to racing, believed his driver was returning with an aggressive enthusiasm to once more join the fray. “What he did was absolutely right to take himself out of the microcosm of F1 and step aside and black out socially,” he said. “He has come back in a great mindset. He is positive, he is determined. Yet again adversity that was thrown at him will make him stronger. As he said: it’s attack mode.”Just over a year ago, the western system of alliances largely lay in ruins, its confidence sapped by Covid and by a US president who saw Europe as a protection racket, treated Nato with contempt and seemed in mysterious thrall to Vladimir Putin. Six months later, Nato suffered the ignominy of the retreat from Kabul and two months after that it lost Angela Merkel – the former German chancellor who was its last best interpreter of Vladimir Putin’s mind. So as a hinge point in the Ukraine crisis arrives, western diplomats are awarding themselves a sigh of relief that diplomatic and security institutions, atrophied by lack of use, have at last cranked back into life and held together. No one is proposing a victory lap – the situation is too tense and unstable – but there is satisfaction that Putin knows he faces a surprisingly cohesive, even galvanised, western diplomatic effort built on exhaustive consultation and shared analysis. Whether the Russian president will as a result wager that the long-term price of an invasion of Ukraine is too high seems unknowable until the missiles launch. Merkel herself once said Putin lives in his own world. The only problem is that he makes us all inhabit it as well. So even if it is too early to tidy up events still in flux, it is already clear where the west has succeeded, and may yet fail. Orysia Lutsevych, head of the Ukraine Forum at the Chatham House thinktank, said: “The west has grasped the importance of this moment. Putin may control the narrative, but the west has not turned away.” Olaf Scholz, the German chancellor, made a similar point when he said: “What is important is that western countries had been able to agree on what they were confronting. If we had not been able to do that, it would have scared me.” There has not just been a shared analysis, but a sharing of responsibilities. The military deployments to shore up the eastern flank have been quick, including French troops into Romania and US troops into the Baltic states. Many of these deployments may prove permanent, UK officials say privately, an assessment they believe Poland, France and Germany shares – although that would require full Nato endorsement. Intelligence has been used in a new way – if a somewhat “the Russians are coming” one – in a bid to win an information war, signal Putin’s next steps and so block them. Dr Anders Åslund, adjunct professor at Georgetown University, said: “The western strategy – I mean here primarily the US and UK strategy – I think has been just right: expose it all, emphasise as much as possible what is going on, and provide as much intelligence as reasonably can be provided, and by doing so, the west is really pushing Putin into a sort of dead end. Either he goes for everything, and then he is likely to lose, or he is not getting anything.” Sanctions and Nord Stream 2 Putin may also have inadvertently engendered unity. The UK may still – slightly neurotically – harp on about its leadership role, but it has also tried to stop being rude about the European Union. French and British defence ministers, for instance, met bilaterally this week in Brussels, ending their standoff caused by the row over the Aukus pact between Australia, the UK and US. David Miliband, the former foreign secretary, said: “The UK has been trying to run a foreign policy as if Europe did not exist. That is a problem when your closest ally, the object of your ardour, the US, thinks self-evidently the EU does exist.” Boris Johnson even went so far as to congratulate the EU Commission president, Ursula von der Leyen, for her cooperation so far over sanctions. The UK has also been forced, in the face of international ridicule, to wake from its slumbers about Russian dirty money circulating in London, going so far as to say that in the event of an invasion Russian firms will be unable to raise capital in London. Differences still exist within the EU over the precise triggers that would launch the sanctions package, but something credible spanning energy and finance is now ready to go, even if it would require Viktor Orbán, the Hungarian prime minister, to withhold his veto. In a concession to the US, Germany has made it understood that Nord Stream 2, the Russian-German pipeline, will not go ahead in the event of an invasion. Even if Scholz did not say as much on his visit to Moscow for legal reasons, US senators came away from private briefings with him the week before, happy with what they heard. Scholz is anyway losing patience with the former chancellor Gerhard Schröder, Putin’s placeman on the Nord Stream supervisory board and an increasing embarrassment to the country’s Social Democratic party. All of this meant at the time of a maximum tension last Friday the US national security adviser, Jake Sullivan, was able to give a warning to the Kremlin that rang true. “If Russia proceeds,” he said, “its long-term power and influence will be diminished, not enhanced, by an invasion. It will face a more determined transatlantic community. It will have to make more concessions to China. It will face massive pressure on its economy and export controls that will erode its defence industrial base. And it will face a wave of condemnation from around the world.” But Joe Biden has also made clear the limits of the deterrence he is proposing. To the frustration of Kyiv, he insists the west will help arm Ukraine, but will not intervene militarily or impose sanctions before an invasion. British diplomats acknowledge that the US president has probably read the mood of Americans right on their limits in terms of protecting Ukrainian sovereignty. That is the good news so far, and a rebuff to those only a year ago warned of a “westless world”. For a whole generation of Europeans that have never conceived of a war on their continent, Nato has introduced itself, and has not fallen over. Deterrence and its limits Beneath the surface, the differences linger about the west’s strategy of deterrence, and how best to constrain Putin. Some of it is about little more than emphasis or tone, but it is also the product of geography, national histories and different politics. The British sniffer dogs in Whitehall in particular remain on patrol for the first “whiff of Munich” or appeasement to emerge, ironically, from Berlin. No one denies the difference in outlook between London and Berlin, to take the two most extreme examples. Scholz, for instance, assured Putin that security in Europe was not possible against Russia, “but only with Russia”. He refused to describe the crisis as hopeless, saying: “War in Europe has become unthinkable for my generation.” Politicians must ensure “that it stays that way”. Bilateral economic relations continued to have great potential, Scholz said. Those that criticise the west’s strategy most also point to the pilgrimage of European politicians to Moscow and worry that it only encourages Putin to conclude armoured tanks massed in the right place can bring the level of attention the country’s status and grievances warrant. Putin felt Russia’s demands had been ignored ever since he put them on the table in a speech to the Munich Security Conference in 2007. “What Putin is after, in part, is our full attention. He has certainly succeeded in that,” said Fiona Hill, the former White House Russia adviser. The critics worry that Putin is not only getting leaders running to his door, but results. Coercive diplomacy works. Russia can already point to the revival of the Nato-Russia security council, a body founded in 2002 that had not met for three years. In response to Putin’s unrealistic treaty demands tabled in December, Nato has replied by making formal offers to hold talks on conventional forces, a replacement for the intermediate nuclear treaty as well as proposals on the transparency of weapons. Two distinguished former British diplomats, Roderic Lyne and David Manning, admit this should have happened anyway, writing in a Chatham House report: “Many agreements underpinning European security and strategic stability between Russia and the US have dissolved, so a more stable order would bring obvious benefits to both sides.” But arms reduction, in Putin’s current mood, is a third-tier prize. Ukraine is his real target, and here Putin can claim to have at least forced the west to pay new attention to the frozen conflict in the Donbas. Political directors in the Normandy format – the four-nation body that oversees the Minsk agreements signed at the end of the 2014 conflict in eastern Ukraine – have met twice after not meeting for three years. Little progress was made, but Putin will have detected that Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, long critical of the support he was receiving from Merkel and Emmanuel Macron, has come under private pressure to shift ground on how to interpret those agreements. Scholz brought with him to Moscow from Kyiv firm promises that three legal texts needed for the Minsk process to continue were being prepared in the Ukrainian parliament – on the status of eastern Ukraine, on a constitutional amendment and on the preparation of elections. Putin is maintaining the pressure by describing what has been happening in the east as genocide and by allowing the Russian Duma, by 351 votes to 16, to back a proposal to recognise the people’s republic in the Donbas as an independent state, a move that was quickly condemned by the US State Department as calling into question Russia’s stated desire to return to diplomacy. Putin will also be surveying the cracks in the west’s resolve about Ukraine’s future security status. More and more western politicians and analysts say out loud that Ukraine’s membership of Nato, put on the table at a Nato summit in Bucharest in 2008, was a mistake that raised false expectations and it would be better to admit as much. Scholz told the German press accompanying him to Moscow: “There’s a fact and this fact is that all participants know that Ukraine’s Nato membership is not on the agenda. So everyone should take a step back and be clear that we can’t have a situation where there might be a military conflict over an issue that isn’t even on the agenda.” In saying Ukraine cannot join Nato as long as it has a pre-existing conflict with Russia, as the UK defence secretary, Ben Wallace, did on the BBC this week, he was stating a fact. But, perhaps inadvertently, he was giving Russia a near veto over Ukraine’s membership. Others, including Sir John Sawers, the former head of M16, propose as “a sensible solution” the possibility of some form of neutrality status for Ukraine akin to Austria’s from 1955. “This issue needs to be finessed,” Manning said. “If the border conflict was settled, and other measures agreed to ensure Ukraine’s independence was no longer under threat, the way would be open for Ukraine to leave its Nato application on the table but commit not to proceed with it within a defined and lengthy period. This would recognise reality without breaching Nato’s principles.” No half measures This approach would be hard to sell to Ukraine, where support for Nato membership is rising. But it also presumes Putin is in this for a deal. “The problem is that Russia is contemptuous of Ukraine as an independent state, but also scared of Ukraine as a functioning democratic state that cleaves westward,” Miliband said. Quoting George Kennan, he said: “Russia sees its neighbours either as a threat or a vassal, never as a partner.” Senior serving British intelligence officers also believe Putin is not interested in half measures. These officials say the key text lies less in Putin’s treaty demands – tabled in January and restated this week – but on his essay on the historical unity of the Russians and Ukrainians in July 2021. One British official points to analysis by historian Andreas Kappeler which, they said, not only shows Putin sees Ukraine as an artificial construct, but also gives a glimpse into his mind – one which “mixes Soviet patriotism, imperial and ethnic nationalism, and a blood-and-soil pathos”. The British official said: “There is a visceral emotional, even semi-spiritual attachment around his view of Ukraine. I think if he’s going to do something, which is going to cause him some significant challenge in his relationship with western nations, I think the answer for him is to look at resolving the question on his terms in the first instance, and then dealing with the fallout from there. I don’t see how something smaller, limited to those separatist republics, is enough to resolve the Ukraine question on his terms.” The argument about Putin’s true intentions is not just a parlour game but goes to the heart of the best response, not just now but in the event of an invasion. James Nixey, head of the Russia programme at Chatham House, said: “What is at stake here is a basic grasp of the nature of relations between states in the 21st century. What Russia is insisting on is its right to a land empire which is entirely at odds with the principles of statehood that now govern Europe, and indeed much of the rest of the world. “By failing to address the real nature of Russia’s demands, Europe is avoiding critical decisions that will affect its future security for generations to come. The implications of that avoidance do not only affect Europe – they are global in importance.” Miliband, too, sees something fundamental at stake not just for the west. “The reset seems to be happening now – and of which Putin is an acute form presents a system of disorganised lawlessness that is dangerous,” he said. “It is happening at a time at greater interdependence. The ramifications of system failure in one part of the system is greater than before because the world is hyper-connected. “And we are only at the beginning of this phase of disorganised lawlessness, involving state and non-state actors. We don’t know where we are going to end up.”Ralf Rangnick has admitted the atmosphere at Manchester United is better after “unhappy players” left in last month’s transfer window. In January the first-team squad members Anthony Martial, Donny van de Beek and Amad Diallo made loan moves. Rangnick, who did not speak of anyone by name, said: “There were players unhappy, the squad was too big, players realised they wouldn’t get game time and the atmosphere is better than it used to be a couple of weeks ago. Now, for us it’s about performing well, showing togetherness on the pitch, winning games and those are the things we can influence.” The interim manager stated that Harry Maguire, whose form has drawn criticism, would remain the captain. “Harry is our captain and will stay our captain until the end of the season,” Rangnick said. United are in fourth place, two points ahead of West Ham, and travel to Leeds on Sunday before Wednesday’s trip to Atlético Madrid for the Champions League last-16 first leg. Rangnick said he was not prioritising either competition. “We are fully aware the Leeds game is an important one for us, to stay where we are in the table,” he said. “But we have an important one at Atlético Madrid in a competition [where] we would like to proceed to the next round and then we have Watford [in the league]. “We take these one by one and I am grateful we have more players available again. Nemanja Matic is back, is maybe even available for Leeds – but certainly for the next two games after.” Edinson Cavani remains out with groin and stomach problems.On Sunday all this will all be over: but before Beijing 2022 comes to a close, Great Britain have a shot at not one but two gold medals, in the women’s and men’s curling. Thanks for reading and emailing today, and see you soon for more. Russian joy, Swedish woe. Arseni Gritsyuk nets the decisive goal at sudden death in the shootout. ROC will go to the final and play Finland. At the end of the shootout the match ends 4-3 but it goes in the book as a 2-1 win for ROC. Sweden will play Slovakia for a bronze medal. They look devastated. But they still have a medal to play for. Today’s Olympics pieces: Men’s ice hockey: It remains 1-1 at the end of overtime so we move on to what Barry Davies used to call ‘the dreaded penalty competition’. In the men’s ice hockey semi-final, Sweden and the ROC team were locked at 1-1 after three periods, and they have now gone into overtime. Anton Slepyshev put ROC ahead in the second period, before Anton Lander levelled it up for Sweden in the third. Report! “None of us put our heads down, we all rallied round each other,” says Jennifer Dodds. “That is such an important part of curling, supporting your teammates ... I think we’ve done that so well with this [team of] five.” Vicky Wright is asked how she felt after the first end, when Sweden had streaked into a 4-0 lead. “I was like right, here we go, buckle up. I fully believed in all of us. I knew we could pull it out of the bag. When you do down, you’ve just got to go for it, and we did. We stuck to our processes, made a lot of shots, and put the pressure on Sweden. And we got there in the end.” “When you get to that final, no one likes going away with the silver medal, so believe you me, we’re going to fight hard for the gold now,” says Muirhead. Twitter joy for Team Muirhead: Eve Muirhead speaks to the BBC: “Third time lucky. I’ve lost two semi-finals before and I was desperate for it because these moments, and these opportunities, don’t come round very often ... I really, really was so, so proud of these girls. All week we’ve dug so deep ... I’m pretty speechless right now, but what a moment. It sounds amazing to say we are in an Olympic final.” Eve Muirhead staged a stunning fightback to steer Great Britain’s women’s curling team into the Olympic final in Beijing with a thrilling 12-11 win over the defending champions Sweden. Muirhead recovered from a nightmare start when she conceded four in the first end to move to the brink of victory with a magical final stone of the ninth that scored four of her own. That thrust Britain into the lead for the first time in the match, turning an 8-7 deficit into an 11-8 advantage, only for Swedish skip Anna Hasselborg to reply with a three of her own to force an extra end. Great Britain held the ‘hammer’, or final stone, but Muirhead did not need it as Hasselborg’s attempt with her final stone drifted wide and gifted the Britons the point they needed to seal a stunning win. It means the 31-year-old Muirhead will experience her first Olympic final at the fourth time of asking, along with team-mates Vicky Wright, Jennifer Dodds and Hailey Duff. (PA Media) “I’ve never seen a match like that ... I’m so excited to see both our teams in the final of an Olympic Games,” says the commentator Jackie Lockhart. “Hasselborg tried to chase ... and the mistakes started creeping in.” I’ll bring you some reaction when the BBC speak to the victorious team. Anna Hasselborg is pictured, looking ashen-faced, sending someone a text message. Great Britain’s Vicky Wright is checking her own phone and smiling and laughing. The women’s curling final will be at 1am UK time on Sunday morning. Hazel Irvine on the BBC says that was the highest-scoring match of the entire Olympic programme. Sweden, the champions, are out! Great Britain will meet Japan in the final! They were 4-0 down after the first end, but clawed it back, and in the extra end, Hasselborg got it wrong with her final stone, and Great Britain can celebrate! They are guaranteed a silver medal at the Olympics, just like the men’s team. Now one stone remaining each ... Hasselborg is weighing it up for Sweden. Muirhead and Wright look on with concerned faces. Two more stones each remaining in the first extra end. The teams are locked at 11-11. The house is ‘invitingly open’, as Cram says on commentary. Sweden hit back at the very last and pull it back to 11-11 after 10 ends! That was a remarkable effort from Hasselborg for Sweden. They score three to level it up, pushing the Great Britain stones away with unerring accuracy with the very last stone of the scheduled 10 ends. It will be an extra end. Hasselborg is an Olympic champion and she’s in no mood to give up her title easily ... Hasselborg’s penultimate stone leaves two stones each in the red ring at the centre of the house. One stone left for each side. Great Britain are looking good for a place in the final but nothing is certain yet. Japan have beaten Switzerland 8-6. Both teams have four stones left in the 10th end, both teams have two stones towards the centre of the house. “This is not over yet, folks,” observes Steve Cram. Four for Great Britain in the ninth end! Muirhead does indeed deliver with a perfect final stone that flicks two Swedish stones away! Great Britain now lead 11-8 and it’s Sweden on the back foot. “Calm down everybody,” says an animated Steve Cram on commentary for the BBC. “Please, no more fours.” “Is it written in the stars?” asks Rhona Howie on co-commentary. A good result from Sweden’s last stone as they push a British stone away from the ‘mixer’, in football parlance. Now Eve Muirhead with the hammer, in what looks to be the decisive ninth end ... Can she deliver? Women’s curling semi-finals: Japan and Switzerland is as nervy as Great Britain v Sweden. It’s 7-6 to Japan in the 10th and final end. Now, Great Britain look like the might be on for four points, and maybe even five, unless Sweden can find something from somewhere with their final stone! Drama! If by some bizarre chance you missed it earlier here is John Windmill’s collection of some of the best images from day 14: Excellent shots from Jennifer Dodds and Vicky Wright for Great Britain. They now have five stones within the house ... Sweden have a couple of stones left, their third-last is a good shot which taps a red stone towards the centre. It’s another crowded house, if you will, in the ninth and potentially decisive end of Great Britain’s semi-final against Sweden. Three stones each near the centre. This could go any which way. Sweden are 8-7 ahead overall. The American Mikaela Shiffrin will get her last chance to win a medal at the Beijing Winter Olympics on Saturday when the mixed team parallel event closes the Alpine skiing programme. All eyes will once again be on Shiffrin, Alpine skiing’s biggest star, who will be competing in her sixth event of the Games but has so far ended up with ninth place in super-G, 18th in the downhill and three DNFs. “I should probably quit,” Shiffrin said after her individual medal hopes had collapsed in the combined. “But I’m going to come back out... and ski some parallel GS because I’m that much of an idiot.” The competition gets under way at 10am local time (2am GMT) on the ‘Rainbow’ course with a round of 14, followed by quarter-finals, semi-finals, a race to decide the bronze medal and one to decide gold and silver. (Reuters) A belting shot from Muirhead nudges a British stone into the middle of the house. One more stone for Sweden. It’s a one-point gain for Sweden after the eighth end and they lead 8-7. I am no expert but it feels like Great Britain just left themselves with a bit too much to do after that first end. They are still in with a chance. Now it’s time for Sweden to have a long debate about the way forward in the eighth end, with two stones to go for Sweden, and one for Great Britain ... Hasselborg then takes out a British stone but the situation remains the same in the house, with a line of stones in a central position near the top: three Swedish and two British. Women’s curling semi-finals: Two stones remaining for each side in the eighth end. Sweden have two right now so would take a 9-7 lead unless GB can change something. Great Britain are weighing up their options. Sui Wenjing and Han Chan of China shattered their own world record for a short program at the Beijing Games on Friday, giving them the narrowest of leads over Russian rivals Evgenia Tarasova and Vladimir Morozov heading into the free skate to decide the Olympic champion. Sui and Han, who won the short program at the 2018 Pyeongchang Games before settling for the silver medal, scored 84.41 points to their orchestral suite from the film “Mission: Impossible 2.” That topped the record of 82.83 points that they set during the short program of the team competition earlier this month. Tarasova and Morozov, who are coached in part by the controversial Eteri Tutberidze, also would have broken the record with their short program. Instead, the fourth-place finishers in Pyeongchang were 16-hundredths of a point behind. (AP) Women’s curling semi-final: Hasselborg goes for a big take out, but fluffs it slightly and now Muirhead, with the hammer, can score two ... and she makes it ... just! Muirhead has her teammates to thank for some energetic sweeping there. The score is locked at 7-7! Sweden will have the hammer in the eighth end. At the end of the session, Sui Wenjing and Han Cong of China lead the mixed figure skating with a world-record score of 84.41. Three pairs from the ROC team occupy the second, third and fourth positions: Tarasova and Morozov, Mishina and Galliamov, and Boikova and Kozlovski, in that order. It’s the seventh end in Great Britain’s match with Sweden. Sweden lead 7-5 overall. Sweden have a stone in the red, outer ring in the middle of the house. The outer bull, in darts lingo ... and now they are scoring three as it stands. This could be bad news for Muirhead and co. Japan lead Switzerland 6-2 in the other semi-final, in the seventh end. “Is there a time limit in curling – does each team have a set period in which to make their play after the opposing team’s stone has stopped?” asks Andrew Benton on email. The answer is yes, there is a time limit, although it’s cumulative and not done stone-by-stone: “Each team shall receive 38 minutes of thinking time for a 10-end game and 30 minutes of thinking time for an 8-end game (38 minutes in wheelchair curling, 30 minutes in wheelchair mixed doubles curling and 22 minutes in mixed doubles curling). This time is recorded, and visible to the teams and coaches, throughout the game.” Here are the full rules of curling if you fancy some further reading. Six ends down in the women’s curling. Sweden have just scored two, and now lead 7-5. Four ends to go, advantage to the Swedes ... can Great Britain pull it back again? Eve Muirhead delivers Great Britain’s final stone of the sixth end. It’s a fine attempt, nearly curling beyond two red Swedish stones ... but it stops just short of being perfect. Sweden with a decision to make, they could potentially score three, but will need to take out that latest stone by Muirhead. Hasselborg delivers ... All change in the mixed skating short program ... and it’s a NEW world record for Sui Wenjing and Han Cong of China! The judges award them a score of 84.41! Anastasia Mishina and Alekansdr Galliamov of the ROC team sit second now, with 82.76, and Cheng and Yang now third, with 76.10pts. Another pair from the ROC representation are up now – Evgenia Tarasova and Vladimir Morozov – and will need to produce something special to get into contention. Japan strike back against Switzerland and now lead their semi-final 5-2. In Great Britain’s match, there is a solitary Swedish stone on the edge of the house. It’s 5-5 in the sixth end. The BBC co-commentator reckons Sweden are ‘running scared’. Women’s curling semi-final: Great Britain might have stolen the lead there, but a good defensive play from Sweden saves them a couple of points ... anyway, it’s 5-5 at the halfway stage. Following the calamitous first end, when Sweden roared into a 4-0 lead, Great Britain would certainly have taken that. Peng Cheng and Jin Yang of China thrill the home fans by scoring 76.10 in the short program of the pair skating. So it’s China, then two pairs from the USA, occupying the podium positions at the moment. Anna Hasselborg of Sweden goes for a take out. She doesn’t get it quite right and Great Britain now have three in the house. One stone each to go in the fifth end. Sweden lead 5-4 overall. Women’s curling semi-finals: A lovely shot by Vicky Wright, slap-bang in the middle of the house, for Great Britain with their third-last stone of the fifth end. GB should be able to pull at least a point back here. In the other semi-final, Switzerland lead Japan 2-1 going into the fifth end. Women’s curling semi-final: Great Britain are still playing catch-up but they are not out of it by any means. As the fourth end comes to a close, they score a point to peg it back to 5-4 to Sweden. Six ends to go, and Sweden have the hammer in the fifth end. GB had chances to make that a two-point gain, but couldn’t manage it. Team figure skating: Ashley Cain-Gribble and Timothy Leduc make it a one-two at the top of the live standings with a stunning routine. There is a huge smile on Cain-Gribble’s face as they finish, and the pair embrace. Then, while waiting for the judges’ verdict, Cain-Gribble squeezes in a wide-ranging greeting to family and friends, and thanks them, knowing she’s live on camera and on mic. The scores come in and they are a fraction behind their compatriots, Alexa Knierim and Brandon Frazier: 74.13 to 74.23. The free skating comes tomorrow, and it’s all to play for. Two-woman bobsleigh: Germany’s pair of Nolte and Levi top the charts after the first run with a track-record time of 1min 1.04sec. Mariama Jamanka and Alexandra Burghardt, also of Germany, are second, 0.06sec back. Elana Meyers Taylor and Sylvia Hoffman (USA) occupy the bronze-medal position heading into the second run later – in under an hour. They are 0.22sec behind the leaders. Sweden move 5-3 ahead in the women’s curling semi-final going into the fourth end. Momentum doesn’t exist in curling, as I feared. “A classy move.” “Someone has to lose I guess.” “My heart hurts.” The Dutchman Kai Verbij had to give up on a podium finish on Friday as an awkward lane change with his skating pair in the men’s 1,000m meant he had to give way, costing him a chance of a medal. Paired against the Canadian Laurent Dubreuil in the last race, Verbij found himself in an awkward position at a crossover. The world champion stuck to the rules and held back to let his opponent race ahead. “I didn’t have enough speed to go before him at the lane change. I just had to quit, because otherwise I would have been disqualified and probably messed up his race,” Verbij said after finishing last. “It’s pretty sad and I’m pretty disappointed that it happened at the Olympics, but yeah. Someone has to lose I guess.” Skaters are required to change lanes after every lap, and the skater on the outside lane has the right of way at the crossover. “It’s tough to do that in an Olympic race,” said Dubreuil, who won the silver medal in an explosive race. “I can’t say thank you enough for him, that was a really professional and classy move to do,” he added. Gold medallist and compatriot Thomas Krol also felt for Verbij after the race. “It’s just sad to see this happen, because he’s my best friend,” Krol said. “He was on course for a medal for sure, and I was really cheering for him and hoping that he would be on the podium for me. My heart hurts.” (Reuters) In the bobsleigh, it doesn’t look like anyone is going to knock Nolte and Levi off the top in the first run. Unless the Belgians can produce something special, they are the last nation to go. Not sure I agree with this ... Great Britain thought they were out of it after just one end, and now they’re right back in it. “Momentum”, if such a thing exists in curling, is with them. Three for Great Britain in the second end of the curling semi-final! They pull it back to 4-3! After a storming start by Sweden, and a nervy opening from GB, Eve Muirhead and co are right back in this. This time it’s Sweden’s turn to produce a howler or two, missing chances to take out British stones, and it’s all looking rosier from a British point of view. Cornelius Kersten came within three tenths of a second of claiming a remarkable speed skating medal for Great Britain at the Winter Olympics in Beijing on Friday. The 27-year-old finished in ninth place in the men’s 1,000m, just 0.31sec off third-placed Haavard Lorentzen of Norway, for the best result by a British Olympic speed skater in 58 years. “On the one hand I’m really happy but to be that close to the podium is slightly frustrating - those three tenths were really in there,” said Kersten. This is the hardest 1000m I’ve ever done and I’m pretty proud of myself but it was so close. I need just another year of hard work and good training to really close that gap, this is my first year training at a world level and look how close I’ve come.” Kersten and his partner Ellia Smeding were the first speed skaters to represent Great Britain at the Games since 1992. Earlier, he finished 25th in the 500m and 19th in the 1500m. He added: “If you compare me with my rivals, I just need another year to get a lot closer to them. Skaters don’t tend to peak until their late 20s, early 30s, so there is a lot more time for me to develop as we look towards the next Olympics.” (PA Media) In the curling, each team has two stones remaining in the second end. Great Britain have three stones in the house. Sweden are going to try to knock two out in one hit. No, in the end, they settle for a single-stone take out ... could Great Britain pick up three points here? I’ve got the figure skating on the laptop, but can’t find live coverage of the two-woman bobsleigh: However, I can tell you that Laura Nolte and Deborah Levi, of Germany, lead that event right now with a time of 1min 01.04sec. Another German pair, Mariama Jamanka and Alexandra Burghardt, are second. Curling, bobsleigh, figure skating and Big Jet TV live from Heathrow – it’s a packed Friday afternoon of sport. Sweden take a 4-0 lead after the first end. That’s a real shocker for Great Britain’s hopes of making the final. They look suitably stony-faced, if you’ll pardon the pun. They need to dig deep here. They have got nine ends to do so. A very poor start from Great Britain in the curling, to be perfectly honest. The latest stone is short, and doesn’t even make the house. This could be a four-point lead for Sweden, right out of the gate, if GB are not careful. The first teams are speeding down the course in the two-woman bobsleigh. And over in the mixed pairs figure skating, the USA team of Alexa Knierim and Brandon Frazier currently top the charts, with a score of 74.23. Japan second (70.85), Georgia third (66.11). Sweden well in control of the first end. Four Swedish stones crowd the centre. Now it’s three ... Eve Muirhead is having a look at how GB can knock one or two of these away. Hello again everyone. Here we go then. Great Britain’s women in action against Sweden in the curling semi-final. Great Britain will be using the yellow stones, Sweden the red. It’s a shaky opening to the match from Hailey Duff, who misses the Swedish stone for starters. The only live event going on at present is the pairs figure skating short program, where the USA’s Alexa Knierim and Brandon Frazier are the early leaders. The curling semi-finals are coming up any moment, though – with Team GB facing Sweden and Japan v Switzerland – as is the first run of the two-woman bobsleigh. The best images from Beijing today including biathlon, halfpipe skiing, curling and ice hockey. Here’s Martin Belam with today’s daily briefing. Perhaps the least edifying sight of the entire Beijing Games, after all the pressure that has been heaped on Valieva’s shoulders, was her coach, Eteri Tutberidze, barking in her ear after the 15-year-old had fallen twice during her routine. “Why did you let it go?” she demanded. “Explain to me, why. Why did you stop fighting? You let it go after that axel. Why?” The story behind Eileen Gu is one that takes in a deep strain of geopolitics. Gu, now 18, was born in San Francisco to an American father and a Chinese mother. She’s a big fan of Chinese dumplings and, every summer, she flew back to Beijing to attend cram school for mathematics. “When I’m in China, I’m Chinese and when I go to America, I’m American,” the she once said. But as the geopolitical mood between China and America began to shift, Gu was also caught in the middle between nationalism, identity and loyalty on both sides of the Pacific. While she was lauded in China, for which she has won three Olympic medals, she was denounced by a Fox News analyst as “ungrateful”, saying that her “reverse migration” was “shameful”. Beau Dure on the pressure the four-year cycle of the Olympics create. We’re still obsessed with “busts” and those who “choke”. Great athletes’ careers are considered unfulfilled if they don’t win the biggest prizes – even in team sports, where one athlete can only do so much. One 2012 list of biggest disappointments included LeBron James, reasoning that he had never won a championship. Oops. Bryan Armen Graham saw the American-born Chinese star complete an unprecedented hat-trick. The 18-year-old soared into history on Friday morning in becoming the first action-sports athlete to win three medals at a single Olympics – missing out on triple gold by a fraction of a point in Tuesday’s slopestyle – making good on years of hype that only intensified in the months leading up to the Beijing Games and grew to deafening levels over the past fortnight as her culture-straddling origin story has become the subject of intense public scrutiny on both sides of the Pacific. I’m off for a cup of tea. I’ll be back in time for the curling and the bobsleigh in an hour. My esteemed colleagues will guide you through the next little bit. Quotes from the Finland men’s ice hocky captain, Valtteri Filppula, via the Olympics website, following his team’s 2-0 semi-final win against Slovakia earlier today: “Close game for sure. There wasn’t a lot of room out there. I think both teams played well defensively, and we spent more time defending our net, which we did a good job of today and our goalie played well. It was a hard game and it was a good thing we were able to get the lead, because they came [at us] really hard and there wasn’t a lot of room. ... It [winning gold] would be huge. Obviously, that’s been the goal and I think, coming into the tournament, we knew we had a good chance if everything goes well and now we have just one game left. It’s going to be, at least for me, the last time I play in the Olympics and the last game, so I’m going to have to try and enjoy it as much as I can.” Great Britain’s women are in curling action in a little over an hour: they face Sweden in the semi-final, with Japan v Switzerland the other last-four encounter. Eve Muirhead and co. achieved a convincing win against Sweden in the round robin – it was 8-2 then – so more of the same would do nicely from a British point of view. Presuming Storm Eunice doesn’t knock out my internet and telly beforehand, I’ll be bringing you updates from that, and all the action later today. The last Alpine skiing race of the Beijing Olympics has been rescheduled to an hour earlier than planned because of forecast strong wind. The mixed team parallel event is now set to start at 10am on Saturday Beijing time, instead of 11am. The wind is supposed to top 20mph. The team event involves men and women from each participating country and is the last chance for American Mikaela Shiffrin to pick up a 2022 Winter Games medal. Only one of the 10 athletes who earned individual Alpine golds in Beijing was listed on the team rosters released Friday: Austria’s Johannes Strolz. He won the men’s combined last week and also picked up a silver in slalom on Wednesday. There is a 16-team bracket but only 15 nations entered, so top-ranked Austria will get a first-round bye. The first-round matches are United States v Slovakia, Switzerland v China, Italy v Russia, Norway v Poland, France v Czech Republic, Germany v Sweden, and Slovenia v Canada. (AP) The medal table is here. Norway, as mentioned previously, have broken the record for gold medals at a single Winter Games: they now have 15, following JT Boe’s latest biathlon masterclass: In the mixed pairs figure skating, there were due to be 20 pairs, but it seems the Hungarian duo have withdrawn. So that makes 19 – I achieved grade ‘C’ in GCSE maths, you know. Anyway, the Georgian team are out there now – Karina Safina and Luka Berulava – sporting grey sequinned outfits. “How good was that for starters?” asks Simon Reed on Eurosport, at the end of their routine. Overnight (if you happen to be in the UK / Europe), Eileen Gu was at it again, winning freeski halfpipe gold: “The overriding emotion is just this deep-seated sense of gratitude and resolution, just like this all coming together, years and years in the making and it’s like letting out a deep breath,” she said. Coming up in a few minutes: The short program in the mixed pairs figure skating. Johannes Thingnes Boe’s brilliant skiing more than made up for some errant shooting in difficult conditions to win gold in the men’s 15km mass start, setting a new record with Norway’s 15th gold of the Beijing Games. With Boe blowing kisses to the TV cameras as he crossed the line, the Norwegians have now taken more gold medals at a single Games than any other nation, breaking the previous record of 14 that they shared with Germany and Canada. Martin Ponsiluoma of Sweden finished 40.3sec after Boe to take the silver, with fellow Norwegian Vetle Sjåstad Christiansen picking up the bronze medal 1min 12.5sec after his countryman. France’s Quentin Fillon Maillet missed his chance to take a sixth medal and become the most successful athlete at a single Winter Games, finishing fourth after five costly misses in a whistling, freezing wind that made shooting difficult. After a tense opening with the athletes tightly packed, Boe wasn’t bothered by an early miss, flying around his penalty loop and then retaking the lead as the front runners entered the second shoot, and a perfect five-shot salvo sent him back out in lead. Germany’s Philipp Nawrath kept the pressure on Boe, entering the first standing shoot a few seconds behind, but he missed three of his five shots to drop out of contention as Sweden’s Ponsiluoma took on the role of the main challenger. Alone on the range for the final time, Boe blasted through his five shots, missing the last two as Maillet and Ponsiluoma arrived, but the Frenchman missed twice and the Swede once, allowing Boe to streak away once. Despite three misses, Christiansen surged late, passing Maillet and trying to join in the chase for Boe, but with his fifth Olympic gold medal and a record in his sights, Boe was never going to be caught and Norway’s status as a winter sports super-power was confirmed. (Reuters) The Dutchman Thomas Krol swept around the National Speed Skating Oval to win the men’s 1,000m, handing the Netherlands its 11th medal in speed skating at this Winter Games. Although slow to start, the 29-year-old quickly gained pace and crossed the finish line in 1min 07.92sec. He waited tensely on the sidelines as he watched the last two races, before raising his fists in victory and covering his face in apparent disbelief when his gold medal was confirmed. His title makes the Netherlands the first country to win three consecutive gold medals in the distance. Laurent Dubreuil of Canada claimed silver in 1min 08.32sec and Haavard Lorentzen of Norway took bronze in 1min 08.48sec. (Reuters) Paul MacInnes spoke to Kersten last month as he built up to the Olympics: Hats off to Cornelius Kersten of Great Britain for an excellent ninth place in the men’s 1,000m speed skating. He is the first long track speed skater to compete for Great Britain since 1992. He also finished ninth in the World Cup meeting in Norway in November, and a strong showing in those World Cup events allowed him to qualify for Beijing. A Swedish gold medallist has said it was “extremely irresponsible” to hold the Winter Olympics in China because of the government’s human rights record. Nils van der Poel, a 25-year-old speedskater, made the comments after returning home from the Beijing event, where officials have been at pains to keep politics and protest out despite diplomatic boycotts. Krol takes it with a time of 1min 07.92sec! He looks like he can’t quite believe what he’s achieved. Laurent Dubreuil (Canada) grabs silver and Haavard Lorentzen (Norway) wins bronze. The previous leader, Michalski of Poland, is knocked off the podium and down to fourth. He missed two shots on his final visit to the range, but he still closes out a dominant win. He has plenty of time to slow up on the final straight and wave to the smattering of fans in the stand. Silver for Sweden’s Ponsiluoma. Bronze for Vetle Christiansen of Norway. Fillon Maillet comes home having fallen out of contention with a nightmare shooting performance late in the race. Boe is skiing to glory. His lead is nearly 40 seconds. He’s already won three gold medals and a bronze at these Games! Biathlon men’s 15km mass start: THREE misses from Fillon Maillet on the final shoot! That’s a horror show. Boe of Norway leads by 17.8sec! Sweden’s Ponsiluoma looks set for silver with Christiansen of Norway rounding out the podium ... Fillon Maillet is now fourth and is giving chase but it looks like that nightmare final visit to the range is going to cost him a medal. Kersten, who was 0.23sec slower than Michalski, has now been bumped down to fifth. Ignat Golovatsiuk (Belarus) second. Men’s 1,000 speed skating: Cornelius Kersten of Great Britain is now third-fastest! That’s an excellent effort. Still, no one can knock Poland’s Michalski off the top. Marten Liiv (Finland) in the silver-medal position, 0.9sec off Michalski’s pace, having bumped Kersten down a spot. There are 22 athletes finished so far. Fillon Maillet shoots clean on the third visit to the range! Can he make up what is currently a 15.9sec deficit to Boe, up front? Sweden’s Martin Ponsiluoma has now slotted in in second pace, six seconds back. That man again: Johannes Thingnes Boe of Norway is now out front as the leading pack of biathletes come into the second shoot. Christian Gow (Canada) shoots clean. Fillon Maillet misses one again but will hope to make it up with his skiing. It’s all to play for: Boe holds a three-second lead over Philip Nawrath of Germany. Men’s biathlon 15km mass start: One miss for Fillon Maillet on the first visit to the range. Sebastian Samuelsson of Sweden shoots clean, one of 10 skiers to do so, and he now leads the way. Here we go with the men’s mass start, 15km biathlon. The Frenchman, Quentin Fillon Maillet, is punishing the rest of the athletes with a seriously hot pace to begin with. He’s trying to whittle down the field to a select group, right from the start. The bunch of skiers is already strung out. Why are Norway so good at this Winter Olympics stuff? Martin Belam and Sean Ingle investigate: Men’s 1,000m speed skating: Piotr Michalski of Poland continues to lead with a time of 1min 08.56sec. Pavel Kulizhnikov (ROC) second, 0.31sec behind, and Damian Zurek, also of Poland, is in the bronze-medal position, 0.52sec down. In less than 15 minutes, we’ve got biathlon to enjoy: the men’s 15km mass start. “Is society getting any better at recognising the humanity of those who walk the high wires of elite sports, where one momentary slip can undo a lifetime of work – if we define their work solely by what happens when people tune into the Olympics every four years?” Mikaela Shiffrin’s two weeks of pain don’t detract from a lifetime of greatness, writes Beau Dure: This time Eileen Gu didn’t leave things late. After her first two events at the Winter Games came down to nail-biting finishes, the emerging American-born superstar representing China lay waste to all-comers in the Olympic freeski halfpipe final, adding to her big air gold and slopestyle silver to complete an unprecedented hat-trick of medals in the mountains northwest of Beijing. Speed Skating: Men’s 1,000m: Piotr Michalski, of Poland, has just gone fastest in the final. Nine pairs will skate, then they will take a break to resurface the ice, after which the remaining athletes will go for gold. It’s over. Canada win 8-5 – the USA, having won gold four years ago, go home empty-handed. There are a few tears as Canada celebrate. The USA team just want to get off the ice. Men’s curling bronze medal match: With a 2-0 margin at the end of the ninth end, Canada streak away to an 8-5 lead moving into the 10th and final end. The USA team look like they know this is over. But they fight on. There are smiles on the faces of the Canadian team, in contrast. “Maybe worth contrasting the reception that Valieva got with that Nana Takagi received after crashing out of the speed skating on the final bend,” emails Daniel Howell. “And Takagi took her team’s gold medal hopes with her, not just her own ...” Very much so. The Olympic spirit. Nana Tagaki must have been so thrilled to see her sister, Miho, subsequently take gold in the 1,000m individual event. Men’s curling: A lovely effort from Canada puts them three up in the ninth end ... John Shuster, USA’s skip, clasps his face in one hand as he weighs up his options. Which aren’t great right now. Shuster goes big, trying to knock Canada’s stones away, but he leaves two for Canada. Two stones each left in the eighth. An unusually strong intervention, as Sean Ingle writes, from the IOC president Thomas Bach on the treatment of the ROC skater Kamila Valieva: Curling bronze medal match: Canada take two points and lead 6-5. We’re into the ninth end. Thanks Mike. Hello everyone. Canada’s curlers are having a debate about strategy. As Mike said, they are trailing 5-4 in the eighth end. If they get this stone right the lead could change hands. Curling: It’s getting to squeaky-bum time in the Ice Box, with a bronze medal on the line. The US still have that narrow 5-4 lead, with two stones each to throw in the eighth end. And at this point, I’ll pass over to Luke McLaughlin, who will see this one through to a conclusion, and beyond with more medals to be won in the men’s 1000m speed skating, men’s 15km mass start in biathlon and figure skating (pairs short programme). Biathlon: Braisaz-Bouchet of France wins gold, ahead of the Norwegian pair of Tiril Eckhoff and Marte Olsbu Roeiseland. It might not have been gold, but ever wondered what the secret to Norway’s success at Winter Games is? I reckon you can find the answer below: Curling: Here’s a massive shot to make at the end of the seventh end, with Canada trailing 4-5 to the US... this could be crucial. And what a shot by Brad Gushue, who knocks out two US stones! It’s a blank for Canada, and their hopes are still alive of winning bronze. Into the eighth end we go. The way 15-year-old Russian skater Kamila Valieva was treated by her coach after her two falls in her figure skating routine on Thursday evening was “chilling” and does not inspire any confidence in her entourage, the International Olympic Committee president Thomas Bach has said. In an unusually strong intervention, Bach admitted that he was shocked to see the controversial Russian Olympic Committee coach Eteri Tutberidze berate Valieva as she came off the ice, barking at her “why did you stop fighting?” even though she had been under enormous mental stress ever since her positive drugs test was revealed last week. Read Sean Ingle’s full report below: Freestyle skiing: Regez leads after a quick start in the big final, ahead of compatriot Fiva in a Swiss one-two. The pair open up a bit of daylight - in fact all four racers are spaced out - and there won’t be any late drama as Regez zips across the finish line and wins gold! Fiva claims silver and Ridzik of the ROC bronze for a second Games in a row. The young Swede Mobaerg finishes out of medals, but he’s a name to watch in the future. Freestyle skiing: A bit of drama at the start of the small final as the racers are twice pulled back from the gates, which appear to be suffering from some kind of malfunction! A crack team of officials descend and the problem is fixed soon enough. Deromedis, the young Italian, flies out of the gates and never relinquishes his lead. He finishes with a bit of showboating - performing a star jump over the final jump - to end his Games in fifth place. Leman places sixth, Rohrweck seventh, and Place eighth. The medals will be decided next. Biathlon: And we’re under way in the the final women’s event of these Games - the 12.5km mass start at the Zhangjiakou National Biathlon Centre. Freestyle skiing: There’ll be two Swiss competitors in the final after Fiva and Regez made it through. They’ll be joined there by Mobaerg and Ridzik. The final coming right up (after the small final). Curling: Game on at the National Aquatics Centre! The US enjoy a great fourth end and, having fallen 3-1 behind, pull back onto level terms at 3-3. Freestyle skiing: The semi-finals are set! Run one will feature the Swiss Alex Feva, Canada’s Brady Leman, Italy’s Simone Deromedia and Sergey Ridzik of ROC. Erik Mobaerg of Sweden, Frenchman Francois Place, another Swiss Ryan Regez and Austria’s Johannes Rohrweck go in the other. There’s no place for Kevin Drury (the Canadian they’ve just called Quadzilla on the TV), and he appears a bit cheesed off at that. Curling: Canada held a 2-0 lead after the first end, only for the US to peg them back in the second and now, in the third, Team Canada lead 2-1. Ice hockey: Finland will contest the men’s title match - and a chance to add a second gold to the six medals (one gold, two silver, three bronze) they have won so far at these Games. It ends 2-0 to the Finns after Harri Pesonen secured victory over Slovakia with a goal right at the death. Freestyle skiing: Oh that’s handy, just as Oliver Davies of Britain goes in the final heat, my feed cuts out. It fires back up just as the athletes are crossing the line, with Davies in fourth. His Games is over. And that completes the men’s skicross quarter-final line-up. Four skiers now in each of the four quarters, with the top two in each going through to an eight-man semi-final stage. Then the top two from each go into the big final, with the bottom two going into the small final. Curling: Who doesn’t love a US-Canada clash, regardless of the sport? The two old foes are staring each other down once again, this time in the men’s bronze medal match. They’re in the first end, it’s scoreless. Freestyle skiing: The men’s skicross 1/8 finals are under way, that man Alex Fiva kicking things off in the opening heat. The US-born Swiss former alpine skier is the first man into the quarter-finals with a dominant display. Ice hockey: A chance for the shorthanded Slovakia to pull level but the puck evades Michal Kristof by a matter of inches off the pass from Juraj Slafkovsky. And it remains 1-0 to Finland as time ticks down in the third period - just under 15 minutes remaining now. Doping: The International Testing Agency has reported bobsledder Lidiia Hunko has tested positive for a prohibited substance. The Ukrainian returned a positive test on 14 February - the day of her monobob event, in which she finished 20th - and has been provisionally suspended. “The athlete also has the right to request the analysis of the B-sample,” the ITA said. Ice hockey: It’s the end of the second period at the National Indoor Stadium and Finland’s narrow 1-0 lead over Slovakia remains. Cross-country skiing: Big news from earlier today - Norway’s Therese Johaug will call time on her Olympic career after she contests the women’s 30km freestyle event that closes the Games on Sunday. Johaug, who missed the Pyeongchang Games due to a doping suspension, has already picked up two gold medals in Beijing, in the skiathlon and the 10 km classic races. “Sunday will be my last Olympic race,” the 33-year-old said. “It [my decision] won’t happen until after the season, I’ll have to go a few rounds with myself, it could take a long time. Johaug has one last chance to add to her collection of Olympic medals, which also includes a silver and a bronze from Sochi. “I think it will be a very tough 30k. If it has not been important previously to allocate [energy] correctly on these trails, then it will definitely be important on Sunday,” she said. Ice hockey: Just one event in progress at the moment - it’s the men’s semi-final between Finland and Slovakia. We’re midway through the second period and Finland lead 1-0 thanks to Sakari Manninen’s first-period goal. The ROC and Sweden play in the other semi later on. Of course no USA or Canada left in the tournament. Thomas Bach: Lots coming out of the earlier presser with the IOC president, including his thoughts on the Kamila Valieva saga. Suffice to say he has not been impressed with the athlete’s entourage. He also said the IOC did not want the ROC figure skater to continue competing, but given they lost the court case, the rule of law has to be accepted. Anyway, my colleague Sean Ingle was there, and his report will be landing shortly. Stay tuned. Freestyle skiing: The men’s skicross is already up and running at Genting Snow Park, with the seeding run to determine the 1/8 final line-up completed. Lots of Canadian flags in the top six - three to be precise - while Switzerland’s Alex Fiva topped the times after laying down a 1:11.94. Freestyle skiing: The big news so far today then is that the incredible Eillen Gu has secured a second gold medal of these Games, in the women’s freeski halfpipe, to add to her big air gold and slopestyle silver. By pocketing her third medal, Gu - who has taken these Olympics by storm - became the first action-sports athlete to win three medals at a single Olympics. Here’s my colleague Bryan Armen Graham’s full report from the slopes north-west of Beijing: Times are all in local Beijing time. For Sydney it is +3 hours, for London it is -8 hours, for New York it is -13 hours and San Francisco is -16 hours. 11.45am-3.10pm Freestyle skiing – after the morning’s freeski halfpipe medal battle for the women, the men do their ski cross 🥇 12.10pm and 9.10pm Ice hockey – the men’s semi-finals will feature Finland v Slovakia first, ROC v Sweden in the evening. 🏒 2.05pm and 8.05pm Curling – in the afternoon, the losers of tonight’s semi-finals will play for the men’s bronze medal. In the evening it is the women’s semi-finals 🥉 4.30pm Speed skating – the men’s 1,000m 🥇 5pm Biathlon – it is the men’s 15km mass start race 🥇 6.30pm Figure skating – it is the short program in the pairs ⛸ 8pm and 9.30pm Bobsleigh – the first and second heats of the two-women bobsleigh varietyEngland have been handed a significant boost before resuming their Six Nations campaign, with Courtney Lawes available to face Wales next Saturday after recovering from a head injury. Lawes has missed England’s first two matches but is on course to return against Wales and comes into the frame for the captaincy. Lawes has not played since mid-January while he has progressed through the head injury return to play protocols. He has been largely restricted to training on his own but the England defence coach Anthony Seibold on Friday confirmed that Lawes took a full part in a full-blooded session. The 32-year-old’s return will be welcomed by Eddie Jones, who switched Maro Itoje to blindside flanker last Sunday against Italy in Lawes’s absence. During the autumn Lawes captained England in victories over Tonga and South Africa and proved a popular leader among the squad. His presence around the camp, despite being unable to fully train, suggests he will resume the role from Tom Curry, who was captain against Scotland and Italy. Seibold said: “Courtney trained fully today, which is obviously really good news for himself and England. He looked sharp. That was the last box for him to tick. He’s had a very thorough return to play integration and did everything in the session. “I was super impressed with Courtney in the autumn, which was the first time I’d worked with him. He took over from Owen Farrell as captain when Owen got injured and he did a fantastic job. He leads through his actions. One of the things with Courtney is his ability in defence. “Everyone can see his athleticism, but what he does off the ball in defence, the little detail around his effort areas, is very high. Defensively he’s a real leader for us. To have him back in the group training raises the standards because it means we’ve got a highly intelligent defensive player who is full of effort.” England currently sit second in the Six Nations table despite their opening defeat by Scotland and victory over Wales would keep them in contention for the title. Jones has already been boosted by the return to the squad of Manu Tuilagi while Sam Simmonds is set to resume full training on Monday, having sat out this week’s camp to manage an existing hip injury.The customary brouhaha erupted yesterday after the release of Vanity Fair’s annual Hollywood Issue cover photos, the most striking of which depicts an angry Benedict Cumberbatch emerging fully clothed from a hot bubblebath sesh with a bevy of swans. The Hollywood Issue increasingly feels like it belongs to a different era, when fashion magazines and actors’ star power were at their respective heights. These days, the printed press is clinging on for dear life (Entertainment Weekly announced just last week that it will be ceasing its print edition), and in Hollywood no one performer is bigger than a franchise. So the Hollywood Issue, which trades in the nose-to-the-window glamour of movie stars, has a more forlorn quality than it used to. In previous issues – such as the “Legends of Hollywood” iteration in 2001, featuring Nicole Kidman, Catherine Deneuve, Meryl Streep and Gwyneth Paltrow variously bestriding and draped over plush scenery – the magazine veritably crowed about the glamour of its catches, and, by extension, its own Brobdingnagian pulling power. Annie Leibovitz has since been taken off photography duties and the covers have been somewhat de-whitened (the extravagantly alabaster tones of 2010’s roster would quite rightly not pass muster in 2022); Maurizio Cattelan and Pierpaolo Ferrari are now on call to provide a self-consciously loopy look at today’s celebrities of the not-so-silver screen. “Look at these stars!” the magazine now appears to mumble, rather hopefully. “You like them?” In a series of eight covers for 2022, which features such other actors as Andrew Garfield, Idris Elba and Penélope Cruz, Cumberbatch’s is the standout. Where Garfield is photographed in goofy neon pink, suspended over Hollywood on a construction hook, and a dreamy Kristen Stewart surveys the city from atop a diving board, a scintilla more art direction appears to have gone into the Cumberbatch shoot. A soapy Benedict stands in a finely appointed room belonging to a Pemberley-style mansion and stares defiantly into the lens while a quartet of handsome swans cavort in and around a gold bathtub. What does the picture signify (apart from being a play on the well-worn “wet fully-clothed movie star” trope)? It’s notable that, in contrast to his surroundings, Cumberbatch is dressed in distinctly modern, action-man togs, while there are touches of distress – some chipped wood in the doorframes – in the antique chamber behind him. Perhaps the photograph is intended as a subversive comment on Cumberbatch’s efforts to distance himself from his extraordinarily moneyed family, whose every generation has its own Wikipedia page going right back to his slave-owning ancestor Abraham Parry Cumberbatch? Certainly it feels as if the UK’s current triumvirate of public school-educated acting superstars, (Cumberbatch, Eddie Redmayne and Tom Hiddleston), have been rather more quiet of late than when they once appeared to dominate the promotional circuits. Indeed, for early students of Cumberbatch’s career – from his stunning Tesman opposite Eve Best in Hedda Gabler in 2005 and his exquisite performance in Stuart: A Life Backwards alongside Tom Hardy in 2007 – a certain level of Cumberbatch fatigue set in after the actor had racked up several Sherlock Holmeses, a Hamlet at the National, the voice of Smaug in three Hobbit films, a Turing and a Julian Assange. Since then, the actor has appeared to scale things back a smidge, keeping a relatively low profile among Marvel gigs with a few cameos and secondary roles before returning to a world that was now more ready for his award-winning turn in Jane Campion’s The Power of the Dog, playing decidedly against type as a gruff and wounded rancher. This tightly coiled, muscular, surly performance seemed also to present a new Cumberbatch, one whose wit and charm had been excised in favour of a more physical charisma, banishing any Englishness from his persona. Although the Hollywood Issue has lost a touch of its pizzazz over the years, it’s interesting to see how, in its depiction of Cumberbatch at least, the magazine has resorted to a type of old-school glamour, playing on notions of money, class and perhaps even race to conjure a vision of ambiguous stardom for 2022 – played out against an empty, dilapidated room.Monday I was at high school during the first Iraq war, when rolling news was a relatively new thing. It was wild to turn on the TV and see a correspondent in a flak jacket, filming the bombing of Baghdad through his hotel window, or standing in front of a chain-link fence by a runway, trying to fill in airtime like it was regular TV. That was 1991. By the time of the second Gulf war, we were used to live footage from war zones, and nearly 20 years after that – and a decade after the Arab spring – we’ve become accustomed to the role played by social media in armed conflict. On Monday, as Russian troops lined up on the border with Ukraine, the coverage was dissonant in what felt like new ways. Aerial footage of the Russian army looked like throwback visuals from the second world war – the difference being that if you happened upon these images via your social media feeds they were accompanied down the righthand column by a stream of broken hearts, sparkling hearts and disappointed face emojis. In principle, an account called @funny_vidz posting “stay strong Ukraine” alongside a flexed biceps emoji is no more pathetic than any amount of slightly better-dressed commentary. Nonetheless, the presentation was jarring, as was the White House statement on Monday informing us that a Russian invasion could happen “at any time”. Popping up as a news alert on one’s phone, it had about it the vibe of a five-minute reminder on a dental appointment or your next Zoom meeting. Heads up, guys, war’s on! Of course, the fact I’m remarking on this at all is completely in line with tradition. The debate around rolling news 20 years ago could be cut and pasted straight into discussions about TikTok coverage of war in Ukraine. Jack Straw, then foreign secretary, went for the full first world war reach in 2003 in a speech that might be dusted off and reused every time. “Had the public been able to see live coverage from the first world war trenches, I wonder for how long the governments of Asquith and Lloyd George could have maintained the war effort. Imagine the carnage of the Somme on Sky and BBC News 24.” Imagine, indeed. Big thumbs down, crying face emoji. Tuesday A friend has tickets for The Music Man on Broadway, the hottest show since Hamilton. It stars Hugh Jackman as the conman Harold Hill, who, in the execution of a complicated swindle, tries to sweet talk his way into selling band instruments to the children of a small Iowa town. It is a big, overblown musical of a kind I haven’t seen for years and every song – Seventy-Six Trombones, (Ya Got) Trouble, Till There Was You – is a winner. In a packed theatre, as the orchestra swells and the big numbers get under way, it feels like the perfect antidote to two miserable years. As Marion the librarian, Sutton Foster is sublime, not least in her ability to suspend disbelief in the face of her co-star. Jackman, spry at 53, turns in a busy performance motored less by the demands of the role than by his obvious enthusiasm for being Hugh Jackman. This is no bad thing if you are, indeed, Hugh Jackman, but for everyone else it can get a little wearying. It hardly matters. The musical, which was written by Meredith Willson in 1957, does that thing all good musicals do, which is to send up America’s hucksterish values while celebrating something pure-hearted behind them. As with the best shows, there’s always something new. I’ve seen The Music Man a million times and never noticed it: as the children’s instruments, ordered by Hill, arrive on stage on the Wells Fargo wagon, my friend leans in to hiss: “If he’s paid for the instruments what exactly is the fraud?” Wednesday The Trojan Horse affair, a podcast put out by the New York Times in conjunction with Serial, is an important and shocking investigation into the 2014 claims made in Britain that a Muslim plot was under way to infiltrate Birmingham schools and radicalise the kids. The podcast exposes the allegations as fraudulent, and nails the racist uses to which they were put at the highest levels of government. According to the podcast’s dogged reporting, the letter at the centre of the story appears to be a hoax. I start listening to the show while tidying up, and am so gripped that I do a more thorough clean of my house than has been done in two years. It’s not just the drama of the investigation. There is something delicious about the application of the gigantic machinery of American journalism to a story that has its roots in a petty local government dispute. In an early episode, Brian Reed, the American host and reporter, interviews a woman called Bridget, who works for Birmingham city council. Reed is accompanied by his co-host, a journalist from Birmingham called Hamza Syed, but it’s the American who cross-examines Bridget as if she’s Bob Haldeman. Caught in an apparent contradiction, Bridget titters “I’m not psychic”, a tone – defensive sarcasm masquerading as bonhomie – recognisable to anyone familiar with British bureaucracy. The story had huge ramifications nationally, lives were ruined and entire communities were maligned, all of which the podcast definitively uncovers. Still, for pure entertainment, it’s hard to touch US journalism’s finest presenting, with all the portentousness of Watergate, the scoop “mid-level functionary at Birmingham city council seems a bit shifty and underpowered shocker”. Thursday I wasn’t going to watch Reacher, the new eight-episode adaptation of Lee Child’s series of novels on Amazon, but then I did and I urge you to follow me. It’s like a warm bath, a return to the pleasures of 80s TV, when heroic fugitives operating under false names fashioned battering rams out of scrap metal to bring down the bad guys and restore justice to small-town America. There are guns and explosions, but not in a gory, Ozark way, and unlike all other bingeable TV at the moment, nothing about Reacher is in italics. He’s just a guy with massive shoulders, bouldering his way through various villains, the purest pleasure of baloney. Friday On the walk to school, my children ask for true stories from the news. They like disaster and mayhem, anything involving people getting trapped in or under things, plane crashes, ship wrecks, extreme weather events, plunging elevators and miraculous rescues and escapes. When the news doesn’t deliver, I scramble for material. We’ve done, in summarised form, Romeo and Juliet (“that’s dumb, why didn’t she leave a note?”), Lord of the Flies (big tick), Mutiny on the Bounty, Rabbit Proof Fence, the Mary Celeste and the Bermuda triangle. Occasionally, I abuse their trust and try to sneak in something slightly more educational. “How about Russia’s imminent invasion of Ukraine?” Instantaneous and categorical “no”.Britain’s men’s 4x100m relay team has been stripped of its 2020 Olympic silver medal after CJ Ujah’s failed doping test at the Tokyo Games was confirmed. The news marks the biggest doping scandal in British Olympic history, and only the third time a Team GB athlete has lost a medal at summer or winter Games. In 1988 Kerrith Brown lost his bronze medal in judo at the Seoul Games after testing positive for a banned substance. The skier Alain Baxter lost his alpine slalom bronze medal in 2002 after using a Vicks inhaler purchased in the US. It later transpired that the same inhaler bought in the UK did not contain the illegal substance. The news was confirmed following a hearing at the court of arbitration for sport in November but only revealed on Friday. It found that the 27-year-old sprinter did have two banned substances in a urine sample, ostarine and S-23, which are known as selective androgen receptor modulators that mimic testosterone in the body. Ujah had blamed his failed test on a contaminated supplement. However under the strict liability rules of the World Anti-Doping Agency that is no defence. In a statement Ujah said: “I accept the decision issued by the court of arbitration for sport today with sadness. I would like to make it clear that I unknowingly consumed a contaminated supplement and this was the reason why an anti-doping rule violation occurred at the Tokyo Olympic Games. “I sincerely regret that this has inadvertently led to the forfeiture of the men’s 4x100m relay team’s Olympic silver medals at the Tokyo Olympic Games. I would like to apologise to my teammates, their families and support teams for the impact which this has had on them. That is something I will regret for the rest of my life.” The British men’s quartet of Ujah, Zharnel Hughes, Richard Kilty and Nethaneel Mitchell-Blake missed out on the 4x100m title by just a hundredth of a second in Tokyo, as the anchor-leg runner Mitchell-Blake was overhauled on the line by Italy’s Filippo Tortu. However, days later it was revealed that Ujah had tested positive for ostarine, which is used to treat muscle wasting and osteoporosis, and S‑23, which targets the muscle and bone tissues to promote muscle growth and bone health. The length of Ujah’s ban will now be determined in a future hearing by the Athletics Integrity Unit but it could be as long as four years. A spokesperson for UK Athletics said it was in regular communication with the athletes concerned, but added that it would not be making public comment on the case until after the World Athletics/AIU process which will follow on from this Cas outcome. The news means that Canada are upgraded to silver behind the gold medallists, Italy, while China now take bronze. Britain’s medal tally from the Tokyo 2020 Games is reduced to 64. In a strongly worded statement the British Olympic Association issued an apology to all Ujah’s opponents after he was found to have doped. “We have always been unequivocal and consistent in our stance against doping. All athletes, wherever they are from, deserve to go to the start line knowing they are in clean competition,” it said. “It is with deep sorrow that colleagues and opponents of Ujah were not able to be reassured of this fact in Tokyo. Having spent the last few years retrospectively awarding numerous British athletes with medals they should have won on the day at Beijing 2008, London 2012 and Sochi 2014, we understand first-hand the hurt and loss doping can cause. On behalf of everyone in British sport we unreservedly apologise to the athletes whose moment was lost in Tokyo due to the actions of Ujah. “We are also disappointed for the three colleagues of Ujah who, through no fault of their own, will now lose their silver medals.”The run-up to an album release is all about teasing and pleasing the fans: thrilling videos, the promise of a fantasy-fulfilling collaboration, the drip-fed unveiling of a musician’s new era. But earlier this month, the British pop star Charli XCX said she was stepping back from Twitter after receiving negative comments from fans about the campaign for her forthcoming album, Crash. “I have been feeling like I can’t do anything right at the moment,” she said. “I’ve noticed lately that a few people seem quite angry at me – for the choices of songs I’ve chosen to release, for the way I’ve decided to roll out my campaign, for the things I need to do to fund what will be the greatest tour I’ve ever done. I’ve been grappling with my mental health the past few months and obviously it makes negativity and criticism harder to handle.” For now, she said, she would draft tweets for her team to post on her behalf, “because I can’t really handle it here right now”. Charli XCX (born Charlotte Aitchison) isn’t the only major pop star to retreat from social media: Billie Eilish abandoned Twitter to preserve her mental health; the US indie star Mitski deleted her accounts after the conclusion of her 2019 tour. The problem hits musicians in a unique way. Actors are not expected to self-promote to the same extent and often eschew social media; writers generally don’t have such large followings nor the parasocial relationships that come with them. But stepping away isn’t an option for every musician experiencing digital burnout – especially after the lack of gigs and in-person promotional opportunities diminished during the pandemic, increasing the pressure on artists to constantly share updates on their work online. Darren Hemmings is a marketing manager who works with acts including Run the Jewels, Wolf Alice and Jungle. “There was a weird logic that became perpetuated as fact: you’re not on tour so you’ve got plenty of time to be all over everything. There are examples where that was a terrific move for some people but telling artists who have been around a long time that they need to be doing more when, in reality, they’ve got less to say because they’re not doing anything, leads to this ‘always on’ mentality that I think is pretty unhealthy.” As XCX noted, social media isn’t exactly a haven for kindness and positivity. And it’s not just negative comments that can make it difficult for musicians. The expectation to constantly put on a happy face can be “draining” says German singer-songwriter Au/Ra, who says she pressurises herself to keep up with the online world. “It is something I judge myself for, it’s a guilt pattern and a comparison thing to other social media accounts.” Sara Quin of Canadian pop duo Tegan and Sara says she derives “0% pleasure” from the Google Doc containing the band’s social media calendar: “Myspace or Facebook posts used to be an add-on but now it feels like making music is about making assets for social media.” Yet when the duo were searching for a new record label, they repeatedly encountered expectations that they should have a widespread and active online presence. “We’re always looking for new revenue streams and opportunities because we’re not touring and I hate to admit it, but our social media reach dictates everything for a band like us,” says Quin. “Our online metrics equate to how much a record company will give us for a record or how much [US festival] Coachella will give us to play Saturday at 3pm.” The two years of the pandemic also correspond with the rise of TikTok as a key platform for music discovery and promotion: new acts including UK producer PinkPantheress and Brit award-nominated UK singer songwriter Mimi Webb first found an audience there. So did US country artist Priscilla Block, who got her start by posting original content and music five times a day or more, according to her co-manager, Crystal Block. Within a few months of putting all her spare time into the app, she released a song, Just About Over You, which was funded by fans through a campaign on TikTok. The track went viral, landing at No 1 on iTunes’s all-genre chart, and helped her secure a record deal. Block just released her debut album, Welcome to the Block Party, but the work doesn’t stop there. Now, says Crystal, “there is always that pressure to make everything new go viral”. That potential to reach new listeners has record labels pressurising artists to add another social media platform to an already overflowing plate that typically includes Instagram, Twitter and Facebook. Even Adele, who had the biggest-selling album of 2021, isn’t immune: in an interview with Zane Lowe, she recalled a meeting where someone at her label suggested that she got on TikTok to ensure 14-year-olds knew who she was. Beyond the few examples of acts whose social media presence has paid obvious dividends, Hemmings questions whether all the time and effort musicians spend on social media is worth it. Due to limited reach, not every post will be seen by their audience, unless it’s a paid-for advert. “You see a lot of artists shouting into the void,” he says. Instead, Hemmings encourages those he works with to build communities on channels that create a more direct route to fans, as with pre-social media fanclubs. It’s a burgeoning world: Run the Jewels have an email database; dance behemoths Chase &amp; Status have a WhatsApp group with fans; British indie artist Bat for Lashes established a Patreon offering exclusive content. In 2020, Sheffield metalcore band While She Sleeps also started their own fan membership platform on Patreon, Sleeps Society. It has about 1,500 members. “It doesn’t sound like a huge amount of people but it makes enough money to keep the band afloat,” says guitarist Mat Welsh. In January, Tegan and Sara launched a Substack newsletter offering in-depth insight into their creative process, which has more than 6,000 subscribers and a paid-for tier priced at $6 (£4.40) a month. “Substack is us unselfconsciously saying, ‘We like our words and our ideas and our stories have value’,” says Quin. “So much of what social media feels like is that we work for those companies, like Spotify, Instagram and Facebook, and don’t necessarily feel any benefit. It feels like I’m always just supplying more content for the food chain.” Still, these alternatives aren’t wholesale replacements for social media. “I want to find people where they are,” says Quin. “I’m not trying to siphon them all into one place, but I’m never going to lie and tell you that I like social media. I hate it but I will do it because I don’t want people to miss out.” Welsh agrees: “Sleeps Society and social media are complementary for us. Our social channels are there for casual fans who want to engage on and off but the community is for those who would consider us ‘their’ band.” Despite the emerging alternatives available, the catch-22 remains for artists trying to have a healthier relationship to the internet while also promoting their work in an ever-more competitive field. “Fans are intelligent people who can immediately see through artists spending time trying to do it all or having an impact just because they feel they need to be,” says Sophie Kennard, manager of Chase &amp; Status. “The moment that it feels a bit disingenuous, it’s game over anyway. So they might as well utilise their time elsewhere.” Ultimately, despite all the pitfalls of social media, there may be no going back. “Sometimes I wish the electrical grid would go down so I wouldn’t have to do it any more,” says Quin. “But we’re in the maze and I don’t know how to get out.”Production of the BBC’s MasterChef will be moved to Birmingham from 2024, the first time the show will be made outside London in more than 20 years. The series will be made at the new Digbeth Loc studios founded by the Peaky Blinders creator, Steven Knight as part of a six-year deal. The BBC director general, Tim Davie, said: “This is great news for Birmingham and the BBC. We said we would create jobs and investment, bringing decision-making and productions to the West Midlands as part of our ‘Across the UK’ plans. Moving one of our biggest programme brands shows we are making that a reality.” Last year, the BBC pledged to increase the proportion of its television budget spent outside London from 50% to 60% by 2028, and said it would relocate 400 jobs outside the capital. MasterChef is one of the BBC’s most prominent shows and its highest rating cookery format over the past five years. The six-year deal also means spinoff shows including MasterChef: The Professionals, Celebrity MasterChef and the recently announced Young MasterChef for BBC Three, as well as any festive editions, will be made in Birmingham. “I am genuinely thrilled that MasterChef is coming to Birmingham,” Knight said. “We will work hard to ensure that this internationally renowned TV institution instantly feels at home in our creative environment, and we look forward to welcoming many more blue chip brands into our rapidly expanding media neighbourhood.” Andy Street, the mayor of the West Midlands, said the announcement was a “real vote of confidence, and the first major step of this new renewed commitment to the region by the BBC”. The success of Peaky Blinders has led to a record number of tourists heading to Birmingham in recent years and Knight’s new film and TV production studio, which is to be unveiled on Friday, will be where the movie version is made. The studio is a few hundred yards from where the first recorded attack by the real “peaky blinders” took place on 23 March 1890. Birmingham is becoming an increasingly popular filming location for Hollywood films. Tom Cruise filmed scenes for the latest Mission Impossible there last year and Steven Spielberg used the region for parts of his sci-fi adventure Ready Player One.Former Post Office workers have broken down in tears recounting the depression and PTSD they suffered after being caught up in the organisation’s IT scandal. More than 700 Post Office operators were prosecuted for theft and false accounting between 2000 and 2014 after the organisation’s flawed Horizon IT system incorrectly suggested there were financial shortfalls. On Friday, former worker Jennifer O’Dell said she had considered killing herself and suffered from recurring night terrors. She was accused of stealing almost £10,000 from a post office in Cambridgeshire. Speaking at the end of the first week of the independent inquiry into the scandal, O’Dell said she had researched how to take her own life, as well as suffering from depression and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). She said: “I went to some very dark places, extremely dark places. I even worked out how to commit suicide. I had to have anti-depressants. I had to have sleeping pills. I had night terrors where my husband had to wake me up. And it wasn’t just once every so often, it was two or three times a week. I had high blood pressure as well. “After the court case in December, I suffered from PTSD and had to have counselling. That was awful. I hadn’t been at war. I hadn’t lost a limb. They caused that.” O’Dell was suspended and, although not prosecuted, she said months of uncertainty left her expecting to “wake up to a court summons”. She said: “I want those people brought to justice. I want them to be persecuted and that’s not at all like me. I want them to say: ‘Yes, we did it, we didn’t tell the truth on oath.’ I want them to say sorry.” The inquiry also heard a written statement on behalf of Guy Vinall, who ran a post office in Funtington, near Chichester in West Sussex. He was threatened with prosecution when the Horizon system showed a £28,000 shortfall. He ran the branch between 2004 and 2009 after taking over from his father, who had been manager for 20 years. They both took out loans to pay back the shortfall, thus avoiding prosecution. Vinall was sacked in January 2010. In his statement, he told how he suffered a mental breakdown, turned to alcohol and attempted to kill himself several times before being admitted to a mental health institution. The statement added: “Guy Vinall feels that he cannot ever be fully compensated for what the Post Office has done. He says that they have literally ripped the life out of me.” Meanwhile, Linda Little, who started working for the Post Office when she was 16, said being accused of stealing “sent me crazy”. She said she paid more than £90,000 of her own money to cover the alleged shortfalls. “The Post Office took everything from me. They ended my career which I had built from the age of 16 and I absolutely loved my job, I really did,” she said. “They took away my retirement plans and my daughter’s and nephew’s futures as they were going to take over the business from me.” On Thursday, Susan Hazzleton, 68, said her children were taunted in the school playground when her Post Office branch in Chelmsford, Essex closed in 2001. Her children were told their mother was a liar and a thief and that she was “the reason the village did not have a Post Office or shop any more”, Hazzleton said. William Graham, 53, who managed the Riverhead sub-post office near Sevenoaks, was convicted for the concealment of supposed losses of £65,521 in January 2011 and received a suspended prison sentence. He was one of 39 former workers to have their convictions quashed by the court of appeal in April 2021. Fighting back tears, Graham told the inquiry on Wednesday his conviction had left him feeling worthless. “I visited the area with my wife and we were basically told: ‘We shouldn’t be speaking to you, we shouldn’t talk to you, we shouldn’t be seen to be talking to you,’” he said. Damian Owen, who managed a Post Office branch in Bangor, north Wales, was jailed for eight months after he was accused of stealing £25,000 as a result of computer errors. His conviction was quashed and he believes the former management should face charges. He said: “I want there to be convictions, not only for the people who have perpetuated the whole conspiracy inside the Post Office; everyone from the top down who knew and was still pushing charges.” The inquiry, which continues on Monday, expects to hear from about 60 former Post Office workers. In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org.Having spent more than 20 years of my career looking at education systems all over the world, including in countries such as China and Singapore, I know first hand the role of the classroom in shaping the way that students understand society. That’s why I was disappointed to see the Department for Education’s new guidance for England on political impartiality in the classroom this week, which threatens that understanding. The confusing new advice will make it harder for teachers to tackle vital subjects such as the climate crisis and racism, by pushing for them to be “taught in an impartial manner”. In particular, the guidance singles out the antiracist campaign Black Lives Matter – which has been central to forming societal attitudes around racial injustice – as having no place in the classroom. In the words of the Department for Education, the campaign goes “beyond the basic shared principle that racism is unacceptable”. The history of the empire, meanwhile, should be taught “in a balanced manner”. Rather than restrictions, teachers need support and encouragement in teaching about these issues. Research published last year by the Runnymede Trust and Penguin Books found that fewer than 1% of students in England study a book by writer of colour at GCSE, with a key barrier to introducing more diverse texts being teachers’ lack of confidence in talking about race and racism in the classroom. Only 12% of primary and 13% of secondary school English teachers who we interviewed reported having had training on how to talk about race, with many teachers asking for further support on how to tackle the subject. Just last month, more than 1,000 teachers registered for a Lit in Colour webinar focusing on ways to approach teaching race in the English classroom, hosted with the Times Educational Supplement and the National Association for the Teaching of English. Teachers need support and there is more we can do to provide it. A separate Runnymede Trust survey of history teachers in 2019 found that 78% wanted training on teaching about migration and 71% on teaching about empire. Racist bullying in schools has been a serious issue over the past five years, with 60,000 recorded incidents since 2016 – which is likely to be the tip of the iceberg. That this guidance threatens those conversations in the classroom is profoundly disturbing. After the events of the past year, in which Covid has exposed the extent of the structural inequalities facing Black and ethnic minority groups, there could be no more important time to talk about race and racism in the classroom – yet the government proposes limiting these dialogues. Without a clear understanding of racism, pupils will not be taught to become antiracist citizens and will lack vital knowledge of how race, migration and empire have shaped the UK. Politicians across the spectrum agree that we must stamp out racism. They have all pledged to deal with inequality. Yet progress continues to be stymied by a purposely vague war on “wokeness”, used to remove the tools that could actually address these challenges. We need to be teaching about the harmful effects of racism, instilling in our children the fundamental value of racial equality and broader social equity, and ensuring schools have antiracist strategies. Is it contradictory that the government is trying to prevent the stifling of open debate in universities, but appears to be imposing a standardised conformity with very little room for difference of opinion in our schools? Promoting diversity of thought is where the strength of our education system lies, and the government is threatening that by introducing confusing guidance that may well shut down conversations about race in their entirety. In recent years, language of “impartiality and balance” has been used to stifle work on race equality and exposing the ugly history of colonialism. Alongside our colleagues at Barnardo’s and the National Trust, our work supporting ethnic minority communities has often been challenged on grounds of imbalance in this debate. I am deeply concerned that this guidance will introduce this thinking in schools, and make the teaching of race and empire political, or a facet of a culture war none of us want to be fighting – least of all our students. Dr Halima Begum is chief executive of the Runnymede TrustThe French virologist Luc Montagnier was a protagonist in one of the most acrimonious scientific disputes of the late 20th century. The disagreement, with the American scientist Robert Gallo, over who had discovered HIV and its role in causing Aids, was resolved only after the intervention of the US and French presidents, Ronald Reagan and Jacques Chirac. In 2008 Montagnier and his colleague Françoise Barré-Sinoussi were jointly awarded half of the Nobel prize for medicine. The rest of the prize went to Harald zur Hausen, for his unrelated discovery that human papillomaviruses cause cervical and other cancers. In later life Montagnier, who has died aged 89, alienated his own supporters after he promoted a range of fringe theories. He was a champion of the anti-vax movement, arguing that diseases including HIV could be cured by diet. When the Covid pandemic began, he claimed that Sars-CoV-2, the virus that causes Covid-19, had originated in a lab experiment to combine coronavirus and HIV. He told viewers on French TV that vaccination was an “enormous mistake” that would promote the spread of new variants. Reports of the Aids epidemic first appeared in the early 1980s, as gay men fell ill with a mysterious immunodeficiency syndrome. Barré-Sinoussi was working in Montagnier’s virology unit at the Pasteur Institute in Paris, France’s premier biomedical research institute. In 1983 she isolated a retrovirus, which they called lymphadenopathy associated virus (LAV), from the blood of patients with Aids. With typical scientific caution, their report concluded that it “may be involved in several pathological syndromes, including Aids”. Gallo, working at the US National Cancer Institute, had meanwhile identified a family of cancer-causing immunodeficiency retroviruses – RNA viruses that can insert a DNA copy of their genetic material into a host cell – that he called human T-lymphotropic virus (HTLV). In 1984 he announced in a series of high-profile papers that a new member of this family, HTLV-III, could definitively be identified as the cause of Aids. The US government patented the blood test he had developed to detect antibodies to the virus before symptoms developed, which made it possible to screen donated blood. The row blew up not only because HTLV-III proved to be near-identical to LAV (and not closely related to HTLV-I and II), but also because material used in Gallo’s studies included samples that Montagnier had supplied from the Pasteur Institute in September 1983. Moreover, the Pasteur had applied for a US patent on blood tests for LAV four months earlier than Gallo; it sued the US government for its share of the proceeds. Before the case came to court, negotiation between the US and French governments led to a resolution that the two scientists should be equally credited with the discovery, both named on the patents, and that the millions of dollars in income from the blood test should be shared between their two institutions and an international Aids research foundation. The parties also agreed to name the virus human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). In 2002 Gallo and Montagnier published a joint paper acknowledging each other’s role: Montagnier’s lab discovered HIV, and Gallo’s proved it caused Aids. When Gallo was excluded from the Nobel prize, Montagnier declared himself as surprised as anyone. The dispute, against the backdrop of the human catastrophe of the Aids epidemic itself, proved to be such a cause célèbre that HBO made a TV film, And the Band Played On (1993), based on the 1987 book by Randy Shilts, in which Montagnier was played by the Belgian actor Patrick Bauchau and Gallo by the American Alan Alda. Montagnier was born in Chabris in the Indre region of France, and grew up near Poitiers, the only child of Marianne (nee Rousselet) and Antoine Montagnier, an accountant. After training in medicine at the universities of Poitiers and Paris, Montagnier began work on retroviruses in the UK, at the Medical Research Council Virus Research Unit in Carshalton, south London, and at Glasgow University, before setting up his own lab at the Pasteur Institute in 1972. In 1993 he established and led the World Foundation for Aids Research and Prevention. After the HIV controversy had substantially died down, he spent three years heading the centre for molecular and cellular biology at Queen’s College, City University of New York, before returning to the Pasteur Institute. In 2009, the year after he won the Nobel prize, he stunned scientific colleagues by publishing (in a journal he founded and edited himself) the claim that electromagnetic signals could be detected in water that had previously held DNA or RNA from viruses and bacteria. This was a variation on the “memory of water” theory that the discredited immunologist Jacques Benveniste put forward as an explanation for the efficacy of homeopathy. Montagnier also claimed that autism was caused by infection and could be cured by long-term antibiotic treatments. Scientists reacted with deep scepticism. From 2010 Montagnier spent a few years working at Shanghai Jiao Tong University in China, where, he said, they were more “open-minded” about his ideas. In 2017 more than 100 members of the French academies of science and medicine published an open letter condemning him for spreading “dangerous health messages outside of his field of knowledge” after he opposed the extension of his country’s childhood vaccination programme. Montagnier married Dorothea Ackermann in 1961. She survives him, along with their three children, Anne-Marie, Francine and Jean-Luc. • Luc Montagnier, virologist, born 18 August 1932; died 8 February 2022That’s all from me, Léonie Chao-Fong on the global coronavirus blog for today as I cross over to our Ukraine coverage. Please feel free to join me there. In the meantime, here’s a recap of all the international Covid developments: Six African countries – Egypt, Kenya, Nigeria, Senegal, South Africa and Tunisia – will be the first on the continent to receive the technology needed to produce their own mRNA vaccines from a scheme headed by the World Health Organization. The project aims to end much of the reliance of African countries on vaccine manufacturers outside the continent. Covid antibody levels for people who have had the AstraZeneca or Pfizer/BioNTech jab decrease with age as well as being higher in women and people who had previously had Covid, data released by the British Medical Journal shows. Scrapping free coronavirus tests and the requirement to self-isolate in England could result in a “sudden change” in the public’s behaviour and lead to “rapid epidemic growth”, the UK’s government advisers have warned. The government’s advisory pandemic modelling group SPI-M-O cautioned against easing rules any further ahead of the prime minister’s unveiling of his “Living with Covid” plan on Monday. South Korea reported 109,831 new Covid cases on Friday, marking the first time daily reported cases have exceeded 100,000 since the pandemic began. Despite the spike in cases, authorities announced a partial relaxing of some restrictions including a later curfew for restaurants and bars. In Japan, health officials have now approved a plan for more targeted restrictions in areas where infections are still relatively high. From Sunday, limits on mobility and commerce will end in five prefectures where the virus appears to have peaked, but curbs will be extended until 6 March in 17 areas with a high level of cases. People no longer have to show a Covid pass by law in order to get into large events, cinemas and nightclubs in Wales after the rule expired at midnight. As of Friday, venues are no longer required to ask customers for proof of two Covid jabs, or a recent negative lateral flow test result. As Hong Kong finds itself engulfed in soaring Covid cases and hospitals reach breaking point, charities are warning that the city’s foreign domestic workers are being “abandoned”, with some forced to sleep rough or being denied treatment after testing positive. Germany’s health minister, Karl Lauterbach, has dismissed calls for a speedier relaxation of restrictions to control Covid, warning that the country was in a more vulnerable situation than comparable countries owing to the relatively high number of unvaccinated people in the over 60 age bracket. The World Health Organization (WHO) said countries struggling with surging Covid infections may shorten the recommended quarantine duration of 14 days in some situations. The UN agency said its new guidelines may be helpful for places where essential services are under pressure. Thank you for following along today and have a lovely weekend. Peter Beaumont, senior reporter on our Global Development desk, on a groundbreaking project headed by the WHO announced today: Six African countries – Egypt, Kenya, Nigeria, Senegal, South Africa and Tunisia – will be the first on the continent to receive the technology needed to produce their own mRNA vaccines from a scheme headed by the World Health Organization. The project aims to assist low- and middle-income countries in manufacturing mRNA vaccines at scale and according to international standards, with the aim of ending much of the reliance of African countries on vaccine manufacturers outside the continent. The announcement comes in the same week that BioNTech, which produces the Pfizer vaccine for Covid-19 – itself an mRNA vaccine – announced it planned to deliver factory facilities built out of shipping containers to several African countries to allow the Pfizer vaccine to be produced on the continent. Primarily set up to address the Covid-19 pandemic, the global mRNA hub has the potential to expand manufacturing capacity for other vaccines and products, such as insulin to treat diabetes, cancer medicines and, potentially, vaccines for diseases such as malaria, tuberculosis and HIV. The WHO established its global mRNA technology transfer hub after vaccine hoarding by wealthy countries – and problems with supply from India, as companies prioritised sales to governments that could pay the highest price – meant low- and middle-income countries were pushed to the back of the queue for Covid-19 vaccines. The scheme’s ultimate goal is to spread capacity for national and regional production to all health technologies. No other event like the Covid-19 pandemic has shown that reliance on a few companies to supply global public goods is limiting, and dangerous, said the WHO chief, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, announcing the first recipients of the technology on Friday after visiting the hub in South Africa last week. Scrapping free coronavirus tests and the requirement to self-isolate in England could result in a “sudden change” in the public’s behaviour and lead to “rapid epidemic growth”, the UK’s government advisers have warned. In a document published today, the government’s advisory pandemic modelling group SPI-M-O cautioned against easing rules any further ahead of the prime minister’s unveiling of his “Living with Covid” plan on Monday. SPI-M-O writes: While behaviour change following the lifting of restrictions has previously been gradual, a sudden change, such as an end to testing and isolation, has the scope to lead to a return to rapid epidemic growth. Warwick University research estimates that the combination of restrictions and behavioural change since before the pandemic, such as testing, self-isolation and mask-wearing, were reducing transmission by around 20-45%. The estimates indicate there is a potential for transmission to increase by around 25%-80% if the population were to return to pre-pandemic behaviour with no mitigations. Regulators in the US delayed the review of the Pfizer/BioNTech Covid-19 vaccine for children under five because its two-dose regimen did not work well against the Omicron variant, the Wall Street Journal reports. Last week, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) said it would delay its decision for at least two months as more data was needed on the vaccine. An early look at data showed the vaccine to be effective against the Delta variant but some vaccinated children developed Covid-19 after Omicron emerged, the report said, citing people familiar with the FDA’s decision. The FDA did not respond to a Reuters request for comment. The British Medical Journal has just released data showing Covid antibody levels for people who have had the AstraZeneca or Pfizer/BioNTech jab decrease with age as well as being higher in women and people who had previously had Covid. The article goes on to say: The study, led by Imperial College London, analysed self-reported results from Fortress lateral flow tests to detect antibodies in a drop of blood from a finger prick. Data were collected from 212,102 adults from January to May 2021, of whom 71,923 (33.9%) had received at least one dose of Pfizer-BioNTech and 139,067 (65.6%) had at least one dose of AstraZeneca. Results published in Nature Communications showed that, after either of the vaccines, antibody positivity peaked four to five weeks after the first dose and then declined until after second doses were given. “For both vaccines, there was a clear increase in the proportion of individuals testing positive after second doses,” the researchers said. You can read the full piece here. With Covid restrictions all but gone in the UK, Guardian writer Joel Golby has written a guide to behaving in public – in case you’ve forgotten. Here is his quick refresher on everyday encounters from shaking hands to sharing drinks: If you’ve just joined us, here is a quick snapshot of all the most recent news stories South Korea reported 109,831 new Covid cases on Friday, marking the first time daily reported cases have exceeded 100,000 since the pandemic began. Despite the spike in cases, authorities announced a partial relaxing of some restrictions including a later curfew for restaurants and bars. In Japan, health officials have now approved a plan for more targeted restrictions in areas where infections are still relatively high. From Sunday, limits on mobility and commerce will end in five prefectures where the virus appears to have peaked, but curbs will be extended until 6 March in 17 areas with a high level of cases. People no longer have to show a Covid pass by law in order to get into large events, cinemas and nightclubs in Wales after the rule expired at midnight. As of Friday, venues are no longer required to ask customers for proof of two Covid jabs, or a recent negative lateral flow test result. As Hong Kong finds itself engulfed in soaring Covid cases and hospitals reach breaking point, charities are warning that the city’s foreign domestic workers are being “abandoned”, with some forced to sleep rough or being denied treatment after testing positive. Germany’s health minister, Karl Lauterbach, has dismissed calls for a speedier relaxation of restrictions to control Covid, warning that the country was in a more vulnerable situation than comparable countries owing to the relatively high number of unvaccinated people in the over 60 age bracket. The World Health Organization (WHO) said countries struggling with surging Covid infections may shorten the recommended quarantine duration of 14 days in some situations. The UN agency said its new guidelines may be helpful for places where essential services are under pressure. The WHO said that six African countries – Egypt, Kenya, Nigeria, Senegal, South Africa and Tunisia – would be the first on the continent to receive the technology needed to produce mRNA vaccines in a project it launched last year. Western Australia’s hard border will come down on 3 March, as the premier, Mark McGowan, acknowledges that sealing off the state has become “ineffective” in the face of a surging local outbreak. WA had been the last Australian state to succeed in avoiding significant community transmission of Covid. The estimated range of England’s Covid-19 reproduction “R” number is between 0.8 and 1.0, unchanged on the previous week, the UK Health Security Agency said, with the daily cases possibly reducing at a slightly quicker rate. Also in England, NHS leaders said free Covid tests should continue for the public and urged against the scrapping of self-isolation rules. Here’s an interesting thread from Philip Schellekens, a senior economic adviser at the World Bank Group, on how global vaccine inequities in last year’s primary vaccination programme have extended into booster coverage in 2022. The estimated range of England’s Covid-19 reproduction “R” number is between 0.8 and 1.0, unchanged on the previous week, the UK Health Security Agency said, with the daily cases possibly reducing at a slightly quicker rate. An R number between 0.8 and 1.0 means that for every 10 people infected, they will on average infect between 8 and 10 other people. The daily growth of infections was estimated at between -4% to -1%, compared with -3% to 0% the previous week. As Hong Kong finds itself engulfed in soaring Covid cases and hospitals reach breaking point, charities are warning that the city’s foreign domestic workers are being “abandoned”, with some forced to sleep rough or being denied treatment after testing positive. Hong Kong relies on some 370,000 foreign domestic workers, the vast majority of which are women from the Philippines and Indonesia, Agence France-Presse reports. Foreign domestic workers must live with their employers, cannot swap jobs easily, and are only entitled to one day off a week. Today, a coalition of groups representing migrant workers said the already grim pandemic conditions have plunged further in the current outbreak. Some workers who have tested positive for the virus have been sacked by employers, forcing them to sleep outdoors. Others have been denied medical treatment at hospitals because they have lost their jobs. J, a foreign domestic worker from the Philippines, told HKFP that she had been living in a park in Yau Ma Tei since testing positive for Covid-19 on Tuesday. Temperatures in Hong Kong are expected to drop to 10C during the weekend. J, who wished to remain anonymous, said: I’m freezing because of the weather, [it’s] very cold. I really don’t [know] what to do. Eni Lestari, an Indonesian domestic worker and activist, told AFP that her peers had been on the “frontlines” helping families throughout the pandemic, adding: Now we are being neglected, we are being denied services, we are being abandoned. We are very alarmed and we are very angry. Our Berlin correspondent, Kate Connolly, reports on why Germany is behind its neighbours in relaxing pandemic restrictions. Germany’s health minister, Karl Lauterbach, has dismissed calls for a speedier relaxation of restrictions to control Covid, warning that the country was in a more vulnerable situation to comparable countries such as Denmark or the UK owing to the relatively high number of unvaccinated people in the over 60 age bracket. Speaking at a weekly press briefing in Berlin, Lauterbach said that about 12% of Germany’s over 60s remained unvaccinated, which he said was around three to four times higher than in other comparable countries. Currently 75% of Germans have had two jabs, and 56% have received booster shots. The UK’s figures are 73% and 56% respectively. Denmark’s are 81% and 62%. The German media in particular has looked with envy to Denmark and the UK in recent weeks as they have dropped most major restrictions, asking when Lauterbach would also declare “freedom day” in Germany. But Lauterbach said: “There can be no such thing as ‘freedom day’.” He said that lateral flow tests and PCR tests would remain free, and that to do away with them would be the equivalent of “flying blind”. A relaxation of protection measures starting with the immediate abolition of the need for people to show their vaccine or recovered status when entering non-essential shops, must be carried out in a “precise fashion” he warned, so as not to cause another wave. Germany’s Omicron wave passed its peak earlier this week. Lars Schade, vice president of the disease control agency Robert Koch Institute, warned that despite a general decrease in the incidence rate, the number of older people getting infected, especially in care homes, was currently rising, and deaths remained high, with 264 new deaths announced on Thursday. Schade added that a close eye was being kept on the advance of the Omicron sub-type BA.2, which is thought to be more infectious and to cause more severe symptoms. Michael Meyer-Hermann, a professor of immunology who is a member of the government’s council of experts, said there was finally “light at the end of the tunnel”. He said Germany had, compared with neighbouring countries, so far emerged with a comparably lower death rate, even though he said 1,400 deaths per million of the population, compared with the average in Europe of 2,200, was still “far too high”. He warned people who got infected with Omicron against believing this would offer them protection against the virus similar to that given by the vaccine. “People who have recovered from an Omicron infection but are not vaccinated will have a lower protection against other variants,” he said. Lauterbach said he believed Covid would remain a major public health issue for at least a decade. Which was why it was important he said to create a “basic immunity” against it as soon as possible. Members of Independent Sage have warned that removing access to free coronavirus tests in England will lead to an increased risk of spread of Omicron and subsequent variants, “leading to more illness, death and burden on the NHS and more risk of new variants emerging”. In a statement published today, they said widespread availability of these tests may have contributed to reducing peak infections last summer and this winter. If the public was no longer able to access free testing, it could lead to a “loss of intelligence on the continuing course of the pandemic” as well as reducing the UK’s ability to detect and track newly emergency variants, the statement reads. Scrapping free Covid tests will have a “disproportionate impact on many of the most disadvantaged and vulnerable in society”, Indy Sage members warn, leading to widening inequalities and affecting the ability of clinically vulnerable people to safely engage with society. Members continue: Independent Sage calls on the government to publish, immediately, the scientific evidence and risk assessments on which it has based this decision. It further calls on the devolved administrations not to follow this path until they have seen convincing evidence that it is safe. Our China affairs correspondent, Vincent Ni, on the recent decision to postpone the election of Hong Kong’s chief executive. Hong Kong has said it will postpone the upcoming election of the chief executive from 27 March to 9 May as the Chinese territory battles a raging wave of the coronavirus, overwhelming hospitals. Citing the emergency ordinance and chief executive election rules, Carrie Lam, the city’s incumbent chief executive said on Friday that the administration’s focus now had to be on the fight against the pandemic. A fifth wave of the virus has engulfed Hong Kong in recent weeks. Despite its intensive contact tracing and stringent quarantine policies, infections have risen 60-fold since 1 February. On Friday, Hong Kong reported 3,629 new daily infections, with an additional 7,600 preliminary positive cases. A policy of admitting every single positive case to hospital also meant that thousands of residents are being added to an already huge backlog every day. The city’s Hospital Authority said 3,774 people on Thursday sought treatment at accident and emergency departments, but only 691 were eventually admitted. On Wednesday, China’s president, Xi Jinping, told Lam that her “overriding mission” was to stabilise and control a worsening outbreak. Xi expressed his “concern about the pandemic situation” and his care for local residents, according to front page stories in local pro-Beijing newspapers. South Korea reported 109,831 new Covid cases on Friday, including 109,715 local cases, marking the first time daily reported cases have exceeded 100,000 since the pandemic began. A further 45 deaths were recorded. Case numbers have spiked in recent weeks driven by the fast spread of the Omicron variant. Daily infections have nearly doubled in just a week after topping 50,000 for the first time on 10 February. Despite the spike in cases, authorities announced a partial relaxing of some restrictions. From Saturday, a curfew on restaurants and cafes will be extended an hour, from 9pm to 10pm, in a nod to increasing criticism from business owners. But other restrictions such as a six-person limit on private gatherings, mask mandates in public spaces, a seven-day quarantine for international arrivals, and vaccine passes for a range of businesses, will remain in place until at least 13 March, officials said. Health authorities warn daily cases could still double or triple. Earlier today, prime minister Kim Boo-kyum said the virus peak is expected to pass around end-February and mid-March. More on Japan, where Covid deaths have risen to record levels despite a decline in new cases. Japanese health officials have now approved a plan for more targeted restrictions in areas where infections are still relatively high. From Sunday, limits on mobility and commerce will end in five prefectures where the virus appears to have peaked, but curbs will be extended until 6 March in 17 areas with a high level of cases. The top health adviser Shigeru Omi told reporters: The priority going forward is to try to hold down serious cases and deaths among the elderly. It comes as Covid deaths rose to a record 271 on Thursday, marking the third consecutive day that deaths have exceeded 200. About 2,446 people have died so far this month, making February the second deadliest month in Japan since the pandemic began. Hello everyone. It’s Léonie Chao-Fong here again, taking over the live blog from Lucy Campbell to bring you all the latest global developments on the coronavirus pandemic. Feel free to drop me a message if you have anything to flag, you can reach me on Twitter or via email. We start with the news that Germany has passed its peak of new daily cases with the Omicron variant of coronavirus, according to the country’s health minister, Karl Lauterbach. Speaking to reporters today, he said government measures to curb numbers have been effective but warned against relaxing restrictions too quickly, adding: We are not really in safe waters. Lauterbach, an epidemiologist by training, noted that as many as 12% of people aged over 60 in Germany are still unvaccinated. In total, almost a quarter of the country’s 20m population has not yet been vaccinated. Germany’s disease control agency reported 220,048 new cases and 264 further deaths today. Germany has been slower than many of its European neighbours in relaxing pandemic restrictions. On Wednesday, chancellor, Olaf Scholz, and the country’s 16 state governors agreed on a three-step plan to end most of the country’s restrictions by 20 March. Lauterbach defended the cautious approach, saying that “if we open too quickly, then the case numbers will rise again”. He said a general vaccine mandate was still necessary, and urged opposition lawmakers not to block compulsory vaccination proposals. A quick snap from Reuters reporting that, according to local media, the election of Hong Kong’s chief executive, which had been scheduled to be held in March, will be postponed to May, as the city battles to control a surge in Covid infections. People no longer have to show a Covid pass by law in order to get into large events, cinemas and nightclubs in Wales after the rule expired at midnight. As of Friday, venues are no longer required to ask customers for proof of two Covid jabs, or a recent negative lateral flow test result. Scrapping Covid passes is the first step in a three-week plan to further ease Wales’ coronavirus rules. On 28 February, face masks regulations will only be required in shops, including hairdressers and salons, on public transport and in health and social care. They will no longer be required in other venues – including museums and cinemas – from that date. Welsh ministers could follow England in scrapping the remaining regulations, including self-isolation requirements and the mask rules, by the end of next month. No precise date has been fixed, although ministers are expected to make their decision on or around 3 March. The BBC has the story. Western Australia’s hard border will come down on 3 March, as the premier, Mark McGowan, acknowledges that sealing off the state has become “ineffective” in the face of a surging local outbreak. McGowan announced the new border reopening date on Friday, allowing quarantine-free travel for those who have received three vaccine doses. The state’s reopening will happen nearly 700 days after WA first sealed itself off from other states in April 2020, with its international border remaining tightly controlled since the federal government initially shut Australia’s borders in March 2020. WA had been the last Australian state to succeed in avoiding significant community transmission of Covid. However, local cases have surged in recent days, with a record 194 new local infections reported on Friday. McGowan said: I firmly believe saving West Australian lives has been worth every effort over the past two years. Eventually there comes a point where the border is ineffective when you get to high case numbers within the state. It is plain to see that four weeks of caution has paid dividends. It means it is now far safer to relax our hard border settings. From 12.01am on 3 March, travellers who have had three doses of Covid-19 vaccine will be able to enter WA, however they will still have to complete a G2G border pass prior to entry and take a rapid antigen test within 12 hours of arrival. Unvaccinated travellers from interstate will not be able to enter WA. The reopening of the international border will be in line with the federal government’s previously announced plan that is already in place in all other jurisdictions – which requires two doses of Covid vaccine. In WA, unvaccinated returning Australians will have to undergo seven days of hotel quarantine, with a smaller cap of 70 people per week. New mask rules, as well as density and gathering restrictions, will also be introduced ahead of the 3 March reopening, to protect the state’s health system from being overwhelmed by the spread of the Omicron variant. The full story is here: Western Australia to reopen 3 March to triple-vaccinated travellers Japanese prime minister Fumio Kishida’s plan to relax the strictest Covid border controls among wealthy nations has pleased nobody, with businesses and student groups worried it might not be enough, Reuters reports. Japan has largely been closed off to non-residents for almost two years, keeping out hundreds of thousands of students and foreign workers sorely needed to fill a labour gap left by the nation’s shrinking, ageing population. Kishida said on Thursday that from March the number of people allowed to enter Japan will increase to 5,000 a day from 3,500 now, while quarantine would be shortened or eliminated entirely. Opinion polls have shown widespread public support for the travel curbs, and people on social media expressed dismay over the lifting of the restrictions while infection controls remain in place over much of the country. An Omicron-fuelled wave of cases in Japan has shown signs of peaking out, but deaths have risen to record numbers this month, particularly among the vulnerable elderly population, amid a slow roll-out of vaccine booster shots. With the Omicron variant now widespread in Japan, business leaders and some politicians have said the border measures no longer made sense. “Japan’s reputation as a stable and reliable partner is at stake,” said Marcus Schuermann, delegate of the German Chamber of Commerce and Industry in Japan, citing a survey of member companies that reported losses during the border closure. Kishida’s announcement is a “positive development”, he added, but a roadmap on how people will be allowed into the country is still missing. The American Chamber of Commerce in Japan echoed the call for transparency. “We also urge that the government allocate sufficient resources to accelerate application and visa processing and to reduce long delays at ports of entry,” ACCJ special adviser Christopher LaFleur said in a statement. Filippo Pedretti, the organiser of a group of international students waiting to enter Japan, said they were concerned the 5,000 daily limit could mean many would still miss the start of the new semester in April. “Thus many will lose another six months of scholarship and will be forced to take online classes,” he said. A Japanese government official told reporters on Friday there was no estimate on how long it would take to let in all the waiting foreign nationals. The political analyst Atsuo Ito said Kishida’s change of course showed his flexibility but also an inability to set clear goals. “Depending on public opinion and experts, his policies just change all the time,” he said. The World Health Organization (WHO) said on Friday that six African countries - Egypt, Kenya, Nigeria, Senegal, South Africa and Tunisia - would be the first on the continent to receive the technology needed to produce mRNA vaccines in a project it launched last year. The technology transfer project, launched last year, aims to help low- and middle-income countries manufacture mRNA vaccines at scale and according to international standards. mRNA is the advanced technology used by companies such as Pfizer/BioNTech and Moderna for their Covid shots. The WHO established its global mRNA technology transfer hub after vaccine-hoarding by wealthy countries and companies prioritising sales to governments that could pay the highest price meant low- and middle-income countries were pushed to the back of the queue for Covid vaccines. Free Covid tests should continue for the public and self-isolation rules must not be scrapped, according to a survey of NHS leaders. More than 300 senior staff in England polled by the NHS Confederation found 79% disagreed or strongly disagreed with the plan to stop free access to Covid-19 tests for the public. Boris Johnson is expected to unveil his plan for living with coronavirus on Monday, with ministers having suggested that free tests will be axed. In the survey, 94% of the 307 NHS leaders polled said testing for health staff and other key workers must also continue. At present, NHS staff are asked to test at home twice a week. Asked on Thursday if free Covid tests would be scrapped next week, Sajid Javid, the health secretary, said “the protections we’ve enjoyed over the last few months” should be “reviewed”. The survey also found that more than three-quarters would disagree with any axing of the legal requirement to self-isolate following a positive Covid result in favour of it being advisory only. Furthermore, more than four in five (82%) would be against ending compulsory mask-wearing in the NHS and care homes. And 83% of health leaders said they did not want the weekly Office for National Statistics infection survey to be dropped or scaled back, as has been reported. Matthew Taylor, chief executive of the NHS Confederation, warned “now is not the time to take risks” with easing coronavirus rules, and reiterated the call for some restrictions to be retained. He told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: The strong sense from our members is that things are starting to return to normal - we are starting to make some inroads into that enormous challenge. But this is not the time to take risks. We need to operate in an evidence-based and incremental way. And that’s why the overwhelming majority of NHS leaders want to see the continued access to free testing. We want to see the continuation of survey every week which tells us about the level of prevalence which exists. We don’t want to get rid of the legal requirement to self isolate and we want the requirement for people to wear masks in the clinical setting. None of those things need disrupt daily life but they will enable us hopefully to continue to move out of this pandemic without taking unnecessary risks. The full story is here: Free Covid tests and self-isolation rules must continue, say NHS leaders Hong Kong’s policy of admitting every positive case to hospital means thousands are being added to an already huge backlog every day, write Helen Davidson and Sum Lok-kei, in this analysis of how the city’s Covid response went so wrong. For most of 2020 and 2021 Hong Kong had one of the world’s most effective responses to the pandemic. It kept total case numbers below 15,000 by quickly crushing outbreaks under a strategy of pursuing zero cases. The stakes were high. Being Covid free is Beijing’s requirement for opening its borders to the city, something Hong Kong has prioritised over opening to the rest of the world. Under the “dynamic zero” strategy Hongkongers enjoyed long stretches of time largely unencumbered. Between those stretches, when four waves of Covid hit the city, the government introduced restrictions which were often complicated and harsh, sometimes illogical, and changed frequently. But they worked – until Omicron arrived and the system crumbled. Full story here: ‘No light at the end’: How Hong Kong’s Covid response went so wrong Hong Kong has identified more than 20,000 hotel rooms for quarantine accommodation, the leader, Carrie Lam, said on Friday, as property developers piled in to show support as the global financial hub battles a surge in Covid cases. Lam said 21 hotels had expressed interest in turning their facilities into isolation venues, exceeding “by a large margin the government’s original target of 7,000 to 10,000 rooms”. Quarantine facilities in Hong Kong have reached capacity and hospital beds are more than 95% full as cases spiral, with some patients, including elderly, left on beds outside in chilly, sometimes rainy weather. The moves come as Hong Kong authorities report new cases have multiplied 60 times so far this month, and after the Chinese president, Xi Jinping, said the city’s “overriding mission” was to stabilise and control the outbreak. Hong Kong is expected to report at least 3,600 new infections on Friday, with another 7,600 preliminary positive cases, local broadcaster TVB said, citing an unidentified source. CK Asset Holdings, owned by billionaire Li Ka-shing, said it would provide more than 3,000 hotel rooms in four hotels. Sun Hung Kai Properties (SHKP) said it could provide 1,000 rooms. Both developers said they would broadcast a government promotional video on vaccine passports in its major malls. “President Xi Jinping’s important instructions to support Hong Kong’s fight against the epidemic, and mobilisation of relevant central departments to help Hong Kong, have given a confidence boost to all Hong Kong people,” SHKP chairman, Raymond Kwok, said in a statement late on Thursday. New World Development said it planned to provide about 700 rooms, while Henderson Land Development said its founding Lee family would donate HK$10m ($1.3m) to send anti-epidemic materials to elderly homes, among others. Reuters reported in September that Beijing had given a new mandate to the global financial hub’s powerful property tycoons, telling them to pour resources and influence into backing Beijing’s interests. The government said the Dorsett Tsuen Wan hotel in the city’s northern New Territories region would provide accommodation starting on Friday for people who tested positive for Covid but had no or mild symptoms. Lam greeted the arrival of several mainland Chinese health experts to help with the outbreak on Thursday and said citywide virus testing was being considered. Local media cited her as saying 300,000 tests could be conducted daily by the end of this month. The city has capacity for around 200,000 tests now. China is ramping up to help boost capacity, with mobile testing vehicles from the mainland arriving in Hong Kong this week. Residents had mixed opinions on a potential mass testing plan, with some saying it could help stamp out the virus while others said it would not help. “If the government wants to test citizens altogether, there will be a long queue as it is now. Waiting … is a big problem for the elderly or those who are not in good health,” said Kenneth Liu, 47. China previously helped Hong Kong roll out a voluntary mass testing programme in 2020. Good morning from London. The World Health Organization said on Thursday countries struggling with surging Covid infections may shorten the recommended quarantine duration of 14 days in some situations. The UN agency said its new guidelines may be helpful for places where essential services are under pressure. For example, quarantine could be shortened to 10 days without a test, and to 7 days with a negative test – provided the person does not develop any symptoms, WHO said. Where testing to shorten quarantine is not possible, the absence of symptoms could be used as a proxy for testing, the agency said in its new interim guidance. WHO also said countries may consider relaxing their contact tracing measures in similar situations. For contacts of people infected with Covid, those at highest risk of getting infected such as healthcare workers should be prioritised, as well as those at high risk of severe disease such as people with underlying ailments or the unvaccinated. A number of countries such as the US, Germany and Switzerland have already shortened the quarantine period to cope with a wave of Omicron-driven infections. I’ll be bringing you all the latest global developments on the coronavirus pandemic for the next few hours. Please feel free to get in touch with me as I work if you have a story or tips to share! Your thoughts are always welcome. Email: lucy.campbell@theguardian.com Twitter: @lucy_campbell_Pret a Manger’s owners have warned of doubts over its ability to continue as a going concern as the coffee shop chain faces uncertainty over future Covid restrictions and a shift to hybrid working. Accounts for Pret’s UK holding company filed this week show that last month it doubled its “standby facility” reserved to support the business in case of difficulty to £200m, up from the £100m set aside in March last year. The latest cash call on shareholders comes on top of £100m pumped into the business in the autumn and £185m in 2020 when the company first warned of “material uncertainties” as sales were crushed by the pandemic. In the holding company accounts, which were signed off on 10 February, directors said there were still “material uncertainties which may cast significant doubt over the group’s ability to continue as a going concern”. They said that the possibility of further trading restrictions linked to Covid-19 and the associated unpredictability of consumer behaviour as well as uncertainty about the group’s ability to refinance a debt facility that expires in July next year were potential clouds over its financial position. The group, which had debts of almost £400m at the end of 2020, has been dramatically affected by the pandemic, during which it was forced to close some outlets for several months. The London-focused business has also been hit by the shift to working from home and a decline in tourist numbers in the capital. Last year, it emerged that sales at Pret a Manger (Europe), the group’s main trading company, dived to a pretax loss of £26m in the year to 2 January 2020 compared with a profit of nearly £49m a year before. That came as sales slipped to £708m from £710m and it bought the Eat chain. Like many other hospitality businesses, the group is also struggling with rising costs, which forced it to put up the price of its subscription service earlier this month shortly after increasing pay for its workers for the second time in four months. On Friday, Pret said its UK shops were trading at 93% of pre-pandemic levels, and much higher levels in regional and suburban shops. Pano Christou, the chief executive, said: “In September last year, we announced ambitious plans to double the size of Pret’s business over the next five years, backed by a £100m injection of funding from JAB and Pret co-founder, Sinclair Beecham. “Since announcing this strategy, Pret has continued to expand its business in the UK and internationally, and we’re confident that we will continue this pace of growth in the coming years. Despite the impact of Omicron on trade in December, our UK shops continue to recover strongly, with our coffee subscription used over a million times every week in the UK.”BLOWIN’ IN THE WIND It’s been a strange old day here at Fiver Towers, what with the gale force winds of Storm Eunice having blown the corrugated roof clean off our bijou wattle hut. All the better to afford us a clear view of nonplussed cows, unsecured trampolines and wheelie bins whirling through the sky like a scene from The Wizard of Oz. But while Eunice might sound like a kindly, slightly maiden aunt from a Famous Five novel, the storm which has taken her name has dominated the headlines in Blighty, a state of affairs likely to raise “oh look, the Brits are at it again”-inspired eyebrows among Fiver readers from countries with less forgiving climates. The kind where a monsoon, hurricane or howling blizzard are little more than daily inconveniences and the odd roof-tile dislodged by a rogue squall isn’t guaranteed to make the front page of the local paper. The British have always had a peculiar, weirdly obsessive relationship with the weather and it is never more apparent than when the weather is either very good or very bad. Today, the Fiver was among several hundred thousand folk who tuned into Big Jet TV on YouTube, to watch aircraft of all shapes and sizes try to land at Heathrow in the face of 85mph crosswinds. All while a preposterously enthusiastic plane nerd and cameraman stood in an adjacent field shouting “Easy! Easy! Easy! Go on son! Wowwwwwwwww! That’s a big swing man! Bosh, he’s done it!” Meanwhile on assorted news bulletins, presenters kept cutting to barely audible, soaking wet reporters standing dangerously close to storm-battered piers, cliff edges and flooding rivers as they warned viewers that under no circumstances should they go anywhere near storm-battered piers, cliff edges and flooding rivers …. “UNLESS IT IS ABSOLUTELY NECESSARY!” And what has all this got to do with football, you might ask – quite apart from the fact that the decidedly inclement weather has interfered with Tottenham’s travel plans ahead of tomorrow’s defeat at the hands of Manchester City, and made their stadium do strange things. Eunice has also prompted the cancellations of trains Newcastle fans were hoping to get to London for their team’s win over West Ham, and caused the postponement of Bournemouth’s game against Nottingham Forest tonight. Today’s chaos also reminded the Fiver of the time when, in his post-football career as a mid-1980s Breakfast television talking head and resident contrarian, the late, great former Tottenham and England striker Jimmy Greaves went off on a diatribe about the ineptitude of weather forecasters. “I’ve lived through storms before in my life, I’ve lived through everything,” Greavsie mused, warming up nicely. “And the fact is that the weather people this year have got nothing right. Absolutely nothing! The biggest problem is that the Met Office doesn’t seem to be as boring and efficient as it used to be. Most of them are too interested in going on Blankety Blank and Call My Bluff and things like this, and they’re paying no attention to the weather!” Stay safe out there, readers. It’s raining truth. QUOTE OF THE DAY “There are times when I’m on the side of the pitch thinking: ‘What am I doing this for? I’m standing here, freezing my chuff off’ – the other manager is abusing you for something, and sometimes you just think: ‘Wow, this is some way to earn a living’” – Paul Warne, manager of League One leaders Rotherham, admits his job isn’t always fun as he gets his chat on with Ben Fisher. FIVER LETTERS “Following JJ Zucal’s revelation that he spent two hours of his birthday watching a dull 0-0 draw: I spent my 30th birthday with my future wife at Glanford Park, watching Firewall FC 0-0 Crystal Palace. I’m a Palace fan, she was a Firewall season-ticket holder, so a draw was probably the best result but it was an awful game. Still, I’m pleased with how our teams’ fortunes have diverged since” – Chris Richardson. “Re: Gareth Southgate [Thursday’s Fiver]. Given it is 130-odd miles from England’s base at St George’s Park to Wembley and only 30-odd to Wolverhampton, playing at Molineux seems to be stretching the concept of ‘taking the squad on the road’” – Robin Hazlehurst. “With regard to Harry Maguire and Cristiano Ronaldo’s tussle for the United captaincy [see News, Bits and Bobs] – perhaps Ronaldo could adopt the ploy of the late, great Ben Hannigan of League of Ireland fame. When faced with a challenge to his authority, Ben gently put one arm around the misguided individual and said: ‘Look at the crowd. Do you think they came to see you or to see me?’” – John Weldon. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’ the day is … Chris Richardson. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS Manchester City have lost their appeal against Kyle Walker’s three-match Big Cup ban after he was sent off against Leipzig. The flying full-back will miss the second leg against Sporting and the first leg of their quarter-final – how will they cope? Harry Maguire has denied reports of a rift at Manchester United. “I’ve seen a lot of reports about this club that aren’t true and this is another,” he wailed. “Not going to start posting about everything that is written but I needed to make this one clear.” In other news, United’s interim manager, Ralf Rangnick (born 29 June, 1958) has backed Maguire to keep the armband. “Harry will stay our captain until the end of the season,” Rangnick straight-batted. Kieran Trippier has gone under the knife for his foot-gah, and may not play again this season for Newcastle. “We’re going to miss his leadership skills,” sobbed Eddie Howe. Liverpool, meanwhile, don’t know when Diogo Jota will be back from his ankle-knack. “It’s something with some ligaments in and around the ankle, but not the ligament, some others,” sighed Jürg. Before their meeting with Steven Gerrard’s Aston Villa, Watford’s Mr Roy has praised the impact of former England players Gerrard, Frank Lampard and Wayne Rooney on the management game. “I’m delighted they have chosen that route because they have so much to give,” trilled Mr Roy. Janine Beckie’s fine strike levelled out Millie Bright’s opener as England’s Lionesses drew 1-1 with Canada in the SheBelieves Cup. Meanwhile, Trinity Rodman, daughter of Dennis, debuted as USA! USA!! USA!!! drew 0-0 with the Czech Republic. Manchester City are set to add the 17-year-old Brazilian winger Sávio to their phalanx of attacking players. Arsenal were interested in the Atlético Mineiro player, who will cost £5.5m plus change. And in addition to Bournemouth v Forest tonight, Dunfermline v Partick (also tonight), Exeter v Barrow and Southend v Grimsby (both Saturday) have also been called off. STILL WANT MORE? Chasing a Champions League spot with a new billionaire investor. Does that mean a happy future for the Hammers? Jacob Steinberg investigates. Premier League: 10 things to look out for, hopefully some of them pertinent. Michael Olise left Chelsea at 14 but after impressing at Reading he is sparkling in the Premier League at Crystal Palace, notes Ed Aarons. Konaté and Van Dijk looks the best Liverpool central defensive partnership for the long term, writes Andy Hunter. Talent from the MLS and USA! USA!! USA!!! is all the rage in Europe, roars Graham Ruthven. Get yer match previews before the games are called off, right here. And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! KEEP SAFE THIS WEEKEND, FOLKSAntonio Conte has said he is happy to speak directly to his chairman, Daniel Levy, about any contentious issues at Tottenham after the club barred him from conducting interviews with the Italian media. During an interview with Sky Sport Italia this week Tottenham’s politically astute Italian manager appeared to suggest his squad had been “weakened” by the board’s decision to allow four “important” players to leave during January while recruiting only two replacements and said the club’s transfer policy would slow the rate at which he can make the team competitive. Conte implied on Friday that the English media were endeavouring to drive a wedge between him and Levy. “It created a bit of a disturbance,” he said. “I don’t understand why someone wants to create a problem with me; not only me but also coaches in the past. I read a lot of stories in the past about the club and it creates a problem with the coach and the chairman. “The chairman knows very well my thoughts. If I have to speak with him, I go to speak with him. It’s not important for me to go to the media. I can speak to him. “I was a bit disturbed by this situation especially because I had an interview with the Italian media. It means the club now doesn’t want me to speak to Italian media because the translation was not so clear in my thoughts.” Conte said he had told Sky Italia that Tottenham had done the best they could in the transfer window and that “we are more complete” with the arrivals of Dejan Kulusevski and Rodrigo Bentancur from Juventus. “I think I was very, very clear,” he said. Spurs travel to Manchester City on Saturday evening aiming to arrest a run of three straight Premier League defeats which have seen Conte’s side slip to eighth, seven points adrift of a top-four place with games in hand. His mood was not improved by Storm Eunice forcing the cancellation of Tottenham’s flight to Manchester on Friday, leaving the squad facing a road trip, but Conte at least welcomed Eric Dier’s return after a thigh injury. Dier, described as “an important player” by his manager, will almost certainly be called to arms, particularly as Conte regards City as near flawless. “They are maybe the best in the world and almost perfect,” he said. “On one side you have a team in a fantastic period of form and on other other you have a team trying to build something important for the future. At the moment, we are on two different levels.” Given that Conte had earlier reminded his audience he was accustomed to “challenging for titles”, he was asked whether the Spurs job was turning out to be not quite as advertised. “I always said I’m enjoying my time with Tottenham, enjoying working with these players,” he replied. “We have four months until the end of the season and we have to try to do our best to finish in the best position – and then we will see.”Pep Guardiola’s winning machine is searching for a 19th victory in 21 matches, while Antonio Conte’s strugglers have lost their past three league games. There is also a whopping 27 points between Manchester City and Tottenham while City’s 61 league goals is 33 better than Spurs. But, in Conte, they have a smart tactician and proven winner of a manager so do not be too surprised if there is a shock result. Jamie Jackson Saturday 5.30pm Sky Sports Premier League Venue Etihad Stadium Last season Manchester City 3 Tottenham 0 Referee Anthony Taylor This season G16 Y66 R4 4.38 cards/game Odds H 3-10 A 11-1 D 5-1 MANCHESTER CITY Subs from Steffen, Carson, Fernandinho, Aké, Mbete, Egan-Riley, Wilson-Ebrand, Lavia, McAtee, Gündogan, Stones, Delap, Zinchenko, Palmer, Jesus Doubtful Grealish (shin), Palmer (foot), Jesus (knock) Injured None Suspended None Discipline Y32 R1 Form WWWDWW Leading scorer Sterling 10 TOTTENHAM Subs from Gollini, Doherty, Rodon, Clarke, White, Bergwijn, Scarlett, Paskotsi, Sessegnon, Sánchez, Winks, Kulusevski Doubtful None Injured Skipp (groin, 26 Feb), Tanganga (knee, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y39 R1 Form DWWLLL Leading scorer Son 9A hitman who murdered a reality television star’s brother in a “tit-for-tat gang war” has been sentenced to life in prison with a minimum term of 35 years. The Metropolitan police described the case as one of the most complex murder investigations in recent history. Flamur Beqiri, 36, was shot dead on the doorstep of his £1.7m home in Battersea, south-west London, in front of his wife as she shielded their two-year-old son on Christmas Eve 2019. Beqiri, the brother of The Real Housewives of Cheshire star Misse Beqiri, was a kingpin in an international drugs gang, Southwark crown court was told during the trial, which concluded last week. Anis Hemissi, 24, a professional kickboxer from Sweden, was hired as an assassin to fly into London to carry out the murder, which the trial heard was meticulously planned for up to six months. Estevan Pino-Munizaga, an accomplice, rented a flat in Oyster Wharf, visited Beqiri’s house nearby and bought a distinctive ladies’ bicycle with a basket. Another associate bought a litter picker on a later trip to London. The bike was used by Hemissi to carry out reconnaissance three days before the murder, once dressed as a street cleaner, wearing a latex mask, sunglasses and hi-vis work clothes, while holding the litter picker and a black bin bag. The outfit and bike were abandoned when a local resident, Jeremy Lyons, became suspicious after seeing Hemissi working on public and private streets, telling him: “Get away from this estate, please.” The Swede acquired a replacement bike, which he parked on the Thames path and used to make his getaway after carrying out the shooting. Hemissi, who flew into London on 20 December, left the country to go to Copenhagen in the early hours of Christmas Day. He was arrested on his return after a holiday in Thailand. He was sentenced on Friday after being found guilty of murder and possession of a firearm. Mrs Justice Cheema-Grubb described the murder as “international crime at its most brutal”. She said: “Flamur Beqiri, a Swedish citizen with Albanian origins, was suspected of involvement in international drug dealing and other serious crime. He was also a son, a partner and a father. His children will never know him and nothing the court does can comfort them, or reconcile those who loved him to their loss. “Anis Hemissi, on the evidence, there is no doubt that, aged just 22, with no previous convictions, in 2019 you were a gun for hire. The intricate planning that enabled you to arrive in London just a few days before shooting that man dead in front of his family as they were walking to their front door on Christmas Eve, also enabled you to leave the country within hours of his death. “This was international crime at its most brutal.” Pino-Munizaga, 35, visited London for about 14 hours in November 2019 to rent the flat where Hemissi stayed, visit Beqiri’s house nearby and buy the bicycle. He was jailed for 15 years, of which he will serve two-thirds, after being acquitted of murder but found guilty of manslaughter. Clifford Rollox, 31, from Islington, north London, and Dutch national Claude Isaac Castor, 31, from Sint Maarten in the Caribbean, were each jailed for three years after being found guilty of perverting the course of justice, having been hired locally to clean up and remove evidence, including the gun, from the flat.A never-before-seen masterpiece by Mark Rothko and one of Andy Warhol’s last self-portraits are among the dozens of works to be auctioned this spring as part of the sale of one of the greatest collections of modern contemporary art ever assembled. The Macklowe collection, which was amassed by the real estate magnate Harry Macklowe and Linda Burg, an honorary trustee of New York’s Metropolitan Museum of Art, is being sold to help settle the billionaire couple’s acrimonious divorce. Last November, more than $676m (£503m) was paid for the first half of the collection, in the most valuable single-auction ever staged and the most valuable action held by Sotheby’s, one of the world’s leading art houses. On Friday, Sotheby’s revealed a further 30 works, which will be offered at auction in New York in May. Highlights were unveiled in London by Will Gompertz, director of arts of the Barbican, and Eleanor Nairne, a curator at the Barbican. Among these were Rothko’s Untitled from 1960, a rich oxblood-coloured and meditative piece from a critical moment in the artist’s career, which is expected to fetch $35m-$50m. The work demonstrates Rothko’s deepening palate, as he moved away from the bright colours he used in the mid-1950s to more emotive ones. One of Warhol’s final works, a monumental self-portrait painted as he contemplated his own legacy and status, is expected to fetch $15m-$20m. Vanitas: Skulls and Self Portraits by Andy Warhol is part of the artist’s “fright wig” series of work from 1986. Warhol’s use of camouflage depicts his performative relationship with identity and his sense of playfulness. The artist died just nine months after making the work. Gerhard Richter’s Seestück (Seascape), a large-scale painting from 1975, capturing the beauty of the natural world, will also be sold, as will two paintings by Willem de Kooning – Untitled, from 1961, and Untitled XIII, from 1984. Other artists including Alberto Giacometti, Pablo Picasso, and Jeff Koons also feature. “The November sale of 35 works from the Macklowe Collection captivated top collectors around the world and set records in the process,” said Charles F Stewart, Sotheby’s chief executive officer. “We are thrilled to present a further 30 works from this legendary collection in May, in what is sure to be another highly anticipated sale.” The Macklowes built up their art collection over almost six decades of marriage. The couple were renowned for making barbed exchanges at public events, and their marital strife eventually resulted in a divorce. But neither they nor their lawyers could agree on the value of their art collection, so a judge ordered that they be sold. Brooke Lampley, the Sotheby’s chairman and worldwide head of sales for global fine art, said the collection told “the story of art in its highest form, with the utmost precision of clarity. Every artist here is represented at a moment of profound creativity”.Mohammed al-Tajer was caught off guard when his iPhone pinged last November with a warning that said his phone had been targeted by a nation state. The 55-year-old lawyer from Bahrain had been known among dissidents for his “fearless” defence of opposition leaders and protesters after the 2011 pro-democracy uprising in the tiny Gulf state, when a series of demonstrations and protests were violently suppressed by authorities with the help of Saudi forces. Tajer had not been involved in human rights issues for five years, however – the last time he’d been rounded up and threatened with arrest by Bahraini authorities. But a forensic examination of Tajer’s phone by researchers at Citizen Lab at the University of Toronto has found that the lawyer’s phone was hacked on multiple occasions in September 2021 by a government client of NSO Group, the Israeli spyware maker. “I used to be head of Bahrain Human Rights Observatory, used to have human rights activities inside Bahrain or with the UN. But now I don’t have any ongoing human rights activities,” Tajer, who is still in Bahrain, told Red Line for Gulf (RL4G), a non-profit collection of journalists and activists who are focused on digital security and freedom of expression in gulf states and worked with Citizen Lab on the recent investigation. “The worst and most harmful thing is you feel you are not secure. That instead of your phone being your friend, it is now your enemy. You don’t know what information is private, and what is already exposed to the state, this is painful.” A separate investigation by the Pegasus Project – a media consortium investigating NSO Group which includes the Guardian and is coordinated by the French non-profit Forbidden Stories – has also identified 20 Bahraini officials who are close to the government and may have been targeted for surveillance. Their phone numbers were identified with the help of Ali Abdulemam of RL4G. The mobile numbers – including those of loyalists close to Bahrain’s ruling family – appeared on a leaked database that the Pegasus Project believes contains the phone numbers of individuals who were selected as possible surveillance targets by clients of NSO. The mobile phone of a US state department official who was stationed in Bahrain at the time of her selection also appears on the leaked database. A state department spokesperson said the US condemns the harassment and arbitrary or unlawful surveillance of journalists, human rights activists, or other perceived regime critics. “While we do not discuss security protocols, procedures, or capabilities, we can say that we are deeply concerned about the counterintelligence and security risks these types of commercial spyware pose to US government personnel,” the spokesperson said. The Biden administration added NSO to a commerce department blacklist last year, citing evidence that the technology has been used by foreign governments to “maliciously target” embassy workers, journalists and activists, among others. While the appearance of a person’s mobile number is not evidence that the person was hacked, the Pegasus Project has previously published stories about dozens of individuals – including journalists and human rights activists – whose numbers appear on the list and whose phones were targeted or hacked by clients of NSO, according to security researchers at Amnesty International who forensically examined the devices. The individuals who were selected as possible candidates for surveillance include 20 members of the Bahrain council of representatives, speaker Fawzia Zainal, who was appointed by the king and selected between January and March 2019, and Ahmed Sabah al-Salloum, an MP and member of the National Institution of Human Rights, an organisation that is funded by the government of Bahrain. The Pegasus Project also identified two members of the royal family who were listed in the leaked database, including Khalid Bin Ahmed Khalifa, the former minister of foreign affairs. The individuals declined to comment on their appearance on the list. An NSO spokesperson said: “The misuse of cyber intelligence tools is a serious matter and all credible allegations must be investigated, if and when the relevant information would be provided. The continued reporting of unsubstantiated allegations by uninformed sources is unfortunate and wrong.” The series of revelations, security experts said, paint a picture of a state that appears poised to use surveillance technology against its perceived enemies and friends alike. When successfully deployed against a target, Pegasus can infiltrate a mobile phone, giving the user of the spyware full access to phone calls, text messages, encrypted messages and photographs. It can track a mobile phone user’s location and turn the phone into a remote listening device. “The situation in Bahrain is still pretty repressive,” said Bill Marczak, a senior researcher at Citizen Lab. “Since 2011 Bahrain has really made it a point to try and remove institutions that help people to organise. “There is no space for dissent or activism, and spyware helps preserve this status quo. Because what they can do is keep an eye on what is going on in private, they can make sure there is nothing bubbling over in private.” NSO has said its government clients are only meant to use Pegasus spyware to target serious criminals and terrorists. The company has strongly denied that the leaked database has any connection to the Israeli firm and said the phone numbers on the list are not targets of NSO customers. Bahrain’s embassy in Washington did not respond to a request for comment. Citizen Lab’s analysis found that Tajer, the lawyer, was hacked with Pegasus spyware just one week after a previous report by the Toronto-based lab detailed nine other cases of Bahrain activists who were targeted with spyware. The researchers have also identified a journalist, who they have not named, who was also targeted with NSO spyware. Sayed Ahmed Alwadaei, the director of advocacy at the UK-based Bahrain Institute for Rights and Democracy, said Bahrain had witnessed a decade of “systematic repression” since the events of 2011. Intent on ensuring there would not be any other uprisings, Alwadaei said the government was seeking to keep all activists and political actors “within their control”. “I guess this is really the new reality, that they want to ensure that this is not going to happen again,” Alwadaei said.Few video games in recent years have managed to equal the sledgehammer disappointment of Cuphead. For those of you not in the know, Cuphead was an independent 2017 game that captured gamers’ imagination like little else before. This was almost entirely down to how it looked. An out-and-out love letter to 1930s cartoonists such as Max Fleischer and Grim Natwick – with a main character inspired by a 1936 Japanese propaganda cartoon about an invasion of an evil Mickey Mouse army – Cuphead thrummed with a gloriously authentic Betty Boop feel. The animations were hand-drawn and imperfect. The big-band jazz soundtrack was recorded on analogue. The voices crackled and hissed as if recorded from worn vinyl. No detail was spared, to the extent that the creators had to remortgage their home to pay for it. And people fell for Cuphead hard. After some initial footage was shown as proof of concept, anticipation hit fever pitch and stayed there for three years. But then the game came out, and it sort of sucked. It might have looked and sounded beautiful, but it was also cripplingly difficult to play. One early reviewer (who plays games for a living, remember) noted that he had died 188 times during the game. It seemed like such a wasted opportunity. And yet, despite this, the kernel of Cuphead remained irresistible. The characters were so engaging, and the aesthetic so beautiful, that a small cottage industry sprang up around it. You might not be able to get past the level where you have to steal the soul from a giant onion (long story), but you could still buy Cuphead dolls and Cuphead books, and you could visit YouTube and watch a seemingly limitless number of users create no end of Cuphead songs, cartoons and comparison videos. The game might have caused you to rip out your hair in frustration, but the characters were too charming to be dismissed. Which brings us to The Cuphead Show! (Netflix), in which the Cuphead characters are given their own series of 15-minute cartoons. It might sound complicated – a cartoon based on a game based on a different cartoon – but go along with it. Because The Cuphead Show! feels like Cuphead reaching its most perfect form. The show sees Cuphead (a headstrong and cocky sentient cup) and his brother Mugman (in effect, a differently coloured Cuphead created solely to allow a two-player mode on the game, here beefed up into a cowardly Luigi type) as they blunder through a succession of wacky misadventures. While there’s a loose nod to the game’s plot – in which Cuphead and Mugman lose their souls by gambling with the devil, who in turn forces them to chase down his debtors – this is by no means a dramatisation. Instead, The Cuphead Show! is a collection of standalone cartoons that have fun splashing around in the tropes of the era its animation was inspired by. This is the sort of cartoon where characters find babies abandoned by their front door, where radio antennas broadcast concentric circles and morse code, where down-and-outs still have the self-esteem to dress themselves in raggedy suits. It is at once a giddy genre exercise and something that your kids would happily watch. For the most part, that is. There’s one scene near the end of the series, where the devil mutates into a series of wild animals, that has the potential to ruin a couple of bedtimes. But, again, for a show that deliberately harkens back to a time where entertainment wouldn’t hesitate to scare kids, that’s probably par for the course. Weirdly, though, Cuphead’s period frills don’t feel quite as authentic on TV. This is partly a tonal thing. Cuphead the game was so rigorously 1930s in its outlook that one of the levels saw him standing in an ashtray, fighting a barrage of cigars and cigarettes, and that would obviously be unthinkable to place in a children’s TV show in the 21st century. But it’s also down to execution, too. Although the surface touches are there – the screen is flecked with dust marks – the characters often carry the sterile perfection of computer animation, while the voices are recorded a little too cleanly. You can understand why these compromises were made, since two and a half hours of hand-drawn animation would be prohibitively expensive, but for a property that prides itself on authenticity, it can sometimes take you out of the moment a little. These are just niggles, though. All in all, The Cuphead Show is an overwhelming success. It’s fast and funny and knowing, and you almost certainly won’t die 188 times watching it. What’s not to like?Jimmy Kimmel Jimmy Kimmel responded to news on Thursday evening that Melania Trump was selling NFTs, AKA non-fungible tokens, to commemorate her husband’s presidency. “Until today, I thought a blockchain was what Melania had on her bedroom door, to protect her from the bored ape in the next room,” Kimmel joked. Melania’s Potus NFT collection will supposedly include 10,000 NFTs priced at $50 each that will highlight “iconic” moments from the Trump administration. “How would she even know what the iconic moments from his administration were?” Kimmel wondered. “Half the time she was first lady, she hid in her room. The other half she spent bitching about Christmas decorations.” The weirdest part, Kimmel added, was that collectors will “enjoy an element of surprise” as the artwork for each NFT would be revealed only after purchase. “So you send Melania your money and in return, you’ll get whatever they decide to send back,” he mused. “Where do I line up? What a deal that sounds like.” Stephen Colbert On the Late Show, Stephen Colbert touched on the truckers’ protest in Canada, which has paralyzed the capital for weeks and caused the prime minister, Justin Trudeau, to invoke emergency powers. Earlier this week, the Canadian government declared a state of emergency as the so-called “Freedom Convoy” protesters, who have called for an end to Covid vaccine mandates, continued to occupy Ottawa. “As with anything that pisses people off, American conservatives are all for it,” Colbert explained, such as MyPillow CEO and Trump acolyte Mike Lindell, who declared he would send 10,000 pillows to the “brave” truckers. The shipment contained “almost as many as are on the bed in your great aunt’s guest room,” Colbert quipped. “These protesters are camped out in the cold – they need food and fuel, not 10,000 pillows!” Lindell packed up his 10,000-pillow convoy and headed for the border … where he was turned back because he was not fully vaccinated and did not have a negative PCR test. “He couldn’t support the vax mandate protesters because he wasn’t fully vaxxed. How can you describe that?” Colbert asked, cueing up a clip from the Canadian singer Alanis Morissette’s song Ironic. Samantha Bee And on Full Frontal, Samantha Bee debunked the latest front of the GOP’s culture war: the Biden administration’s investment in harm reduction programs for drug abuse. “Republicans love to manufacture controversy that sends their base into a frenzy that will eventually, I’m sure, lead them to burn someone in a wicker man to get a better vote harvest,” Bee explained. “Unsurprisingly though, conservatives are also scaring their base by leaning into that classic racist rhetoric, the ‘war on drugs’. “But while Republicans are acting like the Biden administration harm reduction grant would basically be a gift card to Drugs ‘R’ Us, the truth is far less stupid.” The Biden administration has pledged to invest $30m to support harm-reduction services that include treatment, prevention and syringe exchanges and smoking kits. “On one hand, this would be the first-of-its-kind federal grant that would pay for harm reduction tools to help save the lives of people suffering from addiction,” said Bee. “On the other, this goes against the official Republican drug policy of ‘go fuck yourself’.” Hence why the usual cast of Fox News commentators – Tucker Carlson, Sean Hannity, Jesse Watters and others – have misrepresented the evidence-based program as a free handout of crack pipes. The Biden administration has since responded to the faux scandal and confirmed that distribution of crack pipes was never part of the program. “Rather than kowtowing to Republicans, Democrats should be focused on something even more important: harm reduction actually fucking works during a time when we need it to work,” said Bee, as drug overdose deaths increased 28.5% over the previous year. “If harm reduction works, why are Republicans so against it?” she added. “Because conservatives’ ongoing panic over drugs was never about helping people. It was about using racial stereotypes to arrest people of color.” The largest share of resources during the Reagan administration’s “war on drugs”, Bee pointed out, went to policing crack cocaine and incarcerating black and brown people. This, “when referencing crack, conservatives know they’re appealing to a decades-long racist stereotype that riles up their base – that’s the whole point!” Bee said. “If they can discredit policies like harm reduction, they can both make Democrats look bad and keep jailing people of color. For them, it’s probably just a bonus that rebooting the crack panic will likely lead to more death and suffering,” she concluded. “Unfortunately, by hedging their commitment to harm reduction, the Biden administration is inadvertently helping give credence to a bullshit morality about who deserves help.”A woman punched a 6ft shark in the face until it let go of her foot, which it bit while she snorkeled off the Dry Tortugas, islands off the coast of Florida. Heather West, 42 and from Texas, told the Daily Mail the lemon shark “kept tugging and tugging, and I could feel its teeth in my ankle”. Lemon sharks can grow to 11ft and inhabit coastal waters, close to swimmers, surfers and divers. But they present little threat to humans. According to the International Shark Attack File, at the University of Florida, before West’s encounter there had been only 10 unprovoked attacks by lemon sharks, all in Florida and the Caribbean, none fatal. “Caution is still warranted as they are a large predatory species,” the ISAF says. In any year, the US accounts for about half of unprovoked shark attacks worldwide. The vast majority are not fatal. Most bites are exploratory. Sharks eat seals, turtles and fish. Sustained attacks on humans resulting in fatalities, as in Sydney, Australia this week, are likely to be cases of mistaken identity. In a recent book, Emperors of the Deep: Sharks, the Ocean’s Most Mysterious, Most Misunderstood and Most Important Guardians, George Burgess, a University of Florida professor and ISAF organiser, tells author William McKeever: “The major reason more attacks are in the United States is we’ve got a very large coastline … and of course lots of people. “And we are also a nation of some wealth and means, and so we can afford to spend time at the beach. And of course many areas of the country are heavy tourist areas.” West lives in a van, traveling the US and updating an Instagram account. She told the Mail she was heading back to shore when the lemon shark bit her. “I was wearing flippers and my kick wasn’t doing much damage,” she said, “so I decided to lean forward and start punching it. “I punched it in the face over and over again as hard as I possibly could, and after about 30 seconds it finally let go. “For the next two minutes I was in complete shock and couldn’t swim, but by this point my friends had ran back in the water to help me.” The Dry Tortugas are home to a 19th-century fort – where Samuel Mudd, a doctor who treated the man who killed Abraham Lincoln, was once imprisoned – but little else. Fortunately for West, two park rangers were nearby, setting traps for rats. They helped apply tourniquets to her leg and get her to the mainland for treatment. West said: ‘When I got to the shore I just started screaming ‘I won, I won’, because I realised I still had my foot. ‘In the water I was convinced he’d bitten it off, so seeing it still there, even though it was completely mangled, was a huge relief.” On Instagram, West shared footage of the bite and its aftermath and said doctors in Key West told her she would probably regain full use of her foot. The shark, she said, might have been the same one sighted in similar waters earlier, trying to eat a pelican. West said: “Despite all of this, I want the record to show that I love sharks, and don’t want to discourage people from getting in the water. As a matter of fact I’ll be right back in as soon as I heal up.”Only two Black Americans had won an individual medal in nearly a century of Winter Olympics before this week. It took less than 24 hours for Erin Jackson and Elana Meyers Taylor to double that list. When Jackson ended a couple of lengthy speed skating medal droughts for the United States in a sport they once dominated by winning Sunday night’s women’s 500m, the roller derby skater from central Florida became the first Black woman from any country to win an individual gold in a Winter Olympics event according to the Olympedia.org website, the most comprehensive database about the Olympic Games. Then on Monday afternoon, Meyers Taylor took silver in the inaugural monobob event to add a fourth Olympic medal to her career haul – equalling the speed skater Shani Davis as the most decorated Black athlete in Winter Games history – with a warm chance for a record-breaking fifth when the two-woman bobsleigh heats conclude on Saturday night. Black History Month in the US has always coincided with the Winter Olympics on the calendar, but it’s fair to say that any overlap between the two have almost entirely ended there. The Games have been an overwhelmingly lilywhite affair favoring richer, colder nations despite mixed efforts by the International Olympic Committee to increase diversity through quota systems without compromising elite competitive standards. But the 29-year-old Jackson, a former inline skater with an engineering degree from the University of Florida who made the US team for the 2018 Olympics after only four months on the ice, believes there is no reason that more young athletes of color can’t thrive in winter sports if given the opportunities. She hopes that her headline-grabbing success on the global stage can help get that message across. “I hope I can be an example,” Jackson said. “I would love to see more people of color in all the winter sports. It helps to have some visibility out there, to be able to see other people like you doing something maybe you’d never thought about doing before.” America’s first sprint queen since Bonnie Blair is one of three US long‑track medallists in Beijing – along with Brittany Bowe, who earned bronze in the women’s 1,000m, and Joey Mantia, who took men’s team pursuit bronze – to hail from Ocala, the central Florida city more than an hour’s drive from the closest ice rink which has become an improbable speed skating hotbed. All three got their start there and trained under the same youth coach, Renee Hildebrand, who helped guide each to inline world championships before their transitions to the ice. Jackson surprised everyone, starting with herself, by earning a place on the US team for Pyeongchang so quickly after trading her wheels for blades, finishing 24th out of 31 competitors in the 500m in her Olympic debut. She has since blossomed into the top‑ranked sprinter in the world with four wins in eight World Cup races this season, making good on her favorite status in Beijing with Team USA’s first individual speed skating medal of any color in 12 years and the first by an American woman since 2002. Among the earliest spoils of victory was a namecheck by the Oscar-winning actor Viola Davis. Meyers Taylor, already the only woman to win three Olympic bobsleigh medals for the US before Monday’s fourth, began campaigning for the addition of a four-woman event to the Olympic programme eight years ago with Kaillie Humphries, the then Canadian star who has since changed affiliations to the US. Their goal was to offer women the same medal opportunities as men, leading the pair to drive four-man sleds against men’s teams to make their point. But international officials ultimately approved the addition of women’s monobob instead – where only the driver is in the sled – citing the lack of depth in female bobsleigh programmes globally and framing it as a better choice for inclusion. While it might not have been the outcome Meyers Taylor and Humphries set out to achieve in a gender-equity sense, the potential to add geographic diversity is welcome consolation. Jackson and Meyers Taylor remain outliers at the Winter Games both on the field of play and – it must be said – in the press room. But a glance at Team USA’s roster shows encouraging if incremental signs of progress that can broaden the popularity of winter sports and potentially the pool of talent down the road. Kelly Curtis, a decorated heptathlete at Division III’s Springfield College who caught the Olympic bug on a family trip to Atlanta after the city hosted the 1996 Games, became the first Black skeleton athlete to compete for the United States, joining Great Britain’s Brogan Crowley and Italy’s Valentina Margaglio as the only women of color in the field. “It’s pretty important. It’s part of my identity, but it’s not the only thing that I lean on,” Curtis said. “I would like to be known as one of the best sliders. It’s nice with a cherry on top to be known as the first Black Olympian for USA Skeleton, but I would also like to be one of the best. So that’s really what I’m trying to progress toward every time I go out there and slide.” Abby Roque, a forward on the United States’ silver medal-winning women’s ice hockey team, made history as the first Indigenous woman to play for the vaunted national side. The 24-year-old grew up in the Michigan town of Sault Ste Marie on the US-Canada border and is a member of the Wahnapitae First Nations tribe on her father’s side. She was joined on the ice in Thursday’s gold medal game by Canada’s Jocelyne Larocque and Jamie Lee Rattray, who both hail from the Métis Nation. “It’s super exciting,” Roque said. “It’s something that I definitely take pride in and that I think is a great honour, but it’s also something that I hope we continue to grow. “I hope there are more indigenous kids playing in the US, more kids who will make the Olympic roster some day. I wanted to be the first because I wanted to be on this roster, but I wish I wasn’t the first, I wish there were indigenous players on this roster before me.” For Jackson, winning a historic gold is only the start. She’s been partnering with Edge Sports, a Washington state nonprofit that works to bring more diversity to snow sports and promote the normalization of Black and brown bodies on ice rinks and ski slopes around the country, about establishing a chapter in Utah where she lives today. Her goals include eliminating barriers to entry by providing scholarships for winter sports to people of color. “Hopefully it has an effect,” Jackson said after Sunday’s rousing win, “and we can see more minorities, especially in the USA, getting out and trying some of these winter sports. And I just always hope to be a good example, especially with helping kids see they don’t have to just choose one between schools and sport.” • This article was amended on 21 February 2022 because Sault Ste Marie is a town in Michigan, not Minnesota as an earlier version said.My friend Robert Milsom, who has died aged 80 after a decade of Parkinson’s disease, was a legal aid solicitor who often defended the poor and outcast – and sometimes the seriously criminal. He was well known in Cambridge, where grateful former clients would approach him in the street and hug him. Robert had a deep-seated belief that everyone has the right to put forward the best defence possible. Born in Crimplesham, Norfolk, he inherited nonconformist values from his mother, Betty (nee Hunt), a teacher, and his father, Charles, a tenant farmer. He attended Culford school near Bury St Edmunds and gained an award to Queens’ College, Cambridge, to study history. We met at Cambridge, first through CND, then in the Labour club, and both joined an early equality protest in November 1960 when we helped some female students to sneak into the then male-only Cambridge Union Society debate. Robert was a gentle, non-sectarian but principled and passionate idealist. We both went on anti-war demonstrations with the Committee of 100, a breakaway group from CND committed to non-violent direct action. On one occasion, at RAF Wethersfield in 1961, Robert insisted on the principle of being arrested and was charged with obstruction. I visited him on remand in Norwich jail. He was given a conditional discharge. After graduating in 1963, he trained as a teacher, also at Cambridge, but went to work in the education department of the TUC. In 1973, he moved to Birmingham to teach history at Fircroft College, a grant-aided, adult residential college with a Quaker tradition and connected to the trade union movement. Two years later its students, backed by staff, decided to rewrite their curriculum, which they saw as patronising and geared to “improving the working classes”. They wanted a more participatory style of teaching and discussion of philosophy, politics and history, and to hold debates. Initially they were supported by the principal. But this soured, and after an inquiry the trustees sacked all the staff except the principal. Although this seemed like a miserable outcome, Robert was impossible to extinguish. He moved to Cambridge and retrained as a solicitor by correspondence. Qualifying rapidly, he found his metier, and worked for various firms in the city. He retired from Shelley and Co in 2013. Robert had a lifelong interest in the radical politics of the 17th century and after retirement he taught a course on Oliver Cromwell at the University of the Third Age. On 1964 Robert married Penny Kaldor. She survives him, along with their sons Tom and Ben. A third son, Paul, died in December 2021.The leaders of pro-Russian proxy states in eastern Ukraine announced a mass evacuation of citizens to Russia on Friday evening, amid fears that Moscow is manufacturing tension in the region to provide a pretext for renewed military intervention in Ukraine. After the evacuation announcement, warning sirens sounded in Donetsk and other cities in the two Moscow-backed statelets, supposedly due to an upcoming Ukrainian military assault on the region. On Friday evening the Russian-separatist authorities said a car had been blown up near their government building in the centre of Donetsk. There were no reports of casualties and a video seemed to show that it was in an empty car park. Vladimir Putin swiftly dispatched a top official to the border region and announced that those arriving would be given a payment of 10,000 roubles (£95). However, Ukrainian officials insisted they had no plans to launch any assault, accusing Moscow of creating pretexts for an invasion. In a joint statement, the German and French foreign ministers, Annalena Baerbock and Jean-Yves Le Drian said: “We are concerned that staged incidents could be misused as a pretext for possible military escalation.” Late on Friday, Ukraine’s military intelligence service wrote on Twitter that it had information about “the mining of a number of social infrastructure facilities in Donetsk by Russian special services”, allegedly a further provocation. It advised residents of Donetsk not to leave their homes or use public transport. Ukraine also insisted that the dramatic upsurge in fire across the contact line came overwhelmingly from Russia-backed forces. In Vrubivka, one of many towns on the Ukrainian side of the frontline that has seen an uptick in violence in the past two days, humanitarian monitors were analysing the damage on Friday afternoon and helping residents with repairs. Twelve buildings in the town were damaged by incoming artillery fire on Thursday, the first time the town has been hit since August 2018. “I just hope there isn’t going to be any more of this. I can’t sleep at night. My arms and legs are shaking, and it’s scary,” said Anatoly Romanenko, 77, whose roof was damaged in the attacks. There have been reports of incoming fire along the whole length of the line of control, which was frozen in place by a 2015 ceasefire after a bloody conflict between Kyiv’s forces and separatists armed and funded by Moscow. For the past seven years locals on both sides of the frontlines have got used to what is known here as “badminton” – the sporadic exchange of fire across the front. The events of this week have seemed different, however. Daily reports by international monitors from the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe have shown a massive increase in both ceasefire violations and recorded explosions over the past two days, while the Ukrainian army has claimed that the separatist ceasefire violations have been more numerous than at any time in the past three years. Ukrainian officials insist the uptick in violence originates with the separatists and is a cynical attempt to goad Kyiv into a response and provide a pretext for a Russian attack. Russia has moved more than 150,000 troops to various areas around Ukraine’s border. Russian officials have dismissed concerns over the troop buildup as western hysteria, but have also suggested the troops may only be stood down if western capitals accede to Moscow’s demands for a new security architecture in Europe. US intelligence agencies have warned that Moscow may seek to manufacture a false-flag incident as a pretext for intervention. Along the line of control it is often hard to tell exactly where incoming fire originated, and plenty of rumours and doctored photographs have appeared online, adding to the confusion. On Thursday morning some pro-Russian Twitter accounts posted photographs of a damaged kindergarten, supposedly inside separatist territory and hit by Ukrainian forces. In fact, the kindergarten was in Stanytsia Luhanska, in Ukrainian territory. In Vrubivka, too, incoming fire landed just metres away from the local school at a time when 37 children aged between six and 11 were in lessons. “Unfortunately, we don’t have a cellar, but we heard the first noises, the teachers quickly took all the children and rushed them into the corridor where there are no windows, and got them all to lie on the floor,” said the headteacher, Elena Yaryna. “Then we felt the close-up hit, the building shook and we could hear smashed glass. There was real hysteria, the children were all screaming,” she said. Nobody was injured in the attack. There appears to be little military rationale for some of the attacks, adding to the sense that they may be designed simply to provoke a response. Locals in Vrubivka said there were no Ukrainian military positions or installations in the vicinity. Local residents wonder whether the constant warnings of approaching war on television will lead to a renewed hot phase of the conflict that has blighted their lives for the past eight years. Valentyna Melnychenko, 72, saw her kitchen annexe pulverised on Thursday morning as she sat watching television. Her husband had built it before he died recently. On Friday she wept in despair, saying she was lonely and scared. Meanwhile, Russia’s proxies in eastern Ukraine stepped up their claims of an imminent Ukrainian attack on Friday with the evacuation announcement. There has been no evidence that Ukraine is planning such an offensive, which would be an exceedingly risky gambit at a time when Ukraine’s borders are surrounded by Russian troops. Instead, the separatist evacuation sparked fears that it could be part of a plan to trigger a Russian intervention in Ukraine. In a video address on Friday, Denis Pushilin, the head of the self-proclaimed Donetsk People’s Republic, said he believed the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, was planning to launch an offensive against the separatist areas. Pushilin said he was organising a “mass, centralised departure of the population to the Russian Federation. Women, children and elderly people are subject to evacuation first.” The Luhansk People’s Republic, another Russian-backed separatist state, announced similar plans. However, metadata on the two videos suggested they were made on Wednesday, adding to speculation that the supposed threat was manufactured. Late on Friday, a gas pipeline near Luhansk, caught fire late after “a powerful explosion”, Russian news agencies reported. A second blast hit the city about 40 minutes later, the agencies said. Local residents received text messages with a warning about the evacuation, the Mash Telegram channel reported. “Attention! Citizens! An emergency evacuation has been announced! Stay calm, do not give in to panic! Inform your neighbours of this information!” Video from the region showed that several cities had activated air raid sirens. Photographs from Donetsk posted by Russian news agencies showed cars lined up for petrol, people queueing at ATMs to take out cash and a number of private buses queueing for the evacuation, which was set to begin on Friday evening. Ukraine immediately denied Pushilin’s claims, as well as others in Russian-backed media that claimed the Ukrainian army was targeting a chemical facility. “We categorically refute Russian disinformation reports on Ukraine’s alleged offensive operations or acts of sabotage in chemical production facilities,” said Dmytro Kuleba, Ukraine’s foreign minister.My friend Laurens Otter, who has died aged 91, was a committed peace activist. Originally active in the Peace Pledge Union in the 1950s, Laurens joined the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament on its creation, attending the first Aldermaston march in 1958. Throughout the late 50s and 60s he and his wife, Celia, were arrested and imprisoned on many occasions. They spent their honeymoon in 1961 apart, in separate London prisons – Laurens in Pentonville and Celia sharing a cell with the campaigner Pat Arrowsmith in Holloway. Among many direct actions, perhaps the most celebrated is the time Laurens was among protesters who tried to board the nuclear-powered US submarine Patrick Henry in the Holy Loch, Scotland in 1961. An aerial photo captured the scene with Laurens in his kayak surrounded by five naval launches and gunboats. Born in Montreux, Switzerland, Laurens was the younger son of British parents, Helen (nee Stephens) and Francis Otter. Francis, a railway engineer, met Helen, a gifted linguist, en route to India, where Laurens’s elder brother Robert was born, and the family moved again with Francis’s job. They returned to the UK when Laurens was still a boy, and he was educated at Marlborough college and at Trinity College, Dublin, though he did not graduate. In his youth he considered joining the priesthood. He retained a lifelong Christian faith and, despite his commitment to anarchism, adherence to the Anglo-Catholic wing of the Church of England. He married Celia Ball in 1961, and in 1971 they moved from Croydon, Surrey, to Wellington, Shropshire. Thereafter their house became a centre of radical thought and activism. My own political awakening began there, as did that of many others. Laurens had joined the Organisation of Revolutionary Anarchists on its formation in 1969. The following year they published his book An Introduction to Revolutionary Anarchism. He remained a revolutionary anarcho-syndicalist, though seldom a member of any particular group. In the 70s Laurens was active in the local Ramblers Association and a founder of Wrekin Against Racism. He was instrumental in forming Telford Anti-Nuclear Alliance and, as a friend of the murdered activist Hilda Murrell, published the pamphlet The Arrogance of Uncontested Power in the mid-80s, blaming the security services for her death. Laurens helped found the Wellington Civic Society, for which in 1992 he wrote the book Wellington: A Town With a Past. His learning, wit and generosity made many friends, even if his discursiveness sometimes frustrated them. Celia and Laurens were last arrested in 2008, sitting down for peace in Telford. Celia died in 2014. They are survived by their daughter, Fiona.Brentford will wait another week to hand Christian Eriksen his competitive debut, with the Newcastle fixture their target, and in the meantime must hope to channel their early-season vim. They are still outsiders for relegation but have won only one in their past nine and face opponents whose tails are up in the top-four race. Arsenal will be wary of the set pieces and tempo that caused them to flop on the opening weekend but are a different proposition to the side whose prospects looked so uncertain back then. Nick Ames Saturday 3pm Venue Emirates Stadium Last season n/a Referee Jon Moss This season G16 Y34 R4 2.38 cards/game Odds H 1-2 A 8-1 D 3-1 ARSENAL Subs from Leno, Okonkwo, Holding, Awe, Tavares, Lokonga, Elneny, Maitland-Niles, Pépé, Nketiah, Tomiyasu Doubtful Tomiyasu (calf) Injured None Suspended Martinelli (one match) Discipline Y35 R3 Form WWWLDW Leading scorer Smith Rowe 8 BRENTFORD Subs from Fernández, Lössl, Cox, Roerslev, Sorensen, Stevens, Ghoddos, Onyeka, Peart-Harris, Baptiste, Dasilva, Toney Doubtful Toney (calf) Injured Eriksen (match fitness, 26 Feb, Jeanvier (knee, unknown), Jorgensen (hamstring, unknown), Fosu (hamstring, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y42 R1 Form LLLLLD Leading scorer Toney 6Having Covid-19 puts people at a significantly increased chance of developing new mental health conditions, potentially adding to existing crises of suicide and overdoses, according to new research looking at millions of health records in the US over the course of a year. The long-term effects of having Covid are still being discovered, and among them is an increased chance of being diagnosed with mental health disorders. They include depression, anxiety, stress and an increased risk of substance use disorders, cognitive decline, and sleep problems – a marked difference from others who also endured the stress of the pandemic but weren’t diagnosed with the virus. “This is basically telling us that millions and millions of people in the US infected with Covid are developing mental health problems,” said Ziyad Al-Aly, chief of research and development at the VA St Louis Healthcare System and senior author of the paper. “That makes us a nation in distress.” The higher risk of mental health disorders, including suicidal ideation and opioid use, is particularly concerning, he said. “This is really almost a perfect storm that is brewing in front of our eyes – for another opioid epidemic two or three years down the road, for another suicide crisis two or three years down the road,” Al-Aly added. These unfolding crises are “quite a big concern”, said James Jackson, director of behavioral health at Vanderbilt University’s ICU Recovery Center, who was not involved with this study. He is also seeing patients whose previous conditions, including anxiety, depression and opioid use disorder, worsened during the pandemic. Research like this shows the clear need to follow patients in the weeks and months after even mild Covid diagnoses and to seek quick treatment for any emerging disorders, the experts said. “If we apply attention to it now and nip it in the bud, we could literally save lives,” Al-Aly said. More than 18% of Covid patients developed mental health problems, compared with 12% of those who did not have Covid, according to the study published on Wednesday. The study followed more than 153,000 patients who tested positive for Covid in the Veterans Affairs health system between March 2020 and January 2021, and compared them with other health records: to 5.8 million people who did not test positive in that time, but lived through the same stresses of the pandemic, and with 5.6 million patients seen before the pandemic. Among all patients who developed new mental health problems during the pandemic, the Covid patients were significantly more likely to develop cognitive problems (80%), sleep disorders (41%), depression (39%), stress (38%), anxiety (35%) and opioid use disorder (34%), compared with those who didn’t have Covid. The study looked only at patients with no history of mental health diagnoses in the past two years. It compared those hospitalized for Covid versus other illnesses, and compared outcomes to thousands of flu cases. The study also adjusted for factors like demographics, other health conditions and other factors. The results were all clear: Covid has a marked effect on mental health. Those with more severe cases of Covid, especially those who need to be hospitalized, tend to be at higher risk. But even those with mild or asymptomatic cases were more likely to receive mental health diagnoses. “People who were hospitalized had it worse, but the risk in non-hospitalized [patients] is significant and absolutely not trivial – and that represents the majority of people in the US and the world,” Al-Aly said. The study did have some limitations: most of those analyzed were older white men. But controlling for race, gender and age found no changes in risk. The coronavirus can be found in the brain, other studies have shown. “We can actually see the virus in the amygdala, in the hippocampus – the very centers responsible for regulating our moods, regulating our emotions,” Al-Aly said. The study adds to other research showing that “mental health issues are a huge concern” after Covid, Jackson said. And the results line up with what he sees among patients. “We’re learning that Covid may be even more problematic and more impactful than we thought,” Jackson said. Early treatment of patients facing new or additional mental health challenges after Covid can make a crucial difference, the experts said. “The idea here is to identify patients’ data early to hopefully reduce this from becoming a much larger problem down the road,” Al-Aly said. “If you leave a disease unattended, it only gets worse.” But the longer the virus continues circulating, the more long-term problems it may create – adding even greater pressure to health systems. “The wave of people with mental health disorders is going to be hitting the clinics in the next year or two or three, as a result of Covid and as a result of the pandemic,” Al-Aly said. And many mental health practitioners don’t accept insurance, creating a large stumbling block for patients, while others have long waiting lists. “This is a gigantic problem, and I’m not really sure what we’re going to do about it,” Jackson said. “The needs are vastly greater than the resources.” Jackson has set up peer support groups to offer counseling to patients dealing with long Covid – brain fog, cognitive impairment, memory problems, feelings of inadequacy. The groups are held on Zoom, so patients can join from all over the country. “We need to pay attention to the long-term consequences of Covid,” Al-Aly said. “If we only pay attention to the short-term consequences, the first 30 days or the first 90 days, we really, really are missing the larger picture. “The pandemic itself caught the US unprepared, and we’re going to be caught unprepared again for long Covid,” Al-Aly said. “The reality is that Covid is producing long-term consequences, and we cannot just wish it away or sweep it under the rug or not deal with it.”Donald Trump and his two eldest children have been ordered by a New York judge to appear for a deposition within 21 days, as part of an investigation into the Trump family finances. The development presents the former US president with a dilemma: should he invoke his right to silence by pleading the fifth? What does ‘pleading the fifth’ mean? The right of any person to decline to answer questions put to them in criminal proceedings flows from the fifth amendment of the US constitution (hence “pleading the fifth”). The amendment, dating back to 1791, protects individuals from self-incrimination. “Nor shall any person be compelled in any criminal case to be a witness against himself,” it says. Technically, the financial investigation into the alleged fraudulent accounting of the Trump Organization is being conducted by Letitia James, the New York state attorney general, as a civil case, and as such is not covered by the right to silence. There is a complication, though – James has made clear that she is working in unison with the Manhattan district attorney Alvin Bragg, who is also looking into Trump finances but as a criminal matter. On Thursday, hours before Judge Arthur Engoron ruled that Trump and his children Donald Jr and Ivanka had to present themselves for questioning, the former president’s lawyers protested that he was being put in an impossible bind. Alina Habba, one of Trump’s legal team, told the court: “They either disclose evidence in a civil investigation or they have to invoke the constitutional right not to testify, thereby triggering an adverse inference in the civil action. How is that fair, your honour?” Does pleading the fifth imply the witness is guilty? In law, not at all. US law could not be clearer. Invoking your right not to answer a question in a criminal case says nothing about your guilt, and no inference may be drawn from it. The supreme court has underlined that point several times. For instance, in the 2001 ruling Ohio v Reiner, the justices stated that “one of the fifth amendment’s basic functions is to protect innocent persons who might otherwise be ensnared by ambiguous circumstances”. Of course, what the law says is not the end of the calculation. Witnesses have to weigh up how a jury might respond were the case to go to civil trial, as Trump’s might. If you are a politician like Trump, there is also the vexed issue of public opinion. Could Trump family members plead the fifth when they face James in the next few weeks? Absolutely. There is a track record for this. Trump’s younger son Eric, the executive vice-president of the Trump Organization, has already been called before the James inquiry to answer questions about whether the family business misleadingly or fraudulently valued its assets to secure loans or pay lower taxes. Eric Trump pleaded the fifth no fewer than 500 times. Allen Weisselberg, the company’s chief financial officer, also invoked his right to remain silent hundreds of times. What is Trump’s take on this? To plead or not to plead the fifth is an especially fraught question for the former president. His lawyers know that he has a tendency to wander off script, which may be fine at a campaign rally surrounded by supporters but is not a good idea if you are facing a dagger-sharp inquisitor like James. Trump has invoked his fifth amendment rights in the past. The investigative reporter Wayne Barrett chronicled how in 1990 Trump declined to answer 97 questions, many about adultery, during his bitter divorce from his first wife, Ivana Trump. On the other hand, remaining silent could make him look weak and hypocritical. Trump has gone on the record several times denouncing those who invoke their fifth amendment rights. At a campaign stop in Iowa during the 2016 presidential race, he said: “The mob takes the fifth. If you’re innocent, why are you taking the fifth amendment?” In 2014, he offered the disgraced comic Bill Cosby “some free advice” in a tweet. He said: “If you are innocent, do not remain silent. You look guilty as hell!”That’s all for now. Thanks for your shin splints chat and musical offerings. Barry’s done the Fiver business again (though I’m now a little concerned for his safety). I’ll leave you with a nugget from him - and one from me. Stay warm, folks. Mikel Arteta has insisted it wasn’t a shock to see his Arsenal players flop at Brentford on the opening night of the Premier League season. “We knew the difficulties that we were going to have on the opening game in the league, which is always difficult,” he said. “But with the amount of players out that we had, with the team that we played on the day and with a newly-promoted team who had done exceptionally well, I wasn’t shocked because I knew it was going to be very difficult.” The Gunners are unbeaten in their last 32 Premier League home games against promoted sides (W27 D5) but they’ll want to tighten up at set-pieces this time... Michael Olise’s return of two goals and three assists from the 314 Premier League minutes he had played for Crystal Palace by the start of January meant that with a goal contribution every 63 minutes, the 20-year-old was the division’s most productive player. Ed Aarons has the lowdown on a forward who left Chelsea at 14 and struggled to find a new club - but now looks a top-flight natural. Christian Eriksen is closing in on a competitive Brentford debut, according to Thomas Frank. Frank has said that Eriksen - who has told his teammates “not to go easy” on him after being fitted with a type of pacemaker following his cardiac arrest - will not be in the squad to face Arsenal but could be included for the match against Newcastle next weekend: “We have another friendly on Monday behind closed doors - which will be really beneficial for him - so we are aiming for the Newcastle game.” No taking cover for West Ham. They decided to brave the hoolie and swap rondos for handstands, ahead of Newcastle’s Saturday lunchtime visit. “It’s a massive game,” Rice said between back-flips. “If we want to stay up there, competing around the top four places, the European places, it’s a game we have to win. “Newcastle have had a mixed season. They’ve won their last three games and they’ve been excellent in all three, so it would be wrong to overlook them.” Ten Premier League things! Feat. Dan James and Donny van de Beek! Dig in... Who’s in? Who’s out? Fill your boots... West Ham v Newcastle Arsenal v Brentford (to follow) Aston Villa v Watford Brighton v Burnley Crystal Palace v Chelsea Liverpool v Norwich City Southampton v Everton Manchester City v Tottenham Leeds United v Manchester United (to follow) Wolves v Leicester (to follow) Antonio Conte has been purring about Pep Guardiola and the Man City boss has returned the Friday feels. Conte served up a statement result with Chelsea against City in 2016 and could do with a big mood-lifter after scrutiny off the field and three straight league defeats on it. “He show it in Juventus, and many things since his arrival,” Guardiola said of his next opponent in the dugout. “Always my first season here was tough, managers need time and investment to be there for a long time, especially in this country. “I have incredible respect for when I watch his teams, I can learn something new and improve.” Back in the Premier League, Ralf Rangnick played down reports of Maguire-Ronaldo tension earlier but he did toggle his filter back off to admit some “unhappy players” had affected the atmosphere in camp. Rangnick did not dish the dirt further but said: “There were players unhappy, the squad was too big, players realised they wouldn’t get game time and the atmosphere is better than it used to be a couple of weeks ago. Now, for us it’s about performing well, showing togetherness on the pitch, winning games and those are the things we can influence.” Storm Eunice has claimed another football fixture and a tasty one, too: Bournemouth v Nottingham Forest has been postponed. Forest say they are “extremely disappointed” but a Cherries statement says that “structural engineers have carried out an inspection of the stadium and have confirmed that the damage could pose a significant risk to supporters’ safety”. Man City v Tottenham: The build-up to this one has heavily focused on Antonio Conte’s candid thoughts about Spurs’ transfer dealings. “They asked me about the club and if I’m happy,” Conte says of the Sky Italy grilling in question. “I said the club did the best it can do. We lost four players, important players for Tottenham. These players we sent away on loan cost a lot of money. Numerically you could be a bit weaker. Then I said also with Kulusevski and Bentancur we are as a squad more complete. “I don’t understand why someone wants to create a problem between me and also in the past. A lot of stories between the chairman and the club. He knows my thoughts. It’s not important for me to go to the media. I can speak to him. “I always say that I’m enjoying my time at Tottenham and with the players. I’m always saying this.” Hmm. Scary storm stuff: forget wheelie bins, look at the roof at Tottenham! Leicester news: Ricardo Pereira has signed an contract extension that will keep him at the King Power until at least 2026. “I would say this is the natural thing to happen,” he says. “I’m happy here. I think the club is happy. It’s a win-win situation.” Your correspondence: Peter Oh reckons West Ham should blast out a 1983 number from The Cure ahead of kick-off for the PR boost they and Kurt Zouma need. Oh, Peter, the link’s broken! But I see what you did there. This one shouldn’t be. Roy vs Stevie G: Roy Hodgson has been in front of the mic today and the venerable Watford manager is delighted the midfielder he worked with at Liverpool and England has followed him into the dugout. “When it comes to people like Steven, Frank Lampard and Wayne Rooney, who were icons as players, the only question was going to be whether they wanted to take the step into football management and coaching,” Hodgson said ahead of the Hornets’ trip to Villa Park. “It’s a precarious step, it’s not a long-term profession for most people starting off in their mid-30s. It gives you a lot of wonderful things, but it also brings uncertainty. So I wondered whether they would choose to go into punditry like many of their other famous contemporaries. “I’m delighted they have chosen that route because they have so much to give. All three have shown that already and, perhaps Steven in particular with his stint at Glasgow Rangers and his beginning at Aston Villa, has shown that he has the making to be a really top manager.” Hodgson can’t afford any niceties on the pitch, mind; Watford are four points from safety - leapfrogged by Newcastle and Norwich - and are still seeking their first goal under the new boss. Stern Saints test for Frank Lampard’s Everton Arsenal v Brentford: The Gunners’ media team whetted the appetite for this one by teasing that Mikel Arteta would have his say on Storm Eunice as well as serving up some team news. “It was too windy to do what we wanted to do so we had to adapt: one [session] outside and one inside,” Arteta tells us about a dramatic change to training. “We managed to do some bits.” Phew. Any fitness updates? “The doubt was Tomiyasu, which is still not perfect, but he has trained the last few days so he is in contention and we can use him so that’s really positive.” Your correspondence / shin chat (unfortunate typo thankfully avoided): James Kelly gets in touch. “Beth in Tott-ing-ham makes a good point. Shin pads do stop the old close-to-bone knock when tackling. But unless they are on the end of a really brutal tackle, I can’t see these being the issue. My guess is shin splints. In my experience, very painful, and wearing shin pads can cause them to flare up. Might explain why it’s the small version of the shin pads he wears. Anyway, The Shins, what a band.” Pivotal Chelsea week starts at Palace Doubting Thomas? Realistic Thomas. Herr Tuchel has told Chelsea to adopt a “realistic approach” to their Premier League ambitions this season after seeing his side’s string of stutter leave them in a top-four scrap. The new club champions of the world trail Manchester City by 16 points, with any thoughts of the title seemingly long gone but, buoyed by some Abu Dhabi swag, it was time for a different kind of pep talk. “The 16 points (gap on City) sounds too much, is too much, to where we want to be and what we demand of ourselves, but it’s the reality,” Tuchel said, ahead of a trip to Crystal Palace. “To reach your targets, a realistic approach is also necessary. So we should not get confused about winning the Premier League. And we still have to realise we are in the race for top four right now, which is a huge thing in Premier League in general. “You can do of course stuff within the season, try to improve, and this is what we do. But right now the focus has to be on a realistic approach, that we are in the race for the top four, and that maybe in the moment things are not super easy for us. “We will not start judging competitions now, the most important game is at Crystal Palace tomorrow. And after that we go switching competitions, which is positive because it shows how we are progressing. So we should not lose faith now, and not get frustrated or less passionate about what we do. We must keep on going and push ourselves to the limit.” Ruben Loftus-Cheek is fit after an Achilles problem but Reece James needs more time to recover from his long-standing hamstring issue. West Ham special report: A seemingly broken club has risen unexpectedly but will Kretinsky’s arrival herald a new era on and off the pitch? Jacob Steinberg’s deep dive is a must-read for Hammers fans... Kurt Zouma pulled out of West Ham United’s 2-2 draw with Leicester - less than half an hour before kick-off - with what David Moyes insisted was sickness rather than stress but the defender is set to play against Newcastle. Zouma came down ill overnight after a week in which the defender was fined £250,000 for kicking his cat in a video posted on social media and one investigated by the RSPCA. Moyes, who has said he “knows exactly where his moral compass is,” gave this update on the player at his pre-match press conference: “Well, he’s better, but it’s taken him a couple of days to get over it. He had quite bad sickness and illness, but he’s trained the last couple of days, so I’m hoping that he’ll be available.” Asked how Zouma was mentally, Moyes added: “I think he’s probably really disappointed about what he’s done and he’s thinking about it a lot, no doubt, but overall we have tried to get him to move on. We want him to concentrate on his training. He’s really well-liked here amongst the supporters, the performances he’s put in throughout the season already, so hopefully he can focus on his football and we’ll give him as much support as we can until we get him right back to his best.” Another Mo milestone? Aston Villa v Watford: Angry Steven Gerrard promised changes to his side after their drab display at Newcastle last time out. Villa have won just one of their last seven games in all competitions. Let’s check back in on his mood. “The most important thing for everyone to know is that we need to see a change in the level of performance,” a steely-toned Gerrard says. “I’m not going to sit here and talk about what my decisions are and how many changes in terms of personnel but our level has got to change. We want to finish the season strong. “We’re in an area of the league where we have a choice. We can allow [ourselves] to be sucked in or we can push on and a good strong positive performance certainly pushes us where we want to go to.” Your correspondence: Beth in Tottenham has some fresh advice for Jack Grealish and the Manchester City doctor. “Just a thought but do you reckon Jack Grealish might avoid so many shin injuries if he wore shin pads that actually covered his shins rather than those stumpy little things that barely cover his ankles?” Match postponed: Exeter’s League Two clash against Barrow has fallen foul of Storm Eunice. We’ll bring you news of any more footballing disruption as we get it. Manchester dis-United? Ralf Rangnick has addressed that talk of a power struggle between Harry Maguire and Cristiano Ronaldo over the captaincy. “I must say that this is absolutely nonsense. I have never spoken with any player about a possible change of captaincy. Harry is fully aware of that and so is Cristiano. This has never been an issue. Harry is our captain and he will stay our captain.” Wolves v Leicester: Back to the football and ahead of this one on Sunday, Brendan Rodgers has been talking up his Leicester gig. Rodgers has of course guided the club to successive fifth-placed Premier League finishes in the last two seasons, as well as winning the 2020-21 FA Cup, but his side - comprehensive winners in Europe last night - are 11th in the top flight and he’s found himself the subject of a bit of chatter about his future. You don’t need to be a “rocket science” to know it’s been a challenging season, he says, but he’s been purring that he’s still loving every second. “I think it’s one where you can only do your best. I think we’ve started out on a journey here of which we are nowhere near finished. We’re nearly three years in working together and we’ve made some greats steps going forward. “Progress isn’t always linear, there’s going to be fits and starts and you don’t need to be a rocket scientist, I think it’s logic, when you see where we are this year, if you look at the players we’ve been missing. “It’s a challenge in itself to be up there competing when you have all your players fit. But we’ll keep fighting and for me, it’s about returning to our level of football and I know in time we will get to that and we’ll get players back and then that’s all you can do. “I’ve loved every second of being here. I understand the criticism, because when you don’t get results, that will always come your way. So I will take that. But for me, I love working with the players, the club have been very supportive of me and I will continue to do that until I’m told otherwise.” Your correspondence: Dean Kinsella asked for more weather pics earlier. Plenty of dramatic, crashing-wave shots about but hang on, someone’s gone running in this? Eunice has just put paid to another wheelie bin in these parts. I’m staying indoors. Edinson Cavani woe! The Manchester United striker missed the draw against the Southampton and the win over Brighton with a groin problem and he is still injured. “As it seems, Edinson Cavani will still be out,” Rangnick has told reporters. “He’s still having some problems with his groin and on the other hand also some stomach (issue). The same is true with Tom Heaton. “Apart from that, everybody else seems to be available.” How’s Jack Grealish? He’s missed Manchester City’s last couple of games with a shin injury but could he return to face Tottenham? Pep Guardiola doesn’t think so but, hey, he’s only the manager. “I am not a doctor, I am sorry. The shin, the symptoms, seem much less than last season. I didn’t talk with the doctor but we will see. I don’t think he will be ready for tomorrow but hopefully for the next week.” More from Klopp: Here’s some more from the Liverpool manager about the Diogo Jota prognosis... well, sort of. “No, he will not be available but the extent is still not clear. “We need further assessment. It’s something with some ligaments in and around the ankle, but not the ligament, some others. And so, pretty much everything is possible in the moment: that it will go really quick and the other way around unfortunately as well. So we have to wait. “Everybody saw the picture with him in the boot, it’s a normal procedure; even when you just feel something they put you in that boot. For the weekend, for sure not.” Big Storm outside, another brewing at Old Trafford? Not according to Harry Maguire in response to newspaper reports but Ralf Rangnick is facing the media very shortly ahead of that tasty Leeds game so we’ll see what he makes of it all... PS. Thanks, Barry. (Barry’s off to pen a Friday Fiver special.) That’s all from me for today. I’m off to watch planes trying to land at Heathrow in 70mph winds on YouTube but will leave you in the very capable hands of Kate Burlaga. Thank you for your time, stay safe if you’re in the path of Storm Eunice and have a great weekend. Southampton v Everton: Following their win over Leeds United last weekend, Everton are bidding for back-to-back league wins for the first time since September and Frank Lampard says he has plenty to think about as far as team selection is concerned. “There’s an argument for going same again,” he told reporters. “I felt similar going into Newcastle and it didn’t quite work, so it’s not a statement of fact. “The players have to feel through the week that they can find a way into the team, if we have to change our approach to the opposition because Leeds to Southampton - two very good teams in lots of different ways. The good thing is we’ve got players who are playing well and who are hungry to get into the team.” Southampton are 10th in the table after taking four points off Tottenham and Manchester United in their previous two matches and are unbeaten in their last eight home league games. Lampard believes they are reaping the rewards for sticking with manager Ralph Hasenhuttl, who has presided over two 9-0 defeats since taking charge in late 2018. “At those points, that’s when you rely on the belief from the people above and around you and the structure in place,” he said. “They clearly have that and I think they’re a good symbol. It’s testament to the club and testament to the manager. “He keeps working in the same direction and then you see his ideas come out on the pitch and the players buying into them and they’re a very, very strong unit.” The Big interview: Rotherham manager Paul Warne: “Conversation flows with Warne,” writes Ben Fisher in a delightful interview with the manager of League One leaders Rotherham. “Whether he is discussing dressing up for the Super Bowl, being a big James Bond fan – “although the Timothy Dalton phase was a bit cheesy” – his mother tuning into every Rotherham game on iFollow, comparing the nauseating feeling of wanting his players to succeed to watching your child play the lead role in the school pantomime, or taking his labrador, Chief, for a walk to decompress after a game.” In the very unlikely event that snippet hasn’t piqued your interest, read on ... Liverpool v Norwich City: It’s not a huge surprise but Jurgen Klopp has confirmed that Diogo Jota will miss Liverpool match against Norwich City at Anfield tomorrow after he suffered ankle ligament damage during his side’s midweek Champions League win over Inter. The Portuguese forward now faces a race against time to be fit for the Carabao Cup final next weekend. Your comments are welcome: Due to a technical glitch (specifically a colleague who is currently packing up the contents of their Guardian Towers desk and locker forgetting to toggle a button when they were setting up this rolling report) the Below The Line comments section has been unavailable for the past few hours. The situation has now been rectified and we apologise for any inconvenience caused. Feel free to opine or vent politely on the football, the weather or anything else that takes your fancy from this point on. Damien Duff: For anyone who might not be aware of his current activities, the former Chelsea and Republic of Ireland winger kicks off his reign as manager of the famous old League of Ireland side Shelbourne tonight. Shels host St Patrick’s Athletic at Tolka Park tonight to get the league’s first round of fixtures tonight, in a game that has sold out and is being broadcast live on RTE. “I’m really nervous and I guess just interested to see how we go because you never know until the season starts,” he told the Irish national broadcaster. Brighton v Burnley: Brighton boss Graham Potter has been talking up Burnley’s chances of avoiding relegation ahead of his side’s appointment with the Clarets at the Amex Stadium tomorrow. Burnley are bottom of the Premier League, seven points from safety and have not won a game since October. They do, however, have a game in hand against their rivals. After seeing Burnley hold Manchester United to a draw before being edged out 1-0 at home by Liverpool last weekend, Potter is not about to take their challenge lightly. “This league is so competitive, you only need a few things to go wrong and you can find yourself in trouble,” he said. “But Sean Dyche is a vastly experienced manager who organises the team really well. They have a fantastic attitude all the time, are a together team and everyone knows what they are doing. “The reality in the Premier League is that there are a lot of other good teams and it is hard to get points. If you draw a few games, miss the wins, maybe pick up a few injuries to key players or you fall behind in the fixture schedule, then you are playing catch-up a bit and it can be tough. “But Burnley have got the experience, they have got the know-how. I don’t think they will be writing themselves off - and I am certainly not writing them off at all. I think they will get points between now and the end of the season - we just have to make sure it is not against us.” Leeds United v Manchester United: Ahead of one of the weekend’s stand-out and more exciting, unpredictable fixtures, Marcelo Bielsa has refused to discuss his future at Elland Road. Rather bafflingly, some sections of the Leeds United support feel it might be time for a change of manager, despite the success and entertaining football the Argentinian has provided in his three-and-a-half years at the club. Bielsa, who has been repeatedly hamstrung by a series of injuries to key players this season, tends not to sign deals of more than a season in duration at the end of each campaign and one suspects Leeds need him more than he needs them even if there are plenty of supporters (and neutrals) who would be devastated if he left. Leeds are believed to be working on a succession plan in case Bielsa decides to take his business elsewhere and the American former RB Leipzig boss Jesse Marsch has been linked with the club. “It’s not a subject that we should talk about at this moment,” said Bielsa, who went on to talk about what avoiding relegation would mean for the club this season. “It’s an obligation and the injuries don’t justify the season that we’re having.” Bielsea said Stuart Dallas, who has been sidelined with injury, could be fit to play some part against Manchester Un ited but added that Liam Cooper and Kalvin Phillips will not be avaialable until March. “Dallas is recovering,” he said. “He hasn’t been discarded from Sunday’s game. Kalvin and Cooper are continuing their normal processes. The objective is that they get to March and are available. The medical calculation was 12 weeks and that hasn’t changed.” Patrick Bamford and Leo Hjelde remain out indefinitely with respective foot and knee injuries. More correspondence: My thanks to Jon who has written in to point out that I somehow managed to omit Aston Villa’s game against Watford from my original list of top flight weekend fixtures ... a state of affairs that has now been rectified. It’s just another example of the outrageously blatant anti-Watford and Villa bias for which the mainstream media has long been renowned. Some correspondence: “Please can we have more pics of weather Barry?” asks Dean Kinsella. “I tried to snap a shot of the wind here in the west of Ireland yesterday but it didn’t come out very well. We’ve been having so much weather lately. Oh, and I support Charlton Athletic.” Liverpool v Norwich City: Four points from safety having played one game more than Newcastle in 17th place, Norwich City face a difficult trip to Anfield tomorrow to take on Liverpool. Their manager Dean Smith is not under-estimating the task that lies ahead of his players. “Our mindset is going to be a really important part of it. We have to try to out-think Liverpool where we can. I saw them during the week and it is amazing what Jurgen has done at Liverpool in the time he has been there, it is something like 50 Champions League wins alone now. “So, yes we are coming up against a grandmaster and I am really looking forward to it. We have had some good battles against him before, but obviously I was at a different club at the time, so it would be my first with Norwich. “We will have two in the space of two weeks [including an FA Cup tie], so we have to come up with some tricks where we can. We certainly have to limit our mistakes, that is the biggest thing.” Norwich will be without Republic of Ireland striker Adam Idah, who is expected to miss the rest of the season following knee surgery. Idah, 21, picked up knee and ankle problems during the draw against Crystal Palace. Following initial tests, it was determined an operation was needed. West Ham v Newcastle: Newcastle fans making the long journey from Tyneside to that there Big London via rail for their lunchtime kick-off against West Ham tomorrow are advised to check their train timetables. Lots of trains appear to be being cancelled, presumably for weather-related reasons. Tottenham Hotspur’s plans to get to Manchester today for their game against Manchester City tomorrow evening also appear to be have been disrupted although there is no suggestion the game will be postponed. One suspects these won’t be the only teams whose players and supporters will be inconvenienced by Storm Eunice and we’ll bring you more news of any disruptions as we get it. Newcastle United: Marquee January signing Kieran Trippier has undergone surgery to repair his fractured metatarsal and is now facing a battle to be fit before the end of the season. The 31-year-old England defender, brought in from Atletico Madrid for £12m, broke a bone in his left foot after scoring the only goal in last weekend’s Premier League win over Aston Villa, Newcastle’s third in succession since his arrival. “He had his operation yesterday and that went well, so that was good news,” said Eddie Howe. “I don’t know at this moment in time how long he’s going to be out. We hope to have him back before the end of the season, but it’s obviously a significant injury, which is a big blow to us because he was performing so well. Pressed on whether or not Trippier might return before the end of the current campaign, Howe was non-committal. “In terms of a definitive time, no,” he said. “We’re going to have to see how his early rehab goes. As I said, the operation was a success, but it’s an opportunity now for someone else to step up in his place. “But sadly, we’re going to miss his leadership skills on the pitch and everything that he was delivering for us. He’s scored two goals in the last two games which have been defining moments for us, but we’re confident we have enough quality in the squad to cover.” Women’s football: England, Spain, Canada and Germany are the participants in the inaugural Arnold Clark Cup round-robin and the first two matches were played at Middlesbrough’s Riverside Stadium last night. Germany and Spain drew 1-1 in the curtain-raiser, before England were pegged back by Canada in the second game, which finished with the same scoreline. Millie Bright opened the scoring for England with a sensational hook over her own shoulder to give them a half-time lead, but Canada equalised through Janine Beckie. England’s next game is against Spain at Carrow Road in Norwich on Sunday and kicks off at 3.15pm. In the meantime, here is Louise Taylor’s report from the Riverside last night ... Manchester United: The Mirror has reported on a power struggle in the Manchester United dressing-room, where they say Harry Maguire is feeling increasingly undermined by Cristiano Ronaldo. “Maguire is said to feel marginalised in terms of his authority within the United dressing-room, leading to him thinking some of the players are losing respect for him,” they say. “There is now a growing belief within the Old Trafford dressing-room that it is inevitable Ronaldo will replace Maguire – who has been struggling for form – as captain.” Responding to the Mirror’s claims on social media, the out-of-form Maguire pooh-poohed the exclusive. “I’ve seen a lot of reports about this club that aren’t true and this is another,” he said responding to the Tweet. “Not going to start posting about everything that is written but I needed to make this one clear. We’re united and focused on Sunday. Enjoy your day everyone.” West Ham v Newcastle United (Sat 12.30pm GMT) Arsenal v Brentford (3pm) Brighton v Burnley (3pm) Aston Villa v Watford (3pm) Liverpool v Norwich City (3pm) Southampton v Everton (3pm) Crystal Palace v Chelsea (3pm) Manchester City v Tottenham Hotspur (5.30pm) Leeds United v Manchester United (Sunday 2pm) Wolves v Leicester City (4.30pm) View the Premier League table With another busy weekend of football very much ahoy, assorted top flight managers get to participate in arguably their favourite part of the job today by facing barrages of interrogatory projectiles from the ladies and gentlemen of the press. It promises to be a busy Friday so we’ll bring you news of their musings and cover all the other major talking points on a day in which Leeds United manager Marcelo Bielsa has already said “now is not the time to talk about his future” and Manchester United skipper Harry Maguire has felt compelled to deny media reports that he has fallen out with Cristiano Ronaldo”. Hmmm.Franki began living on Auckland’s streets at age 15, shortly after his father died in 2018. He hunted for secret spots to sleep – the backs of buildings and cemeteries. There were times when he was frightened; times when the older street community took him under their wings. He slept rough through New Zealand’s first pandemic lockdown, wandering the quiet roads, struggling to find food. There were few housing options for a teenager – rentals would not accept him, nor many motels. In mid-2020, worried for his health, he walked through the doors of Lifewise, an organisation that supports people into accommodation. Since then, he has been on the move, bouncing between motels and emergency housing units. The constant disruption was difficult and tiring, he says. Two months ago – and four years after becoming homeless – he secured a spot in Lifewise’s new youth-focused transitional housing, a more stable but not permanent solution. “When I lived in the park, I didn’t have any goals. Now I’ve been here for two months I want to achieve my goals – to get a job, save up for a car and get my security licence,” he says. While it does give Franki a chance to reset, he is still in housing limbo. Lifewise will not evict him as long as he sticks to the house rules, but there is an expectation he will eventually find his own home. In the current rental market, that could take some time. Franki is one of the tens of thousands of people either living in emergency accommodation, sleeping rough, or living in cars, garages and on couches across New Zealand – people at the beginning of a long and distressing road to find a permanent home. New Zealand has one of the highest levels of homelessness in the OECD. As far back as 2018, Jacinda Ardern’s government pledged $100m to shelter the homeless population, following one of her party’s key 2017 campaign promises to tackle the housing crisis. Then, at the start of the pandemic, New Zealand made headlines for appearing to eliminate sleeping rough – it invested millions of dollars and resources into moving people into accommodation as the country closed its borders and its citizens locked down. But in the nearly two years since, applications for public housing have jumped by 8,000. There are now more than 25,500 households waiting for a home, with 89% of those in significant and urgent need. Among these are more than 10,000 people living in emergency accommodation such as motels, while another 5,226 households are waiting to be transferred out of public housing that is no longer appropriate. New Zealand’s definition of homelessness includes people in temporary accommodation, so while more people may be off the streets, the number of people deemed homeless is growing. “I really struggle when I hear language like ‘we solved the housing crisis in New Zealand’,” says Helen Robinson, the Auckland City Mission chief executive, “because all we’ve done is transfer [people], by and large, to emergency accommodation, and that’s just not appropriate or [a] good place for people to live permanently.” Housing ‘catastrophe’ For many New Zealanders, that reality is grim, as the cost of living increases. Housing affordability is at a record low, with the average property now worth 8.8 times the average household income, according to property analysts CoreLogic. For those households, it would take nearly 12 years to save enough money for a deposit. Nationally, the average house price is NZ$1.1m (US$740,000; £540,000) – up by $300,000 from the start of the pandemic, according to Quotable Value’s latest index. A ministry of business innovation and employment report for December 2021 shows median rents nationwide have reached $540 a week, up by $50 from the previous year. Meanwhile, a single person on minimum wage takes home roughly $678 after tax, and inflation has hit a three-decade high. The Salvation Army says the situation has morphed into a housing catastrophe. In its State of the Nation report released this week, it said the term “housing crisis” has become commonplace. “Maybe it is time – after looking at these housing supply, affordability and debt challenges – to consider elevating the term to something more than ‘crisis’, possibly towards ‘catastrophic levels’,” it said. Services, like the Auckland City Mission, are struggling to keep up with the ever-swelling need. In 2021, it distributed 50,000 food parcels – triple the number prior to the pandemic. “We have an incredibly low unemployment rate here relatively, but what we’re actually seeing is a growth [in the number of] people who have inadequate income,” Robinson says. Aaron Hendry, the youth coordinator at Lifewise, says the organisation is in touch with 60-70 young people in Auckland, like Franki, aged 14-25 years old who are either sleeping rough, living in “toxic and unhealthy environments” or are being shuffled between emergency accommodation. “That number is growing every day.” Monte Cecilia Housing Trust’s waitlist has grown from 12-15 families in 2017, to between 300 and 400 families in the last year. “I think while the government’s done a brilliant job at keeping the nation safe, sadly, I think homelessness and other economic issues have gone to the background, and we’ve lost a bit of traction,” its chief executive, Bernie Smith, says. “Whānau [families] that are feeling incredibly vulnerable, who are living in a temporary environment, need some sense that there is a hope and a future outside of all that’s occurring at the moment.” Omicron fears Now, as an Omicron outbreak takes off, the services that assist those facing housing and food deprivation are worried about how both staff and the people they support will cope. Many families are still living in overcrowded housing, even if they have been placed in emergency accommodation, Hendry says. “The ability to actually isolate in those spaces is going to be an extra challenge for those whānau.” Robinson adds: “People who are vulnerably housed … their physical and mental health is so compromised. People are suffering the reality of structural injustice, the impacts of long-term poverty, the impacts of long-term trauma, and then you’re adding a pandemic on top of it.” Robinson worries that the phased reopening of New Zealand’s borders will mean motels being used for emergency accommodation could slip out of reach, as businesses swivel back to tourists and international students. In a statement, the minister for social development and employment, Carmel Sepuloni, said the ministry was aware of the potential for pressure on motel demand once the international borders open, but that it is “constantly monitoring the situation”. “However, they have no current indication that motels are intending to stop offering emergency accommodation,” she said. “Across government, there is a wider program of work under way aimed at increasing the supply of public housing and improving housing affordability and supply. “This is the best solution to removing the ongoing need for emergency housing, but it will take time.”David Evans’ letter on poetry commissioned for the Queen’s silver jubilee (11 February) was amusing and instructive. Larkin’s serious submission was obsequious and trite, confirmation that the commissioned royal poem is always the very, very bad poem. Larkin’s Hughes pastiche on the other hand was earthy and hilarious. Perhaps only satire can provide a true artistic response to royal pomp. Simon Armitage please take note. Tom McFadyen Kirkintilloch, East Dunbartonshire • In view of the government’s instruction to schools not to show political bias (Report, 18 February), when the £12m Queen’s platinum jubilee book is sent to all schools, will teachers be required to circulate anti-monarchist leaflets to compensate? Chris Ballance Drumnadrochit, Inverness-shire • Franz Liszt’s first public piano recitals in the 1830s were real gamechangers, both musically and culturally (Letters, 17 February). Before Liszt, concerts were by and large private affairs in aristocrats’ homes. It was Liszt and Paganini who first reduced a public audience to screaming and swooning. Simon Lawton-Smith Lewisham, London • Surely subpostmasters should be recompensed by those who received huge bonuses during the time the flawed Horizon computer system was running (Report, 17 February). Elizabeth Ashby Greatford, Lincolnshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Fashion week is emerging from the Covid pandemic with a new look as a generation for whom upcycling is the new normal have graduated to centre stage: dressing up is back after two years of fashion tumbleweed, but the rules have changed. For 25-year-old fashion designer Conner Ives, ideas that spark his vintage-meets-streetwear cocktail dresses begin not in a sketchbook but in the Sheffield warehouse where he combs through old T-shirts looking for gems he can cut up and splice together into party looks. “We spend hours picking through piles of T-shirts, and what we make depends on what we find that day.” On other days, Ives wakes up to 50 photos of vintage piano shawls, sent via WhatsApp messages from a dealer in Pakistan, from which he chooses the most interesting pieces to rework. “I want to deconstruct the idea that secondhand is somehow secondbest,” said Ives during a preview in his studio. “Personally, I always prefer a vintage T-shirt to a new one – it’s so much more romantic.” Secondhand clothes make up 75% of his raw materials, and the brand’s swing tags bear the motto “Things of Quality Have No Fear of Time”. Ives was headhunted by Rihanna to join her design team while still a student at Central St Martins, and already has a dress on show at the Metropolitan Museum of Art’s Costume Exhibit in New York. But after two years of restrictions, his show on the opening day of London fashion week, in what was once Selfridges’ car park, was his first ever experience of the catwalk. In the 26-piece collection, a Paris tourist-stand T-shirt became an hourglass minidress, its curves tailored to the iconic outline of a glittering Eiffel Tower. Two grey marl sports team T-shirts were combined into a long column dress with a macramé fringed skirt. “Lateral design is a promising business model, because there are so many clothes in the world already,” says Ives. But using found objects presents a challenge to production. While customers can request a colour scheme when an order is placed, each of the dresses patchworked from old T-shirts or sewn from vintage piano shawls is unique. “It’s a different way of doing things, and the only way to figure out if we can scale this business is to try,” the designer said. One of London fashion week’s biggest moments will take place simultaneously on a catwalk at Tate Britain and in the metaverse. The fluid silhouettes and painterly colours of the Roksanda brand, whose sophisticated dresses have a loyal following among an art world clientele and on the red carpet, are far from an obvious fit with the metaverse, where the aesthetic is led by gaming and so far tends toward cyborg metallics and animal fantasia. In a link-up that reflects how seriously the fashion establishment is now taking the metaverse, designer Roksanda Ilincic has partnered with the Institute of Digital Fashion to create an NFT dress that will go on sale in a range of formats ranging from £25 for one of 500 3D renders, to £5,000 for one of 10 3D animation renders with software files that allow an avatar to wear the dress in the metaverse. “For me, the beauty of the metaverse is that anything is possible,” says Ilincic. “A dress that changes colour, or disappears and reappears – if you can imagine it, then you can make it.” She feels that resistance to the metaverse is likely to be futile. “I look at my daughter and I see can see that [digital] is clearly where her generation is headed. The metaverse feels a bit like how it was when e-commerce first started and the luxury industry didn’t want to know – and look how that turned out.” However, the designer admits she was taken aback by the complexities of producing the digital version of a dress that will feature at her show at the Tate gallery. “I thought that you would just press a button for whatever you wanted, but it’s much more complicated,” she laughs, adding that she hopes fashion can “infiltrate” the metaverse. “Fashion has so much to offer. It brings with it not just glamour but a history of design and creativity which can make for a richer digital environment. I would hope that the metaverse can become a place where many different generations and groups of people can find beauty.” A week of 86 live shows feels like good news for most fashion week goers, but Caroline Rush of the British Fashion Council is most excited by the 61 events that remain digital, believing that a hybrid model is the best fit for a modern fashion industry. “Designers are now really thoughtful about who they need to get into a room, and who they can speak to in other ways,” she said on Friday. Young Londoners in the tracksuits they wear to the barber shop were the inspiration for a lyrical and elegant hybrid show by Saul Nash, a 29-year-old who is one of the city’s most promising fashion talents. Nash choreographed dancers wearing his clothes in a short film set in a Kensal Rise barber shop, then invited a small audience to watch a live performance of the routine.Eugen Engel’s opera Grete Minde (Holocaust victim’s opera stored for years in trunk gets premiere at last, 14 February) is based on a short novel with this title by the influential 19th-century German writer Theodor Fontane. Generations of older Germans at secondary schools have read it as a set book and should be well acquainted with its contents. Fontane, whom some critics have described as the German Charles Dickens, wrote the story after he had researched real events that happened in Tangermünde in the 17th century. Fontane’s Grete Minde takes revenge on her bullying family by setting fire to the town. Apparently the libretto of the opera contains long passages of the book’s dialogue. In Grete Minde, as in most of his novels, Fontane attacks the vices he detects in the bourgeois German society of his time: misogyny, dogmatism, injustice, envy and an ambivalent attitude to honour. Harry Schneider Mill Hill, London • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Sajid Javid is right to argue against scrapping the Office for National Statistics’ Covid surveillance study (Cabinet splits emerge over ‘living with Covid’ strategy and free testing, 17 February). Throughout the pandemic, national surveillance studies have provided invaluable information to support decision-making. For any real-time health surveillance system to be reliable and cost-effective, it cannot rely solely on self-reported tests. These data sets are likely to be biased, as it is impossible to know how many people are also reporting their negative results and, if tests start to come with a cost, how many people simply aren’t testing. If we are to get reliable information about the prevalence of Covid, it is essential to maintain studies such as the ONS’s and React to allow statisticians to estimate infectiousness and the proportion of the population who are infected (including those without symptoms), as well as to identify new variants. Abrupt disruption of a surveillance system is wasteful, will make tracking of prevalence meaningless and will put in jeopardy the future health of the public. If important surveillance studies must be scaled down, this cannot be led by arbitrary cost-cutting targets, but should be led by statisticians to ensure that studies continue to provide reliable information. Prof Sylvia Richardson President, Royal Statistical Society • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Time to wrap up - here’s some of today’s main stories. Goodnight, and stay safe. GW Shares in streaming company Roku have tumbled by a quarter today, after it missed revenue forecasts last night and issued underwhelming guidance. Roku is one of the ‘pandemic winners’ that have found conditions more challenging of late (see also Peloton, Shopify, Zoom...). Last night it reported that revenue growth slowed in the last quarter, to 33% year-on-year, from 51% in Q3. For the current quarter, it forecast revenue of $720m, which implies 25% revenue growth, below expectations of $748.5m. Shares have slid over 25% today to $108 - last July, they hit a record high of $490, before the boom in fast-growing tech firms faded. As Bloombert puts it: It’s a sharp reversal for Roku, which was among the stay-at-home winners amid the Covid-19 pandemic that shuttered cities for months on end. The stock gained nearly 150% in 2020 as the coronavirus accelerated a shift toward streaming video among consumers. Investors are now reassessing the valuation it had received, as they rotate out of high-growth tech names. “At a time when interest rates were near zero and retail money poured into the equity markets, Roku was a perfect stock to own,” wrote Michael Nathanson, an analyst at MoffettNathanson, who has a sell rating on the stock. He noted that Roku had some blockbuster quarterly reports in the pandemic era, helped by growth in streaming video. “As the enterprise value pushed higher and higher, it just became harder and harder to justify that valuation.” Pret a Manger’s owners have warned of doubts over its ability to continue as a going concern as the coffee shop chain faces uncertainty over future Covid restrictions and a shift to hybrid working. Accounts for Pret’s UK holding company filed this week show that last month it doubled its “standby facility” reserved to support the business in case of difficulty to £200m, up from the £100m set aside in March last year. The latest cash call on shareholders comes on top of £100m pumped into the business in the autumn and £185m in 2020 when the company first warned of “material uncertainties” as sales were crushed by the pandemic. In the holding company accounts, which were signed off on 10 February, directors said there were still “material uncertainties which may cast significant doubt over the group’s ability to continue as a going concern”. They said that the possibility of further trading restrictions linked to Covid-19 and the associated unpredictability of consumer behaviour as well as uncertainty about the group’s ability to refinance a debt facility that expires in July next year were potential clouds over its financial position. The group, which had debts of almost £400m at the end of 2020, has been dramatically affected by the pandemic, during which it was forced to close some outlets for several months. The London-focused business has also been hit by the shift to working from home and a decline in tourist numbers in the capital. Ukraine worries pulled all the main European indices down by the close of trading. Germany’s DAX fell almost 1.5%, Spain’s IBEX lost almost 1%, Italy’s FTSE Mib shed 0.6%, while France’s CAC only lost 0.25%, as the early rally fizzled out. Michael Hewson of CMC Markets European markets initially had a more positive tone today, ahead of the weekend as the negativity from yesterday started to be replaced by cautious optimism that there will be no further negative developments ahead of next week’s meeting between US Secretary of State Anthony Blinken, and Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov. Unfortunately, the early gains soon disappeared on reports that separatist leaders in Eastern Ukraine were evacuating their citizens in the region into Russia for their own safety. In the City, the FTSE 100 has closed 24 points lower at 7514 points, down 0.3% today. That takes the blue-chip index’s losses this week to 1.9%, after a big fall on Monday. It’s the worst week since late November when the discovery of the Omicron variant rocked markets. Russian steel manufacturing business Evraz was the top faller today, for the second day running, down 7.2%. Technology-focused firms also lost ground, with industrial software company Aveva losing 6.3% and online grocery operation Ocado off 4.4%. Travel companies were also pulled lower by the Ukraine crisis, with IAG (which owns British Airways) losing 2.9%. The smaller FTSE 250 index lost 0.9%, with holiday firm TUI dropping 5.3%. Stocks turned lower after the head of the Russia-backed separatist states in Ukraine announced a mass evacuation of citizens. The move could be part of a plan to trigger a Russian intervention in Ukraine. Here’s the situation across UK travel, with rail, road and ferry operators urging people to avoid journeys due to disruption caused by Storm Eunice: Hermès, the French luxury goods maker, is opening three new factories as it struggles to keep up with demand for its £5,000-plus Birkin and Kelly handbags. The company said on Friday it planned to open new leather goods factories in the French towns of Louviers, Sormonne and Riom before 2024 in order to increase and speed up its production of the expensive bags. It has also recently opened its first leather-working school to train more craftspeople in the art of handbag making. The company, which already has more than 4,300 leather workers on its staff, said it was hiring more than 400 artisans each year. However, Hermès said it needed far more to keep up with demand for its handbags, which has jumped during the Covid pandemic as soaring stock markets have left the world’s richest people with a lot more disposable income. Shares in Hermès have dropped 5% today, after it reported that production bottlenecks had hit sales at its leather goods and saddlery division. European consumers have grown a little less optimistic this month, indicating that inflation, and the Ukraine crisis, may be hitting morale. The Europen Commission’s monthly gauge of consuer confidence in the European Union dropped by 0.2 points to -10.2 this month. In the euroarea it dipped to -8.8, from -8.5. At these levels, the indicator is converging towards its long-term average, the EC says. It slumped early in the pandemic, but then recovered after the first lockdowns were lifted. US home sales have jumped in January, with cash buyers squeezing out prospective first-time house owners. Sales of existing homes (ie, not new builds) jumped 6.7% last month, to a seasonally adjusted annual rate of 6.50 million units. The average price hit $350,300, up 15.4% from January 2021, lifted by record low inventories, pressure to secure deal before interest rates rise, and cash-rich buyers. Lawrence Yun, NAR’s chief economist, explains: “Buyers were likely anticipating further rate increases and locking-in at the low rates, and investors added to overall demand with all-cash offers. Consequently, housing prices continue to move solidly higher.” First-time buyers were squeezed out of the market - responsible for 27% of sales in January, down from 30% in December and down from 33% in January 2021. Each of the four major U.S. regions experienced an increase in sales in January. However, year-over-year, activity was mixed - down 2.3% overall, with sales lower in the Northeast and West, flat in the Midwest and up year-on-year in the South. Back in the UK, John Lewis shops in Cardiff, Exeter and Bristol’s Cribbs Causeway shopping centre did not open because of Storm Eunice today while Waitrose outlets in Saltash, on the Cornish border, Farnham in Surrey, and Hawkhurst in Kent also temporarily closed. Waitrose said that local branches were deciding whether to go ahead with home deliveries depending on weather conditions in the area. On Wall Street, stocks have dipped in early trading, as uncertainty about inflation, rising interest rates and fears of conflict in Ukraine all weigh on markets The Dow Jones industrial average has dropped by 53 points, or 0.16%, a day after sliding 1.8% in its worst fall of 2022. The tech-focused Nasdaq is 0.25% lower. Craig Erlam of OANDA says news that US Secretary of State Antony Blinken is ready to meet with Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov next week has calmed markets. Risk aversion swept through the markets on Thursday as the perceived risk of a Russian invasion of Ukraine rose. Much like the weather here in London, Friday was shaping up to be rather treacherous in the markets, that is until US Secretary of State Antony Blinken accepted an invitation to meet Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov in Europe next week. While we’re still being warned that a Russian invasion is highly likely, the meeting does offer hope that nothing will happen before then which is bringing some stability in the markets. In the absence of the meeting, it could have been another turbulent day in the markets and we could still see some risk aversion creeping in as we near the close, given how quickly these situations can change. Two more UK energy suppliers, Whoop Energy and Xcel Power Ltd, have ceased trading today. Whoop Energy supplies 212 business customers, and 50 domestic accounts, while Xcel Power supplied gas to 274 businesses. Regulator Ofgem says that under its safety net, customers’ energy supply will continue and funds that domestic customers have paid into their accounts will be protected, where they are in credit. Domestic customers will also be protected by the energy price cap when being switched to a new supplier, which will be chosen by Ofgem. A burning ship carrying almost 4,000 cars – including 1,100 Porsches – has been drifting in the mid-Atlantic after the vessel’s 22 crew members were evacuated, the Portuguese navy has said. The ship Felicity Ace, which was carrying a number of Volkswagen Group vehicles from Germany to the US, caught fire near the Azores on Wednesday evening, a VW spokesperson said on Friday. None of the crew members evacuated on Wednesday were hurt, Portugal’s navy said. UberEats have also paused deliveries where there is a Red weather warning, meaning winds are most severe and dangerous today: “Due to the severe weather conditions we have temporarily paused the Uber Eats app in locations where a Red weather warning is in place. Our local teams are closely monitoring the situation and we hope to resume services as soon as it is safe to do so.” Supermarket chain Morrisons says it had paused using larger lorries for deliveries in “red” areas of the UK, where wind speeds are highest in today’s storm. Its home delivery vans are driving more slowly in those areas for safety reasons, so the number of drops will reduce, potentially causing some delays. Eurozone builders had a poor end to 2021, as the surge in Covid-19 cases hit the economy. Production across the construction sector fell by 4.0% month-on-month in the euro area, and by 3.1% in the wider EU. Construction work in Austria, which imposed a full lockdown in November, shrank by 8.1%. Production was down 7.3% in Germany, which brought in restrictions on unvaccinated citizens. Deliveroo has also temporarily halted some deliveries due to storm Eunice. The delivery firm says it has paused deliveries in London, Wales, the south west and parts of the south east in the interests of rider safety. Household spending on holidays and travel jumped in January compared with a year earlier, according to analysis by Britain’s biggest building society, via PA Media. Spending on holidays increased by 379% annually in January, while spending on airline travel was up by 408% and spending on cruises surged by 899%, Nationwide Building Society said. The report was based on an analysis of nearly 200 million debit and credit card and direct debit transactions made by Nationwide’s members in January It shows the difference compared to a year ago, when the UK was in a strict lockdown and Covid vaccines were just being rolled out. Mark Nalder, Nationwide’s head of payments, said spending on holidays, airline travel and cruises is playing a big role in rising spending levels “as consumers start 2022 in a positive frame of mind about the outlook for Covid-19 and about their travel plans for the coming year”. He added: “The rising cost of living also continues to slowly bite into consumers’ pockets with spending on utilities and bills, including energy, water and tax bills, up more than a quarter compared to December but, perhaps more importantly, up nearly 10% on the same month last year. “Spending on paying off existing debts, such as credit card bills, also increased in January as people look to try and pay down debt racked up in the run-up to Christmas.” Mr Nalder said spending is expected to grow in February as “the return to offices boosts spending in areas such as travel, eating and drinking and leisure and recreation”. Holiday firm TUI reported a jump in bookings earlier this month: The storms hitting the UK and Europe are also pushing down power prices, as wind turbine output jumps. Electricity prices for the next few days in Europe have plunged, Bloomberg reports, as the region’s wind turbines are poised to generate some of the highest levels ever seen. They say: Day-ahead power in Germany, Europe’s biggest market, plunged as much as 66% to its lowest level this year. Output from Germany’s wind parks will double by early Saturday compared with actual output on Friday morning, according to a forecast by Bloomberg. The cost of electricity has dropped from records in December, but Europe’s many millions of homes and factories are still facing record bills for this winter. The absence of any real cold spells this year also helped depress prices. In the UK, wind is currently generating 33% of electricity, pushing the overall renewables contribution over 40%: Takeway courier group JustEat and fast track grocery firm Getir have both suspended deliveries in parts of the UK most affected by Storm Eunice. JustEat said it had temporarily ceased operations in London, Cambridge, Brighton, Wales, and the South West, as one of the worst storms in decades hits the UK. A JustEat spokesperson said: “Courier safety is our number one priority and we have immediately suspended deliveries in all affected areas today. We will not reopen until it is safe to do so.” Getir said it was pausing deliveries in London and “affected areas across the south of England” because of the danger posed to its workers. Turancan Salur, general manager for the UK said “At Getir, the safety and wellbeing of our employees come first, and we will continue to assess the situation and follow the latest guidance before resuming operations. We apologise to customers for any inconvenience caused by this momentary pause and look forward to resuming operations once it is safe to do so. All couriers, and other employees affected by closing for the storm, will continue to receive their full pay.” Here’s our liveblog on Storm Eunice: Back in the markets, the oil price has dropped to its lowest level in a week. Brent crude is down 2.5% at $90.60 per barrel, on hopes of a breakthrough in the Iran nuclear deal negotiations. US crude has dropped back through $90/barrel. Yesterday, a US State Department spokesperson told AFP that “substantial progress has been made in the last week,” in the talks in Vienna. If Iran’s 2015 nuclear agreement can be revived, then the eventual lifting of sanctions could see Iranian oil return to the markets again. Oil hit seven year highs on Monday, on worries that conflict in Ukraine was imminent, but has slipped back since. Stephen Brennock at brokerage PVM Oil says (via Reuters): “For all the talk of war and conflict, market players remain unconvinced. This is perhaps why the geopolitical risk premium is starting to wane,” Elsewhere in retail, the boom in rapid delivery services and online shopping has pushed up profits at British warehousing firm Segro. Segro, whose warehouses are scattered across the UK and continental Europe, reported a 20% jump in adjusted profits for 2021, while an earnings measure that tracks the value of its buildings surged by 40%. Segro says it saw record levels of rental growth last year, and a £4.1bn increase in the value of its portfolio. Demand to rent Segro’s properties jumped in the lockdown, as more customers shopped over the internet. As chief executive David Sleath told us late last year: “We get everyday things. That could be a coffee cup, or it could be something you’ve downloaded on your phone that’s gone through a data centre... We create the space to enable extraordinary things to happen.” Segro says that ‘quick-commerce’ (where customers can order goods to arrive almost immediately) is driving growth too. E-commerce is still an important source of occupier demand across Europe and continues to contribute significantly to our lettings performance, but we are seeing new names emerge in the space (for example rapid grocery delivery services and other ‘q-commerce’ businesses) and its impact is now being felt more widely across the portfolio, for example in our urban estates in Germany, France and Spain. In France, power company EDF raising €2.5bn to strengthen its finances, after being forced to sell power below market prices to protect consumers from the energy crunch. EDF will hold a €2.5bn rights issue, through which France’s government will pump €2.1bn into the company. EDF announced the cash call after an estimated €8bn were wiped out by the French state’s move to cap energy bill hikes at 4% this year. Under that plan, EDF was forced to sell electricity generated by its fleet of nuclear reactors to rival home suppliers at well below the current record high market prices, to protect customers in the cost of living crisis. On top of that, EDF says it faces an €11bn hit to core profits from outages at several French nuclear power plants, due to maintance work. France’s finance Mmnister Bruno Le Maire, told RTL radio station that the state’s participation in the EDF rights issue senta signal to investors. “You can have confidence in EDF.” EDF expects that higher global energy prices will add around €6bn to this year’s core profits. Many economists are warning that UK retailers face a tough 2022, despite the bounceback in spending in January. Adam Hoyes, assistant economist at Capital Economics, says the strong 1.9% jump in retail sales volumes last month masks some underlying weakness. Food sales declined for the third consecutive month, by a chunky 2.3% m/m, although this may be partly due to people eating out more and ordering takeaways, which boosts non-retail spending. Clothing sales fell 5.0% m/m (the second decline in a row), perhaps due to the less generous deals on offer in the January sales as confirmed by the consumer price data released earlier this week. This may suggest that the cost of living crisis is already forcing some households to cut back on spending. Consumer spending will be squeezed as wages are eroded by inflation, as Sam Miley, senior economist at the CEBR thinktank, explains: “Sales volumes returned to growth in January as the partial reversal of Omicron effects put upward pressure on consumer activity. Despite this monthly uptick, downside risks remain for the retail sector, notably the emerging cost of living crisis. Other data released this week showed that real earnings are now falling. This trend is expected to continue over the coming months, leading to an erosion of consumer spending power and subsequent changes in the scale and structure of spending. Retail activity is likely to fall as a result.” Jacqui Baker, partner and head of retail at RSM UK, says the cost of living crisis means January’s uplift in sales might not last. ‘Consumer confidence is at its lowest level in 12 months, footfall is down, and mounting price inflation may curb future spending as fear of soaring energy costs, higher mortgage repayments and increased petrol prices eat into household budgets. This all lands ahead of a pinch point as retailers will face increased costs from 1 April with average hourly rates and national insurance both increasing, at a time when the remaining Covid support measures come to an end. ‘The next few months will undoubtably be tough for UK retailers, so it will be interesting to see if the Government will step in and announce new measures to ease the cost of living crisis for consumers and introduce urgent business rates reform in next month’s Spring Budget. This would allow confidence to return; give retailers the chance to recover; and prevent further distress across the sector after a slow start to the year post-Omicron. European stock markets are rather mixed this morning, after Wall Street took a tumble last night. In London, the FTSE 100 is up just 6 points. Utility companies are leading the risers, along with consumer goods maker Reckitt (+1.8%) , discount retailer B&amp;M (+1.4%) and fashion group Burberry (+1.2%) also higher. But NatWest is dragging the market down, now down 3%. Ocado (-2%) and technology-focused investor Scottish Mortgage (-2.3%) are also down, after the US Nasdaq Composite fell 2.9% on worries about Ukraine conflict, and likely US interest rate rises. Across Europe, the German DAX is down 0.1%, the Italian FTSE Mib is flat, while France’s CAC has gained 0.35%. NatWest is giving its bankers bigger bonuses this year after the group, still majority-owned by taxpayers, bounced back to a £4bn profit in 2021 as the economy recovered from the coronavirus pandemic. The lender said it had increased its bonus pool to £298m, a 44% increase on a year earlier. Alison Rose, the chief executive of NatWest, said it was a “restrained bonus pool” and added that the bank was “very mindful of the challenges that our customers are facing with inflation and cost of living”. She told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: “We need to make sure we are rewarding fairly.” Rose’s total pay for 2021 was £3.6m, up from £2.6m a year earlier. NatWest also benefitted from a booming mortgage market last year. Net mortgage lending across the business jumped by £10.8bn in 2021, with NatWest reporting “strong gross new mortgage lending and improved retention”. UK house prices jumped 10.8% during 2021, meaning borrowers had to take out larger loans to buy properties. Customer deposits also rose during the year, up by £17.1bn or 10% across its retail banking. NatWest says this was due to UK Government support schemes, and the Covid lockdowns which hit consumer spending and led to increased savings in the first half of last year. NatWest’s shares have dropped 2.8% in early trading, despite its return to profit, the top faller on the FTSE 100. The City may be disappointed that NatWest has lowered its cost reduction target (see earlier post), as it reacted to the surge in prices. Zoe Gillespie, investment manager at Brewin Dolphin, says NatWest appears to be in good health, following its return to profits. “NatWest has beaten expectations again and looks set to continue on its positive trajectory. The net impairment release of nearly £1.3 billion, bumper profits, and strong capital reserves point to a bank in good health. The increased dividend and share buyback programme suggest NatWest’s management team are optimistic about the year ahead, while rising interest rates should only benefit its core business. NatWest is now much more attractive as an investment prospect, notwithstanding the likelihood of the government winding down its substantial stake in the bank.” Freetrade analyst Gemma Boothroyd says NatWest will benefit from the likely increases in interest rates this year: For a bank like NatWest, an interest rate rise is warmly welcomed news. It means the spread increases between the rate it’s borrowing at and what it’s charging for interest on customers’ loans. Although rates have risen, NatWest customers probably aren’t about to see more interest in their current accounts. They’re not going to benefit here, but NatWest is. That’s because the bank’s not worried about luring in more customers eager to make deposits. NatWest doesn’t need to entice them with higher deposit rates - it’s already got enough cash on hand. It’s all about raising the rates it charges on loans. NatWest’s Q4 net interest margin reached 2.38% - 3 basis points higher than the previous quarter. That’s NatWest’s profit engine, and so long as it can keep widening that as rates rise, it’ll keep strutting through 2022. So slowly but surely, NatWest’s getting back up on its feet. Its share price is finally returning to pre-pandemic levels, and investors will be welcoming today’s 7.5p dividend - well over double last August’s payout. Richard Hunter, Head of Markets at interactive investor, says NatWest’s capital reserves look strong (allowing it to raise its dividend and launch the £750m share buyback programme). “Another period of growth in the final quarter has sealed a successful year for NatWest, with the release of provisions for bad debts being a major driver. Operating profit for the year of £4 billion compares to a loss of £481 million the previous year, and much of this significant swing was enabled by a net impairment release for the period of £1.3 billion. The CET1 ratio, or capital cushion, stood at an extraordinary 18.2% at the end of the period, with a liquidity coverage ratio of 172% not only underlining the strength of the bank’s capital position, but also that there is something of an embarrassment of riches to be considered. NatWest has cut its cost-cutting target for the next two years - due to the inflation squeeze hitting the UK. The bank is lowering its cost reduction target to around 3% per annum for 2022 and 2023), reflecting “higher inflation and our ongoing investment in the business”. Government-backed bank NatWest has returned to profit, as it benefitted from the economic recovery last year. NatWest has kicked off the bank reporting season by posting an operating pre-tax profit of £4bn in 2021, recovering from the £481m loss in 2020. Profits were boosted by impairment releases of £1.3bn -- money set aside to cover potential losses due to the pandemic, which NatWest now doesn’t expect to incur. Shareholders will benefit, with NatWest proposing a final dividend for 2021 of 7.5p, more than double last year’s 3p. It has also announced a share buyback of £750m - another way of returning cash to shareholders. This means NatWest will distribute more than £3.8bn of capital to shareholders for 2021, including £1.7bn to the taxpayer (who own a majority stake, dating back to the bailout of Royal Bank of Scotland in 2008). Here’s the details: £1.2bn dividends - £846m final (7.5p/share), £347m interim (3p/share). £1.5bn on market buy-backs - £750m executed + additional £750m announced today. £1.1bn directed buy back in March ‘21. Total of ~£1.7bn back to UK government in dividends and buybacks for ‘21. CEO Alison Rose says: We are acutely aware of the challenges that many people, families and businesses continue to face up and down the country and are working alongside our customers to provide the support they need - whether that is managing their money better, saving for a house or retirement or starting or growing a new business - as well as playing a leading role in the transition to net zero. Darren Morgan, ONS Director of Economic Statistics, says British retailers saw the biggest increase in sales since last spring: There was also a jump in spending on fuel last month, as more people returned to the office after the move to home working. Automotive fuel sales volumes rose by 4.1% in January 2022, following a fall of 5.0% in December. But, sales volumes in January 2022 were still 3.3% below their February 2020 levels Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. Retail sales have bounced back as shoppers returned to high streets after the Omicron variant hit the UK economy.... despite the squeeze from inflation. Retail sales volumes across Great Britain rose by 1.9% in January, faster than expected, and the biggest monthly increase since the lockdown was lifted last spring. That recovers about half of the 4.0% drop in December when the surge in Covid-19 cases and pandemic restrictions hit spending, and lifts retail spending to 3.6% above its pre-pandemic levels. The recovery was driven by an increase in spending at non-food stores such as household goods and garden centres. The ONS explains: Household goods stores sales volumes rose by 7.5% in January 2022 because of strong growth in furniture and lighting stores (16.6%) and electrical goods stores (16.0%). Sales volumes were 3.8% above their February 2020 levels. Department stores reported a monthly increase of 7.1% in sales volumes but remained 8.0% below their February 2020 levels. But, clothing stores reported a fall of 5.0% over the month -- possibly because the January sales were less generous (which also pushed up inflation to a 30-year high). On an annual basis, people bought 9.1% more items than a year ago, when non-essential shops were closed in the 2021 lockdown. However, spending at food stores such as supermarkets fell below pre-coronavirus levels for the first time. Retail volumes at food stores were 0.8% below where they were in February 2020, having surged once the first lockdown began. In another sign that the economy was returning to more normal, online shopping’s share of spending fell to 25.3% in January 2022, its lowest proportion since March 2020. The retail sales report also shows the impact of inflation over the last year, with the amount spent at retailers up 16.5% -- although volumes were only 9.1% higher.... Elsewhere, European stock markets are on track to open slightly higher, after US secretary of state Antony Blinken agreed to a meeting with Russian foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, next week. Wall Street and European stocks fell on Thursday as the US said Russia was on the brink of invading Ukraine within several days. The agenda 7am GMT: UK retail sales to January 7.45am GNT:France’s inflation report for January 10am GMT: Eurozone construction PMI for December 3pm GMT: Eurozone consumer confidence report for February 3pm GMT: US existing home sales for JanuaryThe omens of impending war we were warned about now seem to be lining up like the horsemen of the apocalypse. The field hospitals have been set near the border, blood banks have reportedly been brought in. On the information war front, a dossier of alleged Ukraine war crimes circulated at the UN security council, and a video popped up purporting to show an attempted Ukrainian attack on chlorine tanks in the Donbas. Now the rebel leaders in the Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts have ordered the evacuation of women and children to Russia, claiming – with no evidence whatsoever – that a Ukrainian attack is imminent. Right on cue, a car bomb went off in Donetsk, injuring no one, but providing a fireball for the cameras. All of this is more or less what US and UK briefers have told journalists to expect in the run-up to a Russian invasion. The one piece that had been missing from Vladimir Putin’s relentless build-up was an effort to prepare the Russian population for the prospect of a major war. That piece seems to be slotting into place. Just as Russian armour and helicopters are edging up the border, Russian messaging is also advancing to the brink. War is becoming more probable by the hour, but it still does not necessarily mean that Putin has made his final decision. Other explanations are still possible, and events unfolding today may be messier than a single Kremlin-orchestrated master plan. If the chlorine video was the “false flag” pretext for war, it is a very crude and low-budget version of what US and British briefers had predicted, which had involved actors, borrowed corpses and high production values. In a similar vein, the dossier presented to the security council on Thursday was extremely thin and did not claim anything other than civilians have been killed in shelling on the rebel side of the lines in the Donbas since 2014. That was already known, it mirrors civilian casualties on the other side, and falls a very long way short of genocide. The most alarming development of the day is the evacuation from Luhansk and Donetsk, creating a sudden refugee crisis in neighbouring Rostov in Russia. The Kremlin spokesman, Dmitry Peskov, and the Rostov governor claim to have been caught unawares by this move. They could quite possibly be lying, to add to the pretence of spontaneity. But it is not impossible that the rebel Donbas leaders are seizing an opportunity, using the crisis Putin has created to force his hand, with the aim of leaving him no choice but to recognise the republics as the Russian Duma is demanding. “I know it’s easy to read into this as part of Putin’s grand plot,” Gennady Rudkevich, a Russia expert at Georgia College, argued. “But there are a lot of parties that are affected by what happens next (positively and negatively). Some might be following the Kremlin’s orders. But others might be trying to deny Putin any option but invasion.” Putin’s carefully curated mystique is designed to keep everyone else guessing while he keeps his options open. Ukraine and its backers have not made the concessions he has demanded, so perhaps Putin believes that they just haven’t been scared enough, and is laying on what we have been primed to expect in the hours before a war. The finger has tightened around the trigger, but there remains a small, ever diminishing, chance it might not be pulled.Downing Street staff being questioned by police about alleged lockdown breaches will be allowed to view notes on the evidence they gave to the Sue Gray inquiry. Those spoken to as part of the Cabinet Office probe were told they could see the notes with a member of Gray’s team present but would not be allowed to bring a phone into the room, to be accompanied by a lawyer, or to request any changes. Gray admitted that it was not “standard practice in internal investigations such as this” to share notes with interviewees, but said in a letter seen by the Guardian that she had decided “as an exceptional measure” that they would get “limited access”. This will let interviewees view the evidence they gave to her before it is passed to police, who have opened a separate criminal investigation nicknamed Operation Hillman. Dave Penman, head of the FDA trade union that represents many civil servants, said he had made the request on the interviewees’ behalf. He clarified: “They will only be able to access notes of their own internal interview – their own words – to assist them in completing the Met Q&amp;A.” It is understood the Met had no objection. The deadline for Boris Johnson to submit the questionnaire sent out to all those believed to have attended gatherings passed on Friday night. No 10 confirmed the prime minister had returned his questionnaire. He was sent the document by the Metropolitan police last Friday, and given seven days to complete. He is expected to argue he broke no rules because he used No 10 as part of his working day, given that it is both his home and an office shared with hundreds of others. More than 50 questionnaires have so far been issued to Downing Street staff, and the outgoing Met commissioner, Cressida Dick, said last week that “some but probably not all may very well end up with a fixed penalty notice”. Alec Shelbrooke, the MP for Elmet and Rothwell, became the latest backbench Conservative to express his anger with the prime minister. In an email to a constituent seen by the Guardian, he said: “I’ve always sought to be straight-talking with my constituents, so you will not hear me attempting to defend the indefensible. I am angry at events of recent weeks in Westminster, as I know others are.” Shelbrooke said he had followed Covid rules “to the letter”, adding that he had not seen his parents for 15 months, “even when I technically could when rules relaxed”, because he believed the public holds MPs to a higher standard. He would not reveal whether he had submitted a letter of no confidence in the prime minister. Another senior backbencher told the Guardian they did not believe the respite for the prime minister would continue indefinitely. “Even if we have up to a month of calm, all the underlying issues remain,” said the former minister, who suggested the pressure on Johnson was “coming in waves”. Commenting on claims by the prime minister’s allies that he believed the events he attended were work functions, they said: “That won’t wash; ignorance is no defence.”The two letters (11 February) about the 2,500 Jewish refugees and prisoners of war shipped to Australia on the troopship HMT Dunera told only part of the fascinating story. One described the guards throwing overboard many of the internees’ personal possessions. Less widely known is that this saved their lives and the ship. This included the life of my great-uncle, Friedrich Schroeder. Days out of Liverpool, the Dunera was torpedoed by U-boat U56. One torpedo failed to detonate and a second passed beneath the vessel. But seeing the discarded luggage later, the U-boat captain sent divers to retrieve some. Reading the many German letters and documents, the captain called off the waiting U-boat pack to give the vessel safe passage, not wanting to repeat the tragedy of the SS Arandora Star a week earlier. That ship had been sunk en route to Canada, with the loss of 800 people, mostly German and Italians. The U56 story came to light only in 1980 when the captain’s logbook was released. The Dunera was the only ship sent to Australia. The outcry after the Arandora Star sinking led to an impassioned debate in parliament on 10 July 1940, and the policy was cancelled. But it was too late for the Dunera, she had sailed just hours earlier. The other events of that 57-day voyage, and the subsequent wartime experiences of those on board are extensively documented in the excellent Australian national archives Christopher Barry Blean, Kent • My mother had a rather better experience than those outlined so far in Guardian letters. Arriving from Germany on a Kindertransport in August 1939, aged almost 16, she went to live with a very welcoming family; her education was supported by the girls’ grammar school she attended. But she was required to report to the local police station if she wanted to go out in the evening – until, before very long, they told her “Not to worry, lass”. I discovered recently that her official status was “internee at liberty”, so I rather think that if she had ever put a foot wrong she might have been banged up somewhere. Luckily, she didn’t. Judith Rhodes Guiseley, West Yorkshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Storm Eunice has claimed the lives of at least five people on mainland Europe, after it whipped through the UK and Ireland on Friday, bringing chaos to millions. From England, the record-breaking gales have begun moving across the continent, hitting Belgium, the Netherlands and parts of northern France, and are expected to reach Denmark and Germany on Friday evening. Dutch authorities issued a red weather warning and hundreds of flights were cancelled, while trains were halted on Friday afternoon. Four people were reported to have been killed after being hit by falling trees. Pieces of the roof of the ADO The Hague football club stadium were blown off, authorities said. A 79-year-old British man died in the Belgian town of Ypres after being pushed from his boat by the strong winds, according to Reuters. Belgian authorities had appealed to citizens only to venture out in an emergency, while in the northern French province of Brittany, four-metre high waves were reported and rail travel was curtailed. In Denmark, trains were ordered to reduce speed and bridges and roads have been closed in preparation for record winds. In Germany, where the storm has been named Zeynep by meteorologists, it is expected to reach speeds of up to 160km (100 miles) an hour and to last into the early hours of Saturday morning. In addition, a thunderstorm is expected to develop within the storm, meteorologists said. The country, along with neighbouring Poland and the Czech Republic, is still reeling from storm Ylenia, which hit on Wednesday night, uprooting trees, overturning lorries and causing three deaths in Germany, including that of a 37-year-old man whose car was hit by a tree. Deutsche Bahn, the national train operator, cancelled regional and long-distance trains, as emergency services in parts of northern and western Germany, including North Rhine Westphalia, Berlin, Brandenburg and Hamburg, were put on high alert. A spokesperson for DB described the weather warnings as “severe” and urged travellers to delay their journeys, promising that the validity of their tickets would be extended. The German meteorological service (DWD) declared a level three storm warning for the whole country, and highest level four warning for the entire 1,300km (808 mile)-long North Sea coast. On the North Sea islands, winds were expected to reach speeds as high as 170km (105 miles) an hour. The carmaker Volkswagen was one of many factories to close its works in the North Sea coastal town of Emden on Friday afternoon, cancelling both the late and night shifts in anticipation of the storm. DWD called the storms “life threatening” due mainly to flying objects such as falling trees. People were urged to close doors and windows and to secure all movable objects including garden furniture, bikes and portable bins. DWD has predicted widespread flooding in the coming days, particularly in the port cities of Cuxhaven and Hamburg, which was also badly hit by Wednesday’s storm. Authorities said they were braced for water levels to rise three metres above their usual height and put officials on standby to observe all dykes in the region. The weather is expected to remain stormy across large parts of Germany over the following days.Russia has amassed up to 190,000 troops on the borders with Ukraine, the US warned on Friday, claiming it was “the biggest mobilisation of troops since the second world war” and an increase of more than 90,000 in less than a month. The estimate including Russian-backed troops inside Ukraine only added to a growing sense of foreboding among western diplomats, as they gathered for a major security conference in Munich, that their efforts to avert war in Europe were doomed and that Vladimir Putin had irrevocably chosen the path of conflict. News that the Russian-supporting republics of Donetsk and Luhansk had announced a mass evacuation of the region’s residents to Russia and reports of a car bomb in Donetsk close to the separatists’ headquarters added to fears of an impending assault as the US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, warned of a strategy of “creating false provocations”. In Moscow, it was announced that Putin would this weekend oversee a drill of nuclear-capable ballistic and cruise missiles. “This is one of the most dangerous moments where provocation and disinformation might turn into escalation,” said German foreign minister, Annalena Baerbock. “What is at stake for the people of Ukraine is their right to determine their own future, and, for all of us, what is at stake is nothing less than peace in Europe and whether we are going to defend our rules-based order, even if it comes to a crunch.” She also warned the scale of violence had dramatically increased in the past 48 hours. The conflict was not a Ukraine crisis, she said, but “a Russia crisis … Those who want to live together in safety do not threaten each other.” Baerbock said she feared Russia would operate through a false flag operation or a coup rather than invasion. Speaking alongside Blinken, Baerbock vowed that Germany was “willing to pay a high price in economic terms” through sanctions, adding that everything was on the table, including the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline. EU foreign ministers will look at their expected sanctions package on Monday, but western officials said it may be necessary to hit Russia “quickly and at scale” in the event of a non-conventional attack on Ukraine. Sanctions could be implemented “where we judge that Russia has crossed a line on this”, the officials said. The warnings came as the US president Joe Biden prepared to hold further talks with European leaders by phone with the discussion as much now focused on how to respond to, rather than deter, an attack. Foreign ministers in Munich are likely to look at the threat of a major humanitarian crisis developing if refugees flee through Poland. The US is nevertheless still hoping that the Russian foreign minister Sergei Lavrov will hold talks on Russia and Nato’s rival schemes for a future security map of Europe at the end of next week, possibly in Geneva. Blinken warned that everything he was seeing suggested Russia had decided not to embark on the path of diplomacy and he feared the developments of the last 48 hours were likely part of a Russian plan to create false provocations. He said he remained fully engaged with diplomacy, but the west had to be informed by history, including the Russian invasions of Ukraine in 2014 and Georgia in 2008. “We have to be informed by the facts, and the facts are that despite what Russia has said in recent days about pulling back troops from the border, [that] has not happened. On the contrary, we see additional forces going to the border, including leading-edge forces that will be part of any aggression,” he said. The French president, Emmanuel Macron, called for an end to the shelling on the frontline in eastern Ukraine. “I welcome what President Putin has said, but I believe that if you want to be a reliable partner, then deeds should be in line with declarations, and I would like to see specific actions. As regards to pressure, military pressure, from Russia, destabilising acts, the increasing amount of shelling in the contact zone, firstly, we call for a ceasefire on such military actions, resume dialogue, because we continue to believe that dialogue is the way to move this situation forward.” The tense mood at the conference was underscored when Baerbock was directly challenged by the mayor of Kyiv, Vitali Klitschko, over Germany’s provision of just 5,000 helmets to Ukraine. But Baerbock stood her ground about Germany’s refusal to supply weapons to Ukraine, saying now was not the moment for a 180-degree turn on Germany’s historic position on not selling arms into conflict zones. She said different countries had different contributions, and Germany was doing more than any other country economically to help Ukraine, adding: “We all have different roles and different history.” But she revealed that Germany was looking at a fresh Ukrainian request for military help. The UN secretary general, António Guterres, accused of being a powerless bystander in the conflict, warned that the threat to global security was now greater than during the cold war. He called on all parties to be extremely careful with their rhetoric. “Public statements should aim to reduce tensions, not fuel them,” he said. “I still think it won’t happen. But, if it did, it would be catastrophic,” Guterres warned of the risk of an incalculable escalation. “This can also be triggered by communication breakdowns and false assumptions. During the cold war, there were also risk assessment mechanisms and informal ways of prevention. Today, most of these systems no longer exist and the people who used them are no longer there.” Additional reporting by Dan SabbaghMy father, Ivor Smith, who has died aged 92, personified the benefits of widening access to higher education. Having left school aged 15, and started work at the General Electric Company in Birmingham, he managed to gain the necessary qualifications for university admission and eventually became professor of electrical power engineering at Loughborough University, where he also served as head of the electronic and electrical engineering department, dean of engineering and pro-vice-chancellor. He wrote or contributed to more than 450 technical papers and served on the MoD’s Defence Scientific Advisory Council. In 1988 he was elected fellow of the Royal Academy of Engineering. Ivor was born in Birmingham, the son of Elsie (nee Underhill) and Howard Smith, and left school without even being entered for any school-leaver qualifications. The 1940s was an era of heavily segregated education; the assumption at institutions such as Handsworth technical school, where he went, was that all boys would ply their trade as industrial apprentices. That was indeed Ivor’s focus for the next few years, working at the General Electric Company’s sprawling Witton campus, where his father was employed. But two university students undertaking industrial placement inspired him with tales of academic endeavour, and the chance encounter changed his life. For the next few years, any spare moments were devoted to securing his Ordinary School Certificate and Higher National Certificate (the equivalents of today’s GCSEs and A-levels) – prerequisites for university admission. He then gained BSc and PhD degrees in electrical engineering from Bristol University, as well as a DSc from Birmingham University, where he was appointed a lecturer in 1959. In 1974 he joined Loughborough University, where he remained for the rest of his career. His pioneering research focused on the production, conditioning and utilisation of large pulses of electrical power. The work done by the Plasma and Pulsed Power Research Group that he founded led to Loughborough becoming pre-eminent in the field. He and his colleagues had security clearance to undertake classified projects for the Ministry of Defence and Nato, collaborating extensively with other universities. Ivor was instrumental in many technological innovations including magnetically insulating high-voltage transformers, pulsed power generation for high-impedance loads, multiple-phase twin-output, high-voltage generation, and unconventional microwave generation. The research had many bio-medical applications, including contactless methods for cancer treatment using intense pulsed electric fields, pre-packed solid food processing using a non-invasive technology, and processing and recovering precious metals from electronic waste. He continued working daily at Loughborough University until his late 80s. Throughout, he remained an avid supporter of Aston Villa FC and Warwickshire county cricket club. He is survived by his wife, Pamela (nee Voake), whom he married in 1962, his three sons, Andrew, Michael and me, and six grandchildren.A mother and stepfather have been sentenced to six years in prison for locking up and starving their autistic son in a room of “abject squalor and filth” for seven months. Matthew Langley, 22, was “days away from death” when he was found in June 2020 weighing just 6st 2lb (39kg). Lorna Hewitt, 43, and her husband, Craig Hewitt, 42, were found guilty of false imprisonment and causing or allowing a vulnerable adult to suffer serious physical harm at Sheffield crown court last month. The trial heard Langley had learning difficulties and suffered from irritable bowel syndrome, double-incontinence and arthritis. Photos show the attic bedroom in which he was kept captive was covered in piles of rubbish, and soiled with vomit and faeces, which had attracted flies. Police said they found the key on the outside of the door. Passing sentence, Judge Michael Slater said A&amp;E staff had to take the “unprecedented” step of washing Langley when he arrived at the hospital. The court was told the couple had been trying to have Langley “taken off their hands”, and had prevented him from attending college as well as cancelling a string of medical appointments in the seven months in which they kept him locked in the room. “This was a grave abuse of trust by a mother to her son,” Judge Slater said, adding that the pair had “effectively turned off” Langley’s care in November 2019. “You were the primary carer for Matthew, with his challenges and difficulties, and it makes it all the more inexplicable that for those seven months you failed to provide him with the support and provision of food and drink that he craved and needed.” He added that Langley had likely spent a “long seven months experiencing feelings of anxiety, confusion, hunger and loneliness”. He praised staff at Northern General hospital for their efforts to save Langley, who “looked doomed not to survive” when he was admitted. He was treated for severe malnourishment and dehydration, with one expert dietician at the hospital telling the court it was the most severe malnourishment case he had seen. Langley had suffered kidney damage due to high sodium levels caused by severe dehydration, and also had a number of skin abrasions that suggested he had been crawling around on all fours. The court was told Langley made a full physical recovery by August 2020, but the psychological impact of the abuse had not been ascertained.I was greatly amused by Arwa Mahdawi’s article (I’m putting my foot down – only barbarians wear shoes inside, 16 February) as it touched on one of the biggest cultural shocks that I’ve had since arriving in the UK from Hong Kong last summer. Being the typical cleanliness-obsessed Hongkonger, I Googled a house-cleaning company upon arriving at our rented place, hoping for a thorough move-in clean. My jaw dropped when the team marched in to the house in their street shoes and proceeded with the work like it was the most usual thing to do. I wondered if anyone else saw the irony in vacuuming and washing carpets and floors while stepping on them in street shoes. I was traumatised. My second experience came the following month when I had the chance to visit a local’s house and was told I didn’t need to take my shoes off – it was a deeply unsettling experience to step in and make my way across the carpet into someone’s living room wearing shoes. This would have been unimaginable back home. I posted the question online with fellow newcomers from Hong Kong and one guy said: “Nothing so surprising, don’t you remember that Mr Bean went to bed in his street shoes?” And so I came to accept this as a cultural difference and just how things are done here – until I read Arwa’s piece. Joanna Tong London • Re Arwa Mahdawi’s article, I must admit to wearing shoes indoors. I thought prissy acquaintances were considering their magnolia carpets when they cast pained glances at my sullied shoes, not our hygiene. How have I survived to be 80 with this filthy habit? It is sad that in these troubled times we worry about such trivialities. Christine Hawkes Cambridge • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.It was good to read Larry Elliott’s article on trade unions, in which he dispels well-worn myths (Unions don’t call the shots any more – but we’d all be better off if they did, 10 February). I would argue that strong trade unions are good for the economy and for reducing inequality. The Nordic models, for example, are characterised by high union densities – around 70%-80% of workers are members of a union, collective bargaining between unions and employers is allowed in the majority of workplaces and industries, and the trade unions are key players in social dialogue – a system of consultation between unions, employers and the government around key economic and social policies. Incidentally, this model is not too dissimilar to one proposed in the Jeremy Corbyn-led Labour party manifesto in 2019. The Nordic models are the most equal of the developed capitalist countries, with the lowest rates of child poverty and highest rates of public provision in childcare and social services. Following the Covid crisis, Denmark and Norway had some of the lowest rates of public sector debt, and only Finland had a public sector deficit in 2019. Since the crisis, the Danish trade unions have played a key role in ensuring an adequate system of social protection and safety net. Unemployment benefits amount to up to a maximum of around £2,000 per month in Denmark, compared with average UK benefits of around £450-£500 a month. David Etherington Professor of local and regional economic development, Staffordshire University • Larry Elliott, lamenting the decline of unions, reminded us of the GMB’s suggestion that the governor of the Bank of England should spend a day as a care worker to appreciate what low pay means. That is little better than politicians donning hard hats to wander around a building site. What they really need to do is to spend a month or more doing such jobs, earning the pay that goes with it. However, 20 or more years ago, Adam Holloway, a former army officer, made a documentary in which he spent three months unemployed, trying to negotiate his way through the benefit system. That experience didn’t stop him from becoming the Tory MP for Gravesham and a member of the European Research Group. Perhaps such people have become so wealthy that they don’t want to learn, to understand and to look for remedies for the inequalities in this country. Levelling up? You’re taking us for a ride! Brian Thomas Marden, Kent • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.My friend Mitzi Davies, who has died of pneumonia aged 81, was an actor who took joy and delight in treating the whole world as her stage. She was a tiny woman, only just over 5ft in height, but resonated with so much merriment, fun and vivacity that nobody would ever forget her presence. She had the most compelling eyes and a smile sufficient to put a lighting director out of work. She was born Eileen Rogers in Glasgow, but discarded her first name in favour of that held by a particularly charming kitten she encountered, and it would be as Mitzi Rogers that she made her name. Having won a scholarship to Rada in London, she was swiftly cast thereafter in some of the most popular television programmes of her era and was in constant employment for more than three decades. Among the series in which she appeared were The Avengers, The Sweeney, Z-Cars, Minder, The Woodlanders, Dr Finlay’s Casebook and Coronation Street. In the last of these, as Jenny Sutton, she married Elsie Tanner’s son, Dennis, in 1968. Her films included the 1980 Agatha Christie adaptation Why Didn’t They Ask Evans? Before retiring in the early 1990s, she had parts in The Ruth Rendell Mysteries and Devices and Desires, a TV miniseries adapted from PD James’ novel of the same name. Mitzi was the elder of two daughters born to Derek Rogers and Betty Hamilton Fingland, who were both teenagers when they married. In 1943, with two children under three and her husband conscripted into the forces, Betty broke her back in an accident. Mitzi was sent to live with her paternal grandparents and was raised by them in Northamptonshire. John Rogers, a former physician to Lord Willington, the viceroy of India, and his wife, Eileen, were both Anglo-Indians, born in the subcontinent, who had recently returned to the UK, and Dr Rogers practised as a country GP. This rural upbringing fostered Mitzi’s lifelong love of animals; while at boarding school she also developed her enthusiasm for drama, in any form. In 1963, Mitzi married Keith Butt, a veterinary surgeon, but two years later fell in love with the television drama director John Davies. They married in 1969 and had two children, Sophie and Ben. By the 1980s they spent more time in Corfu and both met new partners. Thereafter Mitzi lived with Judy Mackrell, who had come to Corfu through her work with Gerald Durrell. They lived a blissfully happy life, most of the year in Tritsi, high up the remote mountainside with astonishing views over the Corfu channel to Albania, rattling down the precipitous roads in their battered Citroen 2CV to socialise with their countless friends in many tavernas. Glitzy Mitzi of Tritsi (as my late husband dubbed her) never lost her glamour nor her unquenchable love of life. Even in the Greek sunshine, she brought an added light to life. She is survived by Judy, to whom she was married in 2015, and by her children and grandchildren, Tom, Joe, Mia and Cobey.The flourishing of the Welsh language in the 19th century and its survival through the last century was, contrary to the claim of your editorial (11 February), almost entirely to do with that industrialisation of south Wales which ensured that the Welsh largely migrated internally. There were more Welsh speakers in Glamorgan in 1951 than in the rest of Wales altogether. The notion of “English suppression” is a convenient and distorted excuse for a complicated process of social and cultural change. Further, if Thatcherism helped to destroy the economic infrastructure of industrial Wales, it did not scatter the population that, by generational rootedness, has best claim to being a “Welsh heartland”, with an experienced history which was neither a “mythology” nor one dependent on hoary old cliches derived from How Green Was My Valley. One of that real history’s legacies was Labour’s delivery of a devolution settlement in 1997. As for the cultural revivalism, as opposed to any linguistic imposition that has followed on from deindustrialisation, it was not S4C but BBC Wales that led the way in securing an audience for both popular programming, serious documentaries and vital new drama, while other connected outcomes have been the foundation of National Theatre Wales, the Library of Wales series of classic English language fiction and a tsunami of creative writing in the Dragon’s other and eloquently expressive tongue. When close relatives speak to each other effectively, it has to be a dialogue based on knowledge, not wish fulfilment. Certainly, volume is not all, whether from propinquity or distance, and it is not only Jeremy Bowen who speaks for his Wales from England, as others do for theirs. Long may the conversation continue. Prof Dai Smith Barry Island, Vale of Glamorgan • Your editorial on Welsh ends by inviting everyone to rejoice in the survival of this unquenchable language. But the article makes no reference to the exciting number of young people, whether from monoglot English families or Welsh-language homes, who are becoming bilingual speakers through the Welsh education system. As a professional storyteller, I work in and through oracy. Listening to young bilingual speakers moving effortlessly between the two equal languages of Wales is inspiring, and their competence and fluency bodes well for the future of the spoken and literary arts. To be able to express oneself in not one but two mother tongues merits celebration. Whether or not the Welsh government reaches its target of a million speakers by 2050, it is my firm belief that everyone in Wales (even those just “passing through”) is already somewhere on the continuum of bilingualism. Many are nowhere near fluent, but, thanks to the government’s commitment to bilingual signage, everyone knows what to expect if they stand long enough at a safle bws, or that they can leave their car in a maes parcio while they shop. Children and young people in Wales are gaining not one but two languages as their birthright, and a very wonderful thing this is too. For the generations of my age and older, who went to school at a time when it was considered that speaking Welsh would hold you back, I hope this is of some comfort. And for those of us who are pushing on a bit, it is never too late to start to learn. It has taken me 20 years, but I am now a pretty fluent speaker of Welsh, and it has enriched my life enormously. Fiona Collins Carrog, Denbighshire • Brought up in England, but with a Welsh-speaking mother and Welsh husband, I was thrilled to read your summing up of recent debates on the Welsh language. Your editorial said: “It does not solely define Welshness, but it contributes to its many-sidedness and unquenchable hwyl.” That fabulous, significant word, expressing joy and excitement but much more, has no exact English translation. So precious! Thank you. Ann Rowland Holne, Devon • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Prince Andrew’s decision to cut his losses and settle out of court with Virginia Giuffre grabbed all the headlines. But the most far-reaching legal activity this week may have taken place in London rather than New York, with disturbing implications for the freedom of the press. On Wednesday, in a landmark privacy case, the UK supreme court ruled that suspects in a criminal investigation have the right not to be named in the media, prior to charges being brought against them. On that basis, it rejected an appeal against a previous high court judgment by Bloomberg News, which was found to have breached the privacy rights of a US business executive by naming him as the subject of a criminal inquiry. In one sense, this was nothing new. The judgment merely confirmed a direction of travel that began a decade ago with the Leveson inquiry. The phone-hacking scandal that led to Leveson came to symbolise the excesses of intrusive and prurient reporting by the tabloid press in particular. In its wake, the concept of privacy – outlined in article 8 of the European convention on human rights – has been interpreted ever more broadly and generously by courts. The right to free expression – and the freedom of the press to report – has correspondingly taken a back seat. In 2018, in the most high-profile case of this type, the high court ruled that the BBC broke privacy law by identifying Sir Cliff Richard as being under investigation over allegations of sexual abuse. He was never arrested or charged. The potential harm to named suspects who are never charged was always capable of being recognised through a defamation claim. But in the way they choose to balance the competing rights of privacy and freedom of expression, these legal judgments reflect the changed perspectives and priorities of the post-Leveson decade. Wednesday’s ruling was a sign that the pendulum has swung too far towards the suppression of information which is of legitimate public interest. The Bloomberg case concerned a criminal investigation into the business activities of an executive in a large public company with investors, customers and shareholders. As the news organisation’s editor-in-chief pointed out in a written response, extending the scope of privacy law to this extent will hobble investigative journalism into corporate wrongdoing. From the Libor banking scandal to the exposure of accounting fraud at Wirecard, the public value of such reporting has been repeatedly demonstrated. Nor is it advisable to throw a cloak of secrecy over police investigations, shielding them from the public gaze and accountability. Perhaps most importantly, an excessive legal presumption in favour of privacy removes the possibility of publicity leading to new testimony, as members of the public come forward. This was the way that Harvey Weinstein was brought to justice after decades of sexual predation. The Bloomberg verdict made clear that there may be cases in which the naming of suspects is in the public interest. But this judgment sends an unequivocal message that the threshold of justification will be intimidatingly, prohibitively high. The right to privacy and protection from reputational damage is in danger of becoming a catch-all instrument with which the powerful and wealthy can erect a screen around the entirety of their lives and shut down scrutiny. A healthy democracy requires a better balance to be struck between the freedom of the press and the right to privacy.Ending all Covid restrictions is premature and “not based on current evidence”, the British Medical Association has said, as experts warned dropping testing and self-isolation could lead to a surge in cases. Boris Johnson told MPs last week that he was preparing to lift the legal requirement in England to self-isolate on 24 February, a month earlier than originally planned, with a formal announcement expected on Monday. The prime minister is keen to claim victory for weathering the Omicron wave and placate lockdown-sceptics on his backbenches, who object to legal restrictions on daily life. But Dr Chaand Nagpaul, chair of the BMA council, said the decision was “not based on current evidence and is premature,” adding: “It clearly hasn’t been guided by data or done in consultation with the healthcare profession.” He said case rates remained exceptionally high, with the latest Office for National Statistics survey suggesting one in 20 people in England were infected last week. Ending self-isolation will form part of the government’s strategy for living with Covid, which is also expected to include the winding down of free mass testing for the virus. Ministers will hammer out the final details in discussions over the weekend. Rishi Sunak, the chancellor, has been pushing for a more rapid end to the costly testing regime, with Sajid Javid, the health secretary, keen to retain aspects of it for longer. The Guardian understands there are concerns within the NHS about some proposals under consideration, including dropping regular asymptomatic testing for healthcare workers, and restricting the use of the most effective PCR tests in hospitals to symptomatic patients, with others relying on cheaper lateral flow devices. Chris Hopson of NHS Providers said it was right for ministers to make decisions about the next steps, but Monday’s plan “can’t simply be a celebration about the removal of restrictions”. He said: “We have invested significant resource in creating effective testing and surveillance regimes that have been key parts of our defence in this highly uncertain environment. Whilst trust leaders recognise the ongoing cost of these regimes, they are clear that the government should err strongly on the side of caution before dismantling or scaling them back.” Experts on the government’s scientific pandemic influenza group on modelling operational subgroup, known as SPI-M-O, which feeds into Sage, warned that ending testing and isolation could lead to a return to rapid epidemic growth of the virus. In a document released on Friday the group note that estimates from a modelling team at the University of Warwick suggest that a combination of measures and behavioural change such as testing, self-isolation, mask wearing and increased home working are currently reducing transmission by approximately 20%-45%. “Warwick’s estimates are equivalent to there being the potential for transmission to increase by between around 25% and 80% if the population were to return to pre-pandemic behaviours and no mitigations,” the document says. “Warwick’s analysis indicates that, while behaviour change following the lifting of restrictions has previously been gradual, a sudden change, such as an end to testing and isolation, has the scope to lead to a return to rapid epidemic growth.” The group add that factors such as waning immunity, seasonality and the emergence of new variants could also affect transmission, either driving it up or down, adding that BA.2 – a close cousin of Omicron that is increasing in prevalence in the UK – may have a growth advantage over other forms of the variant. “If this were the case, it is possible that SPI-M-O’s medium-term projections may underestimate the short-term trajectory of hospitalisations,” the group wrote. A Department of Health and Social Care spokesperson said: “We continue to monitor the data closely and next week we will set out our plans on how we will live with Covid-19 in the long term.” Labour and trade unions are calling on the government to improve sick pay, to ensure that low-paid workers don’t feel forced to go into work while suffering from Covid-19, once the legal restrictions are lifted.If Boris Johnson’s recent reshuffle had an overarching purpose it was to show Conservative MPs that a beleaguered prime minister was listening to them. This is the perspective in which the most eye-catching ministerial move, the appointment of Jacob Rees-Mogg as minister for “Brexit opportunities”, should also primarily be seen. Mr Johnson wants his MPs to be reassured that his faith in Brexit is undiminished and that he has installed another ardent leaver at his side after the departure of Lord Frost. What is less clear, though, is exactly what Mr Rees-Mogg is there to do. He has not simply taken over from Lord Frost, whose responsibility for negotiations with the EU was transferred to the foreign secretary, Liz Truss. But Mr Rees-Mogg’s extended job title gives a clue; in addition to his Brexit promotion role, he is also in charge of “government efficiency”. Mr Johnson is said to have told him to draft an action plan with “1,000 regulations we want to get rid of”. What might these burdensome regulations actually be? On the Cabinet Office website, there is still a blank under the heading “Responsibilities”. On his first day in his new post, Mr Rees-Mogg was reduced to writing an article in the Sun in which he asked readers to suggest EU regulations that they would like to see abolished. But, in the same article, he made clear that his own view of “Brexit opportunities” is largely about economic and financial deregulation. He wants, he wrote, to lead a drive to scrap “obsolete laws”, to diverge from EU rules, and to cut “the red tape that binds your hands”. This is familiar stuff from the referendum campaign. But in nearly six years since the vote it has proved a vacuous and dishonest approach to policy. The reality of Brexit – in farming, fishing, road haulage, housebuilding, medicines and care homes among others, to say nothing of commercial links with Northern Ireland – has been more law, more rules and more red tape, not less. All derive from Mr Johnson’s desire to appease fanatics like Mr Rees-Mogg by leaving the free trading arrangements of the EU. At the end of January, the government produced a glossy 105-page publication called The Benefits of Brexit. The report is full of inflated and unsubstantiated claims. It celebrates four categories of change as the clear benefits of Brexit which are in fact no such thing: some are changes which the UK could have made as an EU member; others are indeed a result of Brexit but are disadvantages; a third group are unlikely ever to be made for practical and competitive reasons; and there is a final category that, as Professor Stephen Weatherill of Oxford University puts it, offers “little more than pie in the sky”. Mr Rees-Mogg’s own view of “Brexit opportunities” is deregulatory. His goal is to reduce legal controls on employers, markets and wealth. This is perhaps not surprising given that he is a major shareholder in an investment firm, Somerset Capital, which specialises in the emerging markets in which he is now tasked with finding “Brexit opportunities” for Britain. But this is at odds with Mr Johnson’s commitments to levelling up and to higher levels of government spending. Mr Rees-Mogg’s appointment may primarily be aimed at stopping Conservative backbenchers from ousting the prime minister. But he could do a lot of serious social damage in this role too.Storm Eunice has left much of Britain’s transport services unable to operate, with railways blocked by fallen trees, with the sea whipped too rough for ferries and extreme gusts of wind making airports perilous for landing. A day that started with police, operators and transport authorities urging motorists and rail passengers to stay at home ended with much of that advice vindicated, as engineers struggled in vain to keep railways open and airlines having to belatedly cancel hundreds of flights. Rail Many train services had been cancelled before Eunice hit the UK, in anticipation of widespread disruption. Transport for Wales stopped all trains across the country for the first time, while Network Rail had slapped 50mph speed limits on most of the functioning railway to limit the risk from falling debris. That restriction meant long delays on key intercity routes into London from the Midlands and the north, and fewer trains running. But as the day went on, an increasing number of lines were shut, mainly owing to falling trees blocking tracks or pulling down overhead wires. While Network Rail deployed teams of engineers ready to clear and repair damage, the incidents were stacking up too fast – about 30 trees on the South Western network alone by early afternoon. Southeastern soon also announced all its lines were closed. Services into several London stations, including Waterloo, and later Euston, King’s Cross and St Pancras International, were suspended for parts of the day. Great Western services into Paddington were all but ended, with lines in Devon and Cornwall, at the other end, shut in advance. Public transport authorities in Manchester and London, to where the Met Office extended its red weather warning on Friday, urged people to avoid non-essential journeys. London Overground services were disrupted by high winds in the morning, and tracks in east London were later blocked by fallen trees. Rail firms had urged passengers to rebook for Saturday, but by the end of the day Network Rail said there was no guarantee that the disruption would be over by the weekend, and passengers should check before travel on Saturday to see if services had been restored. Despite snow in Scotland, ScotRail, which was badly affected by Storm Dudley earlier this week, ran many services. Road Motoring organisations said roads were not as affected as feared – largely because of lower volumes of traffic, with many apparently heeding the advice they and the police dispensed: to stay home because of the danger of high winds. Major crossings were closed – including all of the Severn crossings into Wales, for the first time, along with the Humber and Dartford Bridge crossings. A number of roads were blocked by fallen trees, including parts of the A303 and several lanes of the M4. The M5 was partially blocked by an overturned lorry. Other roads including the A66 cross-Pennine route and the M8 between Edinburgh and Glasgow were partially closed, due to snow, but reopened later in the day. Air While airlines had been optimistic that most services would operate, the storm eventually caused hundreds of flights to be cancelled by British Airways and others. Nearly 400 flights in and out of the UK were cancelled by 3pm Friday, according to data from the aviation analytics firm Cirium, largely at Heathrow and London City airport, the latter being closed altogether. A number of arrivals were diverted or had extreme difficulty in landing at Heathrow and Gatwick airports in high winds. Several planes were unable to touch down at Heathrow at first attempt, including a Qatar Airways A380 that took three approaches to land. Worse befell passengers on an on easyJet flight from Bordeaux to London Gatwick, who had to endure two aborted landings before their pilot decided to return to Bordeaux, landing more than three hours after takeoff. Sea Extremely rough seas led to ferry services being suspended around Britain. P&amp;O Ferries suspended all cross-Channel sailings between Dover and Calais until further notice, advising passengers not to travel to Dover port on Friday. Ferry services across the Irish Sea from Belfast to Scotland and Dublin to Wales were cancelled. Isle of Wight ferry services were also suspended. Main bridges into Cornwall and across the Thames were closed because of high winds. Both the Severn crossings into Wales, the Severn bridge and the Prince of Wales bridge on the M4, were closed. Other roads including the A66 cross-Pennine route and the M8 between Edinburgh and Glasgow were partially closed.A woman who stole £4.2m worth of diamonds by swapping them for pebbles has been ordered to pay back less than £250. Lulu Lakatos, 60, is serving a five-and-a-half year jail sentence after she was found guilty of conspiracy to steal in 2021. Southwark crown court heard she posed as “Anna”, a gem expert, in order to steal seven stones from the Mayfair jewellers Boodles, after being sent to value them on behalf of supposed wealthy buyers. The diamonds were to be placed in a padlocked purse and held in the store’s vault until funds were transferred. CCTV footage from the firm’s basement showed the moment the purse was put into Lakatos’s handbag and switched for a duplicate by an accomplice in 2016. Less than three hours after the switch, Lakatos and her accomplices fled the UK for France. When the purse in the Boodles safe was opened the following day, inside were seven small garden pebbles. The real diamonds have never been recovered. A proceeds of crime hearing on Friday was told Romanian-born Lakatos, from Saint-Brieuc, Brittany, is expected to be extradited back to France. Judge Alexander Milne QC said: “As far as the figures are concerned, there is a striking contrast between the benefit figure of £4,299,671 and the available assets of €293.57[£244].” Since the money has already been seized, he set a one-day default sentence with a month to pay. Christophe Stankovic and Mickael Jovanovic, who were involved in the plot, were jailed for three years and eight months after pleading guilty to conspiracy to steal. Prosecutors said it was the highest-value theft of its kind ever committed in the UK. Lakatos was wanted in Switzerland for an almost identical plot, where an envelope containing €400,000 was switched for a duplicate filled with paper. Lakatos has three previous convictions for theft in France. She arrived in London the day before the theft and was seen on CCTV with Georgeta Danila, 53, entering the Cricklewood Lodge hotel in London, before making a reconnaissance trip to Boodles with Stankovic and Jovanovic. Danila was acquitted after telling a jury she had no idea she had been involved in the crime.British intelligence, so used to operating in the shadows, has been thrust into the spotlight during the Ukraine crisis, cited by Boris Johnson on Wednesday to warn that Russian troop numbers were still increasing or by the foreign secretary, Liz Truss, last month to warn of a possible coup in Kyiv. As the crisis has intensified, the warnings have, if anything, become even less subtle. An extraordinary video released on Thursday by the Ministry of Defence, billed in capital letters as an “intelligence update”, included a Dad’s Army-style map showing a possible Russian invasion plan and other assessments aimed at the general public. A female narrator carefully intones “our intelligence tells us” that Russia has been rapidly been building up forces near Ukraine’s border – as has been documented by independent analysts – and that “an invasion could happen within days”. On Twitter the two-minute clip has been viewed more than 66,000 times. Behind the scenes the effort has been matched by a string of off-the-record briefings from which information has emerged, supported by quotes sourced to officials. It marks an unusually determined and focused effort to seize control of the Ukraine story from the Kremlin, traditionally considered expert in what is sometimes described as information warfare. “It’s a very different approach from the past, when intelligence and information was more closely guarded,” said Prof Malcolm Chalmers of the Rusi thinktank. “What Britain and the west have learned from the last Ukraine crisis in 2014 is that if you don’t actively use your intelligence to shape the narrative, then you will lose ground to Russia.” Russia’s seizure of the Crimea in 2014 appeared to come as something of a surprise to an apparently sleepy Nato. And the image of the military alliance was further damaged last summer during the chaotic withdrawal from Afghanistan, where the idea of a Taliban takeover was barely mentioned or discussed until the fall of Kabul. This time the thinking is that highlighting Vladimir Putin’s possible intentions leaves less room for Kremlin deniability. The west has for some time considered that Moscow is seeking to manufacture a provocation in Ukraine, a false flag, to justify an intervention – a concern that has heightened following false claims by Putin this week that there was “genocide” against Russians in Donbas. The UK supported US intelligence claims that Russia was considering making a “very graphic” video showing a faked drone attack to justify military intervention. “We are trying to expose Russian intent,” said one anonymous western official on Friday. They argued that any embarrassment from being wrong would be a small price to pay if Ukraine was not attacked. Nevertheless, bandying about intelligence assessments in the public domain can be fraught with difficulties. They are usually based around simple, headline-worthy conclusions – judging that a Russian attack was “highly likely”, as the UK defence secretary, Ben Wallace, said last weekend. But often these come with little or no supporting evidence, making it hard to convince a public who can still remember the exaggerated accusations made about Saddam Hussein’s Iraq in the run-up to the 2003 war. Russia, too, is ready to exploit misjudgments. This week Kremlin officials gleefully pointed out that no invasion of Ukraine came on Wednesday after some unwisely precise predictions had emerged from the US over the weekend. Russia’s foreign ministry spokesperson Maria Zakharova called on western media “to publish the schedule for our upcoming invasions for the year” so that she could plan her holidays. Yet the reality is that in the era of social media, full of analysts and commentators making their own judgments about satellite imagery and online videos, relative silence for Britain’s secretive intelligence community is not an option. “Communications and the information space is one of those areas you have to contest,” said one Whitehall insider, one Dad’s Army-style visual a time.Dizzee Rascal’s ex-fiancee has said she left the rapper because of “domestic abuse”, a court has heard. The rapper, whose real name is Dylan Kwabena Mills, denies assaulting Cassandra Jones at a residential property in Streatham, south London, on 8 June last year, as they argued about their children after their break-up. Mills, who attended the trial at Wimbledon magistrates court on Friday, had two children with Jones before they split up in February 2021. Helena Duong, the prosecutor, said the alleged assault occurred in “the context of a domestic dispute” about child contact during a “fairly chaotic scene” when he dropped off their daughter at the property. The court heard that during the incident, Mills allegedly barged his way into the house carrying their son, started “shouting and screaming”, “put his forehead against hers and pushed her around the room” and “pushed her to the ground”. The prosecution said that during the incident, Mills “became very angry and started acting erratically, banging his head three times on the fridge with his son in his arms”. But the defence, Sallie Bennett-Jenkins QC, questioned “inconsistencies” in several witness statements Jones had made about the incident. She asked the court to throw out the case because of “embellishments, exaggerations, inconsistencies and lies” in Jones’ evidence. “Ms Jones was prepared to say absolutely anything about the altercation, which was verbal, we say,” she said. Bennett-Jenkins argued that Jones had “accepted” she previously lied about how he had assaulted her. While questioning Jones, the lawyer asked why she wrote in her first police statement that Mills had “thrown her to the ground” instead of “pushed” or “barged” – as was now being used. Jones, who became increasingly upset throughout the cross-examination, said: “I was in shock about what had happened and I was still caring for both our babies. I’m sorry I used the wrong word but what happened happened and all I can do is speak my truth.” Bennett-Jenkins also questioned the account of Jones’ mother Dawn Kirk, who was present in the house during the argument. She said her daughter yelled that Mills “just pushed me” despite writing in her first statement that she screamed “he just dragged me across the floor” followed by Mills protesting “no I didn’t”. In his first police statement read out in court, Mills denied the allegations and accused his ex-fiancee of assaulting him. He said: “I did not push Cassandra to the floor. I did not push her forehead with my forehead. In fact, she assaulted me by pushing me and scratching my arm.” Meanwhile, the prosecution rejected Bennett-Jenkins’ argument that Jones was not a “credible” witness. District Judge Polly Gledhill then denied the defence’s request to toss out proceedings, saying: “At the moment I am satisfied that there is a case to be answered.” Mills, of Sevenoaks in Kent, who was charged on 2 August last year, denies assault by beating. He released his debut album, Boy in da Corner, aged 18 in 2003 and scored a string of No 1s, including Bonkers, and Dance wiv Me, on 2009’s Tongue n’ Cheek. He also performed at the London 2012 Olympics opening ceremony. The trial continues.A former French soldier has been sentenced to life in prison for the murder of an eight-year-old girl he abducted from a wedding reception near Chambery in the French Alps, which had triggered a six-month police search for the missing child that gripped France. Nordahl Lelandais, 39, who briefly worked as a military dog trainer in the French army, was convicted of the kidnapping and murder of the child, Maëlys De Araujo, who he had persuaded away from the wedding party and into his car in August 2017 while her parents and relatives were celebrating. Lelandais was described by the prosecution as a “psychopath” who presented “a complete danger to society”. He was also convicted of separate charges of the sexual abuse of two other children. Lelandais is already serving a prison sentence for the brutal beating to death of a serviceman who disappeared while hitchhiking in the same area months before the eight-year-old was abducted. In a statement to the court just before it retired to consider a verdict, Lelandais admitted all charges against him and offered an apology. “I know the families will never accept my excuses, but I present them with the greatest sincerity,” he said, adding that he understood the “lengthy” period of introspection ahead of him which he said he has already started. The lawyer for Maëlys De Araujo’s mother said he doubted Lelandais’ capacity “to have any introspection on the crimes he has committed”. Police had searched for months after the eight-year-old disappeared from the wedding reception where Lelandais was a guest. He denied any involvement until investigators found traces of the girl’s blood in his car. He finally led them to her remains in February 2018. But he has refused to give a coherent account of what took place or exactly how she died. During the trial, the groom at the wedding broke down as he described how he hadn’t seen Lelandais for several years and had only invited him to part of the wedding at the last minute on a whim when he had telephoned. The groom described the panic at the reception when the child, the daughter of his cousin, couldn’t be found. He said a happy day had turned into a neverending nightmare. Lelandais had been at an earlier part of the wedding and had asked to come back for the late-night wedding reception. Lelandais was convicted in May 2021 for the killing of Cpl Arthur Noyer in the early hours of 12 April 2017. He had picked up Noyer, 23, as he hitchhiked after leaving a nightclub in Chambery.When Jacqui Coleman heard that Australia’s largest coal-fired power station was to close seven years earlier than planned, she initially didn’t believe it. Coleman is a retail worker in Dora Creek, the closest suburb to the Eraring power station on the shores of Lake Macquarie in New South Wales. For years, she has been selling pies, coffees and sandwiches to some of the hundreds of workers who pass through the News ’n’ More grocery store on either side of a shift. On Thursday morning, Origin Energy announced it was bringing forward the station’s closure to 2025. Many workers at the site first learned their jobs were to be terminated seven years early when they heard it reported on the radio. As Coleman heard one customer after another talking about the news, she said “it hit home that it’s really happening”. “I feel for all of the people whose jobs are going to be lost, especially when some of them have been there for so long. What are they going to do?” she said. “I don’t think the boss is worried for the business because we’ve got enough of the community coming through. “But it’s the workers I worry about. They’ve got families as well. Who is going to support them?” Origin Energy said its decision reflected a rapidly changing energy market in which traditional power stations could not compete with cheaper, renewable options. The Nature Conservation Council of NSW estimated the exit of Eraring would avoid up to 87m tonnes of climate pollution, describing it as a “ray of hope for leaving a safe climate for our children”. But the council said the NSW and federal governments also had a task ahead of them to ensure a seamless transition for both the energy grid and communities affected by station closures. In the NSW Hunter region, four power stations are set to close – on current schedules – by 2033. AGL’s Liddell power station is first in 2023, followed by Eraring in 2025, Vales Point in 2029 and Bayswater no later than 2033. Governments have had years to prepare communities and workers for the transition to a green economy. And yet calls for action from the Lake Macquarie region have gone unanswered. Kay Fraser is the mayor of Lake Macquarie city council, which serves a population of 209,000 in centres including Belmont, Charlestown, Swansea, Toronto, Morriset and Warners Bay. She said the community was “devastated” by Thursday’s announcement, which would affect not only the 400 workers at the plant but thousands more in the supply chain, and the areas they live. “We’ve known this was coming but it’s like a train wreck,” she said. “What I want to see happen is a jobs package and transition package but I don’t want them to talk about it for two years. It needs to happen now.” The NSW treasurer, Matt Kean, has promised to announce a jobs package to support affected communities. Cory Wright, the NSW and ACT secretary of the Australian Manufacturing Workers’ Union, said that plan should have been ready when Origin made its announcement. “You can imagine that some of these workers had a 10-year plan in mind in which they were preparing to make a transition. That’s been cut down now,” he said. Wright said the union would be looking for a plan from Kean that supported not only the 400 directly affected workers but everyone downstream. “This has been bandied about for years, that’s how long we’ve been talking about a transition, and we’ve been begging employers and governments to put their money where their mouth is,” he said. The union’s NSW branch is one of the founders of the Hunter Jobs Alliance, a coalition of groups that historically have sometimes been at odds with each other. They include unions such as the Electrical Trades Union and the United Workers Union, alongside environment groups that have been pushing for a phase-out of coal power, among them the Lock the Gate Alliance, the Hunter Community Environment Centre and the Nature Conservation Council of NSW. For years, the jobs alliance has been pushing the NSW and federal government to establish a statutory authority to guide the massive shift in the region’s economy. Warrick Jordan, the alliance’s coordinator, said the first priority had to be workers and their families, some of whom had now had “their lives turned upside down”. “People have been advocating for years for a government authority and for specific programs to help workers and attract jobs,” he said. “If the closure of Australia’s biggest power station, with the loss of 400 jobs, isn’t a trigger for a Hunter Valley transition authority and workers support and investment attraction, then I don’t know what is.” Georgina Woods, usually known for her work with Lock the Gate, represents the Nature Conservation Council on the jobs alliance. Woods, who lives in Newcastle, said the Origin announcement was “a travesty” that could have been avoided were it not for Australia’s toxic climate politics. Instead, there was no architecture in place to support workers. “We can’t afford to let long term structural and environmental issues of this kind be held to ransom by the political process and elections,” she said. She pointed to the closure of BHP’s steelworks in Newcastle in the 90s, which took years of planning and attention to pathways for workers. “There was money from the federal government, there was investment in building stuff in Newcastle to provide new opportunities. It was a massive undertaking,” she said. “This [closure] is three years away. Origin needs to create a fund now that will be used to help the workforce transition and help the community of western Lake Macquarie.” Greg Piper is the independent state MP for Lake Macquarie. His son works at the Eraring site as a contractor. He said Origin’s decision was a welcome one for the climate and acknowledged there were people who would happily see the station close even sooner. “I have always supported a move away from coal but the fact is, the workers and this power station have been the heavy lifters in giving energy security to NSW,” he said. Piper said there would be workers who had qualifications that were not readily transferable and who would require retraining. He said it was important such opportunities allowed people to keep living in the region. “We can’t be patronising and say we’re going to offer you the opportunity to retrain and can you please move 100km away,” he said. “We’ve got to find opportunities for investment to keep people here.”Back in the Howard era, we used to talk about dog whistles. The point about dog whistles is they are subtle things. The sound is supposed to be inaudible to humans. Scott Morrison holds power in a much noisier era. Everybody shouts, the prime minister loudest of all. There was nothing subtle or inaudible about the penultimate sitting week of the current parliament. It was one of the ugliest political weeks in recent memory. The short version of this story is Morrison weaponised national security. The prime minister knows a significant chunk of voters don’t yet have a settled view about Anthony Albanese, so, generously, he filled in some blanks. Albanese was weak. He was sneaky. He was China’s candidate for the prime ministership, which of course made him deeply suspect. Morrison was very obviously trying to outrun the leaks and the disaster of the previous week. Trying to stay one step ahead of conservatives furious about his failure to deliver the religious discrimination package. Trying to keep level pegging with Peter Dutton, who is auditioning for the top job. Most of all, trying to capture the attention of disengaged voters who determine the outcome of elections, and consume their politics in broad brush strokes. Trying, like a boss. As Jenny Morrison shared about her husband on last Sunday’s 60 Minutes program, the prime minister is very task orientated. His current task orientation is twofold: don’t die wondering about whether you can pull off the second coming, and don’t worry too much about what it might cost. If you were watching the week, you’ll already know Morrison’s pre-campaign framing of Albanese and Labor was about as subtle as a meat axe. It was also reckless and destructive enough to trigger rare public pushback from Canberra’s national security establishment – both past and present. What you might have missed was Morrison’s pep talk to the party room on Tuesday. That was also pretty extraordinary, but in the cacophonous quest to unmask the Manchurian Candidate, it got much less coverage. A few quick points to explain this convention. Government MPs meet every Tuesday when the parliament sits. These discussions nominally happen behind closed doors, but the meeting is semi-public in the sense that a government MP provides a background briefing to journalists afterwards about the subjects canvassed, usually with a prime ministerial staffer hovering in the background. Now – to what Morrison said. There was an implicit apology from the prime minister. “You haven’t seen me as focused as I can be yet.” Morrison said he intended to get sharper. He gave MPs a predictable lecture about unity. Then he gave an unvarnished explication of the government’s immediate political objectives. Reviving the character test legislation (which makes it easier for the immigration minister to cancel visas) would highlight “the risk of Labor” more than any other piece of legislation, Morrison told his MPs. If Labor could oblige the government by voting against that measure, that would deliver some “sharp contrast”. Morrison urged his colleagues to put “the starkness of the choice in front of the Australian people”. The prime minister said: “I know how to do that, and I know that is how you win elections. I know what the path is and I’ll be following it.” I said a moment ago this contribution was extraordinary. Best explain. Extraordinary at two levels, I reckon. The first was how naked Morrison’s objectives were. A lot of political leaders would feel compelled to dress up their intraday political tactics in more lofty terms, particularly when the tactics are reductionist and brutal. But not Morrison. He relishes the mechanics. They aren’t a means to an end. They are the end. Which brings us to the second point. All of the focus in Tuesday’s presentation seemed to be on the nuts and bolts of winning. How you compete for attention in the attention economy. How you tenderise your opponents before landing the knockout blow. Lots about the how. Seemingly absent in Tuesday’s tutorial was the why. Some MPs wondered whether Morrison would get around to articulating a purpose for winning. Obviously there is an implicit purpose: keeping Labor out of office. When everything is this bareknuckle, and tribal, when cortisol levels are raised to the levels we witnessed this week, mired in the thrum of fight or flight, I guess that would feel like a goal of sorts. But it’s not at all clear what the agenda of a fourth-term Coalition government would look like, or even what this disparate group of people sitting behind the banner of the Liberal and National parties would want it to be. Thus far, the government’s pitch for retaining office is all backward looking. Morrison won’t care about the hole in the middle of the doughnut. He won an election three years ago with no policy, and no pitch, apart from Bill Shorten is the bill Australia can’t afford. I suspect a concrete agenda creates liabilities for a prime minister who wants to be able to pivot with maximum speed until he hits the precise formula to drag the Coalition across the line. If you think this last point is an overstatement, or a cynical eyeroll, just think about this past month, where Morrison has lurched between we must get government out of people’s faces, right now, because who needs government – to come to Big Daddy. Only a Coalition government is sufficiently present and muscular to save you from Xi Jinping and his useful idiots in Australia. Whiplash is for wimps. Morrison also won’t care about the institutional backlash that has accompanied his tactical hysteria this week. That’s a transaction cost of changing the conversation from deaths in aged care to national security. If the current play doesn’t work, he’ll pivot again. But out in the real world, voters really are entitled to know whether this government has a plan for them and for the country that extends beyond Morrison’s inveterate brinkmanship. Given Morrison hasn’t really articulated the why, funny then that the media narrative casts Albanese as the small target actor. It’s fair enough of course. The Labor leader is a small target. When the communist hunters rolled into Canberra looking for scalps, Albanese rolled Labor up into a tiny ball. Labor waved the character test legislation through the House of Representatives this week, and when the government regrouped around a second security wedge, a proposal to increase maximum sentences for firearms trafficking and mandatory minimum sentences of five years in prison offences, Labor promptly suspended standing orders to debate the bill, which then passed the lower house without opposition. The government had hoped for a succession of speeches from Labor MPs objecting to mandatory sentencing, given the current party platform is unequivocal. It states: “Labor opposes mandatory sentencing.” When it was obvious that wasn’t going to happen, Dutton crunched the proposal through to the third reading so it would clear the lower house without the political inconvenience of Labor being seen to support it. So small target, absolutely. But Labor does have policy out there that begins to map a story about the future. Albanese told the house this week the pandemic had shaped Labor’s policy thinking. A public health emergency was “an opportunity to take a step back and think about how you should emerge from the crisis even stronger”. “We in the opposition have been doing just that,” he said. His objective was creating “a better future for Australia as we emerge from this crisis – a stronger economy that lifts up living standards, delivers for working people and is more resilient going forward”. Albanese listed policy commitments Labor has already rolled out in energy and emissions reduction, enhancing sovereign capability in manufacturing, 475,000 free vocational education places in areas of skills shortages and 20,000 additional university places, additional health spending, an expansion of the national broadband network, and cheaper childcare. The Labor leader has the bedrock in place for a campaign. Albanese’s core strategy of surviving until the time comes to live has kept Labor in the contest. What remains to be seen, though, is whether Albanese can find an extra gear. He’ll need it, because Morrison isn’t bringing a knife to a gunfight.The United Australia party has been criticised for picturing one of its candidates in military uniform in political advertisements, an act defence advocates say is “wrong” and could be interpreted as suggesting defence support for the party. Clive Palmer’s UAP is again running a vast number of candidates across every lower house seat. This week, the UAP used full-page ads in major Australian newspapers to publish the names, mobile phone numbers and pictures of each candidate. One of the candidates, Benjamin Britton, who is running in the New South Wales electorate of Cunningham, was pictured wearing a beret. Defence has in previous elections warned political candidates against using their military uniform to campaign for political office, saying it threatens the independence of the Australian Defence Force. In 2019, it sent official notices to former military members standing for election, warning them against appearing in uniform during campaigning. The Australia Defence Association, an independent watchdog monitoring defence matters, criticised the UAP for picturing Britton in the beret, saying it was “wrong” and should cease. ADA executive director, Neil James, said the beret appears to be an older version of the beret worn by 3rd battalion, Royal Australian Regiment, indicating Britton is a veteran. James said representing military service in such a fashion, where it was the only available image of the candidate, suggested to voters that the ADF supports the person’s candidacy. He said the practice, if allowed to continue, risked politicising the military. “You’ve got to condemn this. No one will support this. No one in defence,” he said. “It’s wrong, I don’t care about how proud he is about his service, it’s wrong to misrepresent the ADF as endorsing his candidacy.” Britton, who did not respond to a request for comment, is not the first to use military uniform in this way. In 2016, the veteran turned Liberal MP for Canning, Andrew Hastie, was ousted from the army reserve for using campaign banners portraying him in uniform. At the time he defended their use, saying: “It’s just a hint at, ‘Hey, for the past 13 years, I’ve been serving in uniform’ and my formative experiences as a leader were with the Australian Defence Force’.” The ADA made the same criticism in 2020 when Scott Morrison used images of the military in advertisements about the government’s bushfire response. “It’s simple. You don’t use the defence force for party political advantage,” James said at the time. A number of other candidates either work with Palmer or are related to him. Martin Brewster, Palmer’s nephew and Queensland Nickel procurement director, is running for the Senate. James McDonald, also running for the Senate, was Palmer’s chief of staff and has worked for Palmer in other businesses. Domenic Martino, the party’s lead Senate candidate in NSW, also serves as an executive for several mining and gas companies, including coalminer Cokal.