Anthony McCarten’s new play is an odd bromance between two art world legends, Andy Warhol and Jean-Michel Basquiat. Like McCarten’s The Pope (adapted into the Oscar-nominated film The Two Popes), it is based on real-life figures at ideological odds, this time in a more volatile head-to-head. Warhol recently popped up, as a familiar figure in a fright wig, in James Graham’s 1960s political drama Best of Enemies at the Young Vic. He is back on the same stage now, played by Paul Bettany in the actor’s first theatrical appearance for more than 20 years. The story is set in the 1980s when the middle-aged pop artist and the spirited young painter collaborated on a series of works, their partnership pitched as a boxing match in its marketing poster. “He’s old hat,” says Jeremy Pope’s Basquiat. His paintings are “so ugly and angry,” says Bettany’s Warhol. Yet they are persuaded to come together, this play dramatising their first day in the studio and what appears to be their last. An ebullient production under Kwame Kwei-Armah’s direction (there is even a live DJ though, oddly, the music is only cranked up in between scenes), it has two star turns in the central performances and a spectacular set from Anna Fleischle: paint-splattered floorboards and white brick walls which recreate the look of a loft studio. Duncan McLean’s magnificent projections conjure the New York skyline on semi-diaphanous panels. The friendship between the artists is a fascinating one – far spikier than in Julian Schnabel’s 1996 biopic Basquiat – but it does not have the same quietly cumulative force as that in The Two Popes. The first half is stilted – deliberately so – but feels a little slow and static, the artists talking about the purpose of art and the meanings it holds for them. Much of this feels overfamiliar, especially Warhol’s soup tins, the commodification of art and his vision of the artist as a brand. None of it feels mined deeply enough, and exposition glares through at times: Warhol makes a quip about the shooting that nearly killed him; Basquiat tells us what his former graffiti tag, Samo, stood for. The conversation feels as familiar as the Marilyn Monroe silk-screens that hang at the back of the room and seems to tiptoe around points of conflict rather than going in with both feet. The second half is far more animated with intellectual arguments running alongside the human drama of their jagged friendship. There are several arresting moments, with a shocking plotline about a Black street artist beaten into a coma by police officers which also refers back to Basquiat’s identity as a Black American of Puerto Rican and Haitian heritage. The gulf between the first and second acts feels wide, though, and we wish for a smoother arc between the two, which might fill us in on the formation of the intense relationship we see at the end. There are gusts of rage, accusation and mistrust between them, the emotional volatility of the second act all the louder against the quiet of the first. Warhol’s objectification of Basquiat is powerfully conveyed, with all the racialised overtones – he speaks of him as a Haitian immigrant (“No, I’m an American,” says Basquiat), and calls his works “primal” (“Do you mean like a primate?” shoots back Basquiat in a line spoken in Schnabel’s biopic but better explored here). Bettany and Pope do so much more than merely ventriloquising their celebrity parts. Bettany captures Warhol’s tics – his gawkiness and gormless stares with a deadpan streak of cynicism. He is a far more rounded character than David Bowie’s amusingly eccentric Warhol in Schnabel’s film and steers clear of caricature but certainly brings humour. Pope, meanwhile, gives us a seductive, childlike free spirit in his Basquiat but remains – maybe deliberately – more of an enigma. Their collaboration is very much a story for our age of Twitter battles and irreconcilable ideological differences. Despite their charged rows, they do not stop talking or working together, and the final, touching, portrait of them is one of love. • The Collaboration is at the Young Vic, London, until 2 April.Rape survivors who report their attackers are being systematically failed by the criminal justice system resulting in an average wait of nearly two years before a trial begins, a damning official report has found. A joint inspection by two government watchdogs has identified multiple failings in the process from reporting a rape to a possible trial and conviction of an assailant. A lack of collaboration between police and prosecutors has led to months of delays and poor communication with accusers, HM Inspectorate of Constabulary and Fire and Rescue Services (HMICFRS) and HM Crown Prosecution Service Inspectorate (HMCPSI) said. It took an average of nearly 706 days between reporting an offence to police and the start of a criminal trial, the report said, with rape survivors facing repeated delays and cancellations. One case took 16 years to reach court due to “an apparent lack of evidence”, despite the presence of DNA at the scene. Wendy Williams, HM inspector of constabulary, and Andrew Cayley QC, HM chief inspector of the Crown Prosecution Inspectorate, said the current situation for rape survivors could not continue. “Rape victims are continually and systematically failed by the criminal justice system,” they said. “We found many hardworking professionals who are dedicated to supporting victims and pursuing perpetrators, but we also found some deep divisions between the police and prosecutors which must be overcome.” The report examined 556 files from the police and the Crown Prosecution Service, evidence from interviews, and survey responses from 135 survivors and victim support services. Inspectors found that most forces and CPS areas were still listing rape cases as “floaters”, or “backers”, meaning that they could be moved or re-scheduled at the last minute, including on the day of trial. One victim told the inspectors: ““I had 21 court delays, most at 24-hours’ notice. A trial that I was told would take four days took 10 months. It was almost unendurable.” The report echoed long-held concerns that survivors often felt they were the ones being investigated or standing trial, rather than the focus being on the accused. Another survivor, whose attacker was allowed to travel abroad while he awaited trial, said: “He was out there drinking around females. He was able to go abroad on holidays. “I thought: how is it that I am here, I am financially ruined, I am severely traumatised, and barely keeping it together, and yet the system allows him to just go off and do what he wants?” The government apologised following the publication of its rape review last summer, and said it aimed to reverse its dire record on serious sexual offending, convictions for which have plummeted. Figures released earlier this year showed that in the 12 months to September 2021, only 1.3% of the 63,136 rape offences recorded by police resulted in a suspect being charged. The report made a number of recommendations, including creating either temporary or permanent specialist rape courts within the next three months to help clear the case backlog. It also suggested the police and the CPS should work together to ensure that a defendant’s “bad character” is considered in all rape cases following anecdotal evidence that prosecutors and investigators missed opportunities to present such evidence before the courts. Responding to the report, Max Hill QC, the director of public prosecutions, said he accepted the findings. “Strong collaboration between prosecutors and police is vital, and we have a strong joint commitment to improve how we work together so that we can drive up the number of rape cases we bring to court. “We are undertaking extensive work to bring about urgent change, and to improve the support given to victims – working with support services we will improve communication and better understand how we can help victims through the legal system so they can give their best evidence,” he said. Dominic Raab, the deputy prime minister and justice secretary, said the government also accepted the findings. “This is a sobering and considered analysis. We accept the findings, and will look at how best to address them in the most rigorous and effective way possible. “The government is absolutely determined to give victims greater support and swifter justice – and ensure they see their attackers punished.”The Covid vaccination rollout saved 128,000 lives, inoculated more people than expected and was good value for money at £8.3bn, a major Whitehall report says. Despite its success, 3.7 million people are unvaccinated and “substantial risks” to programme’s future success remain, including the need to settle who delivers jabs in the months to come, because NHS staff already have jobs, according to the National Audit Office. The spending watchdog praised everyone involved in the vaccine programme in England, including the taskforce ministers assembled, NHS England and what at its peak was the army of 60,000 vaccinators and 65,000 volunteers and administrative staff needed for such a huge undertaking. The taskforce, which was initially headed by Kate Bingham, secured early supplies of available vaccines and ensured supplies were maintained throughout the pandemic, it said. “The vaccine programme met stretching and unprecedented targets to offer two doses of Covid-19 vaccine to most adults in a short space of time,” the NAO said in an assessment of how the programme unfolded between its inception in 2020 to the end of October 2021. For example, by last July NHS England had achieved all its key deployment targets, including offering all adults a second dose by 19 July. “Uptake has exceeded expectations”, noted the NAO, the 87m doses administered by the end of October six times more than the number of winter flu jabs the NHS usually delivers. By early last summer 96% of people who had had the vaccine felt positively about being vaccinated. “The speed and uptake of the vaccine should be considered a real success,” said Meg Hillier, the Labour MP who chairs the Commons public accounts committee. “Great credit is due to all those involved, including the scientists creating the vaccines, the national bodies involved in securing the doses we needed and all those administering the jabs.” NHS planners and vaccination site staff displayed “goodwill, flexibility and dedication” to ensure the number of centres needed were set up and ran smoothly, the NAO added. However, “lower vaccination rates persist in some groups”, notably those aged between 18 and 29, some people from minority ethnic backgrounds, including those of Chinese and black Caribbean origin, and also mothers-to-be, despite campaigns intended to prompt take-up among them. And although the government pledged to vaccinate most 12- to 15-year-olds by late October 2021, only 25% were jabbed by that date because of “challenges to this rollout”. The vaccination drive has cost £8.3bn in the two years since the pandemic struck, the NAO said – the first time this figure has been disclosed. Of that, £4.6bn went to the taskforce, which it spent mostly in vaccines, and the other £3.7bn on the rollout. Although 4.6m doses have been wasted, that represents just 4% of the total number made available so far and is far below the 15% to 20% wastage expected. About 1.9m doses of the AstraZeneca vaccine had to be written off when the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation said it should not be given to those under 40 amid safety fears. The NAO warned that there was “considerable risks to the programme’s continuing success” include staffing, staff burnout and “the lack of surplus capacity in the healthcare system generally”. Ruth Rankine, director of primary care at the NHS Confederation, said: “Despite a multitude of hurdles primary care has consistently shown just how fast and agile it can be delivering 87m vaccinations in less than a year to October 2021 and a further 38m boosters this winter. This is a truly incredible achievement.”1) A planned impromptu drinks break Although it may be coincidence, someone far more observant than this column recently noticed that Southampton appear to have devised a clever, completely legal mid-game tactic that involves one of their players going down “injured” and in apparent need of medical attention between the 60th and 70th minute, at which point their teammates adjourn to the sideline to receive energy gels and tactical instruction from Ralph Hasenhüttl and his backroom team. Should it occur on Friday evening, we can but hope it won’t be the most interesting talking point to arise from their match against Norwich, but it has piqued our curiosity and is the first of our now traditional 10 things to look out for this weekend. BG Southampton v Norwich City, Friday 8pm (all times GMT) 2) Toffees still in sticky situation With Liverpool otherwise engaged at Wembley, Manchester City have a chance to reopen a six-point lead at the top. In Frank Lampard they take on a former City player; the manager’s single, 2014-15 season in Manchester a forgotten coda to his long spell at Chelsea. Beating Leeds 3-0 two weeks ago lent optimism to his new Everton regime, only for last week’s 2-0 defeat at Southampton to reintroduce the Goodison gloom. Leeds conceding nine goals in their next two matches further deepened it, and all four of the teams below Everton in the table have been in better form over the past five matches. That Leeds and Brentford are on more of a slide may ease some of the nerves but Everton are in their deepest relegation trouble since the 2001-02 season when David Moyes was brought in to escape the drop. In such a situation, a wounded, motivated City feel the opposite of the ideal opponents to face. JB Everton v Manchester City, Saturday 5.30pm 3) Watford need another turning point When Watford beat Manchester United 4-1 at Vicarage Road in November to bring down the guillotine on Ole Gunnar Solskjær’s spell in Old Trafford’s managerial hotseat, they sat 16th in the league, as close to eighth-placed United as they were to the bottom three with the season nearly a third of the way through. It was a turning point in both sides’ campaigns: since then only Manchester City and Liverpool have outperformed United, who have taken 29 points from 14 games, while not until last Saturday did Watford win another game, and their five points from 13 is, on a points per game basis, not far off twice as bad as Everton, the next worst-performing team in the division (0.38 v 0.63). It goes without saying that the Hornets desperately need another turning point but though Roy Hodgson has brought greater defensive organisation, he has not eliminated individual mistakes, has reduced the side’s attacking ambition, and salvation looks as distant as ever. SB Manchester United v Watford, Saturday 3pm 4) Weary resignation at Elland Road Antonio Conte and Marcelo Bielsa have both recently admitted they are struggling to justifying their large salaries and when Leeds host Tottenham on Saturday, the game is likely to be a Derby della Despair for one of them in the event of any outcome other than a draw. While Tottenham go into the game as hot favourites, only a wild optimist would bet heavily on them to prevail despite the porousness of their hosts’ defence. While Bielsa’s future is constantly clouded in uncertainty, Friday’s press conference will reveal if his opposite number has calmed down since his very public existential crisis in the wake of midweek defeat at Burnley. As rare as the sight of elite managers falling on their swords might be, it would be massively surprising if the result of this Saturday’s lunchtime game prompted one of the Premier League’s two more impassioned leaders to decide the jig is up. BG Leeds v Tottenham, Saturday 12.30pm 5) Bees crying out for saviour to lead them to safety At some point during this relegation six-pointer, Christian Eriksen is expected to make his first appearance for Brentford. Almost certainly as a substitute, he will return to top-level football eight months after he suffered his cardiac arrest during Euro 2020. And the stakes will almost immediately be sky high. Brentford are crying out for a saviour, having collected just one point from a possible 21 since beating Aston Villa on 2 January. Newcastle are heading in the opposite direction, having taken 10 from a possible 12, and on last week’s visit to London had West Ham on the ropes before having to settle for a point. A win at the Community Stadium can leapfrog Eddie Howe’s team over that of Thomas Frank, who hope to have Ivan Toney back leading the line. Toney, cast aside from Newcastle during Rafael Benítez’s reign, was a scorer when the teams drew 3-3 in November, Howe’s first match in charge. JB Brentford v Newcastle, Saturday 3pm 6) Villa to offer Brighton home comfort? They might be ninth but last week’s defeat to Burnley was not entirely out of the blue for a Brighton side who boast only one home win in five months now. Encouragingly this weekend’s opponents, Aston Villa, have lost to Newcastle and Watford in their past two games, managing only one shot on target in each fixture, which led Steven Gerrard to this intriguing analysis last week: “We’ve had 19 shots but only managed one on target, so we haven’t worked [Watford goalkeeper] Ben Foster anywhere near enough and that falls on my shoulders. That’s on me and my staff to be more inventive and creative in the final third. We’ve got talented players in there. We’ve got internationals, Brazilians, Argentinians and England internationals. Players have got to want to get in the right areas and people have got to want to create and score. The result falls on me, I’ll take that and I’ll take the heat to protect the players but moving forward you need to be better in the final third.” Which appears to translate fairly clearly as: “It’s my fault we haven’t been more creative. Although obviously it’s the players’ fault. Just to be clear, I’ll take the blame for this, but it’s on them.” SB Brighton v Aston Villa, Saturday 3pm 7) Will Wolves cash in at West Ham? West Ham’s wobble since the turn of the year could have been more costly: they are still four points behind fourth-placed Manchester United, but their stalled form has fans grumbling. A failure to freshen up the squad in January is likely to be costly. That Michail Antonio, Tomas Soucek and Pablo Fornals have flagged is understandable given their workload in a thin squad. As well as a Champions League place – a publicly stated target from the club’s ownership when they moved to the London Stadium in 2016 – it could cost them an extra year of Declan Rice. Wolves, Sunday’s opponents, have refreshed their squad by cashing in assets to bring in fresh talent with an efficiency not reflected in the Hammers’ tentative steps into the transfer market. And with Newcastle now also flush, the chance to top the Premier League’s middle class may already have been squandered. JB West Ham v Wolves, Sunday 2pm 8) A Burnley side set in its set-piece ways It’s been a little under three years since Burnley last won back-to-back-to-back Premier League matches but Sean Dyche’s men can make it three on the spin against a Crystal Palace side that have managed successive wins only once this season. That the first of those two triumphs came at Manchester City tells you all you need to know about Palace’s progress under Patrick Vieira – they are a team capable of beating the best on their day but are maddeningly inconsistent and often don’t get the results their performances deserve. The corresponding fixture at Turf Moor earlier this season was one such game, with Palace gifting Burnley a share of the points in an entertaining 3-3 draw through their inability to defend set pieces. It is a frailty Sean Dyche will look to exploit again, having seen his players score once and go close with at least two other headed opportunities from dead-ball situations against Tottenham. BG Crystal Palace v Burnley, Saturday 3pm 9) Reds back on way to Wembley The time when Liverpool fans would call Wembley “Anfield South” lies long in the past. Jürgen Klopp has concentrated his squad’s efforts on winning the Champions League and Premier League during his time in England, choosing to blood youth in the domestic cup competitions. Sunday’s Carabao Cup showpiece will be only the second English cup final Klopp has presided over, the last coming in February 2016, when he had been in charge for barely four months. Liverpool lost that League Cup final to Manchester City on penalties and – of Klopp’s squad that day – only Jordan Henderson, James Milner, Roberto Firmino and Divock Origi remain. The overhaul that Klopp has carried out in those six years is reflected in names such as Simon Mignolet, Nathaniel Clyne, Alberto Moreno, Mamadou Sakho, Philippe Coutinho and Emre Can, all of them decent, talented players but expendable to a manager who has transformed the club and widened their horizons. JB Chelsea v Liverpool, Sunday 4.30pm 10) Chelsea calling for shots? Chelsea have had 20 shots on target and scored six goals in the Premier League this calendar year; Liverpool have had 19 shots on target and scored nine goals this week. While defensively the two teams have been comparable this season (Chelsea have conceded 17 goals to Liverpool’s 19, and 76 shots on target to Liverpool’s 72) the Reds’ attack is not so much streets ahead of their opponents’ as entire motorway networks more advanced. Meanwhile Jürgen Klopp said after Wednesday’s thrashing of Leeds that in midfield “more often than not you need really fresh legs” and has been putting those words into practice – Liverpool’s two matches this week featured entirely different starting midfield threes, two of them later being substituted on each occasion. This makes it hard to guess whose legs will be freshest come Sunday but though the remainder of the team could feasibly be unchanged some kind of reshuffle here seems likely. SBAmid the boasts on Khabib, the first song of Central Cee’s debut album, lurks the line “I been in the charts for 18 weeks”. The track – named for an undefeated Russian mixed martial arts fighter – is a rare moment of understatement. The London rapper has spent 18 weeks in the Top 10 alone: he’s actually been in the singles chart for 97 weeks since his first crossover hit, Loading, arrived in late 2020. By anyone’s metric, Central Cee had a very good 2021 indeed: a gold album for his first mixtape, Wild West; six hit singles – eight if you count his collaboration with D-Block Europe and his appearance on a remix of Ed Sheeran’s Bad Habits – and three nominations at the Brits. Thanks to a guest slot on FKA twigs’ Measure of a Man, he even ended up on the soundtrack of the most recent Kingsman film, seldom noted for boosting UK trap. It’s not meant to underplay the years the 23-year-old born Oakley Ceasar-Su spent developing his craft – he started out slathering his voice in Auto-Tune before shifting to a more drill-facing sound – to suggest that his actual success has happened very quickly. You can hear it in the lyrics of 23, which come thick with memories of his pre-fame life that still seem to have happened just “the other day”. One minute he’s getting nicked in the crowd at the Wireless festival – apparently for the crime of “trying to get the party turnt”, which presumably wasn’t the precise wording on the arrest form – the next, he’s playing the main stage on both Saturday and Sunday. If you’re wondering how he’s done it, 23 provides some intriguing pointers. As a rapper, he’s possessed of a powerful flow and can turn a phrase – “I had no money / I weren’t embarrassed / I’m doin’ up road in my Toyota Yaris” – but the lyrics tend to stick fast to the usual topics: a rough upbringing (chucked out of home aged 14, left school with no GCSEs); a pre-rap life of crime; the bragging tempered by affecting bursts of regret, as on Ungrateful, which expresses the desire to “turn the page … anti-clockwise, got to burn the sage”; success and its associated feuds and drawbacks. He briefly steps out of character on Retail Therapy, where he expresses a desire to connect with his “female energy” by going shopping and gets a ticking off from his mum for being “materialistic”, but for the most part it deals in the expected done well rather than springing surprises. But 23 also displays how good Central Cee is at the business of making records, not just writing. There are a lot of really strong musical ideas on display, some of which are the work of producer Young Chencs, whose sonic signature is all over the album, quite literally: you’re never far from a female voice announcing who’s produced the beat. The hook of Retail Therapy takes a snatch of sax from Hank Crawford’s 1973 jazz album Wildflower and subjects it to the kind of speeding-up treatment common in early 90s hardcore rave: the result is nagging and unique. Just before it ends, the backing of Air BnB suddenly shifts from merely lifting the electric piano from a 70s soft rock track and turns into the 70s soft rock it’s been sampling, while Central Cee keeps rapping. The brief Terminal 5 is based around another great, unexpectedly jazzy sample, this time of a ragged trumpet-led band. Elsewhere, the idea of borrowing from PinkPantheress’ Just for Me on Obsessed With You is inspired, and not merely because it guaranteed the track – released as a single in September – vast coverage on TikTok, where PinkPantheress is a breakout star. The sound of the original – essentially an early-00s pop-garage cut turned helium-voiced and oddly unsettling – is a perfect counterpoint to the rapper’s voice. The best track might be the most unexpected: Eurovision, on which Central Cee assembles a phalanx of guests, his fellow Shepherd’s Bush native A2anti joined by two rappers apiece from France, Italy and Spain. In one sense, it’s a risk to cede a huge swathe of a track to names that are essentially unknown in the UK and who perform in their native languages (although it may buy him headway in their respective fiercely competitive domestic rap scenes). But it really pays off: Milan’s Rondodasosa, with whom Central Cee guested on a single last year, is a particularly striking find, a furious, gruff voice rapping in a mix of Italian and English. The effect is subtly different, while firmly rooted in a tradition: much like the rest of 23. This week Alexis listened to Sipho – Occasion From his latest EP, She Might Bleed, comes the kind of track that makes you wonder why the Birmingham-based singer isn’t a huge star: the minimal synth backing allows his extraordinary voice space to soar.9 to 5: The Musical is a contradiction. Based on the beloved 1980 film which starred Dolly Parton, Lily Tomlin and Jane Fonda, the stage show – which premiered in 2008, and opened in Sydney on Thursday – is a newer version of the workplace revenge comedy. It’s packed full of new songs (by Parton) and features a reworked script, but it can’t trust itself enough to leave behind its legacy, looping in pre-recorded video messages from the universally beloved Parton to set up the story and even sing along. Still set in the 1980s, the story (adapted for the stage by original screenwriter Patricia Resnick) remains the same: three secretaries (played in the Australian premiere by Marina Prior, Erin Clare and Casey Donovan) band together after a series of injustices – and an accidental act of retribution – to take down their sexist boss, Franklin Hart Jr (Eddie Perfect). While he is indisposed, the trio run the company with working conditions that in 2022 still remain a fantasy for most women: job flexibility, free health care, free day care and equal pay. Back to the contradictions: the show encourages us through explicit lyrics to resist the urge to judge a woman’s value based on her looks, but also makes Roz (Caroline O’Connor) the butt of the joke for her supposed undesirable appearance. It supports the empowerment of women, but reduces its supporting female characters to unflattering and often deferential stereotypes. And while it is all about women reclaiming power by raising their voices, the sound design buries their lyrics, and their top notes, in the mix. Plus, even when the men in the show are supposed to be unpleasant corporate-bros to be laughed at, they’re prominently portrayed with sympathy. As the leader of the male pack, it’s faintly embarrassing every time Perfect appears onstage, playing a truly horrifying boss like it’s endearing. This “ain’t I a stinker?” approach falls flat every time. A final contradiction: based on the above, the production should be charmless. It isn’t. In a testament to the power of smart casting, this production of 9 to 5 often rises above the sum of its parts due to the power of its three leads – and a secret weapon, O’Connor, in a should-be thankless role. Stage veteran Marina Prior’s acting chops are often overlooked in musicals, but her sharp instincts and keen comic timing are in fine form here as Violet (the Tomlin role): the brilliant but often-overlooked supervisor who is denied a promotion in favour of a much younger and less-experienced man. Her wryness and grit ground the action as it veers into the ridiculous. Rising star Erin Clare steps into Parton’s shoes as Doralee Rhodes, a Southern secretary who is sexually harassed by the boss and ostracised by the other women on-staff, who believe she’s having an affair with him. She comes alive as resident firecracker, channelling her anger into glorious retribution. When she corners Hart, ties him up on the sofa and gives him a piece of her mind, it’s almost as cathartic for us as it is for her. Bringing the essential but never overly sentimental sweetness is Casey Donovan as Judy Bernley (the Fonda role), a woman entering the workforce for the first time after the end of her marriage. The most successful and thoughtful arc of the show might be her growth in confidence, as she finds community and allyship with Violet and Doralee. Donovan’s powerhouse voice is in fine form in the second-act number in which she finally steps into her power against the men who have hurt her; she earned a spontaneous standing ovation from much of the audience. As a trio, the women are unstoppable. In the most preposterous scenes, they build upon each other’s performances beat for beat; their growing friendship feels surprisingly authentic, if, as in all musicals, necessarily accelerated and exaggerated. And then there’s Caroline O’Connor. Roz is so in love with and loyal to Hart that she sells out other women, endorses his misogyny, and even sniffs his scent from his office chair. As a character, Roz undermines the entire premise of the show; her solo number Heart to Hart is essentially an extended joke about a woman who is deemed to be unattractive daring to have sexual desires. But O’Connor almost transcends it all. With her towering voice and loose-limbed slapstick comedy colliding with a genuine peacocking sensuality, she refuses to let Roz be an audience punchline: she makes the number hot, and she makes Roz matter. Until Hart confronts her at the end of the song. He’s disgusted by her and her sexuality – and while he’s a pig in that moment, he’s also partly an audience surrogate; we’re supposed to laugh at her, too. It’s the one sour note that even the sublime O’Connor cannot overcome. Sign up for the fun stuff with our rundown of must-reads, pop culture and tips for the weekend, every Saturday morning And yet the four women are magic, delivering the show’s most basic takes on feminism – for equal pay, for equal rights – with a twinkle in the eye for the women watching, earning full-throated cheers. Hilariously, a man in the audience disapproved. He shushed a cheering group of women sitting by me; one of them turned to him, and in the spirit of the show, informed him with utter disdain that they were allowed to laugh. The show has its faults, but with its perfectly cast women – grinning conspiratorially and singing with breathtaking conviction – it will leave you with a smile. 9 to 5: the Musical runs at Capitol theatre, Sydney until 1 May; it then tours to Brisbane and MelbourneThe front pages in Britain and around the world are devoted to the shocking events in Ukraine, with graphic images of the destruction unleashed by Vladimir Putin. A photograph of a woman with a bloodied and bandaged head in the wake of a Russian attack dominates the front of the Guardian with the headline “Putin invades”. The picture appears set to become a defining image of the conflict and features on many other front pages, including the Mirror which juxtaposes the injured civilian with the “power-crazed” Russian president: “Her blood … his hands”. The Sun goes for almost exactly the same formulation with “Her blood on his hands”. The closeup image of the injured woman is used in the same way by the German tabloid, Bild, which goes with the headline: “Putins blood”. The Express also has the picture and the headline “Redrawing map of Europe in blood”. The Daily Mail, meanwhile, reports that “Putin to seize capital in days”, and also features a photograph of a mother and her young child as they attempt to flee Kyiv by bus. The Telegraph goes with the headline “New cold war as Putin strikes”, and also carries an opinion piece by its columnist Fraser Nelson calling this “Europe’s 9/11”. He says “naivety” has left us exposed to the threat of Putin, which was hiding in plain sight. The Financial Times’ splash headline says “Putin’s forces storm Ukraine” and it also carries a story on its front noting that former leaders of Italy and Austria are among those now resigning from the boards of Russian companies. The Metro has “War in Europe” which is a label that translates very well across the continent. Among the other papers choosing this stark headline is Süddeutsche Zeitung: “Krieg in Europa”. The French paper Libération has a similarly simple headline on its front page laid over a picture of a huge explosion somewhere in Ukraine: “L’impensable”, it says, “the unthinkable” fact of a major war in Europe. In Spain, El Pais’s front page says “Putin lanza un ataque masivo contra Ucrania”, or, “Putin launches massive attack against Ukraine”. The American papers managed to report the story in their Thursday editions and the New York Times’ headline reads “Russia attacks as Putin warns world; Biden vows to hold him accountable”. The LA Times says “Ukraine under attack”.Piers Morgan’s global talkshow is weeks away from launching but the British commentator was already handing out voting advice when he jetted in for Sky News Australia’s 25th anniversary party at the Sydney Opera House. “Australians will want to elect the leader who they believe will move most swiftly to restore all freedom rights lost during the crisis, and who will be strong on national security,” Morgan said after arriving on Lachlan Murdoch’s private jet to celebrate with new colleagues including Peta Credlin, Chris Kenny and Rita Panahi. The former Good Morning Britain host will reportedly be paid £50m (A$93m) by Rupert Murdoch for a daily TV talkshow which will also air on Fox Nation in the US and News UK’s TalkTV. And what does Murdoch get for all that cash? An influential television and newspaper commentator whose stated aim is to “cancel cancel culture”. “I’m going to cancel the cancel culture,” he told Peta Credlin on Sky. “I’m going to take those ultra woke lunatics head on.” Morgan will inherit Alan Jones’s primetime spot on Sky News following the shock jock’s unceremonious dumping last year after he failed to attract a significant audience. His extraordinary deal includes columns in the London tabloid the Sun and the New York Post and a book with Murdoch’s publishing house Harper Collins. The 56-year-old former newspaper editor quit Good Morning Britain last year and stormed off the set after being taken to task over comments he made about the mental health of the Duchess of Sussex. “I’ll be calling out extremists from all sides, not just in Australia but anywhere – and especially those who think cancel culture’s a great idea and want to compel us all to lead their own dreary joyless lifestyles,” he told News Corp publications. “I do currently identify as a larrikin, and know my koalas from my possums and my bludgers from my bogans,” he said. “I’m good mates with Shane Warne, so if there are any linguistic issues, I’ll get him to help me. He’s always had a fruity command of the English language.” Don’t ask, don’t tell It’s been a week of “town hall” meetings for staff at the big media companies, with News Corp Australia surprising employees with an extra day off for their birthday. But the Sydney Morning Herald’s town hall, convened by the executive editor of the SMH and the Age, Tory Maguire, was not such a happy affair. Staff had the ability to ask anonymous questions of management in a chat box in the video call – and they didn’t hold back. After a briefing about a new podcast about the mental health of teenagers, staff began to ask about their own mental health, which some say is being affected by overwork. “I can’t wait for the explainer on panic attacks,” Anonymous said. “Then I’ll know what I’m experiencing from working non-stop.” There were several questions on the mental health theme. But some staff were also annoyed about the attitude of the new SMH editor, Bevan Shields, who has made a name for himself by blocking people on Twitter who are critical of him or the paper. The tension sparked on Twitter by Shields’ insistence that Sydney was experiencing a train strike – and not a shutdown of the network by the government – spilled over into the all-staff meeting. Internal messages seen by Weekly Beast show that at least one staff member told Shields before 7am that “not technically a strike” and that “industrial action” would be a better description. Shields insisted it was a strike but the Herald later changed to describing it as a “shutdown”. He later blamed “a few activist accounts” on Twitter for whipping up the furore and dismissed reader complaints about the framing. Some of the anonymous questions were: “How much have subscriptions decreased after Bevan repeatedly blocked subscribers on Twitter?” “Does the social media policy apply to senior editors and if so how is it enforced?” But as soon as the questions appeared they were deleted, and they were never addressed by Maguire. Nine Entertainment declined to comment. Hot Albo returns Just in time for an upcoming federal election, Anthony Albanese has received the Australian Women’s Weekly soft lens treatment. Albo and his new partner, Jodie Hayden, were photographed in the opposition leader’s Marrickville home and they sat down with the magazine to talk about the “ease and joy that sprung up between them” when they met for a drink in a “backstreet brewery”. “When the Weekly arrives at his federation bungalow in the sleepy, suburban end of Marrickville, Anthony (Albo to his mates, his constituents, just about everyone) is unpacking the dishwasher,” the story says. “Jodie, who lives a couple of suburbs away in Stanmore, is pouring tumblers of iced water for our crew. “Perhaps in part that’s because they have such a lot in common. Jodie and Anthony both wear their hearts on their sleeve, and they were both formed by quintessentially Australian, though very different, childhoods.” It’s rare for a politician to be covered in such a positive way, complete with a glamorous photo shoot, and it doesn’t always go to plan. When Julia Gillard was photographed knitting a kangaroo for the royal baby in 2013, the Daily Telegraph mocked the photo under the headline “Spins &amp; Needles”. Albo’s recent weight loss, hip glasses and smart new wardrobe seem to have come at just the right time, and there is no sign yet of a backlash. Unless you consider Peta Credlin sniffing that Albo’s makeover “was no substitute for policy”. On social media people were enthusiastic, asking is “Hot Albo” back? Frying pan to fire One of the faces that will become familiar to audiences as they follow the conflict in Ukraine is that of Misha Zelinsky, who is covering the invasion on the ground in Kyiv for the Australian Financial Review. Zelinsky has transitioned with lightning speed from senior union figure to failed preselection candidate for Labor for the seat of Cunningham in the Illawarra to foreign correspondent. Earlier this month he withdrew from the race for the safe NSW federal Labor seat to clear the way for political staffer Alison Byrnes to win the party’s nomination uncontested. The former national assistant secretary of the Australian Workers Union is a Fulbright scholar and a foreign policy wonk, which will serve him well in his new role. Caro time Prominent media commentator and advertising guru Jane Caro is running for a NSW Senate seat with the Reason party, saying she is attempting the leap from commentariat to elected official because “it’s time to get shit done”. A regular Sydney Morning Herald columnist and a panelist on ABC TVs Gruen show, Caro even has a Walkley award to her name after winning in 2018 for women in leadership. “What worries me is we’re not going to be able to change the direction that we need on so many things if we have a progressive or more progressive House of Representatives and a reactionary and regressive Senate,” she told the Sydney Morning Herald and the Age. Walkleys’ long wait Speaking of the Walkleys, after two false starts and one year of virtual presentation due to Covid-19, the awards will be held on Friday night at the grand ballroom in the International Convention Centre at Sydney’s Darling Harbour. There is intense competition this year around the coverage of the Brittany Higgins story, with news.com.au’s Samantha Maiden and The Project’s Lisa Wilkinson nominated in separate categories. Maiden is up for two awards, including coverage of a major event, and as such is a strong contender for the Gold Walkley. The three finalists in the major event category all covered the same issue: the way women have been treated in federal politics. Louise Milligan and the Four Corners team have been nominated for the story that started it all, “The Canberra Bubble”, and Laura Tingle and James Elton have been nominated for their analysis of the issue on 7.30.The Associated Press has withdrawn plans to sell a video “of migrants drifting in an overcrowded boat in the Mediterranean” as an NFT after facing a backlash online. The news outlet’s Thursday tweet advertising the clip, which came as Russia’s invasion raised fears of widespread displacement of Ukrainians, provoked accusations that the AP was seeking to profit off of suffering. “The Associated Press has deleted a tweet advertising an NFT that sure looked a whole lot like an attempt to make money off the plight of desperate migrants,” wrote the behavioral scientist Caroline Orr Bueno on Twitter. “This is so far beyond the bounds of appropriate,” wrote John Stanton, editor of the New Orleans news outlet Gambit. “How did this get all the way to execute without a single journo saying something,” asked another journalist, SI Rosenbaum. The organization has deleted the tweet and canceled the planned sale. “This was a poor choice of imagery for an NFT. It has not and will not be put up for auction. The tweet promoting it was also deleted,” said Lauren Easton, the global director of media relations and corporate communications at the Associated Press. “AP’s NFT marketplace is a very early pilot program, and we are immediately reviewing our efforts. As a not-for-profit, AP’s mission is to inform the world with accurate, unbiased journalism.” The organization had said in the post that the video would be available the next day through its new marketplace selling NFTs – digital collectibles associated with code that marks them as unique. In a press release last month, the AP announced the online marketplace as a spot where users can “purchase the news agency’s award-winning contemporary and historic photojournalism”, including images of “space, climate [and] war”. “For 175 years AP’s journalists have recorded the world’s biggest stories, including through gripping and poignant images that continue to resonate today,” the press release says. Buyers will receive “a rich set of original metadata offering collectors awareness of the time, date, location, equipment and technical settings used for the shot”. The NFTs are being released on a rolling basis. Currently available images range in price from $219 to $1,799. The proceeds will be returned to the AP’s non-profit newsroom, according to the press release. The sale raises questions about how photojournalism is used beyond a news story. Photographers and news outlets often face thorny decisions about the use of images of human suffering. Dorothea Lange’s celebrated Migrant Mother image, for instance, was intended to illustrate its subject’s Depression-era struggle. But the woman, Florence Owens Thompson, later described feeling “exploited” by the portrait, which did nothing to aid her financially (and sold at auction in 2002 for $141,500). NFTs are pushing that debate even further. With news organizations competing with Google and Facebook for advertising dollars, alternative streams of revenue are essential. The New York Times has sold copies of its articles as NFTs and sells some of its photography through an online store, as does the Guardian. But the available images tend to focus on lighter topics, including the arts, music and cityscapes. The same is true of the other images in the AP’s NFT marketplace.From a distance, it feels like Oscar Piastri was destined for the pinnacle of motor-racing. “My dad’s dad and my mum’s dad, my pop and my granddad, they were both mechanics,” the 20-year-old Australian says. “And my dad – his business is a car-tuning business. So I think it was naturally running in the family.” When Piastri was six, his father Chris returned from a business trip with a remote-controlled monster truck. “I was just fanging around with that in the backyard,” he says. Remote control racing led to go-karting, which led to Formula Four, Three, Two and now, this year, a reserve driver spot with BWT Alpine in Formula One. “That [monster truck] led to the journey I have taken so far.” But for all it may seem as if Piastri was preordained for motor-racing greatness, it has taken considerable sacrifice – and millions of dollars – for that goal to be within reach for the Melbourne-born driver. And despite winning the F3 and F2 championships in consecutive seasons, the Australian has not yet made it to the heights of F1. “It has been an awesome run in the junior categories,” he says. “I think the results speak for themselves.” But in the cut-throat world of motor-racing, results alone are not enough. Ahead of the season opener next month, an F1 seat remains so near, yet so far for Piastri. The prospect of becoming the 18th Australian F1 driver in history, and joining compatriot Daniel Ricciardo on the grid, eludes him – for now. The late afternoon sun shines on Piastri as he speaks over Zoom, from a backyard in Portsea on Victoria’s Mornington Peninsula, at the end of his summer break. A return to Europe beckons (he is based in Oxford, England) ahead of his first year globe-trotting with the international circus that is Formula One. The Australian intends to give it his all; he is a few minutes late to the interview, having been sprinting up and down the nearby sand dunes by way of pre-season training. “I’m looking forward to the challenge,” he says. “It’s going to be a different year to what I am used to, as I won’t be doing any racing. It is a new challenge, another step towards my goal of becoming a full-time F1 driver.” F1 reserve drivers spend most of their time working with the team to support the two primary drivers: on simulators fine-tuning the car, doing testing, sometimes driving in practice sessions. But Piastri will only get an opportunity to race if one of his teammates, Fernando Alonso and Esteban Ocon, is sick or injured. Which means that after spending his teenage years racing as much as possible, 2022 will be an adjustment. “There’s still a lot of work I can do behind the scenes, trying to learn as much as I can about the F1 world,” he says. “How the [race] weekend works, how the season schedule works with all the flying around, getting used to different time zones and so on.” Having won F2 last year, there was nowhere for Piastri to go but up; champions are not permitted to compete again. Yet with only a handful of seats up for grabs across the 10-team, 20-driver grid, Piastri always knew that a year on the sidelines was likely. In the end, the final spot – with Alfa Romeo – was taken by Chinese driver Guanyu Zhou (despite Zhou having finished third, behind Piastri, last year). Motor-racing is not cheap. In an interview with The Age last year, Chris Piastri estimated that his family, together with sponsors and supporters, had put about $6m into Piastri’s pursuit of his F1 dream. When the driver was just 15, Piastri senior was outlaying half a million dollars as his son travelled on the international go-karting circuit. The costs only increased: $1.5m to race F3, and a similar amount for his lone season in F2. (Piastri senior is the founder of an automotive software company.) Piastri speaks openly about this substantial investment in his future. “My parents never, ever, put pressure on me from a financial point of view,” he says. “But I’m quite a realistic person. I was aware of how much money was being spent. I never felt guilty, I guess … I was extremely grateful to be given that chance, that opportunity. A lot of people in life and in racing never get that kind of opportunity. So I felt I owed it to myself, and to my parents and other people investing in me, that I should do well.” He has done exceptionally well to date. “I don’t think the pressure ever really mounted up on me, but of course there were a few moments where you go: ‘This is a lot of other people’s money. So this first reserve driver role, while I haven’t made it to my ultimate goal yet, it was quite a relief to be getting paid, to finally turn professional. “I’d be lying if I said that [$6m sum] wasn’t an extraordinary amount of money. The entry barrier to F1 is very, very high.” The corollary of the costs is that, even at the highest level, the financial backing behind a driver can be the difference between earning a seat, or not. Zhou is expected to bring Chinese commercial interest to the sport; Nikita Mazepin and Lance Stroll both race for teams bankrolled by their fathers. “This year is a tricky situation because there weren’t many seats available,” Piastri explains. “In Zhou’s case, specifically, it’s a very big commercial drawcard, for the sport, and sponsors, to have the first Chinese driver in F1. I know Zhou got quite a lot of criticism for being in F1 – and I thought that was quite unfair [Piastri has been vocal in defending Zhou]. I knew that we couldn’t bring that kind of money.” The Victorian concedes that being Australian, he could never compete with the commercial potential of a Chinese driver. Nor, says Piastri, would he want to pay to play. “I want to get to F1 purely on merit, not because we could buy myself a seat. It’s been part of the game for a long-time, but I didn’t want to get to F1 because I paid to get there. I wanted to get there because I had the results.” Most observers believe that it is only a matter of time before Piastri, who turns 21 in April, is driving in F1. He will spend this year learning from Ocon and Alonso; the latter, a two-time champion, is expected to retire at the end of the season, which may leave an opening. “Working with Fernando, it’s a great privilege,” Piastri says. “Certainly I can learn a lot off him this year. I want to learn as much as I can for when it’s my turn to get in the race seat.” Piastri is also guided by his agent, Mark Webber, the Queanbeyan-born driver who collected nine F1 wins during a glittering career. In the F1 paddock, Piastri will find himself alongside a crop of talented young drivers that have considerably lowered the grid’s average age. The likes of Ocon, Ferrari’s Charles Leclerc, Haas’s Mick Schumacher, McLaren’s Lando Norris, Mercedes driver George Russell and Yuki Tsunoda of Scuderia AlphaTauri are all 25 or younger. “These guys are proving that they can perform almost straight away – they’re already fighting for wins,” says Piastri. “Every time that happens, it opens the door for more young guys, such as myself.” The most prominent young star is, of course, Max Verstappen, the 24-year-old F1 champion. The Red Bull driver beat rival Lewis Hamilton to the 2021 title in controversial fashion in Abu Dhabi in December. Months on, the drama of that race still lingers – governing body the FIA recently moved aside its race director, Australian Michael Masi, in an attempt to end the furore. Piastri is diplomatic when asked about the incident. “It definitely was very hectic,” he says of the final race. “I don’t really have much of an opinion, to be honest, I think maybe the rules could have been followed a bit better. But I for one am happy that the race actually got underway again for a lap, rather than finishing under safety car. I think there would be a much more negative reaction if the world championship … was decided under safety car. There you go – I won’t say any more on that.” After the dramatic conclusion to last season, there will be much anticipation when the F1 begins in mid-March in Bahrain, before it heads to Saudi Arabia and then Melbourne, for the first-time since the pandemic began. Even on home soil, Piastri will be sitting on the sidelines. “It’s never ideal not to be racing, but it’s just the way the cards have fallen,” he says. For now, at least. “I feel like I deserve a chance in F1.”Sydney has experienced its wettest summer in three decades and the most humid season in 10 years, with more torrential rain forecast for the New South Wales north coast and south-east Queensland over the coming days. The heavy rain and flooding has already led to three deaths – two in Queensland and one in NSW. A man died after his vehicle was lost in floodwaters on the NSW Central Coast overnight. The body of the 54-year-old Matcham man was found in a Toyota LandCruiser near the Maddens Creek crossing at Matcham, east of Gosford, about 1.30am on Friday. Emergency services were called after reports a vehicle had gone missing in floodwaters around midnight. Ben Domensino, a Weatherzone meteorologist, said Sydney had received 570mm of rain so far this summer – the highest total since 1991. It has also been the most humid summer in a decade. Domensino said the air in Sydney hadn’t felt so sticky since 2011, which was also a La Niña summer. The NSW State Emergency Service said it had responded to 630 jobs in the past 24 hours, with 27 flood rescues concentrated around the Northern Rivers, Mid North Coast and Central Coast. Dean Narramore, a meteorologist at the Bureau of Meteorology (BoM), said rainfall totals in some areas from Byron Bay in NSW to Fraser Island in Queensland could exceed 300mm in the coming days. “This is a dangerous setup as very heavy rainfall falls over already saturated soils,” Narramore said on Thursday afternoon. He said the homes of people living near rivers or creeks could be inundated and there was a risk of dangerous flash flooding. The body of a motorcyclist missing in the Queensland floods was found on Thursday after his bike was swept away by rising water the previous day. A 63-year-old woman was also killed in the floods. Her body was found in her car submerged in flood waters west of Eumundi on the Sunshine Coast on Wednesday morning. The Queensland Fire and Emergency Service deputy commissioner, Mark Roche, said on Friday that his organisation made more than 30 flood rescues and responded to 100 calls for help overnight. “People are possibly getting surprised by the water on the roadway, but with this weather, people should be prepared,” he told Nine’s Today program. The BoM said Old Range Road south of Bundaberg recorded the highest rainfall in the state, with 463mm falling in the past 24 hours. Pomona had recorded 445mm since midnight, while Cooran recorded 410mm. It said “very dangerous, slow-moving storms” were continuing to hit south-east Queensland into Friday afternoon. The BoM warned “very dangerous thunderstorms” were detected on the weather radar near Fernbale, Conondale and Hatton Vale late Friday morning. “These thunderstorms are slow-moving,” it said. “Very dangerous thunderstorms are forecast to affect Laidley, the area north of Woodford and the area west of Conondale by 11:50am and Gatton, Upper Brookfield and Mount Kilcoy by 12:20pm.” A severe weather warning projecting damaging winds and intense rainfall remained in place for Wide Bay and Burnett, the south-east coast and parts of Darling Downs and Granite Belt, including Brisbane. A severe thunderstorm warning was also listed for south-east Queensland, parts of Gympie and Noosa, with intense rainfall projected to lead to “dangerous, life-threatening flash flooding” in the area. “Heavy rainfall which may lead to flash flooding is forecast to continue over parts of south-east Queensland today and potentially through Saturday morning,” the BoM said. “Locally intense rainfall leading to dangerous and life-threatening flash flooding is possible with thunderstorms during this period, particularly over areas north of Brisbane. Six-hourly rainfall totals in excess of 300mm are possible. “Damaging wind gusts with peak gusts in excess of 90km/h are possible over areas east of about Seventeen Seventy to Brisbane, although most likely near the coast north of Maroochydore.” More than a dozen flood warnings were in place across Queensland, with heavy rainfall in excess of 200mm recorded over the past 24 hours in the Mary River catchment at Gympie. Flash flooding had cut off dozens of roads in Brisbane, Bundaberg, the Darling Downs, the Gold Coast Hinterland, Gympie, Ipswich, Moreton Bay, Noosa, the Sunshine Coast and its Hinterland, Toowoomba, the Department of Transport said. The mid-north coast and central coast copped the brunt of the NSW rain on Thursday with more than 100mm falling in several areas in the space of 24 hours. Between 9am Thursday and 7am Friday, Bateau Bay recorded 116mm, Erina Heights 136mm, Mount Elliott 115mm, and Wamberal Reservoir 140mm and Gosford 136mm. Further north, Bellingen recorded 173mm, Bowraville 112mm, Dorrigo 103mm, and Glennifer 135mm. Between 9am and 2pm on Friday, 25mm fell at Port Kembla in the Illawarra and 29mm fell on the south coast at Nowra. Further north near the Qld border, 36mm fell at Numinbah in the same time. The northern rivers, Mid North Coast and Central Coast are the areas of concern for the SES on Friday. The SES assistant commissioner, Dean Storey, told the ABC there was a “very concerning weather system … sitting just off the coast and due to make landfall”.Australia has vowed to provide nonlethal military equipment and medical supplies to Ukraine, as the prime minister accused China of offering Russia a trade “lifeline” after Thursday’s invasion. The Ukrainian government is pleading for international support and tougher sanctions as it reports at least 137 people have died so far in the fighting, while the UN refugee agency estimates 100,000 have already fled their homes. The US has warned that Russia appears intent to “encircle and threaten” the capital Kyiv, where explosions were heard in the early hours of Friday. Russian forces are said to have captured the Chernobyl nuclear power plant. Scott Morrison said on Friday the Australian government was “extremely concerned at the terrible violence that we have seen inflicted on the people of Ukraine by Russia” in its “unwarranted, unprovoked” invasion. “I want to confirm that we have been working with Nato to ensure that we can provide nonlethal military equipment and medical supplies to support the people of Ukraine,” the prime minister told reporters in Adelaide. He said Australia was “a long way from Ukraine” and the most effective way to provide that support was “through that Nato channel”. Morrison said he could not go into much detail about the support but “you can rest assured that we are working very closely with those partners and allies to support them in their time of need”. He said the Australian government would continue to work with its close allies and partners to impose “a rolling wave of sanctions”, including on oligarchs whose economic weight was of strategic significance to Moscow. The Australian sanctions would also be extended to cover “key Belarusian individuals and entities complicit in the aggression”. Morrison said the coordinated action was intended to “demonstrate very forcefully that we are all working together to shut Russia out as a result of their violence and their unlawful actions”. But Morrison said he was “particularly concerned” by the lack of a strong response from China. He cited a report that China was fully opening up to Russian wheat exports, which had previously been subject to health-related restrictions. The South China Morning Post reported that the announcement was made public hours after the Russian invasion began on Thursday, but was the result of a package of deals made when Vladimir Putin visited Beijing at the beginning of February. Morrison said it was “inexplicable” and “completely unacceptable” for the Chinese government to ease trade restrictions on Russia at a time when other countries were ratcheting up sanctions for the invasion. “You don’t go and throw a lifeline to Russia in the middle of a period when they’re invading another country,” he said. The opposition leader, Anthony Albanese, also criticised China for lifting the trade restrictions with Russia. “It’s doing the opposite of what it should be doing,” Albanese told reporters in Tasmania. “This is a unilateral decision by Vladimir Putin to be the aggressor against a sovereign state with tragic consequences – and that’s why all countries should condemn it.” Comment has been sought from the Chinese embassy, but China’s longstanding and repeated position is that “all countries’ sovereignty and territorial integrity should be respected”. It cites that position to urge other countries not to speak up about Taiwan, which is a self-governed democracy of 24 million people but which Beijing regards as its breakaway territory that will one day be “reunited” with the mainland. At a daily press conference in Beijing on Thursday, China’s foreign ministry spokesperson, Hua Chunying, declined to use the word “invasion” in relation to Russia’s actions. Hua said the situation in Ukraine had “a complicated historical background and context” and urged “all sides to exercise restraint and prevent the situation from getting out of control”. “The current state of affairs is not what we would hope to see,” she said. Hua said it was “quite offensive” to ask whether China’s Xi Jinping had given Putin his blessing to attack Ukraine, insisting that Russia “makes its foreign policy decisions independently” and China was not a direct party to the conflict. Putin and Xi agreed to formalise closer ties between Russia and China at the beginning of the Beijing Winter Olympics three weeks ago, described it at the time as a “no limits” friendship. The Putin-Xi agreement did not mention “Ukraine” – but it included a passage of support for Putin’s position against the enlargement of Nato. China also said at the time it was “sympathetic to and supports the proposals put forward by the Russian Federation to create long-term legally binding security guarantees in Europe”. The defence minister, Peter Dutton, speculated that Beijing was “probably watching to see what the world reaction is so that they can make their own calculations down the track in relation to Taiwan”. The Russian embassy in Canberra defended the “special military operation”, which it said was intended to “demilitarise” Ukraine by targeting military infrastructure, air defence facilities and military airfields. “There is no objective to occupy Ukraine,” the embassy said in a statement on Friday. “The decision to conduct the operation is not to hurt the interests of Ukraine or the Ukrainian people, but rather to defend our country from those who have taken Ukraine hostage and have been trying to use it against Russia and our people.” Amid ongoing diplomatic tensions between China and Australia, Morrison played down the significance of a gesture from the new Chinese ambassador, Xiao Qian, who said on Thursday the two countries should “meet each other halfway” and “look into the future”. Morrison said diplomatic channels were not fully open because China had blocked meetings with Australian ministers and political leaders. The prime minister said while he would be happy to talk, the 14 points on the list of grievances issued by the Chinese embassy in 2020 were “not for negotiating”. “In terms of meeting halfway, there are 14 points. I don’t agree with changing any of them,” he said.A local council has reversed its position on the sign stoush in the Goldstein electorate, now ruling in favour of Liberal Tim Wilson, who complained that independent Zoe Daniel’s signs had been erected prematurely. The Bayside city council now claims that because the House of Representatives election is not technically due until 3 September, signs put up before 3 June are unlawful – until the election is called. A spokeswoman for Daniel said “given the council has backflipped on its original advice to us, which it reiterated publicly two days ago, we are taking further legal advice”. Wilson had written to his constituents accusing Daniel’s campaign of “ignoring the council” by allegedly unlawfully erecting signs before the election had been called, and urging them to dob in her supporters. On Wednesday the council ruled that – since the election will be held by 21 May – signs erected after 21 February “are within the [three-month] period in which an election must be held” and are lawful, even without a permit. That ruling has now been changed, after Wilson complained that, although 21 May is the deadline for a combined lower house and Senate election, the last date for the House of Representatives election is technically 3 September. A lower house election that late would only be possible if the government chooses to split the two votes by having a half Senate election first, almost unheard of this late in the political cycle. On 21 February, Scott Morrison said the “election has to be held by about the middle of May”. “That’s what the constitutional requirements are and, you know, the election will be held this year,” he told Tasmania Talks radio. But the council has now said it has “received advice from the Australian Electoral Commission regarding the timing of the forthcoming federal election”. “The AEC has advised that there is a possibility of separate elections for the two houses of the Australian parliament, with the latest possible date for a Senate election being 21 May 2022 and the latest possible date for a House of Representatives election being 3 September 2022,” it said. The council noted bylaws allowed signs to be displayed for 14 days after an event or three months in total. “Based on [the] above, any sign associated with a House of Representative candidate would be unlawfully erected if: no election has been called; or the sign is erected prior to 3 June 2022.” The council said it had advised all known federal election candidates in the seat of Goldstein. Guardian Australia understands the Daniel campaign engaged a QC to provide legal advice on the sign stoush, including whether requiring a permit infringes the implied freedom of political communication. Daniel’s lawyers are in discussions with the council, hoping to persuade it to reverse position for a second time. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Daniel is one of a crop of independent candidates backed by fundraising vehicle Climate 200 running for parliament on a platform of integrity, greater action on climate change and better treatment of women. Although Wilson holds the blue-ribbon seat of Goldstein on an 8% margin it is threatened by the independent challenge. After encouraging constituents to dob in allegedly unlawful signs, Wilson said: “I feel sorry for those households about to be fined nearly $1,000 each … because their candidate is knowingly encouraging them to break the law.” Community group Voices for Goldstein, which has endorsed Daniel, claims the sign stoush is playing well for the independent, resulting in a bumper crop of donations: On Thursday, Daniel shared news of the council’s deliberations on the sign stoush, thanking the “flood of new people who have engaged with our campaign this week”. Guardian Australia contacted Daniel, Wilson and the AEC for comment.This close to an Australian election, I’m as surprised as anyone to learn the government is staking out campaign space on the issue of equality in women’s sport. This isn’t because Australians don’t like sport – we do! Or because there are no women here – there are plenty! Just look at all the ones who marched around the country last year! The political demands of those marches were for properly resourced anti-violence services, safe workplaces, pay parity, action on underrepresentation of women in decision-making, improved care infrastructure, job security in heavily feminised industries … and a little respect. They have not gone away. Yet Morrison and the Liberal-National Coalition have made meaningful commitments to none of them. This contextualises the rather conspicuous slide of the prime minister’s electoral approval with this not-inconsiderably-sized voting bloc. Pollsters have been warning the Liberals about their dire women problem for a year. So one can see the pressing need of the Liberal-National Coalition to improve their standing with women voters without having to admit to their old rhetoric or to own their past mistakes. Alas, one can now all too easily imagine the panicked campaign brainstorm meeting: “Maybe … sport? Do chicks like sport? Is chicks liking sport a thing?” Now, we are here. Australian sport is certainly a realm with massive and obvious gender inequalities. Government has a crucial role to play in addressing them. There’s the issue that government money flows into professional sporting associations in which the leadership and decision-making structures heave with overrepresentation from men. There’s the ongoing issue of a huge gender pay disparity that denudes women’s opportunities for professional development by obliging their work as part-time. Women’s sport doesn’t get equal media interest as men’s, nor comparable sponsorship opportunities. There have been failures of oversight that facilitated women’s harassment and even, allegedly, sexual abuse. Problem is, the current policy intervention into women’s sport that Scott Morrison claims is “terrific” isn’t about ANY of these things. It’s not even a meaningful apology for how the pretext of funding women’s sporting facilities was exposed as another form of government pork-barrelling in the “sports rorts” affair. The rugby league club that got $500,000 for a unisex change-room upgrade despite not having an above-12 female team sticks in the mind. No, the campaign conversation the Liberals want to have is a private member’s bill proposal from Tasmanian senator Claire Chandler that would empower sporting clubs to kick transgender girls and women out of women’s competition. What the prime minister claims is “terrific” is a policy informed not by science, medicine or the professional standards that already govern everyone’s competitive sporting participation, but on the stale political practice of using myths of danger and threat to create divisive demons within an already marginalised community. The Liberals are using this bill to front active discrimination and pretend it’s got something to do with women’s equality. Even the senator was unable to name a single sporting club in her home state that had actually asked for the ban. With access to the full resources of government, she’d know that the government authority Sport Australia has identified that the tiny percentage of transgender Australians are seriously underrepresented in Australian sport already, at all levels. She’d know, too, that the sporting regulations and codes that administer everything from weight classes for competition to whether someone has recently taken an aspirin exist precisely to ensure sporting opportunities are fair for everyone. The dissembling, of course, occurs in the wake of the Liberals’ failed “religious discrimination bill” to legalise spurious discrimination against transgender Australians as demanded by a hard-right religious lobby. As Labor, various cross-benchers and rebels from the Liberals’ own ranks successfully scuppered that legislation, the likelihood of success for the new bill is zero. The point, of course, is not to win the bill but to satisfy the ideological purity tests of an apparently transphobic hard right disappointed with the last bill’s failure, at the same time feeling out a potential fracture point within the powerful alliance of women arraigned politically against them. It’s not about sport, and it is the opposite of anything to do with equality. It’s about an ancient electoral ploy to attach fear and suspicion on to an already marginalised community that a significant number of Australians don’t know much about, in a place they’re unlikely to encounter them, just to whip up fear and division. That’s not sport. It’s not even politics. It’s just cruelty.If the protesters in front of New Zealand’s parliament have anything in common, it is a self-professed opposition to “Covid vaccination mandates”. These, they say, are an unacceptable burden on the individual rights of those who choose not to be vaccinated and so must be abolished immediately. These protesters are correct about one thing. Although the various mandates, which mean around 40% of New Zealand’s workforce face losing their jobs if not vaccinated, are not strictly compulsory in the sense of making it an offence to not be jabbed, they do limit individual rights. Specifically, the right to refuse to undergo any medical treatment, as guaranteed by section 11 of the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act 1990. However, noting that vaccination mandates limit a right is the easy part. The more difficult task is assessing whether that limit is, in the words of the Bill of Rights Act, a “demonstrably justified limit in a free and democratic society”. If it is so justified, then imposing it is a legitimate governmental choice in legal terms. Such an approach makes intuitive sense. Imagine a person with a virulent form of tuberculosis that could be cured with antibiotics, but who won’t accept that treatment. It would be a kind of collective madness to say that they must remain free to mingle in society and spread the disease just because forcing them into quarantine limits their right to refuse medical treatment. Equally, imposing costs on those who refuse, for whatever reason, to accept Covid vaccination is justifiable if doing so advances public health goals in a proportionate way. That assessment is, at its core, a balancing one between the importance of the right and the reasons for limiting it. Three high court judges have so far been called upon to make exactly this assessment when hearing challenges to vaccine mandate requirements brought by unvaccinated border workers, teachers and healthcare professionals. In each case, after reviewing the evidence presented by both vaccine opponents and the government, the court ruled that the policy is justified. However, in one case late last year a judicial warning did sound, with the court suggesting that whether a measure would remain justified might change when the virus became endemic. That is because justifying a rights limit is very much a contextual matter. It asks not “are all vaccine mandates always justifiable?”, but rather “is this particular vaccine mandate justifiable in these circumstances?” On Friday, the high court answered that question in the negative in a decision overturning a vaccine mandate for all police and defence workers. Although the government argued the measure was needed to ensure these services could continue to operate in a Covid environment, the court found that no real evidence had been presented to show this was the case. Merely asserting that mandatory vaccinations are intended to combat Covid and its effects is not enough, by itself, to justify the rights limits involved. The government must rather demonstrate that the policy actually can achieve the asserted goal. Consequently, as different variants of the virus emerge and levels of infection increase, the balance between the right and the reasons for limiting it also shifts. For this reason, it’s entirely appropriate to ask whether existing mandate rules still serve important public health purposes given the emergence of the Omicron variant and widespread community cases. However, in addressing that question we should be careful to check our collective headspace. Two years into life under Covid, many New Zealanders understandably are growing sick of its strictures. We all look forward to the return of something like the old normal. And so there’s a temptation to play armchair epidemiologist and search out selective evidence that apparently supports a rapid undoing of existing rules. That temptation really needs to be resisted. We will only get one chance to get the shift away from vaccine mandates and other Covid controls right. Those calling for an immediate end to vaccine mandates, be they outside parliament or elsewhere, won’t then have to bear any responsibility for the consequences of doing so. It is those who actually have control of our laws that will have to carry that can. Act too fast, and their mistake will be measured in funerals and lengthy stays in hospital that deny treatment to others. Act too slowly, and some individuals already suffering a limit on their rights will have to do so for a few more weeks or months than otherwise. Ultimately, that is the calculus public health officials and ministers are facing. And so, it perhaps is not surprising that they appear to be choosing to answer it cautiously. Andrew Geddis is a professor of law at the University of OtagoWafaa Al-Najili’s voice, fiery and bright, enchants the group of young people clustered around an audio workstation at the Delia arts centre in Gaza City. Together, they muse over how to mix her vocals with the other tracks of their latest project, a new recording of a traditional choral song. Outside, the neighbourhood still bears scars from last year’s fighting between Israel and Hamas, the Palestinian militant group in control of the Gaza Strip. The joint Israeli and Egyptian blockade that isolates Gaza from the rest of the world means rebuilding efforts have been slow. But, in the darkness of the recording studio, these young musicians could be anywhere in the world. “There are not many outlets for fun and self-expression in Gaza,” said Ayman Mghamis, the centre’s project manager, himself a rapper with a budding international career, which was cut short after Hamas took over the area in 2007. “We don’t just want to give young people that, we want to build up the music sector here into something that people make careers out of.” Palestinian musical traditions have been under threat since the Israeli occupation, but arts and cultural endeavours in Gaza have also suffered greatly under the rule of the strictly conservative Hamas. Concerts have been banned for the last 15 years. Even Mohammed Assaf, the wildly popular winner of Arab Idol from a Gazan refugee camp, has not been able to perform in public. The blockade has also led to a shortage of instruments and other equipment, making music an unaffordable pastime for most ordinary people. Music programmes, which started at Gaza University in 2015, shut down shortly afterwards. At the moment, there is just one instrument shop to serve the strip’s entire two-million-strong population, and few rehearsal and recording spaces. While the impact of these obstacles is hard to measure, in 2015 the Palestinian Central Bureau of Statistics found that only 39% of Gazans listen to music as a hobby, compared with 71% of Palestinians in the West Bank. The Delia arts centre aims to solve some of these problems. Plans for a Gaza branch of the Athens-based Delia Arts Foundation began in 2018, after founder John Keating, a music producer and founder of RNT Records, paid a visit to the strip. Despite a slow start owing to the hurdles imposed by the blockade, and further delays caused by the pandemic, the centre now offers four programmes a week. Three in-person and one online class allow Gazans to learn music theory and sound producing and engineering, and some classes are only for women and girls to encourage more to take part. The centre is now frequented by around 80 people a week, mostly in their late teens and early 20s. “Particularly since the last round of fighting [in May 2021], I have seen changes in the young people I work with,” Mghamis said. “Obviously we were all affected. But I also see how the centre helps them discover happiness and creativity again.” For Najili, the centre is a lifeline: a place where she can experiment with her favourite pieces and original songs, as well as impart her passion to a new generation of Gazan girls eager to explore the world of music. The 30-year-old from Khan Yunis in the south of the Gaza Strip grew up in a family that loved music. She and her siblings learned from their father, who sang and played the oud at weddings. Despite her talent, however, there was no opportunity for Najili to pursue music in the blockaded Gaza, so she trained as a nurse. “Working in nursing was the only way for me to earn money in the difficult economic conditions we are living in,” she said. “I kept singing over the years, but it has caused problems. As a girl who sings and has relatively liberal tendencies in a conservative society, many relatives and neighbours complained to my parents about me, which led my father to ask me to stop. I left Khan Yunis and lived with my aunt in Gaza City for several years.” At the Delia arts centre, Najli has been able to take part in professional recording sessions and put out her work to audiences on Instagram, TikTok and YouTube, including an Arabic cover of Blackbird by the Beatles. In the accompanying music video, Najili glides through choppy Mediterranean waters off the Gazan coast on a paddleboard, her glorious white dress rippling like a sail in the sunset. “I was very frustrated [before I started at the Delia centre], and in some periods in the past, I had begun to lose hope. After training as a voice teacher there, I got back my desire for singing. In a small way, I am helping other girls, and I must continue too,” she said. “I have still never stood on a big stage to sing in front of an audience, because there are no public concerts in Gaza. But it remains my biggest dream.”A British man and his Ukrainian wife spent 12 hours shuttling between cities targeted by Russian bombs on Thursday in a desperate but failed bid to complete her biometric registration for a UK spousal visa. Fozan and Iryna Dar left the central city of Dnipro, where they live, on a midnight train on Wednesday, in a last-ditch attempt to reach the processing centre in Kyiv. Soon after, the city’s airport closed and bombing began, there and in other cities. Their train shuddered to a halt in a distant suburb of the Ukrainian capital as the city was hit by Russian airstrikes. Eventually, the couple decided to get off the train there, pay more for a taxi than they had for the train tickets, and head to the biometric registration centre. When they got there, a handwritten sign on the door said: “Today we aren’t working, sorry for the inconvenience.” They called the embassy, who first said the centre was open, then said there was nothing they could do, as the collection of biometric data had been contracted out. Iryna had originally applied for a UK visitor’s visa two days before the British embassy advised citizens to leave Ukraine, hoping to meet her husband’s extended family after Covid restrictions forced them to have a small wedding. Because the embassy held her passport, the couple could not leave. Fozan studies medicine at a university that has already evacuated many of its international students, but he refused to go without his wife. “There is no way in hell I’m leaving her behind, it’s not up for debate. I have to protect her,” he said. As the situation in Ukraine got more serious, the couple decided to switch their application and ask for a spousal visa. Visitor visas cannot be used for more than six months. As warnings of invasion came, they feared it might not be possible to return to Dnipro for longer than that, and Iryna didn’t want to be in the UK on a restricted visa for an unknown period of time. But the embassy kept her passport and told her that the biometric details collected for her visitor visa could not be used for her latest application, she said. After 10 days of increasingly desperate calls to a consular helpline, her passport was returned on Tuesday and they told to redo her biometric registration in Kyiv. So they bought train tickets that would get them to the Ukrainian capital the first possible day: Thursday morning. “We were woken up on the train at 5am by friends calling, who said they were in hiding in the basement, and the shelling went on for over an hour,” Fozan said. Despite those attacks, and fear of more violence, the couple have decided to return to Dnipro again, because it’s their home, they have family there, and they hope the university where Fozan studies might include them in any further evacuation. As they waited for their train, the couple spent several hours as a kind of unofficial advice bureau to other foreigners milling around the station in desperation after tickets sold out. “People noticed we were speaking English to each other, and I looked Ukrainian, so they asked us for help with things like reading the timetable,” she said. The people they helped included Germans and Pakistanis and a man from Manchester who got trapped when his overnight layover coincided with Russia’s invasion, and his flight out of Kyiv was cancelled.The US decision to withdraw from the Iran nuclear deal was an immense personal achievement for former Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu. In a leaked video, he boasted that he had personally convinced Donald Trump to scrap the 2015 accord between Tehran and world powers. “I had to stand up against the whole world and come out against this agreement,” Netanyahu told members of his Likud party in the clip from 2018. “And we didn’t give up.” But four years on, the Israeli leader has been booted out of office – as has Trump. Both Congress and the Knesset contain more leftwing voices, while in Iran, moderate Hassan Rouhani lost last year’s presidential election to hardliner Ebrahim Raisi. International negotiators in Vienna are edging closer to what amounts to a watered-down version of the original deal. In the process, what a short time ago was believed by many Israelis to be Netanyahu’s major geopolitical victory has instead become a growing source of concern for Israel’s political and security establishment. “The US has tried maximum pressure with sanctions, Israel has assassinated nuclear scientists and carried out attacks designed to limit Iranian military activity around the region. But none of it has worked,” said Danny Citrinowicz, who led Israel’s military intelligence research between 2013 and 2016. “All it’s done is push Iran forward with its nuclear programme. Now we are out of options, and I worry that Israel and Iran are on a collision course in the near future.” The 2015 agreement spearheaded by Barack Obama lifted crippling international sanctions on the Islamic Republic’s economy in exchange for 10-15 years of curbs on its nuclear activities. Since it unravelled in 2018, Iran has raced ahead with uranium enrichment. Although the Iranian government maintains that its nuclear programme is peaceful, experts generally agree that should it choose to, Tehran could possess functional nuclear weapons within two years. The restored deal is set to maintain the original’s timeframes, meaning limits on uranium enrichment will still expire in 2025. For Israel, the outcome is much worse than the maligned 2015 accord. Tehran has not just made significant technological progress, which will only be monitored for the next three years, it is also about to receive $7bn in released frozen assets, as well as sanctions relief on exports such as oil. This money, Israel believes, will be funnelled to Iran’s proxies across the region, and the international legitimacy conferred by the nuclear accord could encourage the Islamic Republic to be bolder in its regional ambitions. Israel is already engaged in longstanding land and air campaigns on its borders against Lebanon’s Hezbollah, Iranian-funded groups in Syria and Palestinian militants in the Gaza Strip, as well as maritime skirmishes targeting Iranian and Israeli cargo ships in the Red and Mediterranean seas. Iran also holds sway over Shia militias in Iraq, and sees Yemen’s Houthi rebels as partners of growing regional importance. In January the Houthis proved their drones and missiles were capable of reaching Abu Dhabi – which means Tel Aviv could soon be a target within their reach. “Iran is entrenched in many theatres in the region now, and it’s not only military – we are talking about economic and cultural ties too. Combined with the proliferation of UAVs [unmanned aerial vehicles, or drones] and UASs [unmanned aerial systems], this is hybrid warfare,” said an IDF official who asked not to be named. “If they want to hurt Israelis, they already have numerous axes to attempt it.” Compared with the Netanyahu era, this time around Israeli officials have been watching quietly on the sidelines as the nuclear negotiations unfold. Aware there is little it can do to influence the outcome, the Israeli government instead appears to be pushing its US allies for a bilateral day-after agreement to address Israeli worries. This week, President Naftali Bennett reiterated Israel’s longstanding position that the country “will always maintain its freedom of action to defend itself”. In November the Knesset passed a budget featuring a 7bn shekel (£1.6bn) increase in spending for the defence establishment to prepare for the threat posed by Iran. Israel is also poised to deepen security ties with its new Abraham Accords partners in the Gulf, who also fear Iranian military capability: this month, a security pact was signed with Bahrain. And while bringing the nuclear deal with Iran back to life may represent a limited success for the Biden administration, the stakes in the Middle East are still rising. “These issues don’t exist in isolation any more. For example, during Operation Guardian of the Walls [the May 2021 war between Hamas and Israel], we saw that you can’t just attack Hamas. Hezbollah got involved too, and we had rocket fire from Lebanon,” said Citrinowicz. “We are active in the shadow war, but we must preserve the rules of the game. If we do something dramatic in Iran, like striking nuclear facilities, it will trigger a severe escalation on many fronts.”Russia’s invasion and bombing campaign in Ukraine has sparked outrage and alarm. Many in Australia watching on from afar are asking how they can help the people of Ukraine. Support local charities There are several Ukrainian charities working on the ground. Caritas Australia has been working with Caritas Ukraine since 2014 to help people affected by the humanitarian crisis, and is providing essential emergency goods including shelter, food relief and cash distributions. The Australian Federation of Ukrainian Organisations – the national peak body for 24 Ukrainian Australian community organisations – is encouraging concerned Australians to donate to the Ukraine Crisis Appeal which has pivoted to supplying urgent supplies to displaced and injured Ukrainians. United Help Ukraine focuses on providing medical supplies and humanitarian aid, and raising awareness of the conflict. Voices of Children aims to help children affected by the war in eastern Ukraine, providing support through art therapy, psychologists, video storytelling and a number of other methods. The Ukrainian Red Cross is also taking donations from abroad to mobilise volunteers and provide resources and support to victims on the ground. Support local journalism English-language news outlets based in the country, such as the the Kyiv Independent and the New Voice of Ukraine, are covering developments on the ground as the conflict unfolds, using local journalists. The Kyiv Independent says it was created by journalists in order to defend editorial independence. This site on Twitter covers many local journalists in Ukraine. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Attend an event Hundreds of Australians gathered in Sydney and Adelaide on Friday in support of the Ukrainian community, calling for an end to the occupation. On Sunday 27 February the Australian Federation of Ukrainian Organisations is holding a nationwide vigil – asking Australians to light a candle of peace and upload an image with the hashtag #StandwithUkraine. In Melbourne, the Association of Ukrainians in Victoria is holding a rally in support of Ukraine’s territorial integrity on Saturday 26 February, kicking off at Treasury Gardens at 12.30pm. The march will conclude at Federation Square at 2.30pm, followed by a community gathering over a bowl of varenyky in North Melbourne. Any profits made will be donated to humanitarian aid in Ukraine. Health authorities encourage people to wear masks when unable to physically distance from others.Storms, like sorrows, come not single spies these days, but in battalions. Or at least, that was my impression from listening to the news. So between the exit of Dudley and the entrance of Eunice I hurried out to check on some vulnerable old trees. Cycling towards Chatsworth, I noticed a few middle-aged oaks in the adjacent fields. The clean trunk of one mighty specimen would, quarter-sawn, make a floor in the duke’s house. Two narrower stems were 10 metres apart, but their vast crowns met in the air, each matched against the other in form and volume so that the dome of bare branches seemed to spring from a single source. Yet, while these oaks were grand, those I really wanted to see were much older, a last fragment of a medieval forest that once surrounded the house. And since this corner of Chatsworth is off limits to casual visitors, I leaned my bike against the estate wall where I could look over at these fading giants. Ancient oaks defy our expectations. Like people in extreme old age, they become wholly idiosyncratic, with deficiencies and disfigurements that make each a character unlike any of its neighbours. And much more than people, each tree is its own ecosystem, with its own assemblage of lichens and fungi, each supporting scores of different species of moths and other invertebrates, gathering genetic mutations as it ages, a sort of wisdom that preserves each tree from the pests and pathogens that have threatened it through the centuries. They really do contain multitudes. One oak in particular caught my eye, its trunk immensely fat but crowned with just a few sparse branches; all it could hold with life ebbing from it, like a slow tide. I spotted a large hole and realised I could see right through its bulk to the hillside beyond. The Dutch botanist Aljos Farjon measured the girth of these trees and found one at over seven metres, meaning they are likely to have germinated in the 15th century. Sobering to think they were already mature when Mary, Queen of Scots saw them during her detention here, a thousand thousand storms ago. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryLike most things in Mahatma Gandhi’s life, his ashram in the Indian city of Ahmedabad was simple and austere. Yet between 1917 and 1930, these modest white bungalows, set on the bank of the Sabarmati river in the state of Gujarat, were the beating heart of Gandhi’s non-violent freedom struggle against British rule and his experiments in upending India’s oppressive caste system. Gandhi – who would eventually lead India to independence and remains a global icon for peace – left the Sabarmati ashram in 1930, never to return, and in the years since, it has become one of India’s most sacrosanct sites. It is where Nelson Mandela, Bill Clinton, Xi Jinping, Benjamin Netanyahu and most recently Donald Trump all paid a visit to during their trips to India. But recently, it has been at the centre of an outcry over a grandiose plan by the government to redevelop the site into a “world class tourist destination” at a staggering cost of 12bn rupees (£117m). Descendants of Gandhi, historians, scholars, Gandhian institutions and lifelong ashram residents have accused the government, led by the prime minister, Narendra Modi, of attempting to co-opt and politicise Gandhi’s legacy to suit their own Hindu nationalist agenda and turning the Sabarmati ashram into a flashy Gandhi “theme park”. “This is the first time any government has actively interfered and imposed their own vision on a Gandhi monument,” said Gandhi’s great-grandson Tushar Gandhi. “This is part of a sinister design by Modi to obliterate Gandhi’s legacy and rewrite the history of India where he and his politics have no place.” Tushar Gandhi has filed an appeal in India’s highest court to halt the development. “If bapu [spiritual father] were alive today, he would never agree to this,” he said. Situated in what is now the centre of Ahmedabad, a city of eight million people, over the decades the ashram has fallen victim to the pressures of urbanisation. Its once sprawling 48-hectare (120 acre) grounds have been eroded to around two hectares and busy four-lane road was built through it. The surrounding area became filled with ramshackle housing, concrete hotels, roadside restaurants and garish shops selling cheap tourist wares. Squatters moved into the residential areas and businesses incompatible with Gandhi’s teaching – a cow artificial insemination centre being one – were set up in the ashram grounds. Discussions on how to restore the Sabarmati ashram grounds have raged for years but with the site being controlled by six different trusts with differing interests and agendas, nothing ever moved. That was until, the Indian government stepped in and took over. Under their new development plan – which unusually is being run directly from the prime minister’s office – the ashram site will be expanded to 20 hectares, given a sleek makeover with new Gandhi museums and monuments erected and other structures knocked down. Yet the government has faced considerable criticism over a lack of transparency for the redevelopment, including the unilateral appointment of Modi’s favoured architect for all his flagship projects, and lack of consultation with Gandhi scholars and institutions. Most worrying for some is the complicated relationship that Modi and the ruling Bharatiya Janata party (BJP) have with Gandhi. During his life, Gandhi was vehemently opposed to the Hindutva [Hindu nationalist] politics now espoused by Modi and the BJP, which believes that India should be a Hindu rather than secular state. Nathuram Godse, who assassinated Gandhi, had been a member of the RSS, the right-wing paramilitary organisation that gave rise to the BJP and to which Modi and many BJP politicians also belonged to. Within RSS circles there is still great disdain for Gandhi and under Modi’s premiership, reverence of Godse, Gandhi’s killer, has now become mainstream in India. Ramachandra Guha, one of India’s most eminent historians and biographer of Gandhi, was fiercely opposed to the ashram development. “Everything that the BJP stands for is antithetical to what Gandhi stood for,” said Guha. “This is a cynical project to whitewash Modi’s dark record.” Ashoke Chatterjee, a trustee for the Sabarmati Ashram Preservation and Memorial Trust – one of the six trusts that look after the ashram, made assurances that the redevelopment plans were still in their very early stages and that, through a “relatively collaborative” process, they government had agreed that the original ashram ethos and heritage buildings would remain preserved. Speaking in a personal capacity, Chatterjee said the trustees had already batted away what he termed “some incredibly stupid ideas”. One proposal was that there should be a hologram of Gandhi that would rise out of fountains on the Sarbarmati river at night, and another that they would build a huge steel spinning wheel in the ashram that would be so big it could be seen from aeroplanes flying over the city – “one ridiculous notion after another”. Nonetheless, Chatterjee said the trustees were well aware there maybe be “hidden agendas” behind the ashram development. He cited the government’s recent decision to remove Abide By Me, Gandhi’s favourite hymn, from the celebrations of India’s Republic Day – thereby erasing the only association with Gandhi left in the ceremony – as “a warning of what the ashram is up against”. “We have seen all these efforts to take ownership of the Mahatma and convert him into something else that they can manipulate,” he said. “We know that we have to be vigilant.” IK Patel, a state government official, denied any politicisation of the ashram. “There is no political agenda from the government,” said Patel. “We are restoring the ashram so the next generation can properly experience the history and values of Gandhi ji. This will honour Gandhi ji’s legacy.” The redevelopment has also faced criticism over the decision to evict the 400 or so families living in the ashram grounds, some whom are descendants of the Dalit families brought there by Gandhi himself. Gandhi left explicit instructions that these families should be allowed to stay in perpetuity and that the ashram should for ever work for the uplift of Dalits, the lowest in India’s caste system who were referred to as “untouchables” in Gandhi’s time. For almost two years, the residents protested against their eviction but now over half have accepted what the government described as a “generous” package: either 6 million rupees compensation, or a new four-bedroom high-rise apartment. Yet behind closed doors, several residents spoke quietly of being intimidated and pressured to accept compensation and leave against their will by a small resident’s committee that has ties with the state government. One lifelong resident said she was “habituated to live a simple life, like Gandhi ji. I do not know how to live in a high-rise flat away from the ashram and the trees and the river. It makes me very sad to be forced to leave my birthplace.” “I have lived here since I was 10 years old, I don’t want to leave my home and everything I have built here but I am being forced,” added Jadi Dhabi, 85, another resident. “Everybody is afraid of Modi so we have no choice.”This liveblog is closing but you can continue to follow our coverage on a new liveblog here. Thanks for reading. As dawn breaks in the Ukrainian capital of Kyiv, air raid sirens are sounding across the capital. Earlier, residents reported waking to the sound of explosions as reports circulated that Russia had launched a series of missile strikes on the city of just under 3 million. Many civilians sought safety in bomb shelters and metro stations as reports of Russian tanks were moving closer to the city from all sides. Here’s what we know so far: Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy has confirmed multiple reports of Russian missile strikes in a national address early on Friday morning. Loud explosions were heard in Kyiv in the early hours of Friday morning. A Guardian reporter in the city confirmed they heard what sounded like a loud explosion. Two multi-story residential buildings were seen on fire in south-east Kyiv after they were reportedly hit by falling debris from an aircraft that was shot down. Photos published by Ukraine’s state emergency services department show a multi-story building burning. The Ukrainian interior ministry said it shot down a Russian aircraft over Kyiv. Anton Gerashchenko, an adviser to Ukraine’s interior minister, said the Russian aircraft was hit by the Ukrainian air force and fell in the Darnitsky district. Russian forces were within kilometres of reaching Kyiv, according to US officials. According to a phone call that took place about 6:30pm ET on Thursday, US defence secretary Lloyd Austin told lawmakers that Russian mechanised forces that entered Ukraine from Belarus were about 20 miles (32km) from Kyiv, the Associated Press reports citing a source familiar with the call. The Ukrainian border post in Zaporizhzhya region was hit by a missile strike at 4.25am local time, Ukraine’s border guard service said. Ukraine’s armed forces confirmed additional weapons are being brought to Kyiv, amid reports of explosions in the Ukrainian capital. The EU’s Ursula von der Leyen and Charles Michel, disclosed the details of the second tranche of sanctions against Russia. French president Emmanuel Macron said Russian president Vladimir Putin had been duplicitous in his conversations with him, discussing the details of the Minsk agreements over the phone while preparing to invade Ukraine. The United Nations announced it is immediately allocating $20m to scale up UN humanitarian operations in Ukraine following Russia’s invasion. Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy gave a national address, confirming 137 civilians and military personnel have been killed so far in the Russian invasion of his country. Zelenskiy added that his country has been left on its own to fight Russia and he and his family remained in Ukraine, despite Russia identifying him as “target number one”. the Ukrainian president also decreed a full military mobilization against the Russian invasion, which is to last 90 days. Russians have also been bravely protesting against attacks on Ukraine despite the often heavy-handed consequences of doing so. The US is ready to accept Ukrainian refugees fleeing Ukraine, White House press secretary Jen Psaki has said. The government of Ukraine is asking for volunteers from the country’s hacker underground to help protect critical infrastructure and conduct cyber spying missions against Russian troops, according two people involved in the project who spoke with Reuters news agency. Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy has confirmed multiple reports of Russian missile strikes in a national address early on Friday morning, Zelenskiy said the strikes began at 4am local time on Friday, adding that Russian troops were stopped by Ukrainian forces from advancing in most directions. The president added that Russian strikes aimed at both military and civilian targets, Reuters reports. Meanwhile, sirens rang out in the western Ukrainian city of Lviv early on Friday, a Reuters witness said. US citizens are being urged to leave Ukraine immediately, according to a recent travel advisory. “US citizens in Ukraine should depart immediately if it is safe to do so using any commercial or other privately available ground transportation options,” the US embassy in Kyiv said in a statement. Ukraine’s central bank has banned payments to entities in Russia and Belarus as well as operations involving both nations’ currencies, the regulator said on Friday, Reuters reports. Ukraine’s foreign minister Dmytro Kuleba has described the attack on Kyiv this morning as “horrific” likening the assault as akin to an attack from Nazi Germany. Last time our capital experienced anything like this was in 1941 when it was attacked by Nazi Germany. Ukraine defeated that evil and will defeat this one. Stop Putin. Isolate Russia. Severe all ties. Kick Russia out of everywhere.” Russian forces that entered Ukraine through Belarus are within kilometres of reaching Kyiv, according to US officials. US defence secretary Lloyd Austin told lawmakers on a phone call that Russian mechanised forces that entered from Belarus were about 20 miles (32km) from Kyiv, according to a person familiar with the call, the Associated Press reports. The call was said to have taken place about 6:30pm ET. The officials described another Russian element that entered Ukraine from Russia being a bit further away, but that both were headed toward Kyiv with the goal of encircling the city and potentially toppling the Ukrainian government, according to the lawmaker on the call. Ukraine President Volodymyr Zelenskiy earlier said the government had information that “subversive groups” were encroaching on the city, and US secretary of state Antony Blinken said Kyiv “could well be under siege”. Amid the chaos happening in Kyiv, members of the Russian community have gathered in cities across the world to demonstrate their opposition to the Russian invasion of Ukraine. Here, one protester burns their Russian passport during a demonstration next to the Andrei Sakharov Square in Studio City in California on Thursday evening local time. Reports are coming in that two residential buildings are on fire in south-east Kyiv after they were hit by falling debris from an aircraft that was shot down. Photos published by Ukraine’s state emergency services department show a multi-story building burning. The fire comes after unconfirmed reports emerged from a Ukrainian interior ministry official who earlier said Russian aircraft had been shot down in the Darnytskyi district of Kyiv. The Ukrainian border post in Zaporizhzhya region has been hit by a missile strike, Ukraine’s border guard service says. The strike was reported to have occurred at 4.25am local time at the Primorsky Pasad border unit in the Zaporizhia region. According to Ukraine’s armed forces, border guards were killed and wounded in the attack. Ukraine’s military has uploaded a video of a fiery explosion seen in the sky over Kyiv this morning. The Guardian’s Luke Harding has shared this photo of an explosion in Kyiv. He added the blast took place between metro stations Poznjaky and Kharkivska. The Ukrainian interior ministry has said it shot down a Russian aircraft over Kyiv. Anton Gerashchenko, an adviser to Ukraine’s interior minister, said the Russian aircraft was hit by the Ukrainian air force and fell in the Darnitsky district. The official added a series of photos to his Telegram account on Friday, including what he said was a nine-storey residential building on fire. Ukraine’s armed forces have confirmed additional weapons are being brought to Kyiv, amid reports of explosions in the Ukrainian capital. Anton Gerashchenko, an adviser to Ukraine’s interior minister, has said an attack on Kyiv is taking place in the early hours of Friday morning. “Attacks on Kiev by cruise or ballistic missiles have just continued. I heard two powerful explosions just now,” Gerashchenko posted to his official Telegram account. We are receiving multiple reports from journalists on the ground in Ukraine that loud explosions have been heard in Kyiv in the early hours of Friday morning. Guardian reporter Emma Graham Harrison confirmed she heard what sounded like a loud explosion while the Guardian’s Luke Harding said explosions are taking place in Kyiv. One explosion occurred between metro station Poznjaky and Kharkivska, he said, adding that Ukraine’s operational command says its anti-aircraft defences are attacking Russian aircraft and drones. Ukraine’s ambassador to Austria, Olexander Scherba, said he heard “two heavy explosions” around 4.25am. A CNN team also reported hearing two large blasts in central Kyiv and a third loud explosion in the distance. Agence France-Presse also issued an alert saying loud explosions were heard in central Kyiv. As the EU’s institutional leaders, Ursula von der Leyen and Charles Michel, disclosed the details of the second tranche of sanctions against Russia, they were joined at a press conference in Brussels by French president Emmanuel Macron. Macron told reporters that Vladimir Putin had launched “massive” military attacks rather than the “targeted” ones that the Russian president had claimed he was undertaking. Macron’s subsequent comments then reflected the concerns of some member states that the EU is not going far enough on sanctions. He said: “It is an initial response, we have decided to inflict severe costs upon Moscow in different sectors, further measures at a government level will be taken”. Despite calls from Kyiv, EU has not cut Russia off from the Swift international payments system. The Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunication (Swift) is used by over 11,000 financial institutions to send secure payment orders and is key to the movement of funds to Russia’s oil and gas sector. Removing Russia from the system, it is argued, would make it close to impossible for financial institutions to send money in or out of the country, with consequences for both the country’s oil and gas sector and its European customers. A quick snap from US president Joe Biden, describing the Russian president’s actions as the unleashing of “a great deal of pain”. The next few days, weeks, and months will be hard on the people of Ukraine. Putin has unleashed a great pain on them. But the Ukrainian people have known 30 years of independence — and they have shown that they will not tolerate anyone who tries to take their country backwards.” Taiwan has condemned Russia’s actions, saying it will join other “like-minded” partners in sanctions, although details have not been provided. The crisis is being watched closely in Taiwan, which China claims as its own territory and has faced increased military pressure by Beijing over the last two years. Premier Su Tseng-chang told reporters in Taipei: We very harshly condemn such an act of invasion and will join democratic countries to jointly impose sanctions.” Taiwan economy minister Wang Mei-hua told reporters the island will “harshly scrutinise” exports to Russia and “coordinate” with unspecified allies for further actions. She did not elaborate. The foreign ministry said in a statement that the island, which is key in the global semiconductor supply chain, will “coordinate closely with the United States and other like-minded countries to adopt appropriate measures in order to free Ukraine from the horrors of war.” French president Emmanuel Macron said on Friday that Russian president Vladimir Putin had been duplicitous in his conversations with him, discussing the details of the Minsk agreements over the phone while preparing to invade Ukraine. Macron told reporters after an EU summit in Brussels: Yes, there was duplicity, yes there was a deliberate, conscious choice to launch war when we could still negotiate peace. Macron said he held a “frank, direct and quick” phone call with Putin on Thursday to ask him to stop military operations at the request of Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy. He added France would add its own sanction to an EU package. Of the 137 people who have so far been confirmed to have died following Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, a 14-year-old Ukrainian boy reportedly lost his life in Chuguev, eastern Ukraine, this morning. Anton Gerashchenko, an adviser to Ukraine’s interior minister, posted a report from the Kharkiv regional police to his official Telegram account on Thursday, claiming the boy was hit from a shell near his house. “What did Anton Tarasenko blame the Russian world?Answer me, Russians! Putin, you are a killer!” Gerashchenko said. President of the European Commission, Ursula von der Leyen, has announced the approval of another package of “massive and targeted sanctions” against Russia. First, this package includes financial sanctions, targeting 70% of the Russian banking market and key state owned companies, including in defence. Second, we target the energy sector, a key economic area which especially benefits the Russian state. Our export ban will hit the oil sector by making it impossible for Russia to upgrade its refineries. Third: we ban the sale of aircrafts and equipment to Russian airlines. Fourth, we are limiting Russia’s access to crucial technology, such as semiconductors or cutting-edge software. Finally: visas. Diplomats and related groups and business people will no longer have privileged access to the European Union.” The United Nations has announced it is immediately allocating $20m to scale up UN humanitarian operations in Ukraine following Russia’s invasion. Secretary-General Antonio Guterres made the announcement saying the UN and its humanitarian partners “are committed to staying and delivering, to support people in Ukraine in their time of need ... regardless of who or where they are,” Reuters reports. The UN chief said: With deaths rising, we are seeing images of fear, anguish and terror in every corner of Ukraine. People - everyday innocent people - always pay the highest price.” UN humanitarian chief Martin Griffiths said the $20m from the UN’s Central Emergency Response Fund will support emergency operations along the contact line in eastern Donetsk and Luhansk and in other areas of the country, and will “help with health care, shelter, food, and water and sanitation to the most vulnerable people affected by the conflict.” Less than two hours ago, Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy gave a national address, confirming 137 civilians and military personnel have been killed so far in the Russian invasion of his country. The president said all border guards on Zmiinyi island in were killed as Russia took the island. Zelenskiy also said he and his family have become targets as he vowed to remain in Ukraine. You can watch the video below. The Ukrainian military has also provided an update as to events unfolding across Ukraine. The general staff of the Ukrainian armed forces gave an address which has since been published by the Ukrainian parliament. In it he said Ukraine continues to fight in the south western part of the Black Sea while the bases and ports of Odessa and the Black Sea are being defended. He added that military forces have also been deployed to the defence of Kyiv. According to the Kyiv Independent, major Ukrainian cities are being threatened by an early morning offensive. The publication believes Russian forces are expected to launch attacks against Sumy, Chernihiv, Kherson, Zhytomyr, Kyiv, and Kharkiv oblasts during the early morning, citing a report from the Ukrainian parliament. Guardian reporter Elias Visontay has compiled a useful rundown of what we know so far on the Russia Ukraine invasion. You can read the summary here: The UK’s ministry of defence has released an intelligence update on the developments in Ukraine. Russian forces have likely captured the Chernobyl nuclear power plant. Workers have reportedly been detained by Russian troops. The Ukrainian Armed Forces have reportedly halted Russia’s advance towards Chernihiv. Fighting probably continues on the outskirts of the city. It is unlikely that Russia has achieved its planned day one military objectives. Ukrainian forces have presented fierce resistance across all axes of Russia’s advance.” Protests continue across the world against Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. Here, activists hold placards and flags as they gather in Lafayette Square in Washington, DC, today. New Zealand prime minister Jacinda Ardern has called for an immediate withdrawal of Russian forces from Ukraine, announcing a travel ban for Russian officials, and adding that she is considering expelling the Russian ambassador. New Zealand calls on Russia to do what is right and immediately cease military operations in Ukraine, and permanently withdraw to avoid a catastrophic and pointless loss of innocent life. New Zealand does not have a legal framework for creating autonomous sanctions independent of the United Nations security council, on which Russia sits. But Ardern said New Zealand had taken a number of steps, including a travel ban on Russian government officials associated with invasion, a ban on any exports that could be used by the Russian military for military or non-military purposes, and suspension of military bilateral consultations. Ardern said New Zealand had not ruled out passing legislation to create an autonomous sanctions regime, but that it would have to be examined through a wider lens than the current conflict. She said she was also considering expelling the Russian ambassador. “It’s one of the things that countries are able to do and will consider, but not a decision you take lightly given the wider ramifications for citizens in-country,” she said. Australia’s prime minister Scott Morrison says he will impose further sanctions on Russian individuals. Australia will be imposing further sanctions on oligarchs whose economic weight is of strategic significance to mask out and everything to members of the Russian parliament that voted to authorise the use of Russian troops in Ukraine to illegally invade Ukraine. We are also working with the United States to align with their further sanctions overnight on key television commercials complicit with the aggressions. We are extending both sanctions to those. These actions are being prepared and close coordination with our allies and partners. We have already announced two rounds of sanctions targeting fresh individuals, banks and companies and we have also seen overnight the latest measures announced by our key partners, including the United States and the United Kingdom, as well as strong statements from Japan and South Korea. Russia has been planning these acts of violence for some considerable period of time. But there must be a cost. There must be a price. And it must be imposed by the global community.” The Guardian team has compiled a compelling array of anti-war protests photographs from across Russia. You can view the gallery below: More from US president Joe Biden’s earlier speech authorising a new round of sanctions against Russia. “We have purposefully designed these sanctions to maximise the long-term impact on Russia – and to minimise the impact on the United States,” Biden said. Russians have also been bravely protesting against attacks on Ukraine despite the often heavy-handed consequences of doing so. United Nations representative Mohamad Safa posted this photo earlier, writing: “The breathtaking bravery of the Russians who know they’ll be arrested for protesting this war and do it anyway.” The government of Ukraine is asking for volunteers from the country’s hacker underground to help protect critical infrastructure and conduct cyber spying missions against Russian troops, according two people involved in the project who spoke with Reuters news agency. As Russian forces attacked cities across Ukraine, requests for volunteers began to appear on hacker forums on Thursday morning, as many residents fled the capital Kyiv. Ukrainian cybercommunity! It’s time to get involved in the cyber defence of our country,” the post read, asking hackers and cybersecurity experts to submit an application via Google docs, listing their specialties, such as malware development, and professional references. Yegor Aushev, co-founder of a cybersecurity company in Kyiv, told Reuters he wrote the post at the request of a senior Defence Ministry official who contacted him on Thursday. Aushev’s firm Cyber Unit Technologies is known for working with Ukraine’s government on the defence of critical infrastructure. A defence attache at Ukraine’s embassy in Washington said he “cannot confirm or deny information from Telegram channels” referring to the mobile messaging platform, and declined further comment. The US is ready to accept Ukrainian refugees fleeing Ukraine, White House press secretary Jen Psaki has said. When asked by CNN’s MJ Lee whether the US was prepared to accept Ukrainian refugees, she said: We are. But we certainly expect that most if not the majority will want to go to Europe and neighbouring countries. So, we are also working with European countries on what the needs are, where there is capacity. Poland, for example, where we are seeing an increasing flow of refugees over the last 24 hours.” Ukraine’s president has said his country has been left on its own to fight Russia after the Kremlin launched a large-scale invasion that killed more than 130 Ukrainians in the first day. In a video address to the nation just after midnight, Volodymyr Zelenskiy said: We have been left alone to defend our state. Who is ready to fight alongside us? I don’t see anyone. Who is ready to give Ukraine a guarantee of Nato membership? Everyone is afraid. Zelenskiy said that 137 Ukrainians, both military personnel and civilians, had been killed since the start of the attack early Thursday. Another 316 had been wounded, he said. The president added that he and his family remained in Ukraine, despite Russia identifying him as “target number one”. They want to destroy Ukraine politically by taking down the head of state. I am staying in the government quarter together with others. The enemy has designated me as the target number one, and my family as the target number two”. The Guardian team has compiled a handy video to explain Putin’s motives in waging war on Ukraine. Guardian foreign correspondent Luke Harding says Vladimir Putin has plunged Europe back into war and a conflict that “I think will reverberate far beyond Ukraine and have huge implications for Europe, for the rest of the world”. Reporting from Kyiv, he examines why the Russian president launched a full-scale invasion of its neighbour, if Putin can be stopped, and what might come next Japan joins the growing list of countries to strengthen sanctions against Russia. The Asian nation will target three areas including financial institutions and military equipment exports, prime minister Fumio Kishida said on Friday, Reuters reports. Japan will also do the utmost to limit the economic impact to Japan from the fall-out from the Ukraine crisis, he said. Reports are just coming in that staff at the Chernobyl nuclear power plant in Ukraine are being “held hostage” by Russian soldiers. White House press secretary Jen Psaki told a news conference: We are outraged by credible reports that Russian soldiers are currently holding the staff of the Chernobyl facilities hostage. This unlawful and dangerous hostage-taking, which could upend the routine civil service efforts required to maintain and protect the nuclear waste facilities, is obviously incredibly alarming and gravely concerning. We condemn it and we request their release.” The report comes after Russian forces captured the Chernobyl nuclear power plant after a fierce battle. In his grim video statement, the Ukrainian president signalled that his country is facing dire odds. But he also put on a brave face: “We are not afraid. We are not afraid of anything.” Having ordered a full military mobilization against the Russian invasion, with all Ukrainian men 18-60 ordered to remain in the country and potentially at ready to fight, Zelenskiy said he’s staying put as well. Russian operatives “want to destroy Ukraine politically by destroying the head of state,” he said. However, “I am staying in the government quarter together with others,” he added. Echoing messages from US and international intelligence, Zelenskiy said that Kyiv was a main target for Russia. “We have information that enemy sabotage groups have entered Kyiv,” he said. Having asked Nato nations to come to Ukraine’s aid, he said that Ukraine is on its own. “I see no one” to fight alongside Ukrainians, he said. Every single soldier guarding Zmiinyi Island, or Snake Island, in the Black Sea has died, Zelenskiy said. The Ukrainian president said he will honor the soldiers posthumously. Zelenskiy has decreed a full military mobilization against the Russian invasion, which is to last 90 days. The Ukrainian military will determine how many people are eligible for service, and the cabinet will allocate money for a mobilization. Meanwhile, “It is forbidden for men aged 18-60, Ukraine citizens, to leave the borders of Ukraine,” according to the State Border Guard Service. “This regulation will remain in effect for the period of the legal regime of martial law. We ask the citizens to take this information into consider.” The Ukrainian president has said he will remain in Kyiv, even as, he says, Russia has marked him as “target #1” and his family and “target #2”. Joe Biden briefed Democrats and Republicans in Congress about the crisis in Ukraine, the US White House press secretary Jen Psaki said in a briefing. The US president “spent an hour this afternoon on the phone” with leaders she said, Members of congress are looking to approve hundreds of millions of dollars in additional military and humanitarian aid for Ukraine. The US has already sent $400m in military assistance to Ukraine since the middle of last year. Nancy Pelosi, the Democratic Speaker of the House of Representatives, said lawmakers are looking to provide $600m for “lethal defense weapons”. “What we’re doing with Ukraine is making sure that we have humanitarian assistance to help the people, that we have lethal defense weapons going into Ukraine to the tune of $600 million for them to fight their own fight,” Pelosi said. In a televised address, Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy said he was disheartened after speaking to Western leaders. “I see no one,” to fight alongside Ukraine, he said. Zelenskiy said that 137 have died so far in the invasion, and 316 wounded. A US defense official echoed to Reuters that Kyiv will be one of three axes of assualt from Russia. From Reuters: “The indications we’ve seen thus far, in just these first, not even 12 hours, are in keeping with our assessment earlier, that would be his goal: to decapitate this government,” the official told reporters, speaking on condition of anonymity. The official did not provide evidence. The official said this appeared to be only the first phase of a large-scale Russian invasion that so far has used a limited number of the more than 150,000 Russian troops arrayed around Ukraine. “We don’t believe he has committed anywhere near a large portion of the forces that he has available to him,” the official said. Previously, U.S. officials had told Reuters that a Russian invasion could last 10-15 days but this official declined to speculate on how long the Russian onslaught would last, saying putting a timetable on it would be “a fool’s errand.” The Chinese embassy in Kyiv is arranging for the evacuation of Chinese nationals in Ukraine. “Improve awareness of safety precautions and stock up on daily necessities such as food and drinking water in due course,” the Chinese embassy said in a bulletin to nationals earlier this week. “Strengthen contacts with local overseas Chinese associations, international student associations, Chinese chambers of commerce as well as acquaintances and friends, and help each other when necessary.” But China has refused to condemn Russia’s attack on Ukraine. Pakistani prime minister Imran Khan was the first leader to meet Putin after Moscow attacked Ukraine. Khan’s office said that both leaders held wide-ranging consultations on bilateral relations as well as regional and international issues of mutual interests. The statement further reads that the Prime Minister of Pakistan regretted “the latest situation between Russia and Ukraine and said that Pakistan had hoped diplomacy could avert a military conflict. Khan also stressed that conflict was not in anyone’s interest, and that the developing countries were always hit the hardest economically in case of conflict. He underlined Pakistan’s belief that disputes should be resolved through dialogue and diplomacy. Khan also focused on the importance of Pakistan-Stream Gas Pipeline as a flagship economic project between Pakistan and Russia and also discussed cooperation on prospective energy-related projects. They also talked about the humanitarian crisis in Afghanistan and Islamophobia, and other issues. Secretary of State Tony Blinken said that “all evidence suggests that Russia intends to encircle and threaten Kyiv”, in remarks to a meeting of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).in remarks “We believe Moscow has developed plans to inflict widespread human rights abuses – and potentially worse – on the Ukrainian people,” he said. “For months, Russia has engaged in the pretense of diplomacy while insisting that they had no intentions of invading Ukraine,” Blinken said. “All the while, the Kremlin has been preparing this cold-blooded attack, the scale of which has not been seen in Europe since the Second World War.” “The entire international community now plainly see Russia’s complete abandonment and abdication of the commitments it made to the world – and we will never forget,” he added. Images of local Ukraine residents taking shelter in metro stations in Ukraine’s capital city Kyiv and the city of Kharkiv, from reporter Benoît Vitkine with the French newspaper Le Monde: The mayor of Kyiv said four metro stations would be used as air raid shelters, while the local Ukrainian leadership in the Donetsk region said Russian forces had hit a hospital there, killing four people, reported Reuters. Fighting has continued throughout the night in Ukraine, with reports of battle in the Ukrainian city of Sumy. During a phone call with Putin earlier today, French president Emmanuel Macron demanded that Putin immediately cease military operations in Ukraine, reports Reuters. According to the Elysee palace, Macron’s demand came after a discussion with the Ukraine president. “After having spoken with the Ukrainian president, and in coordination with him, the president (Macron) called Vladimir Putin to demand the immediate halt of Russian military operations, noting that Russia risked massive sanctions,” said the Elysee as Macron attended an EU summit in Brussels. Putin provided a different account of the meeting, with the Russian government reporting that Putin provided Macron with an “exhaustive” list of reasons for Russia’s military action in Ukraine. The Russian government also said that the two had a “serious and frank exchange of views,” adding that the call took place at Macron’s initiative. The Russian government finally reported that the two world leaders agreed to stay in touch. Macron has remained a key representative for Western countries during discussions with Putin, as Macron has hoped an open communication channel could usher in diplomatic solutions, reports AFP. More on the economic impact of the Ukrainian invasion from the Guardian’s Dominic Rushe, explaining how the war declaration has impacted US markets: Stock market panic following the Ukraine invasion appears to have eased - for now - following Biden’s press briefing. US stock markets collapsed this morning as the conflict sent oil prices soaring and investors worried about the financial impact of the Russian attack. By the end of the day, all the major US markets ended up with the Dow Jones closing over 100 points higher having been down 859 points earlier in the day. Investors were encouraged by Biden announcing that the sanctions against Russia will not disrupt the global oil and natural gas markets, triggering a fall in oil prices which had passed $100 a barrel earlier in the day. Biden’s sanctions also stopped short of kicking Russia off the SWIFT international banking system, one of the most severe financial sanctions the US and its allies could take and a move that would cut Russia off from most international financial transactions. “It is always an option, but right now that’s not the position that the rest of Europe wishes to take,” said Biden. But with the situation in Ukraine deteriorating and the crisis certain to worsen already high energy costs in the US, there are likely to be more wild swings in the markets as the conflict continues. Amid Russia’s declaration of war on Ukraine, global markets have taken a hit, especially European share markets, reports the Guardian’s Peter Hannam. European share markets have largely borne the initial brunt of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, with steep falls in stocks, while Wall Street has so far avoided following suit. Russia’s main share index plunged by a third, erasing some $US200 billion in value, in a record rout for that country’s bourse, Bloomberg reported. Europe’s benchmark Stoxx50 index sank 3.6%, a decline echoed in major financial centres from London to Paris and Frankfurt, with those markets all losing about 4%... On currency markets, the Euro, too, lost as much as 1.8% against the US dollar, touching its weakest level of $1.11 since June 2020, according to Bloomberg data. Russia’s ruble hit fresh record lows against the US dollar. Crude oil, meanwhile, pared its earlier advances, with Brent dropping back below the $US100 a barrel level that it reached earlier on Thursday. Still, oil remains near its highest levels since 2014. The invasion of Ukraine, a major wheat exporter, also pushed up food commodity prices, with wheat rising 5% to hit decade highs. Rabobank, an agribusiness specialist, estimates that some 5 million tonnes of Ukraine’s wheat crop had still to be shipped before the invasion, creating a shortfall that would likely be made up US and European supplies. The EU has agreed to roll out another round of sanctions against Russia’s financial, energy and transport sectors as well as impose export controls, reports Reuters. “The European Council today agrees on further restrictive measures that will impose massive and severe consequences on Russia for its action,” read a statement from the 27 national EU leaders who are currently meeting in Brussels. The newest round of sanctions will also include blacklisting more Russian individuals over the Ukrainian invasion. Uncertainty surrounds the situation at Hostomel airfield as an advisor to the Ukrainian presidential office who said that Ukrainian forces had recaptured the airfield is now saying that fighting is ongoing, reports Reuters. While previously declaring the airfield recaptured by Ukrainian military, the advisor is now saying that fighting is still occurring over control of the airbase. Additional explosions have also been reported from the direction of Ukraine’s Hostomel airport, an international cargo airport and testing facility, following attacks by Russian forces this morning. From reporter Jane Lytvynenko: Big explosion from direction of Hostomel airport just now. Bigger than previous ones. One explosion, not several. Lytvynenko adds: Second powerful explosion. The city of Mariupol in Ukraine, one of the largest Ukrainian ports on the Azov Sea, is under heavy fire with reports of hundreds of explosions. From the Kyiv Post: The Ukrainian city of Mariupol is under heavy fire with reports of hundreds of explosions. The city is one of the biggest Ukrainian ports on the Azov Sea. Taking Mariupol would help Russia secure a direct land route to Crimea, the Ukrainian peninsula annexed by Russia in 2014. Ukraine’s health minister, Oleh Lyashko, has reported that 57 people have been killed and 169 wounded following Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, reported Reuters. The deputy defence minister separately added that heavy shelling was ongoing in the eastern Donetsk region. More on Biden’s remarks today following Russia’s invasion of Ukraine: Biden warned that Putin was not likely to stop his expansion with Ukraine. “He has much larger ambitions than Ukraine. He wants to, in fact, re-establish the former Soviet Union. That’s what this is about,” said Biden. Biden added: “And I think that his ambitions are completely contrary to the place where the rest of the world has arrived.” Biden further remarked that Putin would be a pariah on the international stage and that his actions would cost Russian civilians dearly, reported Reuters. Biden also has not ruled out personal sanctions against Putin, saying that those remained “on the table.” Follow Biden’s remarks on the Guardian US Live blog here. In remarks today, the US president, Joe Biden, called out Putin as having sole responsibility for attacks in Ukraine, implementing even harsher sanctions in response to the expanded invasion. “Putin is the aggressor. Putin chose this war. And now he and his country will bear the consequences,” said Biden following the full-out invasion. Biden also said that the US would be deploying more troops to Germany ahead of increased attacks, but none to Ukraine itself. On increased troop presence in Germany, Biden said: “Our forces are not going to Europe to fight in Ukraine, but to defend our Nato allies and reassure those allies in the east.” Biden also confirmed that he would not be speaking with Putin following the full-out invasion. Follow Biden’s remarks on the Guardian US Live blog here. More images coming out of Ukraine as civilians try to cope and stay safe with Putin’s full-out invasion in Ukraine under way: Here is a summary of some key events on the day Russia launched an all-out invasion of Ukraine, triggering warnings from world leaders of the biggest conflict in Europe since 1945. Minutes after Vladimir Putin ended weeks of agonised speculation by announcing a “special military operation” at dawn on Thursday, explosions were heard near major Ukrainian cities, including the capital, Kyiv. According to Ukrainian officials, the initial wave of strikes appeared to involve cruise missiles, artillery and airstrikes which struck military infrastructure and border positions, including airbases. Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, responded to the invasion by declaring martial law and saying Kyiv would issue weapons to every Ukrainian who wanted to defend their country. As Ukrainian diplomats pleaded with the world to stop the Russian aggression, Zelenskiy warned of a bleak return to the past. By mid-afternoon on Thursday, Russia’s defence ministry claimed to have “neutralised” Ukraine’s airbases and air defences, destroying 74 military ground facilities, including 11 airfields, three command posts and 18 radar stations for anti-aircraft missile systems. Ukrainian authorities said Russia had carried out 203 attacks and that fighting was raging across almost the entire territory. Thousands of Ukrainians are already on the move and leaving the country, with tens of thousands more preparing to flee, after the Russian attack ordered by Vladimir Putin. Videos and photos on social media show lines of cars moving out of cities and heading west, as well as an increase of people on foot near the southern and western borders. The UK’s prime minister, Boris Johnson, announced its “largest ever” set of economic sanctions on Russia, including pushing to end Russia’s use of the Swift international payment systems, freezing assets of all major Russian banks, limiting cash held by Russian nationals in UK banks and sanctioning more than 100 individuals and entities. Ukraine’s foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, voiced his anger as EU heads of state and government appeared to hold back from imposing the potentially most damaging sanction on Russia. With casualties mounting, Kuleba warned that European and US politicians would have “blood on their hands” if they decided against blocking Russia from an international payments system through which it receives foreign currency. Tens of thousands of Ukrainians are fleeing or preparing to flee the country with videos and photos on social media showing lines of cars moving out of cities and heading west, as well as an increase of people on foot near the southern and western borders while reports of casualties mount. We spoke to Maria Romanenko and Alena Dalskaya-Latosiewicz from their cars as they tried to escape the conflict, as well as Romeo Kokriatski a Ukrainian-American, who says he hopes to stay in the capital, Kyiv, for as long as possible. The Czech president, Miloš Zeman, has issued an unequivocal condemnation of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine in a dramatic volte face that won widespread praise and surprised his detractors, writes Robert Tait. In a televised address, Zeman - who has gained a reputation for being an ally and admirer of Vladimir Putin - called the Russian president Vladimir Putin “a madman” and admitted he had been wrong to dismiss the prospects of an invasion of Ukraine. He called for sweeping sanctions in response, including the expulsion of Russia from the Swift international banking system. Zeman said: This is an act of unprovoked aggression that needs to be condemned in the strongest possible terms, not just in words, but also in deeds. Acknowledging respect for Russia’s culture and the country’s sacrifices during the second world, he added: That does not mean that I will agree to a foreign army entering the territory of a sovereign state without a declaration of war. He said he had studied Putin’s speech justifying the invasion and responded with “a single sentence”. Perceived or real mistakes, such as the bombing of Yugoslavia or the entry into Iraq, cannot be a justification for mistakes of one’s own. Russia’s actions amounted to “a crime against peace”, he said. In a remarkable reference to Putin - with whom he has had several warm public exchanges - Zeman said: The madman needs to be isolated and defended against, not just with words but with concrete measures. Zeman, 77, who is recovering from a prolonged bout of ill health, had previously called US predictions of an imminent Russian military attack “an embarrassment to the CIA”. He has previously justified Kremlin policy towards Ukraine, describing the situation following Russia’s 2014 annexation of Crimea as akin to a civil war. But the invasion has touched a nerve in Czech public opinion and popular culture, evoking memories of the 1968 Moscow-led invasion by Warsaw Pact forces to crush the Prague Spring. There have also been comparisons to Nazi Germany’s 1938 annexation of German-speaking regions of Czechoslovakia, an action that presaged a full-scale invasion of months later. Zeman’s speech won praise from Petr Fiala, the recently-appointed Czech prime minister, who is notably more pro-western than the president. Fiala tweeted: It is good that the president is aware of the importance of a common approach and that the main political representatives of the Czech Republic speak the same way. Jiří Pehe, a Czech political analyst and former adviser to Vaclav Havel, the first president of post-communist Czechoslovakia, also hailed Zeman’s comments, writing on Twitter: Thanks to him for that, but his world seemed to collapse.” Uefa will move this season’s Champions League final from St Petersburg, with an extraordinary meeting called for Friday morning to confirm Russia is being stripped of the showpiece match, our reporter Paul MacInnes writes. The executive committee will meet to discuss the consequences for football of the military invasion of Ukraine by Russia, with the aim of the meeting “to evaluate the situation and take all necessary decisions”. Uefa has come under increasing pressure to act after the escalation of tensions this week and said in a statement on Thursday that it strongly condemned Russia’s invasion, was “resolute in our solidarity with the football community in Ukraine” and “ready to extend our hand to the Ukrainian people”. The governing body added: “We are dealing with this situation with the utmost seriousness and urgency.” The British government has called for the match, scheduled for Saturday 28 May, to be moved and on Thursday members of the European parliament wrote to Uefa calling for an extraordinary meeting, to discuss not only moving the final but terminating sponsorship arrangements with the Russian gas company Gazprom. US President Joe Biden has been presented with a menu of options for the US to carry out massive cyberattacks designed to disrupt Russia’s ability to sustain its military operations in Ukraine, NBC News reports. Four people familiar with deliberations told the news channel that US intelligence and military cyber warriors were proposing the use of American cyber weapons “on a scale never before contemplated”. Among the options are disrupting internet connectivity across Russia, shutting off electric power, and tampering with railroad switches to hamper Russia’s ability to re-supply its forces, three of the sources said. One person briefed on the matter said: You could do everything from slow the trains down to have them fall off the tracks. The UK is to impose its “largest ever” set of economic sanctions on Russia, including pushing to end Russia’s use of the Swift international payment systems, freezing assets of all major Russian banks, limiting cash held by Russian nationals in UK banks and sanctioning more than 100 individuals and entities, our chief political correspondent, Jessica Elgot, reports. Boris Johnson has urged European leaders to agree that Russia’s use of the major payments system should be suspended, making the argument in a call with the German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, and in a meeting of G7 leaders. The move is likely to be resisted by EU countries. Announcing a package of sanctions that Johnson had promised would “hobble” Russia’s economy, the PM said legislation would be tabled on Tuesday to ban major Russian companies from raising finance on UK markets and to prevent Russia from raising sovereign debt on UK markets. The sanctions include more key oligarchs who will have assets frozen, though sources said more names – including what they said would be more recognisable figures – would be released in the coming weeks. The prime minister announced 10 measures the UK was taking immediately. The UK will freeze assets of all major Russian banks including VTB, the country’s second largest bank with assets totalling £154bn. Individual sanctions will be imposed on more than 100 individuals, entities and subsidiaries, including Rostec, the country’s biggest defence company, which exports £10bn in arms a year, as well as four other defence companies. Oligarchs who will be sanctioned include Putin’s former son-in-law Kirill Shamalov, Russia’s youngest billionaire; Denis Bortnikov, the chair of VTB Bank’s management board; and Yury Slyusar, the director of the United Aircraft Corporation. The Russian airline Aeroflot will be banned from landing in the UK. US President Joe Biden is expected to deliver an address to the American people from the White House in the next few minutes, where he is expected to outline tougher sanctions against Russia. For more live updates from the US, here is Joan E Greve’s live blog. I will continue here with global Ukraine coverage, and the top lines that emerge in the US. Ukraine’s port city of Mariupol is under heavy fire with reports of hundreds of explosions, a diplomatic source told Reuters. More to follow. Russian forces have captured the Chernobyl nuclear power plant after a fierce battle, Ukrainian presidential adviser Mykhaylo Podolyak has said. Podolyak said: It is impossible to say the Chernobyl nuclear power plant is safe after a totally pointless attack by the Russians. This is one of the most serious threats in Europe today. Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, also said the Chernobyl area near Kyiv was now under the control of Russian troops. The White House has released a statement from Joe Biden saying the G7 leaders have agreed to move forward on “devastating packages of sanctions”. Biden will be delivering an address to the American people from the White House in half an hour. Former German chancellor Gerhard Schröder is facing pressure over his links to Russian companies as three other ex-European leaders renounced board roles, Reuters reports. Schröder, who served as German chancellor from 1998 to 2005, is on the board of Russian oil giant Rosneft and chairman of the shareholders’ committee of the company that is in charge of building the Nord Stream 2 pipeline. He has also been nominated to the board of Russian gas giant Gazprom. In a LinkedIn post on Thursday, Schröder warned against Europe and Russia severing their links: There have been many mistakes - on both sides. But Russia’s security interests do not justify the use of military means either. It comes after three other former European leaders announced they were leaving positions on the boards of Russian companies in protest at Vladimir Putin’s invasion of Ukraine. Former Italian prime minister Matteo Renzi quit car-sharing service Delimobil, Finland’s ex-premier Esko Aho left Russia’s largest bank, Sberbank, and Austria’s former chancellor Christian Kern said he was stepping down from Russian Railways. From our China affairs correspondent, Vincent Ni: Russian forces are attempting to seize control of the Chernobyl nuclear power plant, the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has said. Ukraine’s foreign ministry echoed Zelensky’s comments, warning: In 1986, the world saw the biggest technological disaster in Chernobyl. If Russia continues the war, Chernobyl can happen again in 2022. Ukraine’s ambassador to the United States, Oksana Markarova, said Russian forces had attempted to seize control of the Chernobyl nuclear power plant, adding that the Ukrainian National Guard was working to protect the nuclear plant from attack. Markarova said during a press briefing: They made an attempt to seize the Chernobyl nuclear power station, and the fight is going right there with the Ukrainian National Guard protecting the Chernobyl station from the attack. She added: For the first time since the Chernobyl nuclear disaster — after which Ukraine has been protecting, together with our European and American friends and allies, the world from another nuclear disaster — we have to defend it again from the Russian forces. At the Luzhanka border crossing with Hungary in western Ukraine, hundreds of cars waited in a queue snaking more than 2 km back from the border on Thursday afternoon, writes Shaun Walker. A steady stream of people crossed on foot, carrying suitcases and holdalls stuffed with belongings. Many were Ukrainians from the Hungarian minority that live in the west of the country, and said they were traveling to stay with relatives for a few days in the hope the danger would pass. Others had come from other parts of Ukraine and planned to drive on to western Europe. “The people who have money are leaving,” said one of the customs officials at the post. He said over 1,500 people had left through the crossing by 4pm on Thursday, as opposed to just a few hundred on a normal day. One 19-year-old man from the town of Svyalava said he had left both because he was scared of Russian assault and of potentially being called up to the Ukrainian army. “My brother lives in Hungary and I’ll stay with him as long as it takes,” he said, waiting at the border post. He asked not to use his name. Others also said they were fleeing before receiving army call-ups. At least 705 people have been arrested today at anti-war protests that have taken place in 40 Russian cities, the OVD-Info protest monitor said. The OVD-Info monitor has documented crackdowns on Russia’s opposition for years. The UK will impose the “largest and most severe” package of economic sanctions Russia “has ever seen”, Boris Johnson says. The UK prime minister has been addressing the House of Commons, where he said the UK will do its “utmost” to offer support to Ukraine. All major Russian banks will be excluded from the UK financial system and a full asset freeze is being imposed on VBT, Russia’s second-largest bank. There will be limits on the amount Russians can have in British bank accounts, with asset freezes extended to around 100 more people. Airline Aeroflot will be banned from the UK. Similar measures will be imposed on Belarus, Johnson added. Describing Vladimir Putin as a “bloodstained aggressor who believes in imperial conquest”, the PM said Putin was “always determined to attack his neighbour, no matter what we did”, adding: Putin will stand condemned in the eyes of the world and history. He will never be able to cleanse the blood of Ukraine from his hands. The UK prime minister Boris Johnson is making a statement to MPs about the Russian invasion of Ukraine. He is expected to focus on the beefed-up sanctions being imposed by the UK in response. For more live updates from the UK, here is Andrew Sparrow’s live blog. I will continue here with global Ukraine coverage, and the top lines that emerge in the UK. An errant Russian missile struck a Turkish-owned ship off the coast of the Ukrainian port city of Odesa in the Black Sea, our reporter Ruth Michaelson writes. The ship, Yasa Jupiter, was flying under the flag of the Marshall Islands, and reported no casualties or injuries following the incident. Pictures from Turkish channel NTV showed destruction on board: The Turkish general directorate of maritime affairs said the ship issued no request for help and was now in transit to Romania. Turkey is under increasing international pressure, particularly from Ukraine, to prevent Russian warships from passing through the Bosphorus and Dardanelles straits, which provide entry to the Black Sea. Despite maintaining alliances with both Ukraine and Russia, the conflict in Ukraine is likely to negatively impact the Turkish economy and test Turkey’s membership of Nato. Turkey’s membership of the alliance was already under pressure following its decision to purchase Russia’s S400 missile defence system, leading to sanctions from the US. Earlier today, Turkey’s foreign ministry condemned Russian action in Ukraine. We find the military operation launched unacceptable, and reject it. This attack, beyond destroying the Minsk agreement, is a grave violation of law and a serious threat to the security of our region and the world. The territorial integrity and sovereignty of countries should be respected. It added: Our support for the political unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine will continue. Pakistan’s prime minister, Imran Khan, is the first leader to meet President Putin after Moscow attacked Ukraine this morning, writes Shah Meer Baloch in Islamabad. Khan arrived in Moscow yesterday on a two-day trip when tensions between Kyiv and Moscow were rising but Putin had not ordered a military attack on Ukraine. Khan was given a guard of honour on his arrival in Moscow. On his arrival to Moscow, Khan said: What a time I have come here. So much excitement. The opposition and experts raised concerns over Khan’s visit, describing it as “ill-timed”. Michael Kugelman of the Wilson Center in the US said: There is a risk that Khan’s visit to Moscow will be perceived by many in the west as an indirect endorsement of Putin’s decree on eastern Ukraine – a move that much of the world has condemned and that Pakistan itself likely does not support. Even though Khan’s visit was planned weeks ago and focuses on bilateral relations, the timing will raise eyebrows and present some problems of optics. Khan was in Moscow during military attacks on Ukraine. Indian media, such as the Hindu and a few more media networks shared fake news that Khan had ended his two-day visit to Moscow after the attack on Ukraine. Pakistan denied the news. Adil Shahzeb, a Pakistani journalist tweeted from Moscow that both Russian and Pakistani officials had denied reports that Khan had ended the visit. There is no cancellation of the visit, PM Khan will be meeting President Putin as per schedule. Khan’s planned interaction with the media has been cancelled. Pakistan and the US do not enjoy cordial relations and the US blames Pakistan for its dubious role in Afghanistan. Husain Haqqani, a former ambassador to the US and a scholar, told the Guardian: Imran Khan has consistently signalled his derision for the US and the west while also seeking economic assistance. The timing of his visit to Russia will only reaffirm his anti-western worldview. The image of Pakistan’s prime minister next to Vladimir Putin soon after Putin’s invasion of Ukraine will not endear Pakistan to Americans or western Europeans. Russia’s president Vladimir Putin has ‘re-introduced war to the European continent’, the leaders of the G7 have said. In a joint statement following a virtual meeting, the leaders of France, Germany, Japan, Italy, the United Kingdom, the United States, Canada as well as the European Commission president, Ursula von der Leyen, the European Council president, Charles Michel, and the Nato secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, strongly condemned Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. The crisis is a “serious threat to the rules-based international order, with ramifications well beyond Europe”, the G7 leaders said, adding that Putin had “put himself on the wrong side of history”. The statement reads: We condemn President Putin for his consistent refusal to engage in a diplomatic process to address questions pertaining to European security, despite our repeated offers. We stand united with partners, including Nato, the EU and their member states as well as Ukraine and remain determined to do what is necessary to preserve the integrity of the rules-based international order. Russian troops based in Belarus are advancing towards Kyiv, the UK’s Ministry of Defence has said. In its intelligence update posted on Twitter at 4pm UK time, the ministry said Russia had conducted an air assault on an airfield on the outskirts of Kyiv. Strikes had been delivered through “a combination of Russian ground, air and sea-launched missiles and by artillery bombardment” and had targeted military infrastructure, it said. Heavy casualties had been suffered on both sides, the ministry said, although exact numbers were currently unclear. At 6pm local time there were huge queues of cars trying to escape Kyiv and to head west, writes Luke Harding in the Ukrainian capital. The main road out of the city was jammed with vehicles including buses and taxis. The queue was stationary for much of the time. Drivers stood next to their vehicles, patiently waiting for the route to clear. Over at the capital’s central train station, Kyiv-Pasazhyrskyi, hundreds of passengers were seeking to leave. There were long queues for tickets and information. Several trains had been cancelled - red on the departure board - but others were functioning as normal. Many milled around with luggage but no tickets. A group of Pakistani students from the International European university in Kyiv said they had found a taxi to take them to Lviv for $500. One said: We’ve been here for our studies. Maybe we will stay in the west, maybe we will come back. We can’t go to Poland because we don’t have visas. Several families were among those trying to depart including a group with a baby in a pram, and a couple with a pet dachshund. This vast human exodus seemed out of place in 2022 and more of a throw-back to Europe’s dark last century, all caused by the paranoid behaviour of one man. The mayor of Kyiv has ordered a curfew in Ukraine’s capital from 10pm to 7am, according to a statement shared on his official Facebook page. Public transport will not work during curfew, Kyiv’s mayor, Vitali Klitschko, writes. but metro stations will be available as shelters around the clock. Klitschko writes: We ask all Kyivites to return home on time. If you need to move around the city during the curfew, in particular, as employees of critical infrastructure companies, you must have identification documents. Here is a summary of some key events on the day Russia launched an all-out invasion of Ukraine, triggering warnings from world leaders of the biggest conflict in Europe since 1945. According to Ukrainian officials, the initial wave of strikes appeared to involve cruise missiles, artillery and airstrikes which struck military infrastructure and border positions, including airbases. Regional authorities in the southern Odessa region of Ukraine said 18 people were killed in a missile attack. At least six people were killed in the town of Brovary, near Kyiv, local authorities said. Four people died when a shell hit a hospital in the city of Vuhledar in Donetsk, Ukrainian officials said. Thousands of Ukrainians are already fleeing the country. Russia’s defence ministry claimed to have destroyed 74 Ukrainian military ground facilities, including 11 airfields, three command posts and 18 radar stations for anti-aircraft missile systems. Western leaders united in condemnation: US President Joe Biden said Washington and its allies will announce “severe sanctions” later on Thursday. British Prime Minister Boris Johnson is expected to outline a new package of measures to parliament at 1700 GMT. The EU has also vowed “massive sanctions” ahead of a meeting of leaders in Brussels, but is yet to agree what they should cover. The union has also said it will hit Belarus with sanctions for its role in supporting Putin’s invasion. While Russian state television framed the war as a defensive mission, the Guardian found no support for the war among ordinary people in Moscow. The Russian central bank has purchased millions of roubles to prevent the collapse of the Moscow stock exchange and prop up the currency after it plunged to an all-time low against the dollar. Greece says it will begin evacuating members of its expatriate community in Mariupol, the frontline city in eastern Ukraine, Helena Smith reports from Athens. Athens’ deputy minister in charge of diaspora affairs, Andreas Katsaniotis, said around 100 ethnic Greeks would be be transferred to safety via Romania. Not many of our community members have as yet requested to leave but a small group, around 100 people, will leave Mariupol. There is a plan and we are implementing it ... when other countries were withdrawing their diplomats, we were reinforcing our general consulate in Mariupol. In Odessa, Greece’s former honorary consul to Ukraine Panayiotis Bouboulouras told the Greek daily Protothema: Unfortunately very few of us believed this would happen. The Americans said the fascist Russians had been preparing this attack for a long time but neither us, nor the Europeans, believed them. Greece, alone among EU states, has a large expatriate community in Ukraine and is closely watching events there. Although spread across the country, most of the estimated 120,000 strong minority live in the coastal city of Mariupol close to the frontline. Bouboukouras who presides over Ukraine’s federation of ethnic Greek businessmen, said many were either trying to flee Kiev or the country. Katerina Svefkenko, who heads the association of Greeks in Kharkiv, in Ukraine’s northeast, said inhabitants had heard a barrage of explosions. “In the 40 years that I have lived here I have never experienced anything like it,” she said. Greece traditionally has strong ties with fellow Orthodox Russia but from the outset has firmly come out on the side of its fellow EU and Nato partners blasting Putin for violating international law by staging the attack. In an excoriating statement the Greek foreign ministry said it “unequivocally condemns” the Russian attack which “undermines European peace and security.” Russia’s ambassador to Athens had been called in for explanation, diplomats said. Russia’s invasion risks a “health emergency” in Ukraine and “a humanitarian catastrophe in Europe”, the World Health Organisation has warned, writes the Guardian’s health policy editor Denis Campbell. In a statement the WHO’s regional office for Europe also urged combatants to ensure that health workers and hospitals were not targeted, though its plea came after reports that a Russian shell had already struck a hospital in Vuhledar in Donetsk in eastern Ukraine. Amid the conflict rapidly unfolding in Ukraine, the WHO regional office for Europe reiterates its deepest concern for the safety, health and wellbeing of all civilians impacted by the crisis in the country and possibly beyond. It added that, through its country office in Ukraine, the WHO’s European section “continues to deliver much-needed support on urgent health issues, particularly in the face of an ongoing polio outbreak and the long-running Covid-19 response”. The right to health and access to services must always be protected, not least during times of crises. Health workers, hospitals and other facilities must never be a target and be allowed to continue to serve the health needs of communities. Separately, the World Medical Association, which represents doctors’ organisations globally, also demanded that Russia does not attack health facilities. The World Medical Association deplores the unprecedented aggression in Ukraine by the Russian leadership. It calls on Russian leaders to respect the work of doctors and nurses in the country and the neutrality of health care institutions. A small number of Russians joined Ukrainians for the anti-war protests outside Downing Street, Ben Quinn reports. While those gathered outside the protest outside Downing Street in London were almost entirely Ukrainian, a small group of young Russians working in in sectors ranging from IT to fashion were also present, though they declined to give their names – such were their concerns at the consequences of speaking out against Putin. “I literally couldn’t look at my colleagues in the face this morning,” said one woman, who spoke of a feeling of shame. Alongside her were friends who had taken part in some of the last major opposition protests in Moscow before the regime, before it clamped down on the opposition movement led by Alexei Navalny. They spoke of mixed feelings among their compatriots living in the UK, who they said included a rich elite that was in hoc to Putin’s nationalism but also many who were just as disgusted as they were about the invasion and his stranglehold on their country. “It’s a feeling of shame that this is being done in our name,” said another, with years in her eyes.” EU leaders will call for sanctions against Belarus for its role in supporting Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, according to a leaked summit text. A draft statement seen by the Guardian, to be finalised by EU leaders meeting later on Thursday night, condemns “the involvement of Belarus in this aggression against Ukraine” and calls on Minsk to abide by its international obligations. The document states: The European Council [of EU leaders] calls for the swift preparation of a further sanctions package that will also cover Belarus. Belarus is already subject to EU sanctions, targeting individuals and sectors of its economy, following President Alexander Lukashenko’s brutal crackdown on peaceful protesters in 2020. The draft text repeats EU warnings that Russia will be hit with further sanctions that “impose massive and severe consequences” - but does not spell out what those measures are. That has to agreed by the EU’s 27 leaders meeting in Brussels on Thursday evening. Spain’s prime minister, Pedro Sánchez, has just given a televised address calling on Putin to bring an immediate end to hostilities in Ukraine and to revoke Moscow’s recognition of Russian-controlled territory in Luhansk and Donetsk, reports Sam Jones from Madrid. Sánchez said: The facts are as serious as they are simple: a nuclear power has violated international legality and has begun the invasion of a neighbouring country. At the same time, it has threatened to retaliate against any nation that comes to the aid of the country under attack. However you look at it, this is a flagrant violation of international law and of Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity. But it’s something more than that: it’s a head-on attack on the principles and values - above all the value of peace - that have brought Europe years of stability and prosperity. Sánchez warned that the conflict and the attendant sanctions would have an economic impact on Spain and the EU as a whole, particularly in energy markets. As you know, the Spanish government has been working with the EU for a while now to prepare its response to the risk of military aggression and to the crisis that’s now sadly been confirmed. We will take whatever measures are needed to mitigate the economic and energy impact this crisis will have on Spanish society, on its businesses, homes, industries - and also on the economic recovery we’re seeing as we get over the pandemic. Ukraine is calling on the European Union and its member states to urgently provide air-defence and anti-missile systems, as well as use “all means” to jam Russian satellite signals. In a list of requests sent to the EU leaders ahead of an emergency summit on Thursday night in Brussels, Ukraine also calls for the “fiercest restriction measures against Belarus, which directly supported [the] Russian full-scale invasion”. The paper, drafted by Ukrainian diplomats in Brussels and seen by the Guardian, also calls for: ending software licenses for military and civilian equipment in Russia and Belarus; blocking or interfering with Russian satellite navigation systems in the air, over the Black Sea and Sea of Azov; using all means to block the Russian satellite navigation system Glonass, including jamming its signal over the Black Sea, Sea of Azov, Belarus and Ukrainian airspace. As well as an appeal to end “business as usual” with Russia, Kyiv wants the EU to open its emergency aid system (the civil protection mechanism) to Ukrainians. The strains of Ukraine’s anthem rippled through a crowd of hundreds of Ukrainians gathered outside the gates of Downing Street today to protest against Russia’s invasion, reports Ben Quinn in London. But while shock, anger and defiance were among the common sentiments, events in the early hours of the morning had also heralded difficult personal dilemmas for many Ukrainians living abroad, such as Aleksandra Legosteva, a worker in the tech sector, and her mother, Olena, who had come to visit on Saturday. “I don’t want her to go back,” admitted Legosteva, who told of a largely sleepless night as the family monitored Russia’s invasion and worried about relatives in northern Ukraine who were now stockpiling food and other supplies. Like others, she was eager for the British government step up and move towards “sweeping sanctions” towards Russia, while calls for military assistance and British military boots on the grounds was a common refrain in the crowd. Yuriy Yurchuk, 35, an opera singer at the Royal Opera House, said that he had been due to perform at Moscow’s Bolshoi theatre in two weeks’ time but said that this was now not going to happen. “There’s still a place for talking but there should be a comprehensive response to what is happening in Ukraine, including a military one and also international condemnation. Otherwise what is the UN for?” Those present included the bishop of the Ukrainian Catholic Eparchy of the Holy Family of London, the Right Rev Kenneth Nowakowski, who said: I don’t want to criticise the British government because we’re grateful for what they’ve done so far but there is so much more that can and should be done now. It’s also worth remembering that this is a war that has been going on for eight years now. The rest of the world is now waking up to it and the fact that Putin may not just stop at Ukraine. Dennis Ougrin, a consultant child and adolescent psychiatrist at Queen Mary University, was meanwhile eager to get back to Ukraine to help with what he said would be the inevitable toll on his country’s very youngest as a result of the Russian bombardment. It’s horrific but, as we know from Russian actions before, the type of offensive they undertake really strikes fear into children in particular. I’m thinking of the children in Ukrainian orphanages who’ve had to take shelter underground while missile and artillery attacks take place. The Ukrainian journalist Nataliya Gumenyuk wrote a powerful dispatch for the Guardian from Kyiv, as the Russian attack began. Here is an extract from her piece: For years I have been reluctant to compare any dictator to Hitler, or any war to the second world war. The comparison, to me, seemed exaggerated, even vulgar. But what other analogy is there? With no reason, in an act of pure madness, an old-fashioned air assault has been inflicted on a neighbouring country. I said that to my Russian colleague, and tried very hard not to show how my voice was trembling. She asked for forgiveness again. There is a famous phrase ‘4am Kyiv is bombed’. Every Ukrainian and Russian kid knows it. That’s how the announcement of the German bombardment of Kyiv in 1941 sounded. And here we are: 24 February 5am Kyiv is bombed by Russia. Read the full article here: I’m in Kyiv and awake at the darkest hour – as Putin’s bombs rain down Poland is preparing a medical train to transport Ukrainians wounded in the Russian invasion, the country’s health ministry has told Reuters. In a statement to the newswire, Poland’s health ministry said: Poland is preparing to accept migrants from Ukraine, including Ukrainian citizens affected by the armed conflict. We will do everything to ensure that every person who enters the territory of Poland has access to healthcare, including hospitalisation. Beds are being prepared in hospitals for the admission of the wounded. Poland’s health minister, Adam Niedzielski, said that Poland had prepared a list of 120 hospitals where people affected by the conflict in Ukraine could be treated. “In total, we estimate at the moment that it would be possible to admit several thousand patients injured as a result of hostilities, including those seriously injured,” he told local media. It began in darkness soon after 4.30am local time. There were distant explosions in the Ukrainian capital and the whine of car alarms. A nation shook itself awake, writes Luke Harding in Kyiv. What had been foretold by western governments, by experts, and – late in the day – by the country’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, was actually happening. Russia was attacking and invading. Vladimir Putin’s apparent goal: the subjugation of a nation, a culture, a people. It was unthinkable in the 21st century. And yet, with imperial swagger, Russian troops, tanks and planes were on the move. The disaster unfurled itself on a grey, ordinary Thursday morning, sprinkled by rain. By 5am friends and loved ones were ringing each other, peering into their phones, making life-and-death decisions. Stay or flee? Some packed and got ready to leave; others took refuge in apartment block basements. An underground garage began to fill up in Yaroslaviv Val, close to Kyiv’s historic golden gate, dating back to the 11th century and to Kyivan Rus, a pre-Moscow dynasty. A family arrived. A mother shepherded her two bleary-eyed children to safety. The children were carrying colouring books, scant defence against Russian missiles. Stay or flee? Kyiv comes to terms with disaster of Russian invasion Ukraine’s military command has said four people were killed and 10 injured when a Russian shell hit a hospital in Vuhledar in the Donetsk region in eastern Ukraine. The injured were said to include six doctors. Ukraine has said Russia has carried out 203 attacks since the start of the day with fighting going on across almost the entire territory, Reuters reports. In a separate update from Ukraine’s foreign ministry, issued at 2pm local time, officials said one Russian K-52 helicopter and three helicopters near Hostomel were shot down in the Kyiv region near Mezhyhirya. Fighting is going on in Luhansk region, near the town of Schastye and “the enemy continues to suffer losses” the statement said. It added that “border guards together with the armed forces and the NMU hold the defence and repel attacks”. In the Odesa region, 10 servicemen were said to have received shrapnel wounds during an attack. At a meeting of EU ambassadors held in Brussels to discuss the next steps, it is understood that there is a consensus on the need for a major package of sanctions across the financial and energy sectors and including export-controls on key components. But sources said Italy, Germany and Cyprus - dubbed the “incrementals’” – still want to leave some proposed sanctions out of the EU package tonight. There is further concern that a number of key oligarchs will be left out of the punitive measures, a diplomat said. Some member states want the EU to make public the full scope of the package within hours. France and Germany are said to be “actively pushing to slow down the sanctions train so that leaders can present it themselves tonight”. One diplomat from a hawkish member state complained: This means the sanctions will trail those of the US and the UK and will come into effect later than they could.. So while Putin is driving forcefully into Ukraine, the EU moved to the back seat, lounging and waiting, just to present [Charles] Michel with a nice photo opportunity? Here is a view from a former prime minister of Finland, Alexander Stubb: Journalist Kevin Rothrock has been following anti-war protests in Moscow. Sofya Rusova’s sign reads: “War with Ukraine is Russia’s disgrace.” Any protest is a brave act, given the restrictions on public demonstrations and readiness of the police to step in. Following a meeting with Jens Stoltenberg, Nato’s secretary general, Ursula von der Leyen, the European Commission president, spoke about the planned impact of the sanctions that will be debated by EU leaders later on Thursday, reports Daniel Boffey in Brussels. She said: These sanctions will suppress Russia’s economic growth, increase the borrowing costs, raise inflation, intensify capital outflow and gradually erode its industrial basis. Our measures will weaken Russia’s technological position in key areas from which the elite makes most of their money - this ranges from high-tech components to cutting-edge software. Stoltenberg said: I welcome the coordinated actions announced by the European Union, Nato Allies and partners. This sends a strong message of unity. He was speaking shortly before a virtual meeting of leaders of the G7, the forum for the world’s seven largest economies: Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the UK and the US. In a televised address to the nation, the French president, Emmanuel Macron, said Vladimir Putin had flouted Ukrainian sovereignty and brought the “most serious attack on peace and stability in Europe for decades”, writes Angelique Chrisafis in Paris. Macron said France would respond “without weakness” and with “sang froid, determination and unity”. He said decisions would be taken today in a G7 meeting, as well as at the European council in Brussels and a Nato summit and Russia would be made to answer to the UN security council. He said the events in Ukraine were “a turning point in the history of Europe and our country”, adding that “they will have lasting and deep consequences on our lives. They will have consequences on the geo-politics of our continent.” Macron said sanctions against Russia would be at a level with the “aggression it is guilty of”. He said there would be “no weakness” at the military and economic level, “we will support Ukraine without hesitation” and “we will protect the sovereignty and security of our allies”. France has previously said it was ready to reinforce its presence in advanced Nato positions in Romania, and to send extra forces to Romania. This is likely to be discussed by France at the Nato summit tomorrow. Nato secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, and the president of the European Commission, Ursula von der Leyen, are giving a briefing now. The live feed is above. Ireland’s taoiseach has described Russia’s attack on Ukraine as “an outrageous and moral breach of the most fundamental principles of international law”. In a televised address, Micheál Martin described the invasion as “immoral and totally beyond comprehension”. It has been difficult to confirm some of the military operations taking place in Ukraine at the moment. But one that Ukrainian officials have confirmed is this helicopter assault near Hostomel in the Kyiv region. The videos have shown Mi-8 and Ka-52 helicopters flown in from Belarus to take an airfield close to Kyiv, the Ukrainian capital. At least 20 aircraft were involved in the assault, which was filmed from several different angles by locals at the scene. One of the helicopters was shot down by anti-air fire and its pilot was reportedly taken prisoner. Rob Lee, a senior analyst with Foreign Policy Research Institute, said that the Russian troops were likely trying to take the airport as they prepared to take Kyiv. Note: events are moving fast and the above footage has not been independently verified. The British prime minister, Boris Johnson, has said the UK will respond with “a massive package of sanctions” that will “hobble the Russian economy”. Ukraine is a country that for decades has enjoyed freedom and democracy and the right to choose its own destiny. We and the world cannot allow that freedom just to be snuffed out. We cannot and will not just look away ... Today, in concert with our allies, we will agree a massive package of economic sanctions designed in time to hobble the Russian economy. And to that end, we must also collectively cease the dependence on Russian oil and gas that for too long has given Putin his grip on western politics. Our mission is clear; diplomatically politically, economically, and eventually, military, this hideous and barbaric venture of Vladimir Putin must end in failure. In a rare act of public dissent against the war, the Russian newspaper Novaya Gazeta has announced that its next edition will come out in Russian and Ukrainian languages. Dmitry Muratov, the Nobel prize-winning editor of the paper, said that “together with our grief we feel shame” about a war that he directly blamed on Vladimir Putin. “What’s the next step?” he said. “A nuclear salvo? “We’re going to release this next edition of Novaya Gazeta in two languages because we will never see Ukraine as an enemy or Ukrainian as the language of the enemy.” He added a call for protests against the war. “Only an anti-war movement of Russians in my opinion can save life on this planet.” Our correspondent Luke Harding, who is in Kyiv, has spoken to Andriy Zagorodnyuk, Ukraine’s former defence minister. Zagorodnyuk describes multiple ground invasions on several fronts. The situation is extremely tense, obviously. The first shock this morning was when there were missile attacks, rocket strikes and drone strikes. Some of the buildings in our armed forces are simply destroyed. All of them are military infrastructure. They [the Russians] are trying to break the border and to enter into the country with their ground forces. Ukrainian armed forces are trying to stop them. The city of Mariupol is pretty quiet. There is no breakthrough attempt. At the joint forces operation line [between Ukrainian and separatist forces] there is lots of artillery but no attempt to break through. He adds: There are thrusts taking place. They are quite close to the city of Kherson now. The situation is really critical there. They are also trying to surround Kharkiv. It seems like Kharkiv at the moment is the main target. They also try to get to Kyiv using one battlefield group. The group went from Belarus and it was stopped. There’s quite a bad road [to Kyiv]. It was strange that they sent such a small group on such a road. Clearly it was miscalculation on their side for the moment. There were some Russian losses and on our side. Ukrainian armed forces are fighting quite seriously. There is no panic. There are attempts to resist and in many directions it’s working out. Roads out of Kyiv were jammed with traffic on Thursday morning, as people sought to flee the city following Russia’s invasion. Reports suggested Russian tanks were advancing to Kyiv from Belarus, two hours’ drive and 100 miles away. Nato’s secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, said Russia was waging war with air and missile attacks, ground forces and special forces from multiple directions, targeting the military infrastructure and major urban centres, writes Daniel Boffey in Brussels. Stoltenberg said: This is a brutal act of war. Our thoughts are with the brave people of Ukraine. Sadly, what we have warned against for months has come to pass. Despite all calls on Russia to change course and tireless efforts to seek a diplomatic solution. Peace in our continent has been shattered. We now have war in Europe, on a scale and of a type we thought belonged to history. This is a grave moment for the security of Europe. Stoltenberg said Finland and Sweden, which are not Nato members, would be represented at the alliance’s summit on Friday. This is a deliberate, cold-blooded and long-planned invasion. Despite its litany of lies, denials and disinformation, the Kremlin’s intentions are clear for the world to see. Nato’s secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, has announced that there will be a virtual summit of the alliance’s member states on Friday, reports Daniel Boffey in Brussels. Stoltenberg said: “It will be a new reality, a new Europe after the invasion we saw today.” The alliance has issued new guidance to its military commanders to allow them to move military forces more quickly around Europe. We have already increased and we are increasing the presence of Nato troops in the eastern part of the alliance. We do not have Nato troops in Ukraine and we do not have plans to send Nato troops to Ukraine. Nato allies warned Russia it would pay a “heavy economic and political price” in a joint statement issued after an emergency meeting on Thursday morning. We urge Russia in the strongest terms to turn back from the path of violence and aggression it has chosen. Russia’s leaders must bear full responsibility for the consequences of their actions. Russia will pay a very heavy economic and political price ... Throughout this crisis, Nato, the allies and our partners have made every effort to pursue diplomacy and dialogue with Russia, including at the highest levels, and made many substantive proposals to enhance the security of all nations in the Euro-Atlantic region. We have repeatedly invited Russia to talks in the Nato-Russia Council. Russia has still not reciprocated. It is Russia, and Russia alone, which has chosen escalation. The European Union has pledged to impose “massive” sanctions that have severe consequences on Russia. A statement just issued by the European Council, ahead of emergency talks between the EU’s 27 leaders on Thursday night, said: We condemn in the strongest possible terms Russia’s unprecedented military aggression against Ukraine. By its unprovoked and unjustified military actions, Russia is grossly violating international law and undermining European and global security and stability. We also condemn the involvement of Belarus in this aggression against Ukraine and call on it to abide by its international obligations. We demand that Russia immediately ceases military actions, unconditionally withdraws all forces and military equipment from the entire territory of Ukraine and fully respects Ukraine’s territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence. Such use of force and coercion has no place in the 21st century. We will meet later today to discuss this blatant aggression and agree in principle on further restrictive measures that will impose massive and severe consequences on Russia for its action, in close coordination with our transatlantic partners. The EU also said it stood “firmly by Ukraine and its people as they face this war”, with promises of further political, financial and humanitarian assistance. Multiple explosions could be heard in the Ukrainian capital of Kyiv on Thursday, Reuters reports. Russia’s invasion into Ukraine has left western observers disappointed by Beijing’s initial response, writes the Guardian’s China affairs correspondent Vincent Ni. On Thursday, China’s foreign ministry spokesperson, Hua Chunying, insisted the situation has a “complex historical background”. She also refused to use the word “invasion”. Russia’s act clearly violated China’s own position that sovereignty is sacrosanct. This is a discourse Beijing often deploys when it talks about Taiwan, for example. But on the other hand, Beijing also takes issue with Putin’s opposite side in this crisis: the US and Nato. So far, on Beijing’s scale, the latter appears to be weighing heavier in its messaging. This dynamic is perfectly illustrated on China’s social media platform. On Tuesday afternoon, at least seven of the top ten “hotly-searched topics” on Weibo are related to the crisis in Ukraine. Of course, Taiwan was also featured on this list. At the moment, the top searched topic is the situation in Ukraine. The hashtag: #Follow the latest developments in the situation in Russia and Ukraine has been read at least 1.57bn times. The latest entry under this hashtag is Ukraine’s president Volodymyr Zelenskiy deciding to cut diplomatic ties with Russia. Factual reporting with users’ comments (although many of them seem pretty pro-Russia). The second and seventh topics on the list write #NATO still owes China a blood debt and #The US is not qualified to tell China what to do. The two hashtags have now been read for over 200m times. Clearly, Beijing has found a good opportunity to remind Chinese netizens of what happened more than 20 years ago. On 7 May, 1999, Nato missiles struck the Chinese Embassy in Belgrade and set it ablaze in a predawn strike, killing three Chinese citizens. The US said it was a mistake caused by an out-of-date map, but China was never convinced. Back then, it was a huge event in China that led to rare anti-America protests. Meanwhile, Taiwan is also under the spotlight on Chinese social media. The future of the democratically-run island has been getting a lot of attention in recent weeks as analysts see parallels to the Ukraine crisis. The related hashtag has received over 600,000 reads so far. China’s defence ministry spoke about Taiwan today, but its main target was what it called “Taiwanese separatists and independence forces”. The remark followed Taiwan’s president, Tsai Ing-wen yesterday urging her citizens to be “vigilant”. Unsurprisingly, on today’s Chinese internet, such a comment again stoke up much nationalism. Ukraine has requested that Turkey close the Bosphorus and Dardanelles straits to Russian warships, which use the passages to enter the Black Sea, reports the Guardian’s Ruth Michaelson. Turkey alone controls the straits according to the 1936 Montreux Convention, which stipulates that warships belonging to nations bordering the Black Sea may pass through, while others may pass for a limited time only if they satisfy certain conditions mostly based on tonnage. According to Turkish outlet Hurriyet, Ukraine’s Ambassador to Ankara Vasyl Bodnar reiterated the request to halt Russian access to the straits at a press conference this morning: “We conveyed our official request to the Turkish side regarding the closure of the airspace, the Dardanelles [Strait] and Bosphorus [Strait] for Russian ships,” he said, adding that Ukraine is also requesting that Turkey sanction Russian business and a wider request for Turkish support. He added: We call on you to prevent the aggression in question. Today, Ukraine is protecting your security. Turkey, a Nato member and ally of both Ukraine and Russia as well as a major recipient of Russian natural gas, is attempting to appease both sides of the conflict despite recently strengthening ties with Ukraine including through weapons sales. Turkish president Recep Tayyip Erdoğan has repeatedly proposed a trilateral summit between Vladimir Putin and Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskiy in Turkey, including during a visit to Kiev earlier this month. Turkey has also sold Ukraine its Bayraktar TB2 drones. Baykar, the Turkish company which produces Bayraktar drones, last year began plans to build training and maintenance centres for existing drones in Ukraine as well as factories to jointly produce new drones, a deal which risked angering Moscow. Erdoğan and Putin spoke by phone yesterday, where Erdoğan told Putin that Turkey would “not recognise any step against Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.” According to AFP, Erdoğan told journalists on a return flight from Africa yesterday that Turkey would seek to maintain its alliances with both Ukraine and Russia. It is not possible for us to give up on both. We have political and military relations with Russia. We also have political, military and economic ties with Ukraine. We want this issue to be resolved without us having to choose between the two. From Moscow correspondent Christopher Miller: So far Russia’s cyber offensive against Ukraine has consisted of denial of service attacks and deployment of “wiper” malware, writes the Guardian’s global technology editor Dan Milmo. The use of distributed denial of service attacks ahead of the invasion of Ukraine is designed to spread confusion, according to US cyber security firm Mandiant. In a DDoS attack websites are deluged with vexatious requests for information and become unreachable. The targets on Wednesday included the Ukrainian defence ministry and PrivatBank, Ukraine’s largest commercial bank. (Both sites were accessible this morning). Jamie Collier, a Mandiant consultant, described a DDoS as akin to stuffing a thousand envelopes through a letterbox every second. It’s not so much the technical disruption, it’s what it does to undermine confidence, like in the financial sector. It gets people quite nervous. It’s more that kind of secondary impact. Collier adds that the impact of the wiper malware has yet to be fully understood: We don’t fully understand the full implications of it for now. If a big Ukrainian financial services entity or defence entity is impacted, it might take some time before they go public with that. On Wednesday ESET Research Labs, a Slovakia-based cyber security company, said it had detected a new piece of data wiper malware on “hundreds” of machines in Ukraine. The NotPetya attack in 2017, which devastated Ukrainian businesses, was a wiper attack that irretrievably encrypted computers. ESET said “large” organisations had been affected this time, while security experts at Symantec Threat Intelligence said the malware had hit Ukrainian government contractors in Latvia and Lithuania and a financial institution in Ukraine (NotPetya also went beyond Ukraine’s borders). ESET has called the malware HermeticWiper. However, Dr Lennart Maschmeyer at the Center for Security Studies at Swiss university ETH Zurich, says Russia’s cyber strategy so far seems more improvised. A plausible scenario for more devastating cyber attacks was that Russia had planned this invasion for a long time, and prepositioned implants across Ukraine’s critical infrastructure in order to cause mass disruptions coinciding with the military invasion. That does not seem to be the case. The cyber operations we have seen do not show long preparation, and instead look rather haphazard. Ukraine has claimed 50 Russians have been killed on the eastern front, AFP reports. Ukrainian forces say they have killed around 50 “Russian occupiers” while taking back control of the eastern frontline town of Shchastya. The agency says it could not independently confirm that claim. Here is an extract from their report on the fast-moving situation as Russian tanks advance far into Ukrainian territory, well beyond the areas controlled by Moscow-backed separatists. After holding a series of emergency calls with world leaders, including US President Joe Biden, Ukraine’s leader Voldymyr Zelensky convened a meeting of the top military brass. Zelensky “gave orders to inflict maximum losses against the aggressor,” Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of Ukraine, Major General Valeriy Zaluzhny, said. Presidential adviser Mykhailo Podoliak said Ukraine’s forces were “waging heavy combat” and repelling Russian advances in some parts. Ukrainian officials said Russia was primarily targeting military infrastructure and silos, hitting a string of air fields. These included Boryspil airport in Kyiv, the armed forces said. Ukraine closed its airspace to civilian traffic. Tracking websites showed no civilian airliners within the country’s airspace on Thursday. The invasion was also staged from several positions in Belarus, where Russian armed forces have been holding massive military drills this months involving an estimated 30,000 troops. But Belarus strongman leader Alexander Lukashenko said his forces were “not taking part in this operation”. Ukraine also claimed it had downed six Russian planes, a helicopter, and destroyed four tanks. Moscow did not confirm suffering any casualties or other military losses. Russia’s ambassador to Rome, Sergey Razov, was summoned by Italy’s foreign ministry secretary general, Ettore Francesco Sequi, on Thursday morning, reports Angela Giuffrida from the Italian capital. Sequi told Razov that the Italian government strongly condemns “the very serious, unjustified and unprovoked attack by Moscow against Ukraine, which constitutes a clear violation of international law”. All parties in prime minister Mario Draghi’s broad coalition government were unanimous in their condemnation of Vladimir Putin’s invasion of Ukraine. Enrico Letta, leader of the centre-left Democratic party, said: Italy must condemn without ambiguity the attack against Ukraine and, together with our allies, react to this unprecedented challenge to the principles of freedom and democracy in Europe. Matteo Salvini, the leader of the far-right League who in 2019 was praised by Putin for being “welcoming” to Russia, wrote on social media: A horrible Thursday, images we never wanted to see again, let’s hope it ends soon and reason returns to prevail. He added that the League strongly condemns any form of military aggression and supported Draghi for a common response among allies, while urging coalition partners not to use the tragedy as an excuse for “internal quarrels”. Salvini has previously described the Russian president as one of the greatest statesmen alive” and called sanctions against Russia “idiotic”. Peter Beaumont in Lviv, western Ukraine, writes: On the streets of the western Ukrainian city of Lviv the queues on Thursday morning for banks, pharmacies and supermarkets snaked around the block. On the cobbled streets, there were two classes of people: those glued to the news of the Russian invasion on their phones, and those talking about it. Outside the Kredo Bank on Schevchenka Avenue, in the centre of the city this sits just 60 kilometres from the Polish border, one couple were discussing how much the price of bread would be in a day’s time, while two younger men talked about the how to find thermal imaging equipment for the country’s troops. In recent weeks Lviv has seemed one of the country’s safer places. Western embassies concerned about the possibility of a Russian invasion relocated here. But the morning air raid sirens and the news of Russian strikes in Lutsk to the north and Ivano-Frankivsk to the south have punctured that illusion. One of those glued to his phone was Ivan Taibov, aged 27, a sailor from Odessa in Ukraine’s south west. He displays a screen showing video of smoke rising from Odessa. “It’s my city. They’re calling for people to come to it’s defence,” he explained. “I’ve been visiting Lviv. Now I’m trying to see if it is possible to get back to Odessa because there will be a fight.” For Tanya Hrunyk, a 43-year-old economist waiting in one of the bank queues, the question is whether to stay in Lviv and for how long. “I haven’t made up my mind yet. I have family in the country where I could go and stay. I’ll go if the authorities call for an evacuation. Until then I’m not sure.” Asked what she made of Vladimir Putin’s reasons for attacking on her country she replied sharply: “He’s a crazy man. He’s mentally ill. Our task is to stay calm and united.” For some, the military offensive that was launched on Thursday morning, caught them far from home and wondering what the Russian offensive augurs for other neighbouring countries. Some are concerned that this will not be a short crisis. Weighed down with plastic bags, bartender Ivan Borislavsky had been buying baby formula to last four months for his infant and the baby his partner is expecting in a month. “I’m worried things will be in short supply and the prices will go up.” Asked by the Guardian if he was thinking of leaving he replied: “I need to stay. I need to fight for my wife and children and my land.” Ukraine’s president Volodymyr Zelenskiy on Thursday called on all citizens who were ready to defend the country from Russian forces to come forward, saying Kyiv would issue weapons to everyone who wants them, Reuters reports. Zelenskiy also urged Russians to come out and protest against the war. Separately Ukraine’s foreign ministry has said “the situation is under control” and that Russian troops are suffering losses. And here is a tweet from a Ukrainian diplomat about the pain the invasion will inflict on ordinary people. Oksana Grytsenko has been speaking to people in the south and east of Ukraine. Some refused to give their surnames for fear of reprisals. Mariupol Yulia, a local journalist, says she heard the sounds of an explosion from the eastern part of the city, which is located close to Russian-occupied territory. “There was shelling there. A shell hit a residential house and it was burning,” she said. Yulia and her young son are based in the Primorsky district in the southwest of the city and she said it’s quiet there. “We’ve collected our stuff and are ready to run to a bomb shelter if necessary,” she said. She added she’s worrying because she can’t reach her mother, who lives in the eastern part of the city, by phone. “I hope it’s just because her phone battery has run out.” Odessa Maxim Holenko, a theater director, said he’s heading to his theatre for a meeting with his colleagues to decide how to live under martial law. “Performances have been canceled for the time being,” he said. He said it’s quiet in the city center but there are sounds of shelling from the south of the city. There were rumors about Russian airborne forces landing in the city, but they turned out to be fake. “But I’ve seen the news about explosions in Podolsk [a city in the northern part of Odessa Oblast]. They were reportedly shelled from Transnistria,” he said. He sent a video of black smoke resulting from shelling in Odesa filmed by an actor from his theatre. Kherson Oblast A column of Russian tanks, APCs, military trucks, and multiple rocket launches are moving to the north of Kherson Oblast in direction of Nova Kakhovka. Russian troops are passing Ukrainian villages without stopping there, a local resident told the Guardian. “We are just sitting near our houses,” said Svitlana, a resident of the town of Chaplynka in Kherson Oblast. “The shops are closed, nothing is working.” She added that there were sounds of shelling in the morning, but now it’s quiet. Emmanuel Macron has said he firmly condemned Russia’s decision to go to war in Ukraine and demanded an immediate end to military operations, writes Angelique Chrisafis in Paris. Macron said France stood by Ukrainians and would work with its partners and allies to stop the war. The French president spoke to his Ukrainian counterpart Volodymyr Zelenskiy on his mobile at 8am this morning and is currently holding an emergency defence meeting at the Elysée with the prime minister, the defence minister and top members of cabinet. Vladimir Putin will not be easily swayed by western sanctions or condemnation, suggests the Moscow-based political analyst Alexander Baunov. The Guardian’s defence and security editor, Dan Sabbagh, has been assessing Russia and Ukraine’s military forces and what western analysts believe Vladimir Putin wants from his all-out invasion. Here is his report : Russia has amassed more than 150,000 combat troops on the borders of Ukraine, with another 34,000 lightly armed separatist forces in the pro-Russian self-proclaimed republics in Donetsk and Luhansk. That amounts to an estimated two-thirds of Russia’s total ground forces. Half of Moscow’s air force is also deployed in the region. The invasion of Ukraine is set to be the biggest war seen in the world since the US-led invasion of Iraq in 2003, in which around 175,000 troops were deployed; and western military leaders have warned could lead to the most serious fighting in Europe since the end of the second world war. Western defence sources have said they expect Russia to invade on “multiple axes” of attack – but the key focus is expected to be the capital, Kyiv, which has a population of around 3 million. They believe the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, wants to engage in “regime change” in Kyiv, encircling the city with its military and hoping to oust the president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, without engaging in urban warfare. Britain has warned that Russia’s FSB spy agency has been tasked with delivering Kyiv and Ukraine’s other major cities, while the US has gone further and claimed that Russian officials have drawn up lists of Ukrainian figures to round up in areas where its military has attained control. Ukraine has a regular army that numbers 125,600 according to the International Institute of Strategic Studies (IISS), but has mobilised its reserves of at least 36,000. Many others in the country have said they are willing to fight, and there are around 300,000 people who have had military experience of fighting in the east, some of whom may join an armed resistance. Kyiv’s military is largely concentrated in the east of the country, near the occupied Donbas region, and western analysts believe a key goal of early Russian operations will be to try and degrade Ukraine’s fighting forces. Russia also has significant advantages in air power: its total air force has 1,172 combat aircraft against Ukraine’s 124, according to the IISS. Russia’s navy is dominant in the northern Black Sea where there are concerns that the Kremlin may try to launch a sea-based attack on Odessa. Although Ukraine has sought to modernise its military over the past year, receiving Javelin anti-tank missiles from the US, shorter range anti-tank weapons from the UK, and a small number of TB2 drones from Turkey, the bulk of its army and equipment are older versions of equipment whose designs date back to the Soviet era and will be familiar to Russian generals. There will be no direct military support from Nato as Ukraine is not a member of the military alliance. The British opposition leader Keir Starmer has said “the influence of Russian money must be extricated from the UK”, as he cancelled a planned speech on the economy following the developments in Ukraine, writes Aubrey Allegretti from Westminster. The Labour leader said Vladimir Putin’s order to send in troops “will have horrendous and tragic consequences that will echo throughout the world and throughout history”. All those who believe in the triumph of democracy over dictatorship, good over evil, freedom over the jackboot of tyranny must now support the Ukrainian people. After the government was criticised for what were derided as weak sanctions announced by Boris Johnson on Tuesday, Starmer urged the prime minister to “match our rhetoric with action”. The hardest possible sanctions must be taken against all those linked to Putin. The influence of Russian money must be extricated from the UK. And those who have for too long turned a blind eye to Russia’s actions must reckon with their own consciences. Johnson is expected to give an update following the COBR meeting, as well as make a statement to the Commons this morning where Starmer will respond. The Russian central bank will step into the market to support the rouble, it said on Thursday, as the currency crashed to an all-time low, Reuters reports. Moscow correspondent Pjotr Sauer writes that cash exchange points in the Russian capital have stopped trading roubles for dollars and euros. At a popular exchange point on the Tverskaya street the office manager said that they stopped converting roubles “two hours ago” as the Russian currency further spirals. Here are the key points on the rouble’s slide from Reuters: Russia’s currency, bonds and stocks all tanked, prompting the central bank to announce its first foreign exchange intervention designed to shore up financial stability since 2014, when Russia annexed Crimea from Ukraine. The rouble skidded to an all-time low of 89.60 against the dollar and neared a crucial threshold of 100 versus the euro. It was around 70 to the dollar and 81 to the euro before the recent round of geopolitical tensions between Moscow and the West started escalating in October. ‘To stabilise the situation on the financial market, the Bank of Russia decided to start interventions on the currency market,’ the bank said on Thursday. The move helped the rouble to slightly narrow losses. From Reuters: ADVISER IN UKRAINE PRESIDENTIAL OFFICE SAYS SITUATION UNDER CONTROL, THERE WILL BE NO BLITZKRIEG Lithuania’s president, Gitanes Nausėda, is to ask Nato for security consultations, reports Reuters. Lithuania wants to invoke the defence alliance’s article 4, which allows any Nato country to ask for talks on an issue of concern, “especially related to the security of a member country”. The article has been invoked several times since Nato was founded in 1949. Nato’s secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, is due to meet the president of the European Commission, Ursula von der Leyen, in Brussels this morning. Stoltenberg will then hold an emergency press conference at Nato’s headquarters. In a strongly worded statement, the Spanish government has called Moscow’s invasion of Ukraine “a totally unjustified aggression of unprecedented seriousness and a flagrant violation of international law that risks global security and stability”, writes Sam Jones in Madrid. It said King Felipe would preside over a meeting of the national security council at midday on Thursday. It added: We demand an immediate cease to hostilities before the number of victims rises, and for the return of troops to the internationally recognised Russian Federation territory. In these most difficult hours, we also want to reiterate our support for Ukraine’s territorial integrity and sovereignty, and to show our solidarity with the Ukrainian people. The government said Spain was working with its EU partners and Nato allies to come up with a response to match “the seriousness of the illegal conduct of the Russian Federation”. Spain’s prime minister, Pedro Sánchez, is due to attend the emergency EU summit in Brussels this evening. Ukraine’s ambassador to Ireland, Larysa Gerasko, held back tears this morning telling RTE she “cannot believe this is happening in the 21st century”, reports Ireland correspondent Lisa O’Carroll. “My thoughts are with my people, with my family,” she said. She condemned the “cynical” attack of Russia on her country, which she said started just as the Russian federation was making its speech to an emergency UN security council. “Putin is testing Ukraine and the security architecture of the whole world,” she said. Gerakso told RTE: The devastating and tough sanctions have to be imposed now immediately. Millions of lives are at stake now, life of Ukrainians, the democratic world has to isolate Russia by all means. And Ukraine needs financial support and humanitarian assistance, and of course military. The foreign minister, Simon Coveney, told RTE that EU diplomats, including the two Irish representatives, had moved to a safe place in Kyiv and would be meeting in the next half hour. Italy’s prime minister, Mario Draghi, has joined the condemnation of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, writes Angela Giuffrida in Rome. Draghi said: The Italian government condemns Russia’s attack on Ukraine. It is unjustified and unjustifiable. Italy is close to the Ukrainian people and institutions in this dramatic moment. We are working with European and Nato allies to respond immediately, with unity and determination. Italy had been one of the EU countries, along with France and Germany, arguing for a gradual approach to sanctions against Russia. But all calculations have been upended by the invasion. EU leaders are to discuss imposing “massive and severe consequences on Russia for its action” at an emergency summit on Thursday evening. As this tweet from a German diplomat shows, preparations are already underway. Russian state media have spent the morning praising the military operation in Ukraine, calling it a military intervention in Donbas, while largely ignoring missile strikes on infrastructure and some cities throughout the country, writes Andrew Roth from Moscow. As Russian tanks crossed the borders into Ukraine from points north, east, and south of Kyiv, Rossiya-24, the 24-hour news channel, displayed a chyron reading: “Ukrainian neo-nationalists are waiting for the right moment to strike against Russia.” Live reports were aired from cities in Donetsk and Luhansk, where correspondents were mainly focused on local battles for cities rather than the broader Russian invasion taking place across the country. For Russians who are watching the news, they might think this is largely focused in the areas where fighting has been taking place for eight years. While many ordinary Russians were expressing shock at the attack, some reporters and managers at state-run channels were clearly enjoying the moment. A reporter at one state media agency told the Guardian: “Unfortunately all I’ve heard this morning is pride.” Margarita Simonyan, the newly sanctioned head of RT, wrote in a tweet: “This is a standard parade rehearsal,” she wrote. “Except this year we have decided to hold the parade in Kyiv.” China’s embassy in Ukraine is warning its citizens there to take cover as the situation has “deteriorated sharply”, according to a post on its WeChat page. It urges Chinese citizens and Chinese-funded enterprises to take shelter, and stay indoors away from glass windows, and to keep in touch with Chinese associations and representatives in the country. Those traveling by car should make sure they are able to refuel, and if they get stuck the embassy is suggesting they affix a Chinese flag to their car. The reason for this isn’t totally clear. China has not so far ordered or suggested its citizens evacuate from Ukraine, as other governments have done in recent days and weeks. China’s government and President Xi Jinping have been forging closer ties with Russia and Putin in recent years, and there is a lot of speculation over exactly how China will handle the invasion. We reported a little earlier today that China’s ministry of foreign affairs is so far saving its condemnation for the US and allies, accusing them of fanning tensions and inciting war, while at the same time rejecting the characterisation of Russia’s move today as an “invasion”. From Reuters: An adviser in the Ukraine president’s office says there is a massive Russian artillery bombardment of infrastructure. He says Ukrainian armed forces are fighting hard. Red Square is relatively empty this morning with only the occasional local tourist taking photos, reports Pjotr Sauer in Moscow. There is a noticeable police presence, likely to prevent any potential demonstrations and pickets. “We just arrived to Moscow last night for a weekend holiday and then saw the shocking news,” a visitor from Irkutsk said. The Greek prime minister, Kyriakos Mitsotakis, has called an urgent meeting of the nation’s foreign and defence council, to discuss the invasion and how best to protect ethnic Greeks living in Ukraine, writes Helena Smith in Athens. The government’s supreme policy-making body, Kysea, is expected to focus on Athens’ plans to support the 120,000-strong community in the east of the country. Most of the diaspora reside in the coastal city of Mariupol, which may well become a battle front as the full-scale invasion develops. The centre right government has vowed to protect the community amid speculation that Hellenic navy ships could be dispatched to evacuate ethnic Greeks. After a similar Kysea meeting earlier this week Mitsotakis said: Our country has an additional reason for concern when following developments, the protection and support of ethnic Greeks in Ukraine and the very large community in Mariupol which has been present in the region for over 2,000 years. Spain and Portugal have condemned Russia’s attack on Ukraine, writes Sam Jones in Madrid. Spain’s prime minister, Pedro Sánchez, tweeted: ‘The government of Spain condemns Russia’s aggression against Ukraine and expresses its solidarity with the Ukrainian government and its people. I remain in close contact with our partners and allies in the European Union and Nato to coordinate our response.” Portugal’s prime minister, António Costa, said he “vehemently condemned” Russia’s attack on Ukraine, adding: “My thoughts are with the Ukrainian people in the face of this unjustified and lamentable attack.” Both leaders are due at an emergency EU summit in Brussels on Thursday evening, a meeting called before the invasion began to discuss options for holding Russia to account. A UK foreign office minister has promised “unprecedented” sanctions to punish Russia’s “appalling decision” to invade Ukraine, writes Aubrey Allegretti in London. As a Cobra meeting chaired by Boris Johnson got underway, the foreign office minister James Cleverly promised an “unprecedented” set of sanctions would be imposed by the UK to punish Russia for the “appalling decision” to invade Ukraine. In a direct attack on President Vladimir Putin, Cleverly accused him of “recreating some kind of tsarist, expansionist Russia” and being driven by ego as well as a “foolish attempt to write himself into the history books”. Ukrainians will be “ferocious in the defence of homelands”, said Cleverly, but admitted that Nato could not provide troops or offensive weapons to help them fight back if troops advance toward Kyiv. Asked if British intelligence suggested Putin was planning to try to seize control of the Ukrainian capital, Cleverly told Sky News: “We do, of course, fear that he might try and do something as reckless as that.” Cleverly said Moscow had used lies and false flag operations to “justify the unjustifiable”. He defended the nearly £2m of Russian-linked money taken in donations by the Conservative party since Johnson became prime minister. Cleverly - a former party chairman - insisted the sources of the cash were “certainly not Putin’s buddies”. When pressed on how he knew, he said: “Because we do our due diligence.” He added: “I don’t think this attacking Ukraine has anything to do with London’s role as a Financial Services Centre.” The head of the Bundestag’s foreign affairs committee, Norbert Röttgen, has said he now supports sending weapons to Ukraine. Germany has refused to send weapons to Ukraine, even blocking the release of German origin weapons being transferred from Estonia. Although Röttgen is not part of Germany’s governing coalition, it is a sign of the debate that will surely intensify in Berlin. A report by Helen Davidson on China’s early response: The invasion is the first question asked, but spokeswoman Hua Chunying takes issue with that term, and instead says the situation has a “complex historical background”. Hua again accused the US and others of fanning tensions and inciting war, saying China’s approach so far had been responsible. “China again calls for all sides to not close the doors on peace and stay committed to dialogue and negotiation,” she said. The language largely repeated the message of yesterday’s briefing in which Hua also expressed hope that all sides could be “cool-headed and rational” and commit to a peaceful resolution. Chinese state media is today promoting one of her more fiery quotes from that presser, again attributing more hostility and blame over the crisis to the US than to Russia: When the US drove five waves of Nato expansion eastward all the way to Russia’s doorstep and deployed advanced offensive strategic weapons in breach of its assurances to Russia, did it ever think about the consequences of pushing a big country to the wall? Among China watchers, several have suggested this reasoning could one day be used in the event Beijing decides to move on Taiwan - an increasingly EU-friendly government that makes big weapons purchases from the US. Initial reports of casualties: At least eight people have been killed and nine were wounded by the Russian shelling, an adviser to the Ukrainian minister of internal affairs has said, according to Reuters. Pjotr Sauer sends reactions from Moscow’s Arbat Street: Confusion is felt throughout Moscow this morning. On the Old Arbat, one of Moscow’s busiest pedestrian streets, many expressed shock that Russia had launched a full-scale attack on Ukraine. “I didn’t think Putin would be willing to go all the way. How can we bomb Ukraine? We have our disagreements, but this is not to a way to solve them,” said Ksenia Fadeeva. “I am embarrassed for my country. To be honest with you, I am speechless. War is always scary. We don’t want this,” said Nikita Golubev. “I couldn’t believe the news I read this morning. A war with Ukraine? What are we doing? I feel powerless,” said Tatyana, who asked for her surname not to be published. The Ukrainian Cultural Center in central Moscow said it was shut today due to the invasion . The Ukrainian administrator, who didn’t want to give his name, said: “We are being bombed as we speak. Of course we are closed! Jesus, what is happening?” More on the still unconfirmed Russian ground invasion in the east: Reuters is citing the Ukrainian border guard as saying separate Russian military columns have crossed the Ukrainian border into Chernihiv, Kharkiv and Luhansk regions. On the confusion around whether Putin may have recorded his declaration of war message days ago, more details here from Moscow correspondent, Andrew Roth: Other reports suggest that Novaya Gazeta may have been incorrect in their analysis of the video of Putin’s speech. The newspaper reported that he filmed the speech three days ago, according to metadata. But Aric Toler of the Bellingcat investigative group and other Russian journalists have noted that it’s likely that Novaya Gazeta scraped the data from the wrong file. The video uploaded to the Kremlin website shows that the file was created late Wednesday evening. France’s president Emmanuel Macron, who had made a last-ditch but ill-fated effort to broker peace through a summit between Vladimir Putin and Joe Biden, said: France strongly condemns Russia’s decision to wage war on Ukraine. Russia must end its military operations immediately. France stands in solidarity with Ukraine. It stands with the Ukrainians and works with its partners and allies to end the war. Guardian reporter Luke Harding has this audio dispatch from Kyiv this morning: Ukraine has accused Russia of moving military equipment into the country from annexed Crimea, according to Reuters. A Reuters photographer has taken photos of tanks and armoured personnel carriers (APCs) heading to the eastern Ukrainian city of Mariupol. It is not immediately clear if they are tanks from Russia. Video footage indicates that Russian rockets have hit population centres in major Ukrainian cities despite claims by the Russian military that it is only targeting military infrastructure. Images from the city of Kharkiv showed what appeared to be the tail section of a rocket fired from a Smerch heavy multiple rocket launcher. The rocket’s payload failed to explode on impact and it was left sticking out of the pavement in the city close to an Orthodox church. CIT, an open-source research group, confirmed that the video was shot in Kharkiv and that the tali section resembled a Smerch rocket. The use of those rockets against population centres is a “war crime,” the group claims. Rob Lee, a former marine and senior researcher at the Foreign Policy Research Institute, said it was unlikely that the rocket would be a precision-guided munition, calling it an “ominous sign”. Editor’s note: there is now scepticism from other reports on this claim. See here. Russian media have reported that Putin likely pre-recorded his declaration of war as early as Monday. Russian newspaper Novaya Gazeta found that the metadata on the video file uploaded to the Kremlin website was created at 7pm on February 21, nearly three days before Putin announced the beginning of his military operation on Thursday morning. The similarities between Putin’s appearance today and earlier this week had already raised questions about whether he filmed his declaration of war in advance. He is wearing the same tie and seated at the same desk when he announced his recognition of the Russian-controlled territories on Monday, and when he announced the start of his military operation on Thursday. The Kremlin and its allies have already been caught for pre-recording other events that were supposedly broadcast live, like the meeting of the Kremlin’s Security Council or announcements of evacuations from Donetsk and Luhansk territories. But if true, the pre-recording of Putin’s declaration of war would further suggest that the Kremlin never took the diplomatic path seriously and was always preparing to launch an invasion of Ukraine. Reports of casualties are already starting to come in. Ukraine’s interior ministry adviser says shelling across Ukraine has killed one and wounded another in Brovary in the Kyiv region. Ukraine’s military added that two Russian tanks and several trucks in eastern Ukraine were seen while Russia is moving military equipment across from annexed Crimea. Meanwhile, Russian-backed separatists say they now control two towns in the Luhansk region of Ukraine, according to a report from RIA new agency. This report was confirmed by Ukraine police who later said two villages in Luhansk region seized. Russia’s defence ministry said it has taken out military infrastructure at Ukrainian air bases and degraded Ukraine’s air defences, Russian news agencies reported. The Russian ministry denied reports that one of its aircraft had been downed over Ukraine. Ukraine’s military said earlier that five Russian planes and one helicopter had been shot down over its Luhansk region. The cost of oil has soared past $100 a barrel in the wake of Russia’s attack on Ukraine, fuelling fears about more inflationary pressures spreading through the global economy. The attack also triggered heavy selling in stock markets in Asia, with similar large falls of more than 2% expected in London, Europe and the US today. The benchmark Brent crude has risen 5.11% so far on Thursday and traders are concerned that the rising price of other key industrial commodities such as nickel will add to acute inflationary woes in western economies. Kyle Rodda of IG Markets in Melbourne said the spike could be part of a pincer movement of prices that force the US Federal Reserve and other central banks to rais einterest rates into the teeth of inflation. He said: A civil war would be both a huge growth shock to the European – and global economy – and inflation shock. That’s a dangerous mix, because the supply disruptions in commodity prices would drive costs higher, and exacerbate the inflation central banks are already struggling to contain. That means despite, this the Fed – and others – would be unable to buffet the shock, and would potentially have to tighten policy – a very negative scenario for risk assets. The Russian rouble dropped 5.4% earlier to hit a record low against the euro and its lowest since 2016 against the US dollar. Trade in the currency was later suspended. In case you missed the United Nations emergency security briefing earlier, the Guardian’s Julian Borger has compiled a rundown. Vladimir Putin delivered his speech while an emergency session of the UN security council was underway. It will go down as one of the most surreal sessions the chamber has ever witnessed, as the very war it was supposed to prevent, broke out while it was sitting. The secretary general, Antonio Guterres, was the first to speak, and at that time, Putin’s intentions were not entirely clear. But Guterres pointed to the reports of troops moving into position, and did something notable and rare for a UN secretary general: he publicly called out the head of a security council permanent member. “If indeed an operation is being prepared, I have only one thing to say, from the bottom of my heart,” Guterres said. “President Putin - stop your troops from attacking Ukraine. Give peace a chance. Too many people have already died.” By the time it was time for the Russian permanent representative, Vasily Nebenzya, to speak, Putin had given his address, and there was no more mystery. Peace was not to be given a chance, after all. Nebenzya, who had spent weeks deriding western states for their “hysterical” warnings of impending invasion, pivoted to argue it was not actually a war that was getting underway, but a “special military operation” to protect the people of the Donbas. The Ukrainian ambassador, Sergiy Kyslytsya, had been waiting for his turn to speak while receiving constant updates from Kyiv. When his time came, he had to dispense with his prepared speech because, he said, “most of it is already useless”. Instead he held up a copy of the UN Charter, a small sky blue booklet, and read the clause that said UN membership was open to all peace-loving states which accept the obligations contained in the charter. “Russia is not able to carry out any of those obligations,” Kyslytsya declared. He challenged Nebenzya to deny that Ukraine was under attack. “You have a smartphone,” he said, taunting the Russian to check with his boss, the foreign minister, on what was really going on. “You can call Lavrov right now. We can make a pause to let you go out and call him.” Nebenzya declined. “I have already said all I know at this point,” he said. “Waking up Minister Lavrov at this time is not something I plan to do.” An hour or so into the meeting, the multiplying reports of bombardment of Ukrainian cities had reached the chamber, and if the futility of the council’s calls for peace and dialogue had not been clear before, they were now agonisingly obvious. Some ambassadors demanded to speak for a second time to express their sense of betrayal. “At the exact time as we were gathered in the council seeking peace, Putin delivered a message of war in total disdain for the responsibility of this council,” the US permanent representative, Linda Thomas-Greenfield, said. “This is a grave emergency.” Her British counterpart, Barbara Woodward declared it “a grave day for Ukraine and for the principles of the United Nations.” Kyslytsya himself was trembling with emotion. He stared at Nebenzya and demanded the Russian relinquish his duties as chair of the council. “There is no purgatory for war criminals,” he warned him. “They go straight to hell.” At that point, Nebenzya quickly closed the meeting, claiming that Russia’s aggression was not directed at the Ukrainian people, but “against the junta that is in power in Kiev”. Then he adjourned and left. A security council that had begun, just about, in peacetime, had broken up in a time of war, and perhaps at the start of a major conflict. A quick tweet here from Ukraine’s president Zelenskiy who earlier made an urgent national address introduced martial law and urged people to remain calm. Ukraine’s president Volodymyr Zelenskiy made an urgent national address to the nation in the wake of the Russian declaration of its “special military operation” this morning. In a brief video address, Zelenskiy said Russia has carried out missile strikes on Ukraine infrastructure and on Ukrainian border guards with explosions being heard in many cities across the country. He has introduced martial law. Ukraine’s foreign minister Dmytro Kuleba said on Twitter Putin has just launched a full-scale invasion of Ukraine. Peaceful Ukrainian cities are under strikes. This is a war of aggression. Ukraine will defend itself and will win. The world can and must stop Putin. The time to act is now.” We’re beginning to get a picture of what the Russian invasion may be aiming to achieve although with the huge caveat that everything is incredibly chaotic. CNN has pictures of what appears to be a column of tanks crossing in the area of the Senkivka border crossing with Belarus. The Ukrainian border guard has said the country has been attacked from the northern border with Belarus and that Belarussian troops appear to be involved in the assault. If – and again it is a big if – that is what we are seeing then the obvious route south is towards Cherniv which is on the road to Kyiv following the east side of the Dnieper river. This is not the only axis of attack for Russian forces as far as we can gather. There are also reports of troops crossing further south towards Kharkiv and reports of on going clashes around Lukhansk and Donetsk. The Russian defence ministry is also saying that Ukraine’s air bases have been neutralised. Bear in mind all of this is on top of air and missile strikes. Even where I’m sitting in Lviv in the far west of Ukraine where a lot of the diplomatic missions have withdrawn to I’m hearing what appears to be intermittent sirens in the distance. Bear in mind too that we are just three hours into this. This has a long way to go. Things to be looking out for, I suspect, are whether the Russian forces also make an incursion to the west of the Dnieper river and to the east of Kyiv which will give us a good idea whether Kyiv is one of the main centres of gravity for the invasion. The Russian military has claimed that all of Ukraine’s aviation bases had been disabled in the barrage of missiles that began the Russian invasion this morning around 5am. Smoke has been seen rising from near major airfields outside of Kharkiv and other cities in the east. But Russia also appears to have hit airfields in Kherson and as far west as Ivano-Frankivsk, which is nearer to the border with Poland. It has also indicated that its forces have entered Ukraine, claiming that Ukraine’s border forces “are not putting up any resistance to Russian units.” Reports of explosions have been filtering in from Kyiv, as well as reports of air raid sirens and rocket attacks on Ukrainian fighter jets at an airport outside the city. Russian forces fired missiles at several Ukrainian cities and landed troops on its south coast on Thursday, officials and local media report, after Russian president Vladimir Putin authorised what he called a “special military operation” in the east. Residents could be seen fleeing the city in buses and cars, and Kyiv’s metro system was busy with people carrying suitcases. Guardian reporter Luke Harding who is based in Kyiv said explosions have been reported across the country, including in Kyiv, Kharkiv, Mariupol, Dnipro, Odessa, Slavayansk and Kramatorsk. Two big blasts were reported being heard from the city of Mariupol one after another in an easterly direction, according to a Reuters witness. Ukraine’s defence minister said Russia began intense shelling of Ukrainian military units in the east, as well as military control centres and airfields. A photo provided by the Ukrainian President’s office appeared to show an explosion in the country’s capital, Kyiv, early Thursday morning. Ursula von der Leyen and Charles Michel, presidents of the European Commission and Council, have issued a joint statement: We condemn in the strongest possible terms Russia’s unprecedented military aggression against Ukraine. By its unprovoked and unjustified military actions, Russia is grossly violating international law and undermining European and global security and stability. We call on Russia to immediately cease the hostilities, withdraw its military from Ukraine and fully respect Ukraine’s territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence. Such use of force and coercion has no place in the 21st century.” President Michel of the European Council has urgently convened an extraordinary meeting of the European Council while EU leaders will meet later today to discuss the crisis and further restrictive measures upon Russia. President von der Leyen will also outline a further sanctions package being finalised by the European Commission and which the Council will swiftly adopt. We deplore the loss of life and humanitarian suffering. The EU and its Member States are ready to urgently provide humanitarian emergency response. We call on Russia and Russia-backed armed formations to respect international humanitarian law. The EU stands firmly by Ukraine and its people as they face this unparalleled crisis. The EU will provide further political, financial and humanitarian assistance. We are coordinating our response with our international partners, including NATO and G7 whose leaders will meet today.” Ukraine’s defence ministry says it has shot down five Russian planes and one helicopter in a statement posted on its Facebook page. According to the Joint Forces Command, today, on February 24, 5 planes and a helicopter of the aggressor were shot down. The Joint Forces give a worthy rebuff to the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation. Military units are in their positions. The enemy is taking losses. Stay calm and believe in the Ukrainian defenders. Together we will win! Glory To Ukraine!” The Russian military has denied that one of its planes was shot down in fighting over Ukraine this morning. Western leaders have decried Russia’s president Vladimir Putin as Russia launches attacks on Ukraine. Western leaders responded with fury to Russia launching military attacks on Ukrainian cities, and vowed to hold the Kremlin accountable with strengthened sanctions and other measures. Shortly after reports of explosions near Kyiv broke, US president Joe Biden accused Russian president Vladimir Putin of choosing a “premeditated war that will bring a catastrophic loss of life and human suffering”. “The prayers of the world are with the people of Ukraine tonight as they suffer an unprovoked and unjustified attack by Russian military forces,” he said. Read the full story below. If you have just joined us, here is a helpful run down from the Guardian’s world affairs editor Julian Borger. Ukraine’s border service says guards were attacked by Russian troops from Russia and Belarus. Meanwhile, CNN reports witnessing through a livestream video troops entering Ukraine via Belarus. According to the outlet, troops atop a column of military vehicles were seen entering Ukraine from a border crossing with Belarus. Russian President Vladimir Putin and Belarusian President Alexander Lukashenko reportedly spoke by phone on Thursday, according to Belarusian state news agency Belta. “At about 5am today, a telephone conversation took place between the Presidents of Belarus and Russia, during which Vladimir Putin informed his Belarusian counterpart about the situation on the border with Ukraine and in the Donbas,” Belta cited the Belarusian presidential press service as saying. Scenes from Kyiv show residents carrying bags and suitcases at a metro station in the city. Others show quiet streets and queues for cash machines. I’m Samantha Lock and welcome to our rolling coverage of the crisis in Ukraine, which has escalated in recent hours with the start of a Russian attack on its neighbour. Here are the main developments: Russia has launched a military attack on Ukraine after president Vladimir Putin authorised what he called a “special military operation” to “demilitarise and denazify” the neighbouring country. Putin’s justified the attack by claiming that “a hostile anti-Russia is being created on our historic lands”. His remarks came in a televised address at around 2.30am GMT – as an emergency meeting of the UN security council was under way in New York to avert conflict. He also vowed “consequences greater than any you have faced in history” if there was any attempt to interfere. Explosions were heard and reported in many cities and military locations around Ukraine shortly afterwards at around 5am Ukraine time (3am GMT). Russian troops have landed in Odessa while others are crossing the border into Kharkiv, Ukrainian officials said, in what appeared to be a broad attack across the country. Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy told the nation in a TV address on Thursday morning that Russia has carried out missile strikes on infrastructure and border guards. Foreign minister Dmytro Kuleba said Russia had launched “a full-scale invasion” of his country. “Peaceful Ukrainian cities are under strikes. This is a war of aggression. Ukraine will defend itself and will win,” he said. Joe Biden issued a written statement saying that “the prayers of the entire world are with the people of Ukraine tonight as they suffer an unprovoked and unjustified attack by Russian military forces”. United Nations secretary-general Antonio Guterres made a direct plea to Russian present Putin, saying: “In the name of humanity bring your troops back to Russia.” The British ambassador to Ukraine, Melinda Simmons, has said that a “wholly unprovoked” attack on Ukraine is under way. Stock markets in Asia Pacific plunged after the hostilities broke out and heavy losses are expected in Europe and the US later. Safe havens such as gold spiked, while Brent crude oil rose over $100 for the first time since 2014. The two Russian-controlled territories in east Ukraine had earlier sent an official request to Moscow for military aid to “help repel the aggression of the Ukrainian armed forces”.Courts in Singapore will next week consider arguments by four men who have spent more than a decade on death row, amid fears the city state may push ahead with executions to free up space on death row. The Singaporean government does not disclose how many people are held on death row, though campaigners believe there are likely more than 50 men awaiting execution, the majority of whom have been convicted of drug offences. Singapore has not carried out any executions for the past two years, due to a number of pending court applications that forced the authorities to pause proceedings. However, sentences of the death penalty have continued to be handed down, even during the height of the pandemic when hearings were held over Zoom. Families fear there is now a backlog that the authorities are attempting to clear. Among the cases to be heard next week, is an appeal launched by Nagaenthran K Dharmalingam, whose execution was stayed last year pending appeal. Nagaenthran, who has an intellectual disability, was convicted of trying to smuggle 43 grams – about three tablespoons – of heroin into Singapore. The handling of his case provoked global outrage, with UN experts, the European Union’s delegation to Singapore, as well as multiple rights groups and billionaire Richard Branson, a critic of the death penalty, all expressing concern. Since then, other inmates – Roslan bin Bakar, Pausi bin Jefridin and Rosman bin Abdullah – have been scheduled for execution. These were temporarily halted, but further hearings in their case are scheduled for next week. Kirsten Han, a journalist and activist who has written extensively about Singapore’s death penalty, said families of other inmates on death row are following the proceedings anxiously. “How these recent cases go is taken as an indication of whether their cases might be coming soon. They are all very worried,” she said. Nagaenthran’s sister, Sarmila Dharmalingam, who lives in Malaysia, said she will wait anxiously for a phone call on Tuesday to hear of her brother’s fate. Sarmila said her brother’s mood is unpredictable, and that for two years during the pandemic he refused to meet relatives, they suspect due to depression. “Sometimes Nagaen will talk nicely to my brother [who is now permanently based in Singapore], and then suddenly he will switch off, [start] looking up and down. The character is different,” she said. Sarmila last spoke to Nagaenthran three weeks ago. He asked her why she was busy campaigning and helping organise his appeal. “I am speechless that Nagaen was asking me these questions,” she said. “I ask, ‘Why? You don’t know for what purpose I am doing this? I already informed you that I want to save your life.” It is unclear if he understands the situation. World’s toughest drug laws According to Han’s research, more than 50 people are on death row, including a disproportionate number of ethnic minority inmates. Singapore has some of the world’s toughest drug laws, which its government claims are the most effective deterrent against crime. Campaigners argue this is not the case. “Statistics from countries that have abolished the death penalty show that the absence of the death penalty has not resulted in an increase in the crimes previously subject to capital punishment,” said Chiara Sangiorgio, death penalty adviser at Amnesty International, who pointed to data from Canada. The Singapore government did not immediately respond to a request for comment. In 2012, a legal change granted Singaporean judges narrow discretion to sentence convicts to life imprisonment and possible caning if certain criteria are met. Individuals must prove they were acting only as a courier, and must obtain a certificate of substantive assistance, confirming that they had provided information that significantly helped disrupt drug trafficking activities, or prove they have a mental or intellectual disability that substantially impaired their mental responsibility. Yet inmates who appear to meet such criteria struggle to have this accepted by the courts, including Nagaenthran, whose various psychiatric conditions were not recognised. Pannir Selvam Pranthaman, who was found guilty of carrying 51.84g of heroin in 2017, was also refused such an allowance. His lawyer argued he had given information to the authorities which led to the arrest of another drug trafficker. However, the court said this information confirmed what the authorities had already known and so, while accurate, wasn’t useful enough to warrant a certificate. Pannir’s sister, Angelia Pranthaman, who campaigns on behalf of her brother and other death row inmates, said her brother has exhausted all forms of legal challenge. Their only option is to ask for clemency. “We have no hope in clemency,” she said, adding that no pardon has been issued for decades. “I am very scared of the word because that is the last option we have.” Han said that while the public is supportive of the death penalty, it is becoming more open to discussing the issue. Recent high profile cases may, for many, be the first time they have discovered how the death penalty works, she said. Reforms though, are likely to take time, said Han, which is little comfort to the families of those awaiting execution. “If someone is scheduled to hang next week I can’t possibly tell his family – oh, you know, change takes time and the death penalty will be abolished in 10 years, because they really don’t care about that.”We like to think of wood burning as a climate neutral source of energy. This has led to subsidised wood burning for electricity generation and is part of the appeal of an evening around a roaring fire. This idea relies on the carbon released from wood burning being reabsorbed by forests and woodland. Reality is more complex. Firstly, it takes time for new forests to regrow and absorb the carbon. For large-scale wood burning for power generation using wood imported from North America, it can take decades or perhaps more than a century for forests to reabsorb this additional carbon from our air. This means greater chances of irreversible climate tipping points before any possible benefits accrue. Secondly, for the same amount of heat or energy, burning wood releases more carbon dioxide than oil or gas. This means more carbon in the air immediately after burning wood for electricity compared with fossil fuels, and more carbon in the air after an evening in front of the wood fire than using the central heating. This extra carbon has to be absorbed by new tree growth before we can even talk about neutrality. David van der Spoel from the group Skydda Skogen (Protect the Forest Sweden) said: “Bioenergy aggravates the climate crisis. Instead, we have to move away from burning anything that generates greenhouse gases.” Wood for home burning is sometimes locally sourced. A study in Finland showed that the impact of home heating on forests, and the time needed for carbon to be reabsorbed, depended on the type of wood used; for example, forest waste, small branches or felling mature trees. However, it concluded that wood heating was the least climate friendly option for Finnish homes. A French study has looked at ways to meet a rapid increase in demand for wood energy. These included cutting old forests or chopping down trees before they are fully grown. All options would reduce carbon stored in forests and reduce the total capacity of the nation’s forests as a carbon sink; meaning more carbon in the atmosphere, not less, for several decades to come. Danish and Australian research highlights that home wood burning also produces methane. This is a powerful global heating gas and further skews the balance away from climate neutrality. Wood burning produces soot too, which adds to blackening of arctic snow and increases melt rates. Comparisons between the climate impacts of wood heating and alternatives are even worse if we compare it with heat pumps run by wind or other carbon neutral energy. Studies on supply chains are urgently needed to fully understand the impacts of home wood heating on our climate, woodlands and biodiversity. However, it is clear that the best way to reduce the climate impacts of home heating is to leave trees growing in the forest and invest in insulation and true low or zero carbon energy.They have been a feature of London’s streets for nearly 12 years: the docked public bikes for sharing that are billed as one of the easiest and quickest ways for people to make shorter journeys. Or in some cases, it seems, considerably longer ones. Among the hundreds of bikes that go permanently missing from the 14,000-plus fleet every year, a handful have been tracked down to distinctly non-London locations, including Australia, the Gambia and Turkey, a freedom of information request has disclosed. Other foreign locations in which the bikes have been officially spotted are Jamaica, Romania and the Republic of Ireland. According to the FoI response from Transport for London (TfL), which operates the Santander Cycles scheme, the rogue Irish bike was recovered with the help of garda officers, while the British Transport Police has helped to bring back models from Cornwall, Southend-on-Sea and Brighton. There was no news about the fate of the others. TfL is reluctant to discuss the theft of what many still refer to as “Boris bikes” after the London mayor in office at the time they were introduced, even though the scheme originated from Boris Johnson’s predecessor, Ken Livingstone. While the London hire scheme is seen as a huge success, recording its 100 millionth journey just over a year ago, the number of bikes lost permanently is gradually rising, albeit from a total number that has more than doubled since it was launched. In 2013, the first year records are available, 108 bikes went missing – this rose to 950 bikes in 2020 and 851 in the first seven months of last year. TfL declined to give further details about the particularly exotic places in which some bikes were found, beyond to say that they were identified through a mixture of reports from the public, social media and GPS. From the start of 2020, TfL has trialled GPS tracking for some of the bikes as a way of reducing overall theft numbers. However, details about some of the examples have previously emerged. Footage from Jamaica showing one of the bikes, in the red livery of Santander – the bank that sponsors the scheme, has been widely shared on social media in recent weeks. The example from the Gambia appears to be a much earlier case. In 2013, a staff member from the charity Oxfam in the west African country took a photo of one of the bikes, in the blue colours of then sponsor Barclays, being ridden down a dirt road. There was speculation that the bike could have been donated but it was unclear. Theft and vandalism have created a significant barrier to other bike share schemes in the UK, particularly companies that offered dockless bikes that could be left on the pavement or street after a ride. In 2018, the Chinese firm Mobike pulled out of Manchester because of what it called “unsustainable” losses from theft and vandalism. It has since ceased all UK operations, but for wider commercial reasons. In contrast, the TfL scheme requires customers to take bikes from fixed docking points, using either membership or a bank card, and charges up to £300 if a bike is not returned. The scheme has proved increasingly popular, in part due to the construction of more cycling infrastructure around London, but also, more recently, because of people avoiding public transport due to Covid. The system reported a record number of 10.9m hires in 2021. David Eddington, TfL’s head of cycle hire, said: “We take cycle theft extremely seriously and are taking measures to deter it, including installing GPS trackers on bikes, installing cameras at select docking stations and checking equipment at docking stations to ensure bikes are returned properly.”Peter Sarsgaard peers into the webcam, half-man, half-beard. “I’m in the Kenny Rogers camp right now,” says the 50-year-old actor. “I look like a dropout. Whenever I’m not working, I feel like I’m growing hair in case I need it for the next movie.” His sleepy grin matches the rest of him: bed head, bed eyes, bed voice. It is this apparent languor that makes his glinting wit and flashes of cruelty stand out sharply on screen. He can be creep, charmer or both. “I don’t tell myself I’m the antagonist or the protagonist,” he says. “They can figure that out later.” He has played, among other things, a magazine editor who unpicks his colleague’s lies (Shattered Glass), a suave adulterer (An Education) and a transphobic killer (Boys Don’t Cry). His wife, Maggie Gyllenhaal, with whom he has two children, recently directed him in The Lost Daughter as a professor who falls for a married academic, played by Jessie Buckley. “I was nervous, because I wanted to do a good job in her movie,” he says. “I didn’t want people to say: ‘Too bad she cast her husband as the object of desire, because that doesn’t make any sense.’” No one did. Although Sarsgaard has only a few minutes to persuade us that a woman would leave her family for him, he is convincingly shrewd, seductive and ravenous. His tendency to seem half‑asleep and harmless until – snap! – he has you in his teeth, like a Venus flytrap, serves him well in the world of The Batman. Robert Pattinson plays the caped vigilante, while Sarsgaard is Gil Coulson, the shady, shaven-headed district attorney of Gotham City. “Gil is leading a double life,” he says. “He is protective of his family, but he’s involved in some things that are not legit.” The mix of sweet and sour appeals. “It creates more conflict. What if the biopic of Donald Trump showed how he made a damn good cherry pie on Thanksgiving, and sang songs with his family, but then he did all this other stuff?” While filming The Batman, he marvelled at Colin Farrell, who was unrecognisable beneath the Penguin’s prosthetics. “I said to Colin: ‘It’s a blast in there, isn’t it?’” Sarsgaard thought fondly of his own experience on The Green Lantern, in which he played a deranged scientist whose head swells up like a Macy’s Thanksgiving Day parade balloon. That maligned film gave him “the most variety I’ve ever had. Probably because I had this crazy 8lb [3.6kg] thing that took four hours to put on. You feel really liberated as an actor wearing a mask.” He is big on freedom and never discusses his creative choices before the camera rolls. “You need to give yourself agency as an actor. Don’t ask for a dancefloor – create one.” He is no superhero devotee, although his wife appeared in an earlier Batman film (The Dark Knight), while her brother Jake was the villain in Spider-Man: Far from Home. “So I’ve seen those,” he says. His viewing habits tend towards the esoteric. On one occasion, he was trusted by his high school friends to choose the evening’s entertainment and brought home Peter Greenaway’s transgressive arthouse thriller The Cook, the Thief, His Wife &amp; Her Lover. “They had the beer ready. They were all set. Then afterwards, they were like: ‘Peter is not picking the movie any more.’” He giggles impishly. The surprise is that an actor who has been vocal about his scepticism about superhero films has made two of them. In 2009, he declared himself “a little suspicious” of them: “I’ve always wondered, if there were no money in playing superheroes … [whether] actors would still be as drawn to them.” How does he feel now? “The same way,” he says. “But there’s also the idea that we could do the most obscure, interesting thing in a basement somewhere – I joke with my wife that one day we’ll just do experimental theatre in some socialist country – and yet you want to share what you do with the largest number of people.” Have we reached saturation point with superhero films? “Probably,” he shrugs. “So, if you’re going to do one, you’d better be damn sure Matt Reeves is directing it.” Regardless of which film-maker is at the helm, the ubiquity of these blockbusters can only harm the kinds of films that Sarsgaard adores. When The Batman opens, it will swamp all available cinema screens; the latter-day equivalent of The Cook, the Thief, His Wife and Her Lover won’t get a look-in. “Right, right,” he says. Then a note of concern: “Do you think The Lost Daughter would be on the screen next to The Batman?” *** Still, an actor needs to eat. Sarsgaard does a better job than many of balancing superior schlock – he menaced Jodie Foster in Flightplan and was superb as the credulous father of a violent adoptive daughter in the horror movie Orphan – with searching, socially conscious fare such as the tragic, Soviet-era true story Mr Jones and the eco-thriller Night Moves, as well as TV series including The Looming Tower (about the events leading up to 9/11) and Dopesick (the US opioid crisis). Unease sets in if he is required to be himself. “Doing this is foreign to me,” he says, referring to the interview. Acting, though, he has always adored. “Since the moment I started, I’ve found comfort in it.” The roles themselves have rarely been soothing. For his film debut, he was murdered by Sean Penn in Dead Man Walking. “I wept during the audition. I think I wept because I wanted the part so badly.” Then he was John Malkovich’s son in The Man in the Iron Mask. “John asked me on set: ‘You know why they cast you, don’t you?’ I said: ‘No.’ He said: ‘It’s because you sound like me.’ I was like: ‘Oh. Bummer.’ I didn’t want that to be the reason.” Another high giggle slips out. It is true that they sound alike. But was Malkovich screwing with him? “Maybe. His whole sense of humour is based on that tension.” Has Sarsgaard done that to other actors? “Probably. I’ve been in situations where I couldn’t figure out how to work with another actor – and I’m not somebody who gives up – so I’ll encourage us to hang out together to find a connection so that we can at least drag something on to the screen.” Any examples? “Nuh-uh,” he says with a lopsided smile. “But it was worth asking.” His breakthrough came in 1999 with Boys Don’t Cry, although the shoot got off to a shaky start. After Sarsgaard’s first few takes as the real-life murderer John Lotter, the director Kimberly Peirce took him aside. “I thought I’d hired a man,” she said. “Turns out I’ve hired a pussy. So what are you going to do about it?” He gives a rueful look. “I was like: ‘Huh. OK. You wanna see a man?’ It struck me really hard. I’m not somebody who goes around like that character, lording it over people and being the sheriff in the room, so it was challenging for me to give myself permission to be a dick.” His newfound swagger spilled over when he was out with Chloë Sevigny and the rest of the cast at a “not-fancy” bar in Texas. “We ordered margaritas. Chloë took a sip and said: ‘Oh, it’s too sweet,’ and everyone sat there bummed‑out for a second. I picked up the tray of drinks, took it back to the bar and said: ‘These are awful. We want tequilas and we’re not paying for these.’ And I’m someone who never even returns corked wine.” How long did he carry that confidence with him? “A while. What stays with you as an actor after you’ve finished work are the things that are enjoyable. I don’t sit around trying to hold on to stuff from my work day. But things like that will stick.” He makes it sound like the body drawing nutrients out of food. “It definitely is. When you’re deciding whether to play a role, you ask questions such as: ‘Does this pose an interesting challenge?’ and: ‘Will it enable me to be a better actor, or to be wealthier?’ Hopefully, it checks several boxes. It’s not just: ‘Yay, I’m richer,’ or: ‘Yay, I’m doing experimental theatre in some country no one’s ever heard of.’” Unusually among actors, he enjoys watching himself on screen. “That’s not to say I could direct it while I act, but I know what I think works.” In a word: understatement. “I’d be like: ‘This moment’s good, but get rid of the part where I react to the big thing.’” Take The Man in the Iron Mask, in which his character is killed by a cannonball. “They’re waving a flamethrower in front of me to make this blinding heat and they want me to act like I can see the cannonball coming. Now, that is never going to look OK to me. What they wanted was this.” He widens his eyes in horror. “Whereas, if I were directing the movie, it would be more like this.” He stares blankly at the laptop screen. He doesn’t even blink. It reminds him of Liam Neeson’s advice on the set of Kathryn Bigelow’s K-19: The Widowmaker. Sarsgaard’s character had to embark on an apparent suicide mission to repair a nuclear reactor; Neeson suggested beforehand that he shouldn’t overdo the fear, since everyone in the audience would already be scared on his behalf. “That movie was a real acting lesson for me, to be around Harrison Ford and Liam and see how they approached all this technical stuff,” he says. “None of us knew what the hell we were saying: ‘Shut down No 3 generator, blah-blah-blah.’ Do you give up on that or do you try to find some meaning for yourself? Well, everything has meaning to Harrison Ford. I never saw him throw something away.” Not even his Russian accent? “No one wants to do an accent,” he protests. “Harrison and I did midwestern Russian. Liam did Irish Russian.” When I mention that Dennis Lim in the Village Voice described Ford’s performance as “acting without a nyet”, he roars with laughter. “Oh my God! That’s cruel. But awesome. Anyway, you could say the same about me in that movie.” One of Sarsgaard’s pieces of advice to young actors is: have a point of view. What is his? “I think movies have a responsibility to reflect something real about the concerns people face in their lives. If you can make that compelling, it’s going to be worthwhile to me. But I also like movies that are timeless, that exist outside social commentary.” Such as? “My wife’s movie. I was on a talkshow and they said: ‘Can you explain what’s happening before we show the clip?’ I was like: ‘Nuh-uh. I don’t think I can.’ That’s the sort of movie I love. One that you can’t set up.” He is right: The Lost Daughter is complex, enigmatic and resistant to precis. Rather like him. • The Batman is released in Australia on 3 March and in the UK and the US on 4 MarchPicks of the week Bone, Marry, Bury The world would be a better place if all true-crime podcasts opened with a karaoke version of Céline Dion. This spoof of the genre starts on a high and stays there as Allie (Sarah Hyland) and her entertainingly critical best friend Gabe (Harvey Guillén) go to a New Year’s Eve party. Allie’s just been dumped and fired, with not a lot left to lose, but as the night unfolds there’s a promise of sex and death with plenty of twists. Hannah Verdier Conviction: The Disappearance of Nuseiba Hasan “There are a lot of people who don’t want me to tell you this story,” says journalist Habiba Nosheen as she introduces this podcast about Nuseiba Hasan , who’s been missing for 10 years. Nosheen’s investigation started three years ago after a tip-off from a source desperately searching for Hasan, her birth mother. She shares what she has learned since. HV Calling Bullsh!t “How in the hell did we get here?” Former advertising executive Ty Montague asks this about big-brand fake news and purpose-washing, exploring the gap between what companies say they stand for and the actions they’re actually taking. First up, Facebook, followed by Blackrock, Juul and Airbnb. Hollie Richardson Love Thy Neighbor Thirty years ago, riots broke out in the Brooklyn neighbourhood of Crown Heights. Collier Meyerson looks at how those four days shaped New York, amassing interviews with people who lived there at the time to learn how the car accident that killed a young boy led to such anger and retribution. She believes it can help us to understand modern dilemmas, from police violence and racism to antisemitism. HV Spectacle: Las Vegas Host Brent Holmes exposes every side of Sin City with the help of some of Vegas’s best-known characters. First up is Penn Jillette, who started out as a hippy and thought he was too good for the Strip, until he and Teller were offered big money to transfer their magic act to Las Vegas. HV Producer pick: Short Cuts Chosen by Danielle Stephens If BBC Radio 4 had decided to run this episode of Short Cuts for Valentine’s Day, the cynic in me wouldn’t have listened out of spite. A week later though, I was more than happy to hear what seemed to be a love letter to love – not simply falling in love, but falling out of it, and everything in between. Josie Long’s voice is a perfect accompaniment to the topic at hand, and she never fails to seem invested in hearing more. The smooth montage of people sharing their experiences with crushes had me smiling, cringing and nodding along in agreement. Parts two and three work nicely to help change your mind on the power of love, and the ending seems like a sort of recorded therapy session that the listener is let in on. You do feel that you’re overhearing a special moment between exes, unscripted, and real. Did it leave me feeling anything different about the concept of love? Maybe not, but it gave me insight to the thoughts of strangers – and that was the fun of it. Talking points The TV industry’s obsession with adapting podcasts doesn’t look like ending soon. In the coming weeks, we’ll get the AppleTV+ adaptation of WeCrashed (starring Anne Hathaway and Jared Leto) and the Disney+ version of The Dropout (starring Amanda Seyfried). Plus, romcom podcast Meet Cute has just been picked up by the producers of Dickinson, with Amazon set to adapt horror-pod, The Horror of Dolores Roach. Here’s the real question, though: how long until someone makes a pod adaptation that’s genuinely brilliant? Why not try: Whenever It Kicks with Jessie Cave | Beneath the Blue Lights Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about Hear Here or any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to the Guide, our weekly look at the best in pop cultureFor those of you who have not had the pleasure of watching the six seasons of History’s Vikings (not history’s Vikings – they’re only loosely affiliated with the show), let me bring you up to speed before we turn to the new spin-off, Vikings: Valhalla (Netflix). Vikings was 89 episodes about Vikings. The main Viking was the legendary hero of the Norse sagas and eventually king Ragnar Lodbrok (Travis Fimmel). Vikings started in 793 (or 2013 out here in the watching world), with the Viking raid on Lindisfarne and marauded through the schedules for a couple of generations’ worth of Vikings and seven of our years. It was a simplified Game of Thrones, a Nordic – which is to say a less utterly demented – The Tudors (another production by Vikings creator Michael Hirst) – designed to trouble the mental capacities of no one, though it doubtless caused medieval scholars significant pain. At various points it starred Gabriel Byrne, Jonathan Rhys Meyers and – as I believe is statutorily mandated for all Scandinavia-based productions – a Skarsgård; in this case Gustaf, son of Stellan, brother of Alexander. Vikings: Valhalla is also about Vikings. We pick up about a hundred years after we and Ragnar left off, with the St Brice’s Day massacre. King Aethelred (Bosco Hogan), not so Unready on 13 November 1002, orders the slaughter of every Dane in England in retaliation for their fellow Norsemen’s propensity for raiding his kingdom over the preceding years. King Canute (Bradley Freegard) immediately starts gathering a vengeful Viking army at Kattegat and prepares to go to war, aided by Harald Sigurdsson (Leo Suter) – AKA Harald Hardrada, and you may want to keep an eye on him, because Vikings: Valhalla is going to take us all the way up to the Battle of Stamford Bridge – and, ideally, Olaf “the Holy” Haraldsson (Jóhannes Haukur Jóhannesson). Two problems: one, Olaf is now a zealous Christian and won’t fight alongside his pagan countrymen. Two, I’m not entirely sure who anyone is because they are all just moving masses of beard and animal skins. Olaf is the largest – OK. Canute is the handsomest – fine. And Harald is sporting a manbun that, even at a distance of 1,000 years, is upsetting but at least a working identifier as long as he’s facing away from camera. When he’s not, he is indistinguishable from Leif Eriksson (Sam Corlett). Eriksson is a real history Viking – the son of Erik the Red, and an explorer who is thought to have beaten Christopher Columbus to North America by about 500 years – but here we know him first as the leader of a group of Greenlanders who have arrived at Kattegat to avenge the rape of his sister Freydis (Frida Gustavsson, a great performance that throws others into sharp relief) by an unknown Christian and just at the wrong time not to be caught up in a war they have little interest in. Freydis was also a real Viking, and quite the marauder in her own right – if we get to nominate a spin-off to the spin-off, Freydis Takes Valhalla gets my vote. It’s fun, no more, no less. Bit of history, bit of gore, bit of sex, bit of plot, lots of hair. As mindless distraction at a gruelling time, it will be hard to beat. Wrap yourself in a direwolf rug – I may be crossing streams here – pour yourself a hornful of strong ale and enjoy. Skaal!We were warned about Vladimir Putin – about his intentions, his nature, his mindset – and, because it was profitable for us, we ignored those warnings and welcomed his friends and their money. It is too late for us to erase our responsibility for helping Putin build his system. But we can still dismantle it and stop it coming back. Russia is a mafia state, and its elite exists to enrich itself. Democracy is an existential threat to that theft, which is why Putin has crushed it at home and seeks to undermine it abroad. For decades, London has been the most important place not only for Russia’s criminal elite to launder its money, but also for it to stash its wealth. We have been the Kremlin’s bankers, and provided its elite with the financial skills it lacks. Its kleptocracy could not exist without our assistance. The best time to do something about this was 30 years ago – but the second best time is right now. We journalists have long been writing about this, but it is not simply overheated rhetoric from overexcited hacks. Parliament’s intelligence and security committee wrote two years ago that our investigative agencies are underfunded, our economy is awash with dirty money, and oligarchs have bought influence at the very top of our society. The committee heard evidence from senior law enforcement and security officials. It laid out detailed, careful suggestions for what Britain should do to limit the damage Putin has already done to our society. Instead of learning from the report and implementing its proposals, Boris Johnson delayed its publication until after the general election and then, when further delay became impossible, dismissed those who took its sober analysis seriously as “Islingtonian remainers” seeking to delegitimise Brexit. That is the crucial context for Johnson’s ludicrous claim this week to the House of Commons that no government could “conceivably be doing more to root out corrupt Russian money”. That is not only demonstrably untrue, it is an inversion of reality. On leaving the European Union, we were told that we could launch our own independent sanctions regime – and this week we saw the fruit of it: a response markedly weaker than those of Brussels and Washington. The Liberal Democrat MP Layla Moran, speaking with parliamentary privilege on Tuesday, listed the names of 35 alleged key Putin “enablers” whom the Russian opposition politician Alexei Navalny has asked to be sanctioned. Blocking the assets of everyone on that list and their close relatives would be a truly significant response from Johnson to the gravity of the situation. But it would still only be a start. Relying solely on sanctions now is like stamping on a car’s accelerator when you’ve failed for years to maintain the engine, pump up the tyres or fill up the tank, yet still expect it to hit 95mph. Other announcements in the last couple of days have amounted to nothing more than painting on go-faster stripes. Tackling the UK’s role in enabling Putin’s kleptocracy, and containing the threat his allies pose to democracy here and elsewhere, will require far more than just banning golden visas or Kremlin TV stations. For a start, we need to know who owns our country. Some 87,000 properties in England and Wales are owned via offshore companies – which prevents us seeing who their true owners are or if they were bought with criminal money. Companies House makes no checks on registrations, which is why UK shell structures have featured in most Russian money-laundering scandals. Imposing transparency on the ownership of dirty money in this way would strike at the heart of the London money-laundering machine. Governments have promised to do this “when parliamentary time allows” for years, yet the time has never been found, and instead they’ve listened to concerns from the City that such regulations would harm its competitiveness. Above all, we need to fund our enforcement agencies as generously as oligarchs fund their lawyers: you can’t fight grand corruption on the cheap. Even good policies of recent years, such as the “unexplained wealth orders” of 2017, which were designed to tackle criminally owned assets hidden behind clever shell structures, have largely failed because investigators lack the funds to use them. We must spend what it takes to drive kleptocratic cash out of the country. Johnson is not the first prime minister to fail to rise to the challenge – Tony Blair and David Cameron both schmoozed with Putin even when it was obvious what kind of a leader he was. And I don’t think Johnson is personally corrupt or tainted by Russian money; he’s lazy, flippant and unwilling to launch expensive, laborious initiatives that will bring results only long after he himself has left office and is unable to take the credit for them. It is time, however, for his colleagues to step up and force him into action. This is a serious moment, and it requires serious people willing to invest in the long-term security of our country and the future of democracy everywhere. Oliver Bullough is the author of Moneyland: Why Thieves and Crooks Now Rule the World and How to Take It Back, and the forthcoming Butler to the WorldBrompton has revealed plans to invest as much as £100m in a new UK factory that will secure its place as the UK’s biggest bicycle manufacturer. In an added twist it has decided to reject the normal grey shed, instead opting to build its plant on stilts amid a newly restored wetland. The folding bike maker plans for the new site at Ashford in Kent to be open by 2027, on a 40 hectare (100 acre) floodplain. The stilts will be needed to prevent the factory being regularly inundated. It will also have no new car parking, instead relying on new pedestrian and cycle paths from the train station. “The whole reason this works is everything about it is slightly mad,” said Will Butler-Adams, Brompton’s chief executive, speaking before the plans were approved by Ashford borough council’s cabinet on Thursday evening. It is part of an expansion that will increase employee numbers from 850 to 1,000 in the next year. Butler-Adams said Brompton will also develop new products at the site, with an ultimate goal of building 200,000 bikes a year, compared with just shy of 70,000 in the year to March 2021, when Brompton made revenues of £76m (including a bike subscription service in some cities). The company will move from a “nondescript great big grey box” in Greenford in west London to a custom-built facility that will also host a museum, visitor centre and café, Butler-Adams said. Brompton hopes the facility, designed by architect Guy Hollaway, will be distinctive enough to attract a small portion of the 4.5m annual visitors to the designer outlet next door. The Greenford factory will continue to operate until at least 2030 during a transition to the new site. Part of the plan will involve restoring the new area to something similar to what it would be without human intervention: 24 hectares will be dedicated to a “rewilded public nature reserve” with a cycle path and trails open to the public. The cost of the factory will be as much as 50% higher than building a new shed-style factory, Butler-Adams said. However, he hopes it will save money in the longer term and avoid competing for shed space against booming online retailers. The company will also be able to spend on energy-saving measures such as insulation, ground source heat pumps and solar panels on its roof. Brompton has a net zero carbon emissions “ambition”, and so will aim to use materials with a lower carbon footprint. The factory will not include the usual expanse of tarmac for car parking (beyond a few spaces for disabled employees). Instead, workers will be able walk or cycle directly along 4km of new paths from Ashford International station. Those workers who do drive will have to use existing parking around Ashford, possibly in the nearby shopping centres. Hollaway, the architect, has also designed Ashford’s upcoming Newtown Works project, as well as galleries, a winery for English vintners Chapel Down, and even a multi-storey skatepark. Hollaway said he wanted the Brompton building to ask, “what is the factory of the future?” The complex – with floor-to-ceiling windows around much of the circular main building, according to digital renders – is designed to celebrate manufacturing and inspire workers, Butler-Adams said. “So much manufacturing is in some industrial estate hidden away, and nobody sees it,” he said. “It’s like an abattoir. It’s hidden. “We want to turn normal upside down and redefine manufacturing. Everyone thinks it’s dark satanic mills and people with boilersuits and monkey wrenches. It’s not.” In the shorter term Brompton is still coping with pandemic supply shortages, shipping delays of up to a month to add to normal 10-week lead time, and disruption caused by Brexit. Butler-Adams said he thought they were “over the worst of it” on supply issues. “The Brexit situation has been a bit of a nightmare – that’s improving,” he added. Brompton is sitting on an £11m cash pile, and it has not raised external capital in the 20 years Butler-Adams has been with the business. He said he would prefer not to raise new capital unless required, but added it would not be difficult if necessary. When Brompton started talks with Ashford, the council had initially put forward the site that eventually became a vast lorry park to cope with extra Brexit customs checks. The council will provide undisclosed financial support for the new factory. The Ashford site offers easy access to and from London, with its millions of commuters and potential Brompton customers, but Butler-Adams said the proximity of the Eurostar station would also allow the company to “engage with Europe really easily”.World leaders will come together online and in Nairobi, Kenya, next week, in what is described as a “critical moment” in progress towards the first ever global treaty to combat plastic waste. Inger Andersen, director of the UN Environment Programme, said an agreement at the UN environment assembly could be the most important multilateral pact since the Paris climate accord in 2015. Public disgust and impatience over the growing mountain of plastic waste has led to an unprecedented “degree of focus” that could see member states agreeing a blueprint for a legally binding treaty to control plastics “from source to sea”, she said. “Public impatience is something that is very powerful,” Andersen told the Guardian. “The public has had enough. We are all dependent on plastic, but they obviously want to see some resolution of this issue.” Earlier this month, the US, which generates more plastic waste per person than any other country in the world, joined with France in calling for a global agreement that recognises “the importance of curbing [plastic waste] at its source.” A key goal of the fifth UN environment assembly, from 28 February to 2 March, is to thrash out broad terms for a global agreement on plastic pollution and to form an intergovernmental negotiating committee (INC) to broker a final deal. If member states can agree on a framework, the INC would then negotiate a final treaty to be signed. Only 9% of plastic waste is recycled. It is difficult to recycle, slow to decay, expensive and polluting to burn, and breaks down into tiny particles that enter the food chain and cause harm to animals. These microplastics are ubiquitous, from the deep seafloor to the Arctic ice pack. Addressing delegates on Wednesday, ahead of the summit, Andersen said: “The world is watching with anxiety but also with hope – because for the first time in history, we are seeing unprecedented global momentum to tackle the plague of plastic pollution.” “From the 1950s to today, we have produced around 9bn tonnes, and 7bn tonnes of that is waste,” said Andersen. “That waste doesn’t disappear. We may feel good when we put it into the recycling bin, but it doesn’t all get recycled … 76% ends up in landfills and then the rest is incinerated, which causes toxic emissions as well as carbon dioxide.” If the UN does not agree on a treaty to curb production and use of plastic, ocean plastic pollution could quadruple by 2050 and there will be widespread ecological damage, according to a WWF report earlier this month. Reducing use of plastic, made from oil and gas, has implications for the climate as well as pollution levels, Andersen said. “If we manage to land it [an agreement], it will be the biggest thing we have done as a global community in a new multilateral environment agreement. We haven’t dealt with this issue with this degree of focus before. It is a very significant moment, and it is absolutely critical.” This week, negotiators in Nairobi are looking at two main resolutions, one from Rwanda and Peru, which addresses the full lifecycle of plastics and has the backing of more than 70 countries, including 27 from the EU. The other, from Japan, backed by Cambodia, Palau and Sri Lanka, prioritises waste management interventions and limits its scope to marine litter. More than 300 scientists and research organisations are calling on all UN member states to accept nothing less than the key elements of the stronger Rwanda-Peru resolution. And 90 business leaders, including fast-moving consumer goods companies, key producers of plastic waste, have also called for an agreement. Andersen’s wishlist for the agreement is that it covers the whole lifecycle of plastic, not just marine litter, includes monitoring and targets, and has a financial element, to help developing countries less able to recycle. “What’s interesting is that 90 CEOs have signed up, calling for a legally binding agreement. That includes PepsiCo and Coca-Cola and Procter &amp; Gamble and Unilever. And then you ask, ‘Well, why?’ Because [of] shareholders and consumers, that’s where the lever is. There are many, many more who want to see that shift.”The New South Wales Liberal division will have another month to solve its deadlock on selecting candidates for the federal election and hold an annual general meeting – but it is still possible that the federal division could step in next week. Matthew Camenzuli, a member of the NSW state executive of the Liberal party, has won his case in the supreme court, which means the state executive remains validly elected until at least 28 March. The chief justice of the equity division of the NSW supreme court, Julie Ward, ruled that the state branch’s constitution should be interpreted as allowing the state executive to remain in place even though it has not held an annual general meeting. She said she had concluded “(with some hesitation) that the natural meaning of the words ‘until the next AGM’ is premised on such an AGM occurring”. “If an AGM does not occur, then the event on which the termination of office will happen has not arisen and the elected office-bearer continues in office until such time as an AGM is held,” she said. The case was in response to legal advice presented to state executive last week that said if it did not hold an annual meeting by the end of February the division would be in breach of its constitution. This prompted talk of federal intervention, and raised fears that the situation was being used in order to influence preselections. The party’s state president, Philip Ruddock, who had sought the advice, sent an email to Liberal Party members explaining his actions. “Earlier this month, out of an abundance of caution, the division sought legal advice on constitutional uncertainty regarding continued operation of our state executive. We had also advised the federal executive of this potential concern,” he wrote. “Now that the judge has provided us with clarity; the state executive can continue operating on behalf of our members, and collaboratively prepare to campaign for the reelection of the Morrison government.” Whether the extra month will help the party solve its preselection impasse is unclear. With just a few weeks until the federal election is likely declared, it is still an option for the federal executive of the party to intervene when it meets on 3 March. Meanwhile, there were small signs this week that the preselection process was moving forward. After months of failing to convene because the federal immigration minister, Alex Hawke, the prime minister’s representative, was unavailable, the nominations review committee met this week to vet some candidates. The state executive had also agreed that a preselection by way of a branch plebiscite for the seat of Bennelong, in Sydney’s north, would go ahead on 23 March. The Senate spots would also go to a vote of the Liberal party council. The foreign minister, Marise Payne, was likely to retain top spot on the ticket, while senators Concetta Fierravanti-Wells and Jim Molan and two other nominees would be contesting the other winnable position. This was scheduled for 27 March, on the eve of the planned AGM of the council. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The rest of the contentious preselections would again be discussed on Friday night at the scheduled meeting of the NSW state executive. In advance of the meeting the NSW president, Philip Ruddock, advanced a compromise position, which would involve the three sitting members – immigration minister Alex Hawke in Mitchell, environment minister Sussan Ley in Farrer and MP Trent Zimmerman in North Sydney – being automatically re-endorsed by the state executive. This was being voted on via a remote ballot on Friday afternoon. This could leave open the potential for preselections via plebiscites in Hughes, Warringah, Dobell and Parramatta, but even this concession may not be sufficient to placate a vocal group on state executive – said to be between four and seven – who want the Liberal party to abide by its constitution and hold branch votes in all seats. To use special power to bypass preselections, Ruddock would need 90% of the 28-strong state executive to agree. The Camenzuli group would propose a motion detailing a timetable to achieve the remaining plebiscites, in line with the Warringah rules, which were inserted into the constitutions in 2018. Under the plan, notice periods would be shortened to allow all preselections to be completed within four to five weeks. Weary factional organisers said there was some likelihood this course would be supported by the state executive tonight – but that may be only to provoke federal intervention. Branch votes in all seats would almost certainly be unacceptable to the prime minister, who would likely lose Ley, one of his few women in cabinet, as well as factional ally Hawke, as they face increasing challenges from the right. The federal division will meet on 3 March and has warned that further delays could trigger intervention. This could range from a full-scale takeover of the state branch’s affairs, by effectively appointing an administrator, or taking control of preselections. Such a move would likely end in the courts.Inside Culture With Mary Beard 7.30pm, BBC Two Beard is back with the fifth series of her curious cultural review show. In tonight’s opener, the classicist explores what thousands of years of stereotyping women means for those who are in positions of power today. To unpick this, she is joined by Valerie Amos, the first Black woman to serve as a minister in the British cabinet, along with a group of female guests who have smashed many a glass ceiling. Hollie Richardson Unreported World 7.30pm, Channel 4 Thailand is experiencing a cryptocurrency revolution, after the pandemic left many citizens cash-strapped and jobless and eager to boost their fortunes. From the founder of the largest Thai cryptocurrency exchange to a farmer who trades crypto from his hammock, Jonathan Miller interviews a range of people to find out more about this new way of earning. HR Your Garden Made Perfect 8pm, BBC Two Tonight, Essex couple Agata and David have £60,000 (that is not a typo) to do their garden up. Cue three designers eager to proffer their virtual ideas – but which one will the couple choose to turn into reality? HR Death in Paradise 9pm, BBC One Series finale time, and it’s checkmate for reclusive chess grandmaster Julius Rotfeld (David Sibley), who dies during a comeback match – poisoned via one of his own pieces. DI Neville Parker (Ralf Little) tries to get to the bottom of it while attempting to mend his heartbreak via online dating. Meanwhile, commissioner Selwyn Patterson (Don Warrington) faces the very last person he was expecting to see. Ali Catterall Dating No Filter 10pm, Sky Max Fast becoming a firm favourite on the Friday night schedule, London Hughes, Emily Atack and Tom Allen are among the celebrities analysing footage of tonight’s blind dates. Pocket-sized rapper Aaliyas is looking for “a LeBron James type” but, as Hughes puts it, “LeBron isn’t gonna be in Liverpool, babe.” HR The Graham Norton Show 10.35pm, BBC One RuPaul is in the house with Norton tonight talking all things Drag Race, along with Oscar-nominated Power of the Dog star Benedict Cumberbatch and Normal People’s Daisy Edgar-Jones. Regard and Years &amp; Years team up to perform their single Hallucination live. HR Film choices The Man in the White Suit (Alexander Mackendrick, 1951) 1pm, BBC Two There’s a distinct touch of Jesus to Alec Guinness in this brilliant 1951 Ealing satire. His wide-eyed, unworldly scientist, Sidney, invents a cloth that never gets dirty and lasts for ever. Of course, this will not do, as the textile industry would become defunct, so an unholy alliance of capital and labour races to prevent him bringing it to the public. Master director Alexander Mackendrick sets the scene with a lightness that belies the tragic beating down of Sidney’s creative impulses – from the musical plops and parps of his lab apparatus to Joan Greenwood’s mellifluous turn as the factory owner’s daughter. Simon Wardell Bacurau (Juliano Dornelles and Kleber Mendonça Filho, 2019), 12.45am, Film4 A remote town in Brazil is attacked by trophy hunters in search of human prey in Juliano Dornelles and Kleber Mendonça Filho’s sly modern western, which riffs on 30s horror The Most Dangerous Game. The first sign that something is wrong comes when the settlement vanishes from online maps, but matters soon turn bloody. Udo Keir is in charge of the braggadocious post-colonial invaders, but he little realises that the good folk of Bacurau, including Sônia Braga’s doctor and Silvero Pereira’s outlaw, have a fierce community spirit and psychotropic drugs on their side. SWTop story: Signs of ‘fierce resistance’ Morning everyone. I’m Martin Farrer and these are the top stories this morning. Ukraine is fighting for its survival today as the Russian offensive against its neighbour continues to escalate. Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, confirmed reports of missile strikes on military and civilian targets this morning, while multiple explosions were heard in Kyiv and air-raid sirens sounded across the city. The key Hostomel air base just outside Kyiv is controlled by Ukrainian forces again, but there is heavy fighting going on north-west of the capital. The deputy defence minister has just said that Russian troops will soon be “just outside Kyiv”, but British military experts said Ukrainian forces had provided “fierce resistance across all axes of Russia’s advance”. In a grave address to the nation earlier on Friday, Zelenskiy said 137 Ukrainians have died so far and although he said he was “target number one” of the Russian military, he would stay in Kyiv. Here’s what we know so far about the invasion, and you can also follow developments at our live blog and read our visual guide to what’s happening. Zelenskiy lamented the lack of on-the-ground military support, with the west’s response only to impose more sanctions. Some EU states are reluctant to go so far as to cripple Russia’s economy by excluding it from the Swift system of dollar payments, so the bloc may not endorse the plan, bringing fury from Ukraine. Boris Johnson has promised tough action as well. In Russia, police arrested more than 1,700 people after protests against the invasion in 53 cities. The question of why Putin has pursued such a reckless path is being asked by governments all over the world, and bewilderment about the Russian leader’s “despotic mindset” has been amplified by his bizarre justifications about “denazifying” Ukraine. Our team of correspondents take us through the tense buildup and then the unleashing of Russia’s military might on the first day of the invasion, which also included a carefully chosen list of targets and “data-wiper” cyberattacks. Ukraine has now called on hackers to help defend against more cyber warfare. Our columnist Timothy Garton Ash, an expert on eastern Europe, writes that the invasion will change the continent for ever, while a Ukrainian journalist in Kyiv shares her disbelief that the attack went ahead. And Oliver Bullough argues that Johnson’s claims that Britain is rooting out Russian money are wide of the mark. * * * Student inequality – Plans to reform student finance in England will result in wealthy undergraduates being better off, while women, disadvantaged students and those from the north and Midlands are most likely to be worse off, according to the government’s own equality analysis. Under the proposals, students who enrol in 2023-24 would make loan repayments for 40 years rather than 30. It means that graduates who end up earning more over their careers would see their lifetime repayments fall, while those making less would see theirs increase by 150%. * * * Blocking move – Social media users could be cut off from other accounts on platforms such as Twitter if they do not sign up for ID verification, under proposals to tackle anonymous trolls. Sites including Twitter, Facebook and Instagram will be required to give users the option to opt in or opt out from receiving messages, replies and content from unverified or anonymous accounts. Verified users could also block unverified or anonymous accounts from seeing their content under the opt in/opt out proposals. * * * Rape failings – Rape survivors who report their attackers are being systematically failed by the criminal justice system, resulting in an average wait of nearly two years before a trial begins, a damning official report has found. A joint inspection by police and crown prosecution watchdogs has identified multiple failings in the process from reporting a rape to a possible trial and conviction of an assailant. A lack of collaboration between police and prosecutors has led to months of delays and poor communication with accusers. * * * Long way round – Theft of London hire bikes, dubbed “Boris bikes” after their introduction by the then London mayor, has been increasing. But the end destination of the stolen bikes has thrown up surprises with the list including Australia, Gambia, Turkey and Jamaica, a freedom of information request has revealed. Today in Focus podcast Our correspondents join Michael Safi to discuss the Russian invasion of Ukraine and fears it could escalate into the most serious conflict Europe has seen since the second world war. Lunchtime read: Peter Sarsgaard – ‘I find comfort in acting’ Peter Sarsgaard may star in The Batman, but his taste is more arthouse thrillers and experimental theatre. He discusses overacting, bad accents – and being cast as a charmer by his wife, Maggie Gyllenhaal. Sport The four-times world champion Sebastian Vettel has issued a strident call for Formula One to abandon this season’s scheduled race in Russia after its invasion of Ukraine. This season’s Champions League final will be moved from St Petersburg, but pressure remains on football to respond even more strongly as the crisis in Ukraine escalates. On the field, a wild night at Ibrox featuring two goals for James Tavernier and a bizarrely ruled-out effort by Ryan Kent ended in a 2-2 draw as Rangers dumped favourites Borussia Dortmund out of the Europa League 6-4 on aggregate. Mikel Arteta said Alexandre Lacazette “behaves like someone who wants to stay with us” after the striker made a vital contribution to Arsenal’s dramatic late Premier League victory over Wolves. After Sarina Wiegman’s England team won the Arnold Clark Cup, our writers address key questions in the buildup to July’s Women’s Euros. Novak Djokovic’s run of two consecutive years as the undisputed tennis No 1 has come to an end after he suffered a shock defeat to Jiri Vesely in their Dubai quarter-final. Russia’s Daniil Medvedev is set to overtake the Serb on Monday. Leeds will have to defy history if they are to win the Super League title after labouring their way to a third successive defeat – a 10-4 loss to Catalans Dragons – to start the new season. England have been dealt a colossal blow before Saturday’s crunch Six Nations match against Wales with Manu Tuilagi ruled out by a hamstring injury – just hours after he was recalled to the side by Eddie Jones. Greg Norman, who is fronting a Saudi Arabia-backed breakaway golf league, has warned the head of the PGA Tour “it certainly is not the end” despite a string of high-profile players shunning the scheme. Business Financial markets are still absorbing the blow from Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, with commodities prices soaring amid the uncertainty. Brent crude oil, which yesterday went above $100 a barrel for the first time since 2014, was on the rise again on Friday with a 2% lift to $101.20. The FTSE lost nearly 4% yesterday but looks set to recover at least 1% of that this morning. The pound is on $1.343 and €1.197. The papers The Guardian’s front page has the stark headline “Putin invades” and carries a picture of a wounded civilian woman that features on many fronts. “Her blood … his hands” says the Mirror, while the Sun goes with “Her blood on his hands”. The Mail reports “Putin to seize capital in days”, the FT has “Putin’s forces storm Ukraine” and the Telegraph says “New cold war as Putin strikes”. The Express splash head is “Redrawing map of Europe in blood”, Metro says “War in Europe”, as does the Press and Journal in Scotland. The i has “Ukraine’s agony” and the Northern Echo says “Our worst fears have come true”. See more front pages from around the world at our papers wrap here. Sign up The Guardian morning briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekendThe Dominican Republic has begun work on a border wall with Haiti, sparking controversy between the neighbouring Caribbean countries. Construction began this week on a concrete barrier that will span nearly half of the 244-mile (392km) border between the two countries, with Dominican officials claiming it will reduce flows of migrants, drugs, weapons and contraband. “The benefit for both nations will be of great importance,” said the Dominican president, Luis Abinader, in a statement given at a ground-breaking ceremony in the Dominican border town of Dajabón, adding that the first phase of the project should be completed within nine months. While the two countries that make up the island of Hispaniola are close geographically, their differences are stark. The Dominican Republic, with a population of 10.8 million, is a booming tourist destination with year-round visitors to its resorts and golf courses. Haiti, with a population of 11.4 million, is the western hemisphere’s poorest country, wracked with crime and mired in political and economic crisis. “Each time Haiti has suffered a catastrophe, the Dominicans have always been the first to arrive with help,” Abinader said. “However, the Dominican Republic cannot take charge of the political and economic crisis in that country.” Haiti has been beset by overlapping crises. The country’s president, Jovenel Moïse, was assassinated in early July last year in circumstances that remain unclear. A 7.2-magnitude earthquake wrecked the country’s rural south in August. About 500,000 Haitians live in the Dominican Republic, according to a 2018 survey. Many of them work in the construction, agriculture and tourism industries for low pay. There are concerns the wall will bring opportunities for bribery. Santiago Riverón, the mayor of Dajabon, where construction began, claimed that soldiers have profited from illegal border crossings. “Now we have to work with the wall in the minds of the military, who are the ones who take advantage of the border and receive a bribe of 100 or 200 pesos [£1.30 or £2.60] to let people cross,” the mayor told AFP on Sunday. “The relationship between the Dominican Republic and Haiti has always been difficult due to their different speeds and rhythms,” said Fiammetta Cappellini, the Haiti representative for Italian charity AVSI. “However, the decision to build a wall worries us, as a possible reason for conflict and violence.” Made of 20cm-thick concrete and 3.9 metres (12.8ft) high, topped with a metal mesh fence, there will be 70 watchtowers built along the wall, which will have fibre optics for communications, movement sensors, cameras, radars and drones. No cost has been given for the project and observers say that the wall will do little to stem migration flows. “AVSI, along with much of civil society in both Haiti and the Dominican Republic, pledge to strengthen dialogue and to invest in more inclusive development,” said Cappellini, to reduce migration. “Instead of building walls.”Pick of the week The Dropout On the back of her health technology company (the fittingly villainous-sounding Theranos) Elizabeth Holmes became America’s youngest self-made female billionaire. But her so-called innovations were a dangerous scam, and Holmes now faces prison. This tale feels increasingly emblematic of modern American life: Holmes seemed to embody progress, prosperity and innovation, but her business was built on sand and her story culminated in deception and humiliation. Starring Amanda Seyfried as a smart, brittle and terrifyingly ambitious Holmes, this drama feels like a nuanced and at times even sympathetic rendering of a grim late-capitalist fable. Disney+, from Thursday 3 March *** Killing Eve Oddly, given that it’s presented as an espionage thriller, plot isn’t really the big point of Killing Eve. It’s more about the electrifying chemistry between Eve (Sandra Oh) and Villanelle (Jodie Comer) – and the success of this final season hinges on a satisfying resolution of their relationship. Eve is now in private security – albeit with a sideline suggesting her interest in the Twelve hasn’t abated – and Villanelle has, comically, found herself in a religious community. The show has drifted since its startling first season, but there’s still enough class and charisma to hope for a good send-off. BBC iPlayer, from Monday 28 February *** The Guardians of Justice Ninjas! Laser attacks! Demonic squid! This hyperactive and berserk new animation series from Castlevania’s Adi Shankar is equal parts superhero narrative and love letter to 90s US pop culture. Featuring whatever format might appeal at any given moment – styles include stop-motion, claymation, pixel art and many more – Shankar tells the story of an alien superhero called Marvelous Man, who has maintained peace on Earth for several decades, before a grim secret throws the world into chaos and all-out war looms. Netflix, from Tuesday 1 March *** Savage Rhythm There’s rags-to-riches/riches-to-rags street dance action in this never knowingly understated Spanish-language drama. Starring Paulina Dávila and Greeicy Rendón, it is set in the contrasting worlds of two Colombian dancers, both looking to get ahead in a dangerously competitive world and both with personal demons. It’s ripe, frequently melodramatic fare but the themes – ambition, temptation, class – are universal and there are lashings of sex, infectious music and improbable dance moves galore. Netflix, from Wednesday 2 March *** Joe vs Carole Are you ready for Tiger King: The Drama? Some people might argue that, given we already have two documentary series’ worth of this story, Joe vs Carole is superfluous. They might also contend that Tiger King was inextricably linked to a moment in time – visceral escapism during the disorientation of early lockdown. But Exotic v Baskin isn’t a thread TV-makers show any signs of wanting to stop pulling. For the purposes of this overheated melodrama, Kate McKinnon plays Carole and John Cameron Mitchell is Joe. Peacock on Sky/Now, from Thursday 3 March *** The Boys Presents: Diabolical Another superhero universe spreads its wings: DC comic adaptation The Boys gets an animated spin-off. This eight-part series is in the tradition of The Animatrix – a short series set in the universe of The Matrix but not directly connected to its narrative. Instead, these stories stand alone – and there are some big-name creators involved, with writing from Seth Rogen, Awkwafina, Eliot and Ilana Glazer and Andy Samberg. Expect a range of styles – from Looney Tunes homage to graphic novel-esque heroics – and an engaging sense of fun. Amazon Prime Video, from Friday March 4 *** Pieces of Her How well do you actually know the people you love? This enigmatic drama, based on Karin Slaughter’s 2018 novel, stars Toni Collette as Laura Oliver, a middle-aged woman who might not have told her daughter Andy (Bella Heathcote) quite everything about her life. The catalyst is a potential shooting spree in a cafe that is slickly terminated by Laura. But where did she learn those ninja skills? And why has the incident prompted her to insist Andy move out of the house they share? An intriguing tale that surrenders its secrets carefully and gradually. Netflix, from Friday 4 MarchThere are countless talking points in the new oral history of Mad Max: Fury Road. As well as Tom Hardy v Charlize Theron, we hear accounts of everything from the writing process to stunts, on-set challenges and the battle faced by the softly spoken Australian auteur George Miller to get Warner Bros to release his film in an untampered state. “Talking points” is a salient phrase. The format of Kyle Buchanan’s book, Blood, Sweat &amp; Chrome: The Wild and True Story of Mad Max: Fury Road, reduces the journalist’s voice to let subjects speak for themselves. This approach has obvious appeal for talent, whose views aren’t diluted by the writer’s. This is presumably a key reason the book is an authorised version of events, meaning it was made with the participation of Miller and the collaboration of his production company Kennedy Miller Mitchell. I also wrote a book on Mad Max (Miller and Max: George Miller and the Making of a Film Legend), which covers all four movies to date as well as the story of Miller himself – charting the former medical doctor’s journey from the small town of Chinchilla, Queensland to the highest echelons of Hollywood. My book was fun to write, but far from easy; I wasn’t surprised to learn that support groups exist for writers of unauthorised biographies. I interviewed 79 people, speaking to an array of colourful characters – many of them battered-looking men with whom I shared meals, long chats, beers, coffee and on one occasion “choof tea” (a marijuana infusion). I also spoke with Miller’s childhood friends and engaged extensively with the family of Byron Kennedy, the co-creator of Mad Max and producer of the first two films who died in a helicopter accident in 1983. I didn’t, however, get to chat to Theron, Hardy or other super-famous talent – including Miller himself, who declined to be interviewed. When my book finally arrived on the shelves, I expressed my gratitude to Miller for his work, describing him in the introduction as “the most influential Australian artist of the 20th century” as well as a man who seems to me “humble” and “down to earth”. Yet I would estimate that, conservatively speaking, about 25 people (most of them involved with Fury Road) either pulled out of interviews with me or never agreed – because my project didn’t have the director’s blessing. Writing an unauthorised book turned ever more tricky. In the end, no images from any Mad Max movie – or even the words “Mad Max” – could be used on the cover. So it was interesting to read an account that came with the blessing of Miller and co, one revealing some things I couldn’t – including various details about Miller’s combative relationship with the studio, and the friction between Theron and Hardy. But that logic swings both ways; there are merits in both authorised and unauthorised accounts. Reading Blood, Sweat &amp; Chrome made me reminisce on some of the more … colourful elements in Miller and Max that might never have made it into an authorised book but were published in mine. For example, during the making of Mad Max 2, the crew were having difficulty locating the three-legged dog stipulated in the script. According to multiple interviewees, Miller suggested they find a four-legged one and amputate its leg. “We were all gobsmacked,” one person in attendance told me. “I think, I hope, it was a joke,” said another. My book recounts various debaucheries such as how, during pre-production of Mad Max: Beyond Thunderdome, some crew members (unbeknown to Miller) drove its spectacularly freaky skeletal vehicles around backstreets in Sydney while – in the words of the production designer Grace Walker, who was one of them – “pissed as tits”. Real dog skulls were used to decorate the film set, prepared by the set dresser and decorator Martin O’Neill, who recounted to me in gory detail how he picked up dead dogs from the pound then boiled them. Late one weekend evening, O’Neill arrived on the set of Bartertown with a pump-action shotgun, intending to create a more lived-in looking environment (in his words, to “distress the set a bit”). He also recounted that evening to me in detail: “I just went mental in there,” he said. “I’m going CHI-CHI BOOM! CHI-CHI BOOM! CHI-CHI-BOOM! in every direction.” My book also details some pretty disgusting ideas and imagery used in the writing and brainstorming process for Fury Road, arguably in contrast to the film’s eventual interpretation as a powerful feminist statement. It contains plenty of other stories, which, I believe, offer light and dark, colour and shade, and more than a whiff of petrol-scented lunacy to the narrative of these extraordinary artistic achievements. Buchanan’s book is attracting considerable publicity. But for me, its crowning achievement is its detailed illustration of how difficult the film-making process was. Fury Road fans should definitely check it out. You won’t find the full story in the authorised account – though you won’t find it in the unauthorised one either. As ever, the truth lies somewhere in the middle.Emergency room visits for eating disorders among 12- to 17-year-old girls doubled during the coronavirus pandemic, according to new research from the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention – a troubling existing trend that was likely worsened by the stress of living through the prolonged crisis. “We are seeing such a high volume of patients in need of eating disorder care as well as worsening severity,” said Tracy Richmond, a physician and the director of the eating disorder program at Boston Children’s Hospital, who was not involved in the CDC study. “It feels really clear for those of us who take care of teenagers that there is an absolute second pandemic of mental health needs in adolescents.” After a decade of increasing concern, the American Academy of Pediatrics declared a national mental health emergency among children and teens in 2021, and the US surgeon general warned in December of a youth mental health crisis that began building before the pandemic. In 2020, kids actually made fewer visits to emergency departments than the year before – a decline of 21%, the CDC report found. In 2021, there was a decrease of 8% compared to 2019. But the reason for those visits changed dramatically during the early months of the pandemic, with the proportion of emergency visits for mental health among kids rising by 24% in 5- to 11-year-olds and 31% in 12- to 17-year-old, as compared with the year before. There are also marked differences in gender. Among teen girls, aged 12 to 17, visits for eating disorders and tic disorders increased in both 2020 and 2021. There were also more visits for depression and obsessive-compulsive disorder among teen girls in 2021. Another CDC study published the same day found that overall visits to the emergency room declined in this same time, falling by 51% in 2020, 22% in 2021, and 23% in the first month of 2022, compared to 2019. Covid-19 remained the predominant reason for ER visits among kids – particularly among children too young to be vaccinated during the Omicron wave, when visits for that age group increased. There were also increases in visits related to behavioral health conditions among children five to 17, including self-harm, drug poisonings, socioeconomic and psychosocial concerns, and – among adolescents only – symptoms of mental health conditions and substance use. “The results point to the importance of increased awareness for health concerns that could arise due to delayed medical care and heightened emotional distress during the pandemic, especially among adolescents,” said Lakshmi Radhakrishnan, a health scientist at the CDC and the lead author of both studies. The reasons for the rise in distress among teen girls are complex and various, she added, making it difficult to pinpoint their cause. Richmond said that inpatient visits at her center have nearly tripled and the need for outpatient care has also increased. “As patients are coming in with higher needs, they’re coming in with more severe presentation, and they’re often coming in with comorbid mental illness, like depression, anxiety, suicidality,” Richmond said. Potential reasons include changes in routine and schedule, including spending more time at home and new habits around eating and exercise, as well as the stress of living through the pandemic – losing parents and caregivers to the virus or to other related causes, watching parents worry about their jobs and their own mental health. Social isolation can be particularly challenging in the teenage years, when it’s important for kids to form close relationships with peers and build their own identities. “They’re meant to be individuating from parents and family, and really be striking out on their own and developing their own individuality,” Richmond said. “Instead, in the early parts of the pandemic, they were driven back into the home and closer to their families.” Kids have also had disruptions to their regular activities and extracurricular interests – sports teams, theater groups, newspapers. The isolation may have accelerated an existing tendency to spend time on social media, where they are flooded with increasingly precise algorithms that may lead to the rapid rise in eating disorders. “As our adolescents have been spending more time with social media, we also are uncovering that the content that they’re being served is just getting more and more extreme,” Richmond said. The tic disorders seen were particularly unusual because boys of the same age didn’t see an increase – and tic disorders tend to be diagnosed at earlier ages and are more common in boys than in girls. The increase in tic disorders may also be linked to social media – specifically TikTok, where cataloging tics has become its own genre of videos. But social media can also provide support and socialization, as well as a creative outlet, for many kids – and nuanced discussions of the role of social media are very important, said Tyler Black, a child and adolescent psychiatrist and suicidologist at BC Children’s Hospital in Vancouver. “Kids were online and connecting virtually and Snapchatting before we were Zooming – they were doing virtual teleconferences before we even knew what Zoom was – and they were very prepared for online interaction.” The return to school, for those who attended remotely or on a hybrid schedule, may have also contributed to stress, Black said. School is a major cause of stress for kids with anxiety, according to a 2014 study from the American Psychological Association. Kids are about twice as likely to die of suicide in the United States on school days versus non-school days. “People naively say things like ‘if we send kids back to school, we’ll restore their mental health.’ And I keep wanting to remind everybody that prior to the pandemic, we had a lot of concerns about school and kids’ mental health,” Black said, including bullying, racism and a lack of mental health curriculum or support services for kids. Eating disorders can affect everyone, Richmond said – “all genders, all ages, all socioeconomic groups, all racial and ethnic groups – and I do think we’ve seen more of that during the pandemic than ever before.” Every wave of Covid-19 has also brought destabilization, she said. “There’s just continued uncertainty, and a feeling of loss – you sort of feel like you’re getting your footing under you, and then a new variant comes and shakes everything up,” Richmond said. “I do think there’s some sense of kids wanting to control things … and for many of them, it just spirals out of control in a way that they didn’t expect.”Demand for nature is exceeding supply but new wildlife areas can be created by regulations to ensure housing estates bring about “biodiversity net gain”, according to the chair of England’s nature watchdog. Tony Juniper said the post-pandemic surge in people visiting wild places for their mental and physical wellbeing – and to walk lockdown puppies – was concentrating footfall in relatively few nature reserves, which were increasingly used like public parks. But Juniper, who has been reappointed as chair of Natural England for a second three-year term, said his agency must “increase the supply of nature”. “Part of the challenge post-lockdown – the footfall in relatively few sites – makes you wonder how we’re going to cope with that increased demand for nature when nature is depleted and fragmented,” he said. “Visitor pressures on protected sites [such as national nature reserves] is a supply and demand question.” Juniper, a former executive director of Friends of the Earth, has been credited with restoring morale – and adding a 47% budget increase this year – to beleaguered Natural England, which had been decimated by a decade of cuts. But after three years “building the picture and getting the toolkit and resources to deliver it” he said it was time for him and Natural England to deliver on “the gargantuan task of nature recovery” to help the government meet its ambitious wildlife targets. The government’s target to protect 30% of land and sea for nature by 2030 was “a big stretch”, he said. “We have targets coming on species abundance and nature recovery, and if we are going to get to those 2030 targets we need to start really hitting the ground now.” The new “public money for public goods” farm subsidy system, although not fully finalised, should help, according to Juniper, who said he was also hopeful that wildlife could be restored via biodiversity net gain, which from 2023 obliges every housing and infrastructural development to create 10% more nature than was there before. One-fifth of Tory party donations come from major developers but Juniper said biodiversity net gain was not “just a licence to trash” wildlife. “It isn’t, because we’re not abandoning anything we already have in terms of the existing protections and tests [for wildlife] that need to go through the planning system,” he said. He admitted there were “tensions” between developers providing nature-friendly spaces close to new homes or boosting wildlife in distant sites. “On the one hand we want more bigger, better, more connected nature-rich places, on the other we want to improve the environments around where people are living,” he said. Speaking during a tour of 25 acres of arable farmland acquired for restoration to wildlife-rich chalk grassland by the charity Cambridge Past, Present and Future, Juniper said it was important to plan a network of new nature-rich places close to new homes. The restoration will increase Wandlebury country park by 20% but Cambridge’s population has grown by 20% this century, with an ongoing jobs, development and population boom. “There’s limited semi-natural habitat around here so creating more of it to be able to serve that population makes sense,” said Juniper. “But doing it in the best possible way to get the biggest strategic impact is the key thing. We don’t want little pocket parks scattered all over the place randomly. We’d like to see the coherent construction of a nature recovery network which is not only taking account of biodiversity net gain but also the existing protected areas and blend that with the new agricultural schemes. It’s a jigsaw to piece together.” While Juniper has helped win an enhanced role and funding for Natural England, and said he was hopeful of “further increases this year because the work is expanding”, Natural England staff went on strike in January over a decade of pay freezes and below-inflation rises. Juniper said Natural England’s executive was doing all it could to push for more money for staff. “We’re very aware of the issues being raised by staff around pay. Since I’ve been there we’ve consistently done the maximum we could each year in terms of staff rewards and pay but the big picture is constraint – we have the rules set by the Treasury.” In his next three years, Juniper said he hoped to create more big national nature reserves and said the issue of out-of-control dogs in wild spaces was raised wherever he went. He said it was still possible to make more space for wildlife and for people. “Everyone at Natural England is convinced it’s not nature recovery or public access – it’s both. With some limits during the bird breeding season, raising awareness and management, I think we can do that.”Start Herne Bay clocktower Distance 6.9 miles Time 3-3.5 hours Total ascent 115 metres Difficulty Easy Google map of the route It’s funny who you bump into on a stroll along the north Kent coast. At the start there’s pioneering aviator Amy Johnson, while lurking near the end is Hammer horror and Star Wars actor Peter Cushing. In between, there’s detective inspector Edmund Reid, who not only failed to detect Jack the Ripper but also that the town he chose to retire to would be washed away. All three add more history to a walk along this stretch of the 163-mile Saxon Shore Way that runs from Gravesend to Hastings. The volunteers who created the trail in 1980 wanted it to follow the shoreline as it did in the third century AD, when the Romans were being plagued by Saxon pirates. The path is waymarked with a warrior helmet logo. None of the famous people mentioned are still with us, so I enlist the support of my friend Adam as a walking buddy to prevent me from talking to ghosts. Our easy route – mostly along a flat, concrete pathway with the Thames estuary and beach to our right – features abundant birdlife. Adam knows what’s what on the shingle shore and intertidal mudflats, spotting ringed plover, redshank and turnstones. The bronze statue of Amy Johnson is a few hundred metres into a walk that begins at Herne Bay’s clocktower, built in 1837, the first year of Queen Victoria’s reign. In 1930, Johnson was the first woman to fly solo from England to Australia, and the statue shows her in flying gear, hand to head, ready to pull down her goggles. Her gaze passes the town’s 1920s bandstand and out to the estuary where her plane crashed in bad weather on 5 January 1941. Her body was never found. Also out to sea is the dilapidated and eerie-looking pier head, a remnant of a time when Herne Bay’s pier was the second longest in England and paddle steamers were able to moor alongside it. Storms have left it isolated, distant from the stub of pier that remains, with its beach-hut-style stalls and a helter skelter. The sun is on us, though any warmth is whipped away by a blustery breeze that underlines the pier head’s vulnerability. The sea and gales have previously wreaked havoc on the place we arrive at next: Hampton-on-Sea. The idea of Hampton was catnip to Victorian businessmen, who from the 1860s thought it represented a real catch for the oyster industry and would make an impressive seaside resort. Sadly, the combination of an 1866-built oyster pier, poorly conceived sea defences and a culvert of Hampton Brook prone to flooding caused erosion that meant by the early 1920s the “town” was drowned. We pass what remains: the Hampton Inn and a short stone pier. I read an information board as Adam watches a starling murmuration above Long Rock to the west. The last resident to leave Hampton was Edmund Reid, in 1916. Once head of the CID, Reid spent his retirement highlighting the plight of the town and its people as both ebbed. As we walk to Long Rock, a site of special scientific interest, Adam points out turnstones on the shore flipping pebbles with their beaks, and sanderlings lined up just out of reach of the waves. By a patch of inland water is an egret, its white plumage contrasting with the blue water and the grassland around it. The rare hog’s fennel grows here and supports the equally rare fisher’s estuarine moth. The quiet is interrupted only by bird cries and the tumble of waves that are far enough out to reveal The Street, a shingle spit at Tankerton that can be walked – with caution – at low tide. A kestrel hovers above, but is soon gone. Fishing boats bobbing against their moorings signal we are approaching Whitstable, its harbour front busy with people buying seafood and browsing art and craft stalls. What I love about this walk is how it evolves from a traditional (Victorian) portrait of the seaside into a contemporary coastal scene. In Whitstable, our path brims with oyster shacks, cafe-restaurants, artists’ studios and wooden houses by the shore, many of them holiday homes. These houses have wonderful estuary views. One, at Sea Wall, belonged to Peter Cushing. The actor was so fond of a particular vista – he would paint here – that it has been named Cushing’s View. A bench and plaque mark the spot, though it doesn’t mean the conclusion of our walk. We continue through Whitstable, passing Old Neptune, a popular pub on the shore, and head for West Beach, its shingle dotted with battered and derelict boats. The end comes with our elevation – the only hill we encounter. It is well worth the short, sharp incline to discover the Rose in Bloom pub on Joy Lane. Sitting on its terrace – awaiting lunch, with a view of the Isle of Sheppey, the estuary in wide angle and, in the distance, Southend – I think how fish and chips remains a unifying part of coastal life. No matter how the seaside evolves, nor how much nature shapes and changes it, this dish is the one tying past and present together. The pub The Rose in Bloom’s Shepherd Neame ales, including Master Brew and the Whitstable Bay collection, come from a brewery in nearby Faversham. The menu offers locally caught seafood (mussels in cream and garlic with fries, £14.50; cod and chips, £14; sea bass with fries and salad, £14), and the interior is elegant, with a conservatory. Yet the main attraction of the Rose in Bloom is its outdoor terrace (covered in winter). High above the shore, eating and drinking here is elevated by a sublime vista over treetops and a tangle of undergrowth and across the Thames and Swale estuaries to Essex. Stay The Space at 8 is a stylish, two double-bed apartment on a terraced row no more than a couple of minutes’ walk from Whitstable’s high street, with its cafes, bars and shops, and less than five minutes from the beach. It used to be a fisherman’s cottage, but renovation in 2018 has turned it into an art-laden design haven. There’s a gorgeous tiled bathroom, large kitchen and dining area, and – the clincher – bifold doors that open on to a south-facing garden, with a furnished patio that feels quiet and private, despite being so close to everything. Sleeps four from £120 a nightLawyers for the newspapers being sued by Ben Roberts-Smith told one of his former comrades they would “steer clear” of questioning him about an alleged war crime killing he committed in Afghanistan if he agreed to testify about a key murder allegation against Roberts-Smith, it has been claimed in the federal court. The former SAS soldier, anonymised before court as Person 56, served alongside Roberts-Smith in Afghanistan in 2009 and 2012. Person 56 has been subpoenaed to give evidence, but is seeking to be excused from appearing. His lawyer told the court he is suffering serious health conditions and has a terminally-ill family member. “Life is a bit of a shit-fight,” the court heard on Friday. Roberts-Smith is suing the Age, the Sydney Morning Herald and the Canberra Times over reports he alleges are defamatory and portray him as committing war crimes, including murder, as well as acts of bullying and domestic violence. The newspapers are pleading a defence of truth. Roberts-Smith denies any wrongdoing. In 2009, Person 56 was part of the Gothic 2 patrol commanded by Roberts-Smith that conducted a raid on the village of Darwan, in Afghanistan’s Uruzgan province. The court has heard previously that Person 56 was sent away – ostensibly to return an interpreter to another patrol in the village – during a critical stage of that mission. The newspapers allege in their defence that on that mission Roberts-Smith took an unarmed, handcuffed Afghan farmer, named Ali Jan, forced him to kneel near the edge of a 10-metre cliff, and kicked him off, before being involved in shooting Jan and dumping his body in a nearby field. Roberts-Smith denies the allegations, and has previously told the court “there was no cliff … there was no kick”, and that the man purported to be Ali Jan was an enemy “spotter” who was lawfully killed in a cornfield within the military’s rules of engagement. There is dispute between the newspapers and Roberts-Smith’s legal team about how long Person 56 was separated from his patrol, and where he and the interpreter were during the period that Ali Jan was allegedly in custody and allegedly murdered. Person 56 was also present on an SAS operation in Fasil, in southern Uruzgan province, on 5 November 2012. Last week, the court heard evidence from a soldier who claims Roberts-Smith boasted about shooting a captive, unarmed and handcuffed Afghan teenager who had been a passenger in a ute stopped by Australian troops. The newspapers allege Roberts-Smith shot him with his pistol, and the court heard from a former comrade last week who said Roberts-Smith told him: “I pulled out my 9mm, shot the cunt in the side of the head, blew his brains out. It was the most beautiful thing I’ve ever seen.” Roberts-Smith also denies that allegation, and has told the court he never used his pistol while on deployment in Afghanistan. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The federal court heard on Friday that the newspapers believe Person 56 was also responsible for killing a person during the Fasil mission. An emailed transcript of a phone call from a lawyer for the newspapers to Person 56’s counsel was read into court: “We know that Person 56 was the other person involved in the mission in Fasil and that he was a person who killed somebody.” Lawyers for the newspapers have been seeking, over a number of years, to have Person 56 appear in this trial. Person 56 is seeking to be excused from giving evidence on account of the mental harm it would cause him. Peter Bartlett, counsel for the newspapers, appeared in the witness box on Friday and told the court: “Person 56 was a member of the applicant’s patrol on two crucial missions. We have always taken the view that he would be in possession of information that would be in the benefit of this court.” But Arthur Moses SC, acting for Roberts-Smith, told the court that after Person 56 said he would seek to be excused from his subpoena to give evidence, lawyers for the newspapers approached Person 56’s lawyer seeking an agreement for him to appear if they acceded to only ask about the Darwan mission and not to question him on events at Fasil. “The 5 November incident is hotly contested,” the account of the phone call between one of the newspapers’ lawyers and Person 56’s lawyer said. “The two people killed were killed by Ben Roberts-Smith and a member of his patrol we know to be your client [Person 56]. We think we can steer clear of all that stuff and just limit it to Darwan,” the email cited in court said. Moses said it was clear evidence of an agreement between the newspapers’ lawyers and Person 56. Bartlett, who was not a party to the conversation referred to by Moses, disputed his characterisation of the discussions between the lawyers as a “deal”. Lawyers for Roberts-Smith have argued the agreement goes to the credibility of Person 56’s evidence if a “side deal” has been done with the newspapers. Lawyers for the newspapers have countered they were simply being transparent with the witness, and making a “forensic decision” about which matters to pursue, noting the highly unusual evidence, and the difficulties faced by Person 56 in giving evidence. Nicholas Owens SC, for the newspapers, said the negotiations with Person 56 were “perfectly proper”. “We were willing to engage with Person 56 on the basis that we did not wish to adduce evidence from him that would incriminate him. “This isn’t a ‘tell us everything’, this is a ‘tell us what you are willing to give us’,” he said. Owens told the court that Person 56 had indicated “an objection would be taken to any questioning on any topic other than Darwan on the grounds of [potential] self-incrimination”. “We accept that he has a reasonable basis for anticipating that that evidence would incriminate him. We accepted that we would not apply to have him compelled to give that evidence over his objection,” Owens said. Justice Anthony Besanko asked from the bench: “That’s unusual isn’t it?” Owens replied: “These are unusual circumstances. It is a situation that a witness has information about two matters, but, for reasons that are obvious, is very unwilling to give evidence about the second of those matters.” Sean Richter, acting for Person 56, said the former soldier was seeking to be excused from appearing because giving evidence, particularly about the events at Fasil, would be damaging for his health. The court imposed a suppression order on the nature of his health conditions. Richter said there was “the potential here for further harm to Person 56” and told the court “there needs to be a balancing act between the public interest in having him give evidence as opposed to his personal interests”. Richter said any “deal” with the newspapers’ lawyers about what would be asked would offer “no protection”. “It’s not as simple that the respondents [newspapers] only wish to ask about portions about his military service, there is nothing preventing the applicant’s [Roberts-Smith’s] counsel from going to the remainder of his military service.” Justice Besanko has reserved his decision, likely until next week. The trial resumes Monday.An expert witness believes Kumanjayi Walker posed little or no threat to two police officers when he was shot a second and third time, a court has heard. Walker, a 19-year-old Warlpiri man, died in November 2019 after two Northern Territory police officers attempted to arrest him in Yuendumu, a remote community about 300km from Alice Springs. One of the officers, constable Zachary Rolfe, is on trial for Walker’s murder in the NT supreme court. The court has previously heard Rolfe shot Walker three times after Walker stabbed him in the shoulder with a pair of scissors. Dr Andrew McIntosh, a biomechanist, gave evidence on Friday that at the time Walker was shot by Rolfe on the second and third occasion, he posed no threat to Rolfe and a low threat to his colleague, Adam Eberl. Rolfe is not charged in relation to the first shot fired at Walker, which occurred only moments after Walker had stabbed him. But it is alleged that when Rolfe fired the second and third shots several seconds later, Walker had either fallen or been wrestled to the ground by Eberl and had his right arm pinned underneath his body. Rolfe has pleaded not guilty and defends his actions on the basis they were justified in light of the risk Walker posed to him and Eberl. The defence also disputes that Walker was under control at the time of the shots. McIntosh, who reviewed body-worn camera footage of the incident and the evidence of other witnesses including Eberl, said it appeared that Walker no longer posed a serious threat to the officers at the time of the later shots because of a range of factors. Under questioning from the prosecutor, Philip Strickland SC, McIntosh said that Walker posed no threat to Rolfe as he was on the ground under Eberl, whereas Rolfe was standing up. Walker posed a low threat to Eberl because the arm that had been holding the scissors was pinned between his body and a mattress on the ground, and Eberl’s body mass was pressing down on top of him, McIntosh said. When cross-examined by David Edwardson QC, for Rolfe, McIntosh agreed the body-worn camera footage had limitations. He gave the analogy of “cricket buffs” watching a match on television and being convinced a bowler bent their elbow when bowling, when in reality their arm had not changed position. Edwardson also said that while McIntosh had been able to review the camera footage frame-by-frame, Rolfe and Eberl were assessing the threat in real time. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “They, of course, were dealing with this situation, this dynamic situation, in a matter of seconds … and from their perspective, it might be quite different, as we’ve acknowledged, from the body-worn video,” Edwardson said, to which McIntosh agreed. In reports prepared for the case, McIntosh said it was more likely than not that Walker could have harmed or injured the officers at the time the first shot was fired, but that “the body-worn evidence regarding this threat and the presence of the scissors is inconclusive”. Edwardson said the fact that the scissors could not be seen in the footage until after the third shot was fired demonstrated that Rolfe and Eberl could have seen things that their body-worn cameras did not capture. “That’s a reasonable point, yes,” McIntosh responded. The trial continues.An effort is under way to isolate Vladimir Putin diplomatically by challenging Russia’s right to a permanent seat of the UN security council on the grounds that Russia took the seat from the defunct Soviet Union in 1991 without proper authorisation. Diplomats are also looking to see if there is a basis for removing Russia from the presidency of the council. The presidency rotates monthly between the 15 members of the security council, allowing the office holder to shape its monthly agenda and to chair its meetings. The Russian envoy Vassily Nebenzias was chairing an emergency meeting of the Security Council in New York on Wednesday night as Putin announced his assault on Ukraine. Nebenzias started reading out a text sent to his phone by the Kremlin justifying the attack. He maintained the fiction that an invasion was not under way but instead a special military operation had begun in the Donbas. Most council members condemned Russia, one of the five permanent security council members, with the UN secretary general António Guterres taking the rare step of accusing Russia of being in breach of the UN charter. A draft security council motion, condemning Russia and calling for its unconditional withdrawal, is being negotiated behind the scenes in New York and will probably be debated on Friday, but Russia as a permanent member will use its veto. The Ukrainian ambassador to the UN, Sergiy Kyslytsya, told Wednesday night’s meeting that article 4 of the UN charter says the UN is open only to peace-loving states that accept the terms of the charter. He said Russia’s actions showed it could not comply with those terms. But he also asked Guterres to distribute to the security council the legal memos written by UN legal counsel dated 19 December 1991 that the Russian Federation be permitted to join the security council as the successor to the Soviet Union. Ukraine claims the constituent republics of the USSR declared in 1991 that the Soviet Union ceased to exist, and with it should have gone the legal right of any of those entities, including Russia, to sit on the council. No decision to permit Russia to the security council was ever put to the General Assembly. The UN charter was never amended after the USSR broke up. It still references the Soviet Union, and not Russia, as one of the permanent members of the UN security council. By contrast in 1991 China’s entry into the UN was subject to a resolution. A member of the United Nations which has persistently violated the principles contained in the present charter may be expelled from the Organization by the General Assembly upon the recommendation of the security council. The Russians claim its actions were taken in line with clause 51 of the charter citing self-defence. The tension between Ukraine and Russia at the Wednesday meeting boiled over at the UN when Kyslytsya at the close of the session looked at his Russian counterpart and said “there is no purgatory for war criminals”, adding “they go straight to hell, Ambassador.” Guterres in a brief televised statement on Thursday said the “Russian military operation is wrong, is against the charter and unacceptable”. He again appealed to Putin to stop the operation and bring the troops back to Russia. The Russian diplomatic delegation is working hard to maintain the protection of China, which has been reluctant to abandon Russia, and would never support a motion for expulsion. But US officials said, “Russia’s aggressive actions here carry risks for China along with everyone else. It’s not in China’s interest to endorse a devastating conflict in Europe and defy the principles of sovereignty and territorial integrity it claims to hold dear.”From Sydney, Dasha Sarana calls her dad, Oleksii, in eastern Ukraine. He can hear shelling outside his window – and knows the Russian forces are getting closer. Her friend in a different part of the city texts – they’re trying to get out with their four-year-old child, but there’s no petrol. The WhatsApp goes silent. A different friend in Kyiv calls. No one in their apartment is sleeping. They pacify their toddler with cartoons and constantly check the news. Every now and then, the bomb siren interrupts their shock and they run to the basement, hoping it won’t be their building. Sarana is worried she’ll never see her father again. At 5am Ukrainian time on Thursday, Oleksii – along with most of the country – woke to news they were being invaded. Within minutes of Russian president Vladamir Putin’s televised address announcing a “special military operation”, they started dropping bombs near major Ukrainian cities. The Ukraine government announced the country was in the midst of “a full-scale invasion” and declared martial law. Oleksii had left Sydney for his home city Sievierodonetsk just a week ago – and like many he didn’t think a real war, a full invasion, was possible. “I told him don’t go, but he said ‘don’t worry, we’ll be fine, nothing will happen’,” Sarana said. Oleksii’s mother had died of Covid and he wanted to see where she had been buried. “That’s why he wanted to go,” Sarana said. “He was desperate to go back.” On the phone he is calm, describing how he can hear bombs drop, exploding buildings near him or guns going off. He has prepared his documents and has a visa to return to Australia if he has to flee – but right now getting out of the city is impossible. “They are all just sitting there waiting,” Sarana said. “Getting ready to go to the basement. Everyone is checking the news, social media and what other people are saying in different parts of Ukraine. “Obviously my dad has nowhere to go. We have relatives but they live in the same region, they are in the same situation. There’s shooting everywhere in eastern Ukraine. There’s no safe place to go.” War has returned to Europe, and for those on the doorstop, this moment has become about survival – about waiting it out, one day at a time. “Our other friends, they live in the same city, they were trying to escape,” Sarana said. “They were trying to get petrol, trying to get to friends ... in central Ukraine, but we don’t know if they succeeded. We haven’t heard.” Russian forces are now within kilometres of Kyiv. Normally, the city is vibrant, filled with street vendors, people gathering over coffee and on their way to work. Now it’s quiet. There are cars lined up on major artilleries for kilometres as people desperately try to get out. The ATMs are empty, and the city seems to have run out of fresh bread. But there is booze. “Thank god they still have alcohol,” said Rachel Lehmann Ware from her apartment in Kyiv. Lehmann Ware and her husband are from Huonville, a small town in Tasmania. For the past five years they’ve travelled the world, teaching in international schools. They came to work in Kyiv in July and instantly fell into the rhythm of the city. “You can’t get out of here. The roads are completely blocked there are literally people walking down highways with their suitcases,” Rachel said. “Dfat [Australia’s Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade] have been telling us for a long time, but we could not get out because we had Covid.” At first they were reluctant to leave their community – Ukrainian families were still sending their children to school, and they needed teachers. When the situation escalated, the couple got Covid. Now they are stuck. “The [Ukrainians] are amazed we are still here,” Rachel said. “I was talking to a parent last week, she said ‘thank you so much for still being in Ukraine’. “I said ‘you are sending your child to school, if you are doing that, I will be here’. At the moment, though, shit is getting real. I don’t know what’s going to happen.” From their apartment, they hear bombs dropping. Loud explosions leave plumes of smoke rising before the horizon. Lehmann Ware admits it’s nerve-wracking talking to media. No one “knows whose going to rule this country next week” and there’s a concern that people who speak out could be punished. “The people here are so wonderful. They just want their freedom,” she said. On Thursday, the prime minister, Scott Morrison, urged the estimated 1,400 Australians who remain in Ukraine to leave if they can. Some of them have been able to cross the border into Poland. Australian Pixie Shmigel moved with her boyfriend to Ukriane six months ago to immerse herself in her cultural heritage. After Putin declared war and the reports of shelling came through, the pair realised they needed to leave. At 4am she rang her mother, Nadia Mencinsky-O’Keefe, in Sydney and booked an Uber to take them across the border. “The roads were still quiet. She was on the phone to me the whole time,” she said. “We spoke about the sadness and horror – the man that was driving them would have to go back.” Mencinsky-O’Keefe’s grandparents had fled Ukraine during the second world war, on the same roads that her daughter had left just days ago. “[She] was fleeing through the border, exactly where my grandparents would have been. History is repeating itself for the Ukrainian nationals in terms of Russia’s aggression. “Post-WW2 we thought the international order would protect us all. I thought this wouldn’t happen again.” Mencinsky-O’Keefe is involved in Australia’s Ukrainian community. She said some had young family members who had signed up to join the militia; they’d written escape plans for their wives and children. “It’s frightening and distressing,” she said. “It’s difficult to believe in 2022 this is what’s happening.” She said she welcomed the sanctions, but wanted to see Australia and the international community do more. “How can Ukraine defend itself against these attacks without substantial military equipment, technical support and medical supplies? We also need humanitarian aid – Ukrainian people are innocent but they will bear terrible suffering and deprivation as a result of this aggression.”Australia has vowed to keep ratcheting up sanctions in response to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine – but it has virtually zero economic leverage over Moscow. Trade figures make that clear: Australia was 94th on the list of Russia’s main export destinations before the pandemic upended the world, which the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade rounded down to 0.0% of Russia’s exports. Australia was 47th on the list of Russia’s import sources. In both directions, Russia’s most significant trading partners are China, the United States and European countries. This tends to explain why the head of Treasury advised Scott Morrison’s national security committee earlier this week that Australia could expand sanctions “with minimal impact on Australian businesses”. “Australia’s trade with Russia is essentially negligible from both countries’ point of view in a big strategic sense,” says Dr William Stoltz, from the Australian National University’s national security college. “So our sanctions have to be part of a larger global effort really to close off Russia’s economy from the world.” Australia began by imposing travel bans and targeted financial sanctions on eight members of the Russian Federation’s security council, on the basis that this group had backed the false pretext for sending troops into Ukraine. This body, chaired by Vladimir Putin, has 12 permanent members including the foreign minister Sergei Lavrov. But Lavrov was not included in the sanctions that took effect early Friday morning (nor was Putin). The eight targeted members included Dmitry Medvedev, who is deputy chair of Russia’s security council and was previously president and prime minister. The second round of sanctions – which also took effect on Friday morning – targeted another 25 officials including Anton Vaino, chief of staff of Putin’s Presidential Executive Office, along with military commanders and deputy defence ministers. Four military contracting firms were also targeted. The government has also moved to curb business with a number of Russian banks and Morrison said on Friday the next targets will be more than 300 members of Russia’s parliament that rubber-stamped the invasion, along with Russian oligarchs. The names of the oligarchs targeted have not yet been released. Experts don’t believe there’s much more Australia can do in the sanctions space. “Russia has been hardening itself to economic sanctions over the past 20 years,” Stoltz says. “And it’s clearly evident from Putin’s behaviour in the last couple of days that he does not care about the economic hit that his country will take,” he says. While that might change as the US, Europe and the UK continue to raise the economic costs, he says “economic sanctions alone are not enough”. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Australia exported $723m in goods to Russia in 2019-20, including live animals, specialised machinery and meat, according to data compiled by Dfat. In that same year, Australia imported $250m in goods from Russia, such as fertilisers ($71m) and crude petroleum ($59m). Curbing imports such as crude petroleum may have to be “on the table” for discussion, says Stoltz, but importers may also be weighing up those growing risks. “If you were a business in Australia doing business with Russia, I think on your own volition you’d be looking for other opportunities. It’s all just too uncertain.” Australian superannuation funds are also weighing up the impact of the crisis. “At UniSuper we have no direct exposure to Russia or Ukraine,” says its chief investment officer, John Pearce. “However, like every other fund we are exposed to the impacts of higher energy prices. It’s pretty clear that the invasion has contributed to a perfect storm [of higher inflation and interest rates] that had already engulfed markets.” Morrison said on Friday that Australia was playing its part alongside countries that had bigger economic stakes in Russia to “demonstrate very forcefully that we are all working together to shut Russia out as a result of their violence and their unlawful actions”. But Morrison and the opposition leader, Anthony Albanese, both took aim at China after a report said it was fully opening up to Russian wheat exports, which had previously been subject to health-related restrictions. Australia is basically playing a supporting role, rather than a lead role, in the sanctions effort. “And that’s ultimately why China’s refusal [to add to the pressure] is so problematic in terms of getting a unified international response,” Stoltz says, “because you have to have no safe haven, essentially, and at the moment there’s a big one.” Additional reporting by Paul KarpI lay on my bedroom carpet looking at the blue of the ceiling, feeling like I was in a teen movie. My phone buzzed and I picked it up to respond to my crush’s last text – except this time it wasn’t a text, but a voice note, a short audio file you send via Facebook, Instagram or WhatsApp. It was the first time I’d heard his voice – it was flat, low and attractive. He asked me how my day had gone. My stomach fluttered because I knew this meant he wanted to get closer to me, yet I also freaked out because there was so much pressure to get my response right. At first, I ignored the switch in communication and started typing out a message, because I hate my voice – the way I can hear my nerves prickle through my speech, the high pitch of my intonation and the number of times I say “like”. But don’t voice notes feel so much more intimate? Hearing the subtleties of the other person’s speech, as if they were whispering in your ear – and I wanted to get closer to him. So I focused on getting comfy, and pushed the record button. In response to his “How was your day?” I started telling him about the bike I had just got. “It hurts so much on your vulva. I only lasted about 10 minutes before I limped off.” His response was awkward. “Yeah ... I can’t say much about, er, women’s engineering down there ... The seats are probably built for a male anatomy...” “Wow, say that again,” I replied in another voice note, in a mock sultry voice. He didn’t reply. I recorded another note. “I didn’t actually think you were being sexual then,” I began, a slight breathlessness hanging off each word. “I was joking cos you sounded so formal, you know?” On and on I went; it was excruciating. I should have deleted the recording but I was so panicked I forgot I could do that. I imagined him raising his eyebrows on the other end of the line. Playing my note back to his friends. Laughing at me. In a last-ditch attempt to salvage the unsalvageable, I changed the subject: “Do you like Drake’s new album?” It was clumsy, obvious, and from then on he ignored me. This recent encounter will forever remind me why I’m better off texting (like most twentysomething Gen Zs, I hate phone calls, with their awkward silences and long, drawn-out endings: “Yep, speak soon, good to chat, bye, love you, yeah bye, bye, bye …”). But, whether I use voice notes or not, among my peers they are becoming ever harder to avoid. When WhatsApp introduced them in 2013, receiving a voice note felt like a novelty – something more human in a sea of emojis and abbreviations – now, around 200 million are sent every month. Instead of a simple “I’ll meet you outside the station” text, friends now send long rambles about how they were going to catch such and such train, but then they realised the bus would drop them outside, and while they were on the bus they thought about this idea for a novel … It’s like having to sit through an unedited podcast. Twitter has introduced a voice note feature, as have dating apps Hinge, Bumble and Happn. Last month, dating website String launched with the tag line “Date with your voice”. In 2018, American singer Charlie Puth felt passionate enough about voice notes to name an album after them; and on her latest release, 30, Adele took this tribute a step further by including voice notes from her son, Angelo, in the track My Little Love. Yet for something seemingly so inoffensive, voice notes are incredibly divisive. One friend calls them “the worst thing to happen to communication since the ‘seen’ receipt on messenger”. Another, who pushes a pram, says they’re indispensable. They are beloved of younger generations, but older family members seem to find them baffling. Social media comments range from mundane observations like the Twitter user who got 142.6 likes for pointing out how often she ends a voice note with “so yeah”, to more impassioned rants on voice note etiquette. For voice note fan, model and digital editor Maddy Reid, 23, who sends 10 to 50 a day over WhatsApp, much of their appeal lies in how efficient they are to send, particularly when you’re on the move. “It’s like a phone call, except you don’t have to rely on both parties being free at the same time. Text messages don’t convey emotional nuance in the same way a voice note can, Maddy says. “If you’re broaching a sensitive topic, a lot can get lost in translation over text. That’s why if I’m cancelling a date or telling a friend something tricky, or anything else that could be misconstrued, I will almost always do it via voice note so the other person can hear how I’m actually feeling.” Reid is right to think voice is a more reliable way to express oneself than text. Silke Paulmann of Essex University’s psychology department, says: “Vocal cues alone can communicate our internal state (emotions, attitudes, motivations) without the need for additional words.” When we hear people talk, she says, any “discrepancies”, such as someone who insists they’re fine but doesn’t really sound fine, “can be picked up within a couple of milliseconds” forcing the listener to “re-evaluate” the message. So, if cancelling a date via voice note, the other person would be able to decipher from the tone whether the speaker really is busy or losing interest. Whereas with a “something’s come up” text, it is harder to work out the sender’s true feelings, especially if it includes kisses, emojis and multiple characters (“I’m soooo sorry”) to warm up the mood of the message. This is less of an issue with older generations, who tend to interpret text messages at face value. If someone replies “OK”, they assume it means they’re actually OK. Whereas a person my age (I’m 26) is more likely to think the brevity of the response means the sender is annoyed. Voice notes bypass the slightly exhausting code of texting etiquette that can make it a minefield. Of course, voice notes are not just a text substitute; increasingly people use them instead of the traditional phone call. They give you authority, says Paulmann: “In a normal conversation, you might have little control over how often you get your voice heard. The other person could talk on at you for minutes and unless you felt comfortable interrupting, you’d end up just listening. Real conversations are more fluid and prone to changes – if the other person shows no interest in what you’re saying, for example – but voice notes protect you from that.” This may explain why the majority of people who send me voice notes are women: it gives them an avenue to speak in the same way men do, without fear of being cut off or dismissed. But not everyone likes having that much power over an interaction. According to Bernie Hogan, a senior research fellow at the Oxford Internet Institute, it is this one-sidedness, without important social cues, that makes voice notes a challenge for some people. “During phone calls we modify our tone and the content of our conversation according to the feedback we get from the people we’re talking to,” he says. “In the absence of that feedback, we must work hard to think about the person on the other end of the phone. For some people, that comes very easily, others don’t care, but a third group get very self-conscious about having to ad-lib on the spot.” I get immensely self-conscious ad-libbing on the spot. But I still prefer phone calls to voice notes, because at least the other person can chime in with experiences that resonate with what I’m saying: I like being able to hear them mmming in a way that expresses sympathy. I feel totally at sea without these cues and begin to doubt the content of what I’m talking about. Do they want me to wrap up the story, or does it need more detail to be interesting? It’s what happened when I was sending voice notes to that guy I liked. I worry I’m making the other person listen to something that they would rather avoid. “It makes me paranoid that I’m wasting someone’s time,” agrees voice note sceptic Issey Gladston, photographer, 23. She likens the feeling of sending a voice note to making a point in a university seminar. “I just want to get out what I’m saying as quickly as possible, but then there are these other people, usually men, who go on these long tangents for five minutes which don’t have anything to do with the question because they feel they have the space to do it. I don’t feel I have the space.” There’s something quite self-indulgent about thinking people care to listen to you talking for a long time – indeed, any length of time – without interruption. You don’t know where that other person is, they might have to put earphones in to listen, and when they finally get sorted, you might just be saying: “Oh sorry, one sec, just in the shop ... yeah, Rizlas please ... the blue ones.” Voice-note devotee Reid reassures me that “it’s not about loving the sound of my own voice”, and uses the fact that she doesn’t listen back to them as proof of this. But if she doesn’t want to listen to her own notes, isn’t that proof of something else? That no one likes listening to voice notes in the first place? I normally hate the sound of my own voice, though this often changes when alcohol is involved. Recently I came back from a night out and was lying on my bed, trying and failing to persuade myself to stop scrolling on my phone and take my makeup off before I passed out. Somewhere between the prosecco haze and the inability to use my fingers properly I started sending voice notes. One to my friend about the guy at the gym who seems to treat the place like a social club; another to my mum about what I want for my birthday; then another three to people I barely speak to anymore. I told Gladston about this experience and she confessed to sending out drunken voice notes too. “The other night I sent about seven to all my friends and in the morning I unsent all the ones which hadn’t been played yet because I couldn’t bear people listening to them.” If I like sending voice notes when I’m drunk – when I’m feeling more self-assured – perhaps it’s not the voice note I have a problem with, but my own confidence in what I have to say. Either way, I need to learn to love voice notes because ever more variations of them are being developed. Hogan thinks the next big thing will be features that allow us to sound like someone else, say, Bugs Bunny or Britney Spears, “like a filter but on sound rather than image”. Reid says her main reason for using voice notes is “fostering closeness with people I don’t get to see”. With a fake voice you’d no longer hear the ripple of nerves as they talked about a job interview or the high-pitched squeal as they recalled a great date. It wouldn’t be a voice note at all, would it? In that case, I’d probably send one: clumsy flirting as told by Britney might just work.A few months ago, Paul Van Haver, better known as the Belgian singer-songwriter/rapper Stromae, announced his comeback. In the French-speaking world, this was big news. As the 00s turned into the 2010s, Stromae had established himself as one of the biggest Francophone artists in the world. He sold 8.5m albums. His single Alors On Danse went to No 1 in 19 countries: in 2010, it was the most-played French-language song in the world. Its level of success was almost freakish, leading to the assumption that he was, as he puts it, “a one-hit wonder … when you have a hit people say it’s going to be the only hit in your life”. But he wasn’t. His second album, 2013’s Racine Carrée, spent five years in the French chart: it was the best-selling album of the year twice on the trot. He was critically acclaimed for a kaleidoscopic sound that takes in everything from Congolese soukous to knowingly cheesy Europop to the mordant chanson of his countryman Jacques Brel, an unpredictable mishmash that he thinks is rooted in his peripatetic childhood. His largely absent father was Rwandan – he was killed in the 1994 Rwandan genocide – and his Belgian mother was an inveterate traveller. “Sometimes we loved it and sometimes it was pretty close to a nightmare, because we didn’t have a lot of money, so they weren’t all-inclusive vacations,” he says. “Sometimes good memories, sometimes really bad, but memories you don’t forget.” He became so famous that he launched his own fashion label in conjunction with his wife, a stylist. English-speaking artists seemed to be queueing up to work with him: Kanye West jumped on a remix, Lorde invited him to appear on the soundtrack for The Hunger Games, on which he collaborated with Pusha T, Haim and Q-Tip. And then, in 2015, Stromae suddenly stopped. He pulled an African tour after suffering what he calls “a black hole” on stage. Speaking on Zoom from his French record company’s offices, it’s not something he wants to discuss in depth (“it’s really personal, so I prefer to keep that for me”), but it sounds like a panic attack. “It was kind of a burnout, and also because of a medicine called Lariam” – an anti-malaria medication that lists among its panoply of potential side-effects severe anxiety, paranoia, confusion, hallucinations, dizziness, shortness of breath and blurred vision – “but it was a really bad story.” As a result, he avoided public appearances for the best part of three years, questioned whether he would ever make music in the future and kept a low profile. He released a solitary track in 2018 to tie in with his latest fashion collection and briefly turned up on Coldplay’s 2019 album Arabesque, but that was pretty much it. “It was important for me just to heal and get better,” he says. Under the circumstances, you can see why Stromae’s first album in nine years, Multitude, is considered a very big deal. But it wasn’t just that he had decided to return. It was the way he chose to do it. In January, he turned up on a Sunday-night news broadcast on the French station TF1, ostensibly giving a straightforward interview, then, in answer to a question about mental health, suddenly started performing his new single L’Enfer. He insists that the first part of the interview was real enough – “I didn’t know any of the questions, except the question [that was the cue] before I was to start singing” – but the whole thing was, in fact, a setup. Cue much controversy and debate. How dare someone turn a news broadcast into an advert for their new single, ran one argument in the French press. Isn’t every interview on a current affairs show with an artist who has something to promote just a glorified advert, another countered. Stromae had considered the potential for a backlash. “I’m not a political figure, it’s just about music, but you’re right: it’s an ad,” he says. “So I think it’s pretty honest and modern from TF1, because TF1’s news on Sunday, it’s kind of a dinosaur, you know? But when an actor [is interviewed] on the news, it’s the same. He’s not revealing himself, he’s just acting, he’s just telling a story, so it’s between an act and a kind of a fiction.” Whatever viewers and commentators thought about it, it was a very Stromae thing to do. Aside from his music, one of the things Stromae is famous for is blurring the lines between fact and fiction. There was the controversial video for his single Formidable, which consisted of hidden camera footage of him stumbling around the streets of Brussels, apparently drunk, complete with bystanders filming him on their phones, passersby attempting to help and the police intervening. The idea, he explains, came from a video shot by an intrusive fan that went viral and made the national news. Stromae was eating in his car when a guy wielding a cameraphone knocked on his window and asked him: “‘Why are you in this shitty car, you have so much money?’” he recalls. “I was like, this viral video has more success than the video I just released? OK, so they want blood, I will give them blood.” And there was the video grandly titled Stromae Takes America, featuring him busking around New York and being roundly ignored by passersby. There was a grain of truth at its centre. For all the high-profile co-signs, the English-speaking world has yet to take to his work with the kind of enthusiasm shown elsewhere, beyond a brief flash of success for Alors On Danse and some love on the hipster blogs. While Spanish-language artists such as Bad Bunny are now among the most successful in the world, Francophone acts haven’t had the same kind of crossover. While you can appreciate the music on a song such as Multitude, which reaches back to Stromae’s childhood visits to Bolivia with his mother and features Chinese strings, it’s hard for non-French-speakers to grasp the blackly comic view of fatherhood on C’est Que du Bonheur without the aid of translation, meaning you miss out on his ironic juxtaposition of standard parenting platitudes with observations from its more visceral side. His son was born in 2018, a period that left its mark on the record. “Yeah, I talk a lot about poop and pooping in general on this album,” Stromae says, laughing. “I actually had my hand in the shit for two years. There are so many songs that say ‘I love you, you’re the best thing in my life’, and that’s the reason I wanted to give another point of view.” Still, he says, maybe there’s a positive to some audiences not understanding his lyrics. “There’s a lot of songs, even in French, that I couldn’t understand when I was young. I understood them when I was 20, and I was like, ‘Whoa, nice, another vision, another point of view of a song I’ve loved since I was seven.’ I think it’s the same with other languages – if you take the time to translate it, you go, ‘OK, I didn’t know it was about this.’ You don’t have to understand it if you feel it. It’s first a question of emotion, I think, and then, if you start to dig in, you discover meaning.” • Multitude is released on Island/Universal on 4 MarchThe former Southampton manager Nigel Adkins infamously told reporters that the biggest room in his house was the room for improvement but the incumbent at St Mary’s, Ralph Hasenhüttl, tends to use a different analogy when it comes to analysing progress, with the club looking up and hopeful of a top-half finish for the first time in five years. “Sometimes it is a little bit easier for the young lads because the hard disk is not so full,” Hasenhüttl says. “It is a little bit empty and then you can put things on it easier. The older players need sometimes to put in a little bit more energy to change things because old habits are there. If you want to change them, it takes a lot of energy but they still never stopping trying.” Impressive strides have been made across this Southampton team, from the teenager Tino Livramento, who is enjoying a breakthrough season, to the quiet evolution of the captain, James Ward-Prowse, via the revival of Oriol Romeu and the unlikely comeback of the goalkeeper Fraser Forster, who turns 34 next month. Romeu has been at the club for seven years but is arguably playing his best football and Forster, who made one Premier League appearance in three years before returning to the lineup at the beginning of last year, has been vital during a run of one defeat in 11 matches which has also earned an FA Cup fifth-round tie at home to West Ham. Mohamed Elyounoussi, another player whose days once appeared numbered, has impressed, too. Livramento, a £5m recruit from Chelsea, should be in the conversation for the signing of the season given the way he has excelled, and everywhere is evidence of enrichment. The on-loan Chelsea striker Armando Broja has been a gallant presence, striking up a fine partnership with Ché Adams. Kyle Walker-Peters, whose right-back berth was snatched by Livramento, has shone on the opposite flank, leading Hasenhüttl to compare the versatile right-footed defender to Philipp Lahm. Mohammed Salisu, signed from Real Valladolid two years ago, has seized his chance in the heart of defence. Hasenhüttl’s work at Southampton is more than three years old and he has developed an expressive and hungry teamwho are easy on the eye. Last weekend’s remarkably routine victory over Everton added to the sense that Hasenhüttl has developed a slick machine on modest resources. The result is the beauty of longevity rarely afforded to managers – Hasenhüttl is the top flight’s sixth-longest-serving manager – and his work is surely a triumph for coaching. There have been testing times – the chief executive, Martin Semmens, offered Hasenhüttl his unequivocal backing after the 9-0 defeat by Leicester – but trust in the Austrian and the model has proven well placed. Since Hasenhüttl assumed charge in 2018, when goal difference prevented the club from being bottom, Everton have had five managers. “You can see a lot of ‘automatism’ in our behaviours,” says Hasenhüttl. “We, as staff, have improved our knowledge about the game in possession massively. We get harder to screen, I think, because for the opponent it is not so easy now to know what is coming up. We have variable tactics. We have not only the 4-2-2-2; we are very flexible. It is never stopping. The most important thing is that you don’t think: ‘Now it goes by itself’ … It is always a big challenge, hard work to put in every week.” Semmens recently made the point about being transparent about the pathway on offer. Livramento was part of a back four against Everton that had an average age of 22. At 30, Romeu was the starting XI’s oldest outfield player. For now Ibrahima Diallo, 22, is an understudy awaiting his opportunity. “If you don’t let Tino Livramento go to Liverpool one day when they want him, then the next one doesn’t come in,” Semmens said. “We believe that we have created one of the best pathways in the league for the best young players in the country to come in and get better. That’s how we think we’re going to win games.” The recruitment led by Martyn Glover, who joined in 2019, and Matt Crocker, who arrived as director of football operations later that year, has been shrewd. Southampton absorbed the loss of the experienced Danny Ings, Jannik Vestergaard and Ryan Bertrand last summer. Romain Perraud has slotted in at left-back, Salisu at centre-back with some colossal displays and Broja has been a big hit after a slow start. “There were a few people out there who thought without Ingsy and these players that we would struggle this season and the opposite has happened,” says Hasenhüttl, though he knows they have not cracked anything – or maximised the space on the hard drive – yet. “There is still room [on] there. There are still a lot of things to learn.”“They have only one objective: to prevent the development of Russia. They are going to do it in the same way as they did it before, without furnishing even a single pretext, doing it just because we exist.” These were Vladimir Putin’s words on 21 February, in his now notorious speech on Ukraine. They repeat the argument already formulated in his speech on Crimea in March 2014: “The politics of the containment of Russia, which continued throughout the 18th, 19th and 20th centuries, continues today. There is a constant attempt to push us back into a corner because we have an independent position, because we stand up for ourselves.” Putin’s vision of Russian history is one of an emergence continually blocked by enemies. The contemporary “west”, in this vision, battles to contain Russia out of jealousy. Europe has collapsed into decadence, crushed by the weight of its humanism and political liberalism: tired, divided, at the mercy of every passing wind. The United States, mired in an instrumental, materialist culture and the contradictions of its own history, is in the process of losing its pre-eminence. Russia, by contrast, like its emerging ally, China, is on the rise in civilisational terms. Putin leans here on a strange theory advanced by the 20th-century historian and ethnographer Lev Gumilev. The son of two of Russia’s most famous poets, Nikolai Gumilev and Anna Akhmatova, Gumilev maintains that every people possesses a distinct life force: a “bio-cosmic” inner energy or passionate substance that he calls passionarnost. Putin may have known Gumilev in St Petersburg at the start of the 1990s. At any rate, he has embraced his ideas and never misses an opportunity to refer to them. In February last year, he said: “I believe in passionarnost. In nature as in society, there is development, climax and decline. Russia has not yet attained its highest point. We are on the way”. According to him, Russia carries the power and potential of a young people. “We possess an infinite genetic code”, he has said. In addition to Gumilev, Putin relies on another thinker – a minor figure in the history of Russian thought. Last October, he spoke of regularly consulting a collection of political essays titled Our Tasks, the major work of Ivan Ilyin, who died in 1954. In one of the president’s preferred essays, “What does the world seek from the dismemberment of Russia?”, Ilyin denounces the country’s “imperialist neighbours”, these “western peoples who neither understand nor accept Russian originality”. In the future, he suggests, these countries will inevitably attempt to seize territories such as the Baltic countries, the Caucasus, central Asia and, especially, Ukraine. The method, according to Ilyin, will be the hypocritical promotion of values such as “freedom” in order to transform Russia into “a gigantic Balkans”. The final object is to “dismember Russia, to subject her to western control, to dismantle her and in the end make her disappear”. It is necessary, then, to understand that what is actually happening in Ukraine is the result of a vision of Russia that is deeply embedded in the mind of Putin. In 2008, he punished Georgia for its desire to leave the orbit of the old imperial power. In 2014, he annexed Crimea and prevented Ukraine from joining Nato by starting the Donbas conflict. But that is not enough for him. He wants a confrontation with – and a victory over – a west that he holds responsible for the fall of the Soviet Union, for the weakness of Russia in the 1990s, and for the autonomous tendencies of the old Soviet republics. Why now? In the years following his re-election in 2018, the patriotic exaltation that followed the annexation of Crimea faded. Everyday problems for ordinary people – declining living standards, increased poverty, inflation, a healthcare crisis – have become worse year by year. Meanwhile the US has become more preoccupied with China than Russia. So in July 2021, Putin published the infamous article in which he proclaimed the unity of the Russian and Ukrainian people. The Ukrainians, he maintained, could not be left to suffer indefinitely under an illegitimate government, which came to power in what he described as a coup d’etat in 2014. Putin massed his troops on his neighbours’ borders from the spring. He intensified military preparations in the autumn and issued his ultimatum to Nato and Washington. He set a carefully laid trap for the west, knowing it was impossible to accept his demands. Everything was ready for what followed. As in 2008, Russian state media echoes Putin in evoking the risk of a genocide. In place of the Ossetians, supposedly menaced by the then Georgian president, Mikhail Saakashvili, this time the victims to be defended are in Donetsk and Luhansk. The manufacture of this humanitarian crisis may, for Putin, carry a pleasing element of irony. He has never forgotten Nato’s bombing of Belgrade in the spring of 1999, a few months before he became prime minister. By parodying the language of ethnic cleansing and genocide (the Russian-speakers of Donbas this time, rather than the Kosovars), Putin wishes to cancel out the affront caused by that episode in the darkest way imaginable. What should we think of this perpetual sense of victimhood that allows the Russian president to artificially create situations in which Russia appears humiliated and insulted. Are these the actions of a rational leader? The answer is both simple and worrying. Putin has developed, over decades, a vision of the world that is paranoid but coherent. According to this vision, Russia has for centuries been the victim of an attempt to contain and dismember it. These attempts must be resisted. The logic of this is based on a belief that Russia’s passionarnost must not be constrained. For Putin – in stark contrast to the tired westerner, lost in the search for profit and material comfort, “the Russian man thinks first of all … in relation to a superior moral principle”. And he is prepared to die for it. Putin often cites a well-known Russian saying: for Russians, “even death is beautiful”. There may, therefore, be no limits to the quest to avenge perceived humiliation. The president’s worldview paves the way to extremism. Michel Eltchaninoff is editor-in-chief of Philosophie magazine and a specialist in the history of Russian thought. He is the author of Inside the Mind of Vladimir Putin. This article was translated by Julian Coman Guardian Newsroom: the Russian invasion of Ukraine. Join a panel of journalists, hosted by Michael Safi, for a livestreamed event on the Russia-Ukraine crisis. On Thursday 3 March, 8pm GMT | 9pm CET | 12pm PST | 3pm EST. Book tickets hereMagnus Carlsen has had a rough week at the $150,000 online Airthings Masters, but the world champion still overcame the effects of Covid to reach the two-day final, starting at 5pm on Friday. Free to view live commentary by England’s David Howell and Jovanka Houska is available on chess24.com. Carlsen was beaten four times in 15 games in the qualifying round, and blamed the defeats on symptoms which were similar to brain fog: “I lacked energy, which made it hard to focus, and when I tried to think I blundered.” Those who beat Carlsen included two teenagers: Russia’s Andrey Esipenko, 19, who had already scored against Carlsen at Wijk 2021, and India’s Rameshbabu Praggnanandhaa, 16. The world champion kept his equilibrium, made sure of qualifying for the final eight, then eliminated Vietnam’s Le Quang Liem and Russia’s Vladislav Artemiev. By the time of Thursday’s semi-final the world No 1 was back to his normal fearsome strength, playing the first game of the match in a classical attacking style. Earlier, in the qualification rounds, Carlsen faced the Dragon Sicilian, and followed a formula advocated by Bobby Fischer: open up the h file, sac pieces if needed, expose the black king, then checkmate. Thursday coincided with the invasion of Ukraine, and apart from Carlsen the other semi-finalists were all Russian. Ian Nepomniachtchi, crushed by the Norwegian in their world title match in Dubai two months earlier, was impressively back in form, winning the qualification section with rounds to spare and then eliminating the young pretender Esipenko in his semi-final. Away from the board, Nepomniachtchi tweeted: “History has seen many Black Thursdays, but today is blacker than the others.” It was signed with the hashtag #saynotowar. Previously the most politically outspoken Russian grandmaster has been the 2016 world title challenger, Sergey Karjakin, who switched allegiance from Ukraine to Russia and is well known as a Vladimir Putin sympathiser. War in Ukraine poses an immediate problem for Fide, the global chess body. The biennial 150-nation team Olympiad, which was postponed from 2020 due to Covid, is due to be staged in Moscow in July-August this year. The Fide president, Arkady Dvorkovich, used to be deputy prime minister of Russia under Dmitry Medvedev, and the Russian chess federation is scheduled to send out formal invitations to participate as early as this weekend. Uefa has switched the Champions League final away from Moscow, but the Olympiad lasts several weeks and it seems unrealistic to find a new host at short notice. Meanwhile, some posts on the English Chess Forum are already calling for a boycott. Late on Thursday afternoon Fide issued a statement expressing “grave concern”. An extraordinary meeting of the Fide Council will review all planned Fide official chess competitions and events in Russia, and will take decisions after consulting member federations. Several players and commentators, among them Carlsen’s chief aide Peter Heine Nielsen, have called for Fide to act more decisively, move the Olympiad away from Moscow, and show unity and solidarity with Ukraine. Moscow 2022 would not be the first Olympiad to be dislocated by combat. When the second world war broke out in the middle of the 1939 event at Buenos Aires, the English team withdrew from the finals. Three of them became Bletchley codebreakers. Germany beat Poland by half a point for the gold medals after their match was declared a 2-2 draw without play. 3804 (by Dragoslav Djaja) 1 Nh6!! If Rxh6 2 a8Q Rxa8 3 Rxa8 leads to K+R v K+R. If 1...Rxa7 or a3-a2 2 Rg7+! Ke6 3 Rg6+ Ke5 4 Rg5+ Ke4 5 Rg4+ Kf3 6 Rg3+ and the rook gives perpetual check on the g file.In the middle of an unforgiving snowstorm, a group of strangers find themselves stranded in a remote visitors’ centre, keeping warm until the weather allows them to leave. It could be the set-up for an off-Broadway play, a tight dialogue-heavy chamber piece, but in the far less lofty Disney thriller No Exit, it’s the jump-off for a schlocky sub-Agatha Christie whodunnit instead, one that lets us know who done it a little too fast. Our unlikely detective is Darby (Havana Rose Liu), a young addict racing away from the rehab centre she just broke out of and toward the estranged mother whose brain aneurysm has sent her to the hospital. Inclement weather forces her off the road and into the aforementioned safe haven alongside four others (Dennis Haysbert, Dale Dickey, Danny Ramirez and David Rhysdahl), playing cards until the blizzard breaks. But Darby soon makes a horrifying discovery – a young girl kidnapped in the back of a van outside – and realises that one of her newfound friends is up to something sinister. Wisely bypassing cinemas and landing straight-to-stream on Hulu (internationally, it will premiere on Disney’s Star platform), No Exit plays every bit like a Netflix-adjacent TV movie, one that seems ill-fitting of the grandiose 20th Century Studios logo that precedes it. Based on a 2017 book by Taylor Adams, it’s a thinly plotted potboiler that takes familiar elements and barely reheats them, the end result failing to insist itself as a worthy proposition amid such consistently intimidating competition. There is some initial fun in watching Darby try to figure out who owns the van, a tense game of Bullshit peppered with inquisitive jabs, but it’s far too short-lived, an unease that isn’t stretched anywhere near far enough. Cards are shown too soon with a predictable reveal coming soon after, followed by a betrayal based on a dynamic far too under-developed to have any real impact and so a game of guessing evaporates into a repetitive one of survival. Performances are mostly unremarkable, with Dickey particularly underused, wasted in a role that mostly requires her to sit and look concerned. What Australian director Damien Power struggles with, along with Ant-Man and the Wasp screenwriters Andrew Barrer and Gabriel Ferrari, is a confident mastering of tone, their film torn between two distinct target audiences. For the most part, No Exit plays like a sanitised YA thriller, softened for a PG-13 crowd, complete with a bumbling I-don’t-wanna-hurt-anyone henchman. But then when the frenzied third act comes crashing into view, suddenly so does some R-rated gore, a last ditch attempt to appeal to the horror crowd, most of whom would have lost interest a long time back. There’s a nifty reversal late in the day but it’s explained as an act of desperation rather than anything more nefarious and so a sharper bite is swapped out for something far more toothless, a development that’s indicative of the film at large. It’s an airport novel that’s now an airplane movie. No Exit is now available on Hulu in the US and Star elsewhereThat is where we will leave the blog for today. Thanks for following along. Here’s some of what you might have missed today: A man has died after his vehicle was lost in floodwaters on the NSW Central Coast overnight as storms continue to batter the east coast, and flood south-east Queensland. Prime minister Scott Morrison announced a new round of sanctions against “Russian oligarchs”. Defence minister Peter Dutton said some Australians in Ukraine might need to shelter in a bunker as shelling continues. The Registered Organisations Commission concluded its probe into AWU’s political donations, finding minor breaches. Ten Network filed its defence against Tegan George’s claim alleging “humiliation and distress”. NSW recorded 7,583 new Covid cases and six deaths; Victoria recorded 6,580 new cases and 11 deaths; Queensland 5,440 new cases and seven deaths; the ACT 773 new cases; WA 1,043 new cases; SA 1,714 new cases and two deaths; the NT 755 new cases and one death; and Tasmania 851 new cases and one death. The Bureau of Meteorology has updated its warnings for south-east Queensland, adding flood warnings for the Lower Brisbane and Bremer rivers. BoM says between 70-230mm of rain fell over the the lower Brisbane River and tributaries in the past 23 hours, and is forecasting further heavy rain going into Saturday. A severe weather warning for damaging winds and heavy rainfall remains current for the Wide Bay and Burnett, Southeast Coast and parts of Darling Downs and Granite Belt Forecast Districts. Lockyer and Laidley creeks have also seen rapid rises, with BoM continuing to urge people not to drive through floodwaters. Many of the flood and heavy rainfall warnings are being maintained overnight, with damaging wind gusts also forecast for the region. As always, Amanda Meade hits a home run with her Weekly Beast column: As Russian troops apparently prepare to encircle the soon-to-be-beseiged Ukrainian capital of Kyiv, investors out this way seemed to be hoping for only limited fallout for them. The benchmark ASX200 share index ended Friday up 0.1%, a reasonable result after sinking 3% on Thursday. Japan’s and mainland China’s bourses (with China’s central bank helping boost liquidity) were higher too, as were European stock futures. Wall St, which rose on Thursday by some 3% for the Nasdaq (a bit “huh?”), was poised to give up some of those advances. The Australian dollar strengthened a tad to trade recently near 72 US cents. Crude oil rebounded from yesterday’s dip, with the brent variety back above the US$100 a barrel mark. (Sydney’s petrol prices were averaging about 180 cents a litre and Melbourne’s174.6 cents, with any spike related to the war perhaps a few more days off.) Wheat, as we noted in any earlier post, has seen its prices soar, given the Black Sea region accounts for about one-third of global trade. Bloomberg data suggests wheat is trading at the highest since 2008. Economists in Australia, meanwhile, have been busy preparing for next week’s data releases and the Reserve Bank’s March meeting on rates. Don’t expect any change from the RBA at the Tuesday board gathering although no doubt “market turbulence” will feature in the bank’s commentary. Wednesday will have a bunch of ABS stats including fourth-quarter (and full year) GDP. The CBA, for instance, expects GDP after inflation to have increased 3% in the quarter, reaching 3.6% on an annual rate. “We expect a massive bounce in household consumption due to the easing of restrictions in NSW and Victoria post the long Delta lockdown,” the CBA said. “Business investment and inventories are expected to also add to growth while residential construction, public spending and net exports should detract from growth.” The ANZ has an identical prediction for GDP as the CBA, while Westpac is expecting a little less pep, coming in at 2.8% quarterly and 3.4% annual growth. Earlier today, WA premier Mark McGowan announced that close contact rules for police and health staff would be relaxed, in the face of growing case numbers. The state reported daily case numbers over 1,000 for the first time, and McGowan warned there was “no cause for panic”: Many may know someone who has caught the virus, many more know someone who is isolating. But once again I want to stress, this is not a cause for panic, but it is a reminder to take the virus seriously as we manage it in the community. The premier said “very high caseload settings” would be implemented for frontline workers to “ensure our most essential workers in a pandemic are prepared for what is to come”. The new settings stipulate that workers that are close contacts but asymptomatic can continue working, but under strict conditions, including daily tests. In the event symptoms develop, they must stop working, and follow the normal symptomatic close contact rules. In the event they return a positive RAT test, they are then a positive case and must follow positive case rules.” Earlier at that press conference, BoM meteorologist David Grant said more heavy rain was forecast for south-east Queensland until at least tomorrow. He added that an emergency alert has been issued from the Gympie regional council area, as the river continues to rise, with Normanby Bridge and Pengellys Bridge also closed. Grant said major flooding warnings were in place for Murray River, as well as Laidley and Lockyer creeks. Since many catchments are saturated, there is a high risk of dangerous and life-threatening flash flooding. We have a major flood warning now current for the Mary River, with Gympie expected to exceed the major flood level and exceed levels that have not been seen since February of 1999. A major flood warning is also current for the Logan River, with Beaudesert expected to exceed the major flood levels sometime during the course of Saturday. Deputy commissioner Steve Gollschewski has stepped up to provide an update on police operations, saying there are “hundreds of jobs” they are attending across the whole of south-east Queensland. Gollschewski took the opportunity to urge residents to avoid going out unless necessary. This is likely to continue for sometime yet, it won’t be over for a while and we’re coming into the night, and that makes things more difficult, and if people are travelling on our roads, it makes it more difficult to assess what’s happening. Gollschewski said there were six people on their roofs in the region, with police moving to rescue them. Queensland Fire and Emergency Services commissioner Greg Leach is providing an update on the flooding in south-east Queensland, and said the service had so far received 997 calls for aid in the last 24 hours. He said the storm was one of the worst he’d seen in a decade, and that it was becoming potentially life threatening. We’re continuing to see dangerous and prolonged rainfall in Queensland, stretching from Hervey Bay in the north to the Gold Coast in the south and to Toowoomba in the west. This is one of the most severe weather systems that we’ve seen in south-east Queensland over the last decade. This is an incredibly serious and potentially life threatening situation that’s unfolding. And it’s escalating quickly in terms of flash flooding and rapidly rising catchments. Leach added that residents should keep on top of media and BoM reports on the situation. The Ten Network has filed its defence in the federal court against a claim which, among other things alleges that its political editor Peter van Onselen undermined and humiliated the network’s federal political reporter, Tegan George. “Network 10 continues to take the matter very seriously and has been actively involved, over many months, in seeking a sensible resolution,” Ten said on Friday. “We have offered and provided support to all employees involved in this matter. This support will continue. Network 10 has filed its defence and will defend the proceedings, without reservation, in the meantime. No further comments will be made at this time.” George said in a statement of claim that she has been unable to work since June last year and she has suffered “hurt, humiliation and distress” and the loss of opportunity to advance her career at the network, in part due to her treatment by Van Onselen. She accused him of backgrounding other journalists against her, according to a statement of claim filed against the network in the federal court earlier this month. The Ten defence has not been posted online by the federal court at the time of writing. United Australia Party has reportedly disendorsed its candidate for the Victorian federal seat of Macnamara, Jefferson Earl, over tweets where he indicated support for Russian president Vladimir Putin. The Australian reported UAP leader Craig Kelly pushed for the disendorsement after it confirmed the tweets were from Earl. The tweets, which are still up on Earl’s account, express support for Putin and criticise the response from Western countries to Russia invading Ukraine. In one tweet to Putin’s official Twitter account he wrote in January: President Putin. I have supported u for many years. I am the endorsed candidate for the seat of Macnamara in Melbourne Australia for the United Australia Party. Is there any truth to what the media is saying? Is Ukrainian ok? I feel like Russia wants peace correct? He later tweeted that if Russia were to invade Ukraine it would be to protect itself against a western push. When his tweets were reported, he said his words were in line with his thinking and not UAP policy, arguing he just didn’t want to see mutually assured destruction. The Northern Territory has reported 755 new cases overnight and one death. There are currently 101 people in hospital with the virus, with 19 patients requiring oxygen, and seven people in ICU. The death toll in the Territory currently stands at 20. South Australia has reported two Covid-19 deaths overnight, and 1,714 new cases. There are 112 people in hospital with the virus, with 13 of those in intensive care. The Registered Organisations Commission has concluded its investigation into the Australian Workers Union’s political donations. The ROC was investigating a $100,000 donation to GetUp and $25,000 to the ALP when Bill Shorten was national secretary of the AWU before his election to parliament in 2007. The case sparked raids on the AWU headquarters (which the federal court found were not reasonable) and a police investigation of a leak about the raids. It also prompted Michaelia Cash to correct incorrect evidence that her office wasn’t involved, as well as the infamous whiteboard incident of Cash avoiding cameras when entering a hearing to be quizzed on the matter. But despite all that sound and fury, the case has ended more with a whimper than a bang. The ROC found: Nine breaches of industrial law for late or incomplete disclosure of donations 20 breaches of the AWU’s own rules over the process of deciding to give the donations; and The AWU failed to disclose $42,000 of donations to its own members. But the ROC said: Because of the deficient record keeping practices of the AWU, the effluxion of time, and its inability to produce relevant documents, the investigation was unable to attribute any of the specific failures by the national executive or the AWU to any one or more individuals or office holders. The investigation concluded that there was insufficient documentary evidence of specific conduct that contravened officer’s duties to recommend any further regulatory action against any individuals ... recommendations were made and accepted that it is not in the public interest ... to take further regulatory action against the AWU or any individual in relation to these matters at this time. The AWU national secretary, Daniel Walton, said the AFP raids in 2017 were “one of the most shocking abuses of power by an Australian government in modern history”. He said: The donations made by the AWU at the centre of this investigation were never remotely secret, let alone concealed. Yes, the AWU donated money to ALP campaigning. Yes, the AWU donated money to GetUp. These donations were openly discussed, declared, and even promoted in our magazine. Yet the Coalition Government’s ROC has spent thousands of hours, millions of taxpayer dollars, and the resources of the Australian Federal Police, trying to get mud to stick the AWU and its former national secretary Bill Shorten – who just happened to be opposition leader at the time. The assistant minister for industrial relations, Amanda Stoker, said Shorten had “serious questions to answer about these findings”. The chief executive of a company that pocketed more than $1m in government payments and grants for a barista course for people with disability without the most basic equipment has apologised to a former employee. Mzia*, a woman with ADHD who was employed as a BusyBeans barista trainer, told the disability royal commission she was forced to create an entire program from scratch, initially without basic equipment. She was employed by Rehab Management, a company linked to AimBig, her disability employment services (DES) provider, and said her complaints were not taken seriously. She told the inquiry she was left with a “broken heart” and “broken life”. Marcella Romero, the founder and chief executive of Arriba Group, the holding company of Rehab Management and AimBig, told the royal commission on Friday: I would like to apologise on by half of the group ... Rehab Management and AimBig. I would like to apologise for Mzia not having a good experience with us and I would apologise for the way she feels. We did not live our people value in that instance. Romero insisted the program had placed “people with a disability into stable ongoing employment”. In a statement separate to today’s hearings, she said: Following the Disability Royal Commission, I acknowledge that BusyBeans program experienced certain challenges in the early stages of the program. We will continue to take the feedback from participants on board and continue to make improvements to the program, which will include appropriately considering how to implement any recommendations that may emerge from the Disability Royal Commission. The program is currently suspended due to Covid, but Romero said the company would “hope to explore how we may be able to re-establish the program in future”. *Mzia is a pseudonym provided by the royal commission. A relatively large crowd of anti-war and pro-Ukranian protesters have gathered in Martin Place in Sydney today, chanting for further sanctions to be imposed on Russia. Undeterred by the rain, the protesters held aloft placards and wore the blue and yellow of the Ukrainian flag. Western Australia has jumped above 1,000 cases for the first time today, reporting 1,043 new cases overnight. Of those, 825 are confirmed local cases and 214 are still under investigation. Four cases are travel related. After a complaint from MP Tim Wilson’s campaign, Bayside City Council has now reversed its position on election signs – ruling that signs erected before 3 June need a permit. The council said: Bayside City Council has received advice from the Australian Electoral Commission regarding the timing of the forthcoming federal election. The AEC has advised that there is a possibility of separate elections for the two houses of the Australian Parliament, with the latest possible date for a Senate election being 21 May 2022 and the latest possible date for a House of Representatives election being 3 September 2022. Clause 52.05-10 of the Victorian Planning Provisions states a sign must not be displayed longer than 14 days after the event is held or 3 months, whichever is sooner. Based on this above, any sign associated with a House of Representative candidate would be unlawfully erected if: no election has been called; or the sign is erected prior to 3 June 2022. Council has advised all currently known federal election candidates for the seat of Goldstein of the AEC advice. Cast your minds all the way back to last Sunday 20 February, when tech billionaire Mike Cannon-Brookes teamed up (well, 20/80) with Canada’s Brookfield on an unsolicited bid for AGL Energy. (Thankfully, the “Brookes Brothers” hasn’t caught on.) They pitched $7.50 a share, or less than 5% above AGL’s previous closing price of $7.16, valuing the company at about $8bn (once you toss in $2.85bn for debt). Anyway, AGL’s share price duly soared more than 10% to close at $7.92 on Monday, as greedy investors poured in, betting the suitors would need to pay more to seal the deal. Well, that optimism has tended to dim with each passing day, with AGL’s share today dropping below the $7.50 bid price. It was recently at $7.47, down 17 cents or 1.8% on the day, after dipping as low as $7.42. (Not a great outcome in an overall market that’s up about 0.3% for the day, but not a bad result given events in Europe.) The latter day slide doesn’t mean there won’t be a higher bid yet, but perhaps we won’t see a bidding war for AGL. Here are the latest coronavirus numbers from around Australia today, as the country records at least 28 deaths from Covid-19: ACT Deaths: 0 Cases: 773 In hospital: 41 (with 3 people in ICU) NSW Deaths: 6 Cases: 7,583 In hospital: 1,144 (with 64 people in ICU) Northern Territory Deaths: 1 Cases: 755 In hospital: 101 (with 7 people in ICU) Queensland Deaths: 7 Cases: 5,440 In hospital: 350 (with 30 people in ICU) South Australia Deaths: 2 Cases: 1,714 In hospital: 112 (with 13 people in ICU) Tasmania Deaths: 1 Cases: 851 In hospital: 11 (with 2 people in ICU) Victoria Deaths: 11 Cases: 6,350 In hospital: 301 (with 38 people in ICU) Western Australia Deaths: 0 Cases: 1,043 (1,039 local) In hospital: 12 (with 0 people in ICU) Good afternoon, Mostafa Rachwani with you this afternoon, and a quick thanks to the brilliant Matilda Boseley for her work this morning. With that, I shall hand you over to Mostafa Rachwani who will take you through to the weekend. Bye! Protesters have gathered in Martin Place in Sydney in a show of support for Ukraine. New Zealand prime minister Jacinda Ardern has called for an immediate withdrawal of Russian forces from Ukraine, announcing a travel ban for Russian officials, and adding that she is considering expelling the Russian ambassador. New Zealand calls on Russia to do what is right and immediately cease military operations in Ukraine, and permanently withdraw to avoid a catastrophic and pointless loss of innocent life. New Zealand does not have a legal framework for creating autonomous sanctions independent of the United Nations security council, on which Russia sits. But Ardern said New Zealand had taken a number of steps, including a travel ban on Russian government officials associated with invasion, a ban on any exports that could be used by the Russian military for military or non-military purposes, and suspension of military bilateral consultations. Ardern said New Zealand had not ruled out passing legislation to create an autonomous sanctions regime, but that it would have to be examined through a wider lens than the current conflict. She said she was also considering expelling the Russian ambassador. “It’s one of the things that countries are able to do and will consider, but not a decision you take lightly given the wider ramifications for citizens in-country,” she said. A reminder that you can follow the Ukraine live blog below for more updates on the unfolding situation there: Morrison says he would describe Putin as “a thug”. Morrison: As I said, the South China Morning Post reports on the uploading of that protocol, at a time when the western world is actually imposing sanctions on Russia, the Chinese government is easing trade restrictions on Russia. So, you know, that is inexplicable, and I think it is important to call this out. I have never hesitated in calling these things out. I have been criticised for calling it out, but, on this, at times I have been a bit of a solo voice, but I can tell you my voice will not be silenced on this. This is of great concern to Australia, that these acts are not being called out with the same voice, when it comes to those in our region, and this needs to be understood. Reporter: You said you would match the US sanctions, would you consider sending troops in from Australia? Morrison: There is no suggestion of that. The United States are not suggesting that, Nato are not suggesting that, so that is just not ... It is not getting to that point. The US have made that very clear. Reporter: So the US is sending in troops today? Morrison: Well, this would be done under Nato*. We are going to work closely with Nato as to how we best provide the support, and that has been worked through every single day, so there will be no hesitation. If there are ways that Australia can assist those efforts, whether it is in medical packs or other things like this, then we stand ready to do that. *The US has repeatedly stated that they will not be sending in troops directly to Ukraine at this time, although they have sent military supports into allies’ Nato countries. Morrison is now taking questions and has taken a firm stance that Russia is solely to blame for the current conflict in Ukraine. There is no doubt that when you are involved in seeking to stop people who are coercing and bullying others, including yourself, as Australia has often found, that you will often have to bear some cost yourselves in doing so, but when issues are as they are, and when you have a bullying, threatening, violent act being undertaken on an innocent state in Ukraine, and these things are necessary to do. This is very important that they do this. I mean, the suggestion that there is some security pretext by Russia for this invasion, which has been suggested by the Chinese government, is completely unacceptable. That is not the case. There is no pretext for Russia to violently invade Ukraine. There is not some concession that Ukraine should have been making. There was no threat that Ukraine was making against Russia. So this suggestion that somehow it takes two to cause this, no, it only took one, and the world should be shutting that one out, in Russia. And just quickly, Morrison has moved on to speak about the new $65m funding package to help “fast-track of Australia’s access to space”. And unsurprising (given he is speaking from Adelaide), this speech seems aimed at getting premier Steven Marshall re-elected at the upcoming state elections. I am very thrilled to be here [with] premier Steven Marshall to make further announcements today ... $65m in funding for the fast tracking of Australia’s access to space measure. Where we are standing, in this amazing precinct, this is the great vision of premier Steven Marshall. None of this would have happened without premier Marshall. The great turnaround of SA over these last for years have been extraordinary. I remember coming here as a treasurer, I remember South Australians telling me how people were leaving the state and businesses were having to go elsewhere. Morrison: I have also said this, you may have seen [earlier] today about international sporting events scheduled to be held in Russia this year. The F1 should not be held in Russia. Any other, the men’s volleyball international tournament should not be held there. I commend those Australians that are saying they won’t participate in anything that is occurring in Russia this year. International sporting bodies, and a number of them are already joining, and I welcome it very much. This is the way you impose a cost on Russia that is invading its neighbour. I am also concerned that there is some suggestion in the comments made by the Chinese government that there is some sort of security pretext for the invasion that is taking place. There is none. Morrison: I want to confirm that we have been working with Nato to ensure that we can provide non-lethal military equipment and medical supplies to support the people of Ukraine. That is the most effective way for us to do that. We are a long way from Ukraine and the most effective way is to be doing that to our Nato partners to ensure that we can support that commitment. We are providing financial support as well as equipment through that Nato channel and I know that you will hear people in Australia, some 40,000 Australians of Ukrainian descent, will welcome that action. Morrison urged all countries to join in on imposing sanctions against Russia, singling out China for easing trade restrictions with the country during this time. I particularly have been concerned at the lack of a strong response from China. Overnight, it was uploaded, the report is in the South China Morning Post today, at a time when the world was seeking to put additional sanctions on Russia, they have eased restrictions on trade. At a time when Australia, together with the United Kingdom, together with the United States and Europe and Japan, are acting to cut off Russia, the Chinese government are following through on easing trade restrictions with Russia. That is simply unacceptable. China seeks to play a positive role in world affairs. They say they seek peace and I welcome those sentiments and I welcome their comments which talk about trying to get to a position where these violent acts can cease. But that said, you don’t go and give a lifeline to Russia in the middle of a period when they are invading another country. That is simply unacceptable from the reports we have seen and I would urge all nations to decide this is not a time to be easing trade restrictions with Russia. We should all be doing the exact opposite. I would call on everyone here in Australia, as well as overseas, to note this and urge all nations to join the sanctions against Russia. Morrison: We have already announced two rounds of sanctions targeting fresh individuals, banks and companies and we have also seen overnight the latest measures announced by our key partners, including the United States and the United Kingdom, as well as strong statements from Japan and South Korea. I also welcome the statements from Indonesia. As I have made clear all along, we will work along with our partners for a rolling wave of sanctions and continuing to ratchet up that pressure on Russia. We understand the concern that the threat of sanctions did not lead to them not going ahead with this. That was not our expectation. Russia has been planning these acts of violence for some considerable period of time. But there must be a cost. There must be a price. And it must be imposed by the global community. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, is speaking now and has announced further sanctions will be placed on Russian oligarchs. Before I get to the important announcements we have to make today, I would like to make some statements regarding the situation in Ukraine. We continue to be extremely concerned with the terrible violence we have seen inflicted on the people of Ukraine by Russia, unwarranted, unprovoked. Today, Australia will be imposing further sanctions on oligarchs whose economic weight is of strategic significance to mask out and everything to members of the Russian parliament that voted to authorise the use of Russian troops in Ukraine to illegally invade Ukraine. We are also working with the United States to align with their further sanctions overnight on key television commercials complicit with the aggressions. We are extending both sanctions to those. These actions are being prepared and close coordination with our allies and partners. Tasmania has reported an additional Covid-19 death and 851 new infections. The island state has now recorded 12 virus deaths since borders reopened in mid-December and 25 since the beginning of the pandemic, reports AAP. Friday’s case figure is the fourth day in a row daily numbers have been in the 800s, after a jump from 569 on Monday. Health authorities say the increase is related to the start of the school year earlier this month. The premier, Peter Gutwein, on Thursday said 156 of 195 state government schools had reported at least one case among their student cohort. Tasmania has 4,525 active cases, the 10th day in a row the figure has risen. Eleven people with the virus are in hospital, with four of those being treated specifically for Covid-19. Two patients are in intensive care. Tasmania will drop proof of coronavirus vaccination requirements for incoming travellers at 12.01am on Saturday, opening the door for unvaccinated people to arrive without needing to quarantine. Australian shares have opened about 0.5% higher, reversing a bit of Thursday’s “sea of red”, when they lost 3%. New Zealand shares are also 2% up, and presumably more markets will be positive as they open across the region – at least until more bad emerges from Ukraine. Rabobank, meanwhile, has published some interesting info about the history of wheat shipments from Russia and Ukraine, suggesting that the 5% or so spike in wheat prices might have a long way to go yet. Firstly, the Black Sea region accounts for 34% of global wheat exports, and a loss of all shipments through that area hasn’t happened since the first world war. (Think, Gallipoli.) Anyway, a full-scale conflict could halt shipments of wheat not just from the blockages to shipment but insurers pulling support for vessels that venture there. Plus, sanctions. “Global wheat prices have already risen 21% since February 1 this year and – in the very short term – prices could rise another 5 to 10%,” Rabobank predicts. Should conflict continue until July, when the next harvest would start, global prices could rise another 61% from current levels. Of course, a lot else might be messed up by then, but, either way, higher wheat prices would flow into many other products, whether grain-fed beef, or even ethanol that motorists in some states (eg NSW) fill up their cars with. (Manildra, an E10 supplier, boasts of using Australian-grown, GMO-free wheat as feedstock, you might be glad to know.) Typically eastern Australian wheat is mostly consumed locally and Western Australia is the main source of exports, but perhaps high prices will see a lot more grown in both places – provided the weather plays nice. Whether higher oil, wheat and other prices nudge up inflation in a sustained way is hard to tell at this point. One (admittedly flaky) guide to what investors think the RBA will do next is the rate futures bet, and their response yesterday was to nudge back their view of when the central bank will lift its official cash rate to July. The next RBA board meeting is on Tuesday 1 March (already), when members will no doubt comment on market volatility and uncertainties. Australians are now more hesitant to receive their third Covid vaccine shot compared to the beginning of the booster rollout, a new survey has found. In a survey of more than 3,400 adults, conducted in January, 65.4% of respondents said they would definitely receive a third Covid vaccine dose. That figure has dropped from 71.9% last October. Prof Nicholas Biddle, of the Australian National University’s Centre for Social Research and Methods, said: Leaving aside those who are not eligible, for some others this may reflect a belief that they are sufficiently protected from their initial two doses. The experience of the first two doses, particularly side effects, may also have made some reluctant to seek out a third dose. Australians aged 18 to 24, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Australians, those who had not completed year 12, and people who lived in disadvantaged areas were also less likely to have received a third dose, the survey found. Biddle said: The findings suggest that booster uptake is not due to active resistance to government policy or recommendations, but rather because people either do not have that much information about the need for a third dose or because they have made a judgement that it is not necessary for them. The Greens have proposed a $19bn plan to diversify fossil fuel-reliant towns and subsidise the wages of coal workers who transition into new jobs, saying employees can stay in mining but should seek employment in critical minerals or green metals. Workers would get a decade or more support under the plan, with the Greens’ idea seeing the government pay half the wage of their new job in “non-polluting industries” outside the coal, oil and gas sectors. The focus on transitioning mining towns into new industries comes as the Greens stress their belief that “coal workers haven’t caused the climate crisis”, three years after former party leader Bob Brown’s anti-Adani convoy through Queensland was partly blamed by some for a cratering of the progressive vote in that state. “Australia is sleepwalking into the closure of the coal industry, but every single worker is being told by the Liberal and Labor parties that they have nothing to worry about,” the Greens leader, Adam Bandt, said. You can read the full report below: Heads up, we are also expecting to hear from the prime minister in the next half hour or so. He is announcing some space program funding, but I think it’s save to say that the key topic of this press conference will ultimately be the Ukraine situation. Looks like we will be getting an update on both the Covid and flood situation in Queensland in about two hours. A man has died after his vehicle was lost in floodwaters on the NSW Central Coast overnight, reports AAP. The body of the 54-year-old Matcham man was found in a Toyota LandCruiser near the Maddens Creek crossing at Matcham, east of Gosford, about 1.30am on Friday. Emergency services were called after reports a vehicle had gone missing in floodwaters at about midnight. A report is being prepared for the coroner. The man’s death comes after several areas on the mid-north coast and Central Coast were smashed with more than 100mm of rain in 24 hours. The Victorian court of appeal has issued a judgment in the challenge against the federal Labor intervention into the Victorian branch. The court dismissed the appeal, which was brought by Diana Asmar on behalf of the Health Services Union and other members of Labor-affiliated unions who say the intervention deprived them of voting rights in preselections. The court found the trial judge was correct to conclude the Victorian branch was bound by the national constitution, and Labor’s national executive acted within power in the intervention, which was triggered by allegations of branch stacking. This is a win for Labor leader Anthony Albanese and national secretary Paul Erickson, although it might not be the final word – that will depend on whether Asmar seeks leave to appeal in the high court. Interestingly, the court found the preselection disputes are subject to the court’s jurisdiction. There is a long-running argument in Australian electoral law about whether party disputes are purely internal matters or can be judged by courts. By coming down in favour of yes courts can hear the disputes, this case may pave the way for more litigation like the appeal to the NSW supreme court about the NSW Liberal branch’s federal preselection woes. Since Asmar won on that point, there’ll be submissions about how to carve up costs. But, it was a win for the federal intervention today. The prime minister has praised Australian aerial skier Danielle Scott for withdrawing from the World Cup finals, which was due to be held in Russia, to their actions in Ukraine. Morrison then called for all international sporting events in Russia to be cancelled. The Northern Territory government has been condemned for a “breach of trust” after NT police confirmed that spithoods and restraint chairs remain in use, despite promises to phase out the “inhumane” devices. NT police data reported by the NT News shows spithoods have been used 27 times since 2018 and 21 of those applications having occurred since 2020. Restraint chairs were used six times on young people in police watch houses between 2020 and 2021, and in one instance was used on a 15-year-old boy in Katherine. While they were used throughout the Territory, the most frequent location they were used was in the Palmerston watch house, where they were used 15 times on children. You can read the full report below: This is the front page of our UK paper today. Scott Morrison has played down the prospect of fighting “temporary” fuel price hikes with a cut in excise tax, as Russia’s invasion of Ukraine reignites concerns about Australia’s energy security. With petrol prices at the bowser already north of $1.80 and headed to $2.00, the expected invasion has added to global oil price pressures and led to concern for gas supplies to Europe – although experts say there is little Australia can do about either. The government has come under pressure including from independent senator, Rex Patrick, to cut fuel excise, which is 44.2 cents a litre. Labor so far has attacked the government on fuel security but has not weighed in on tax. On Thursday Morrison acknowledged that Australia’s petrol prices are “very high” but explained there was a “a global issue with fuel prices”. You can read the full report from Paul Karp and Daniel Hurst below: It really is bucketing down over in south-east Queensland! Russian president Vladimir Putin is determined to rebuild the Russian Federation into something akin to the old Soviet Union, according to Australia’s former foreign affairs minister. Julie Bishop says the consequences of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine will be profound as the Russian president “rips up the rulebook”, reports AAP. Bishop told the Seven Network: He is formidable. He is a risk taker. He has been threatening for many years that he won’t tolerate an expansion of Nato membership on Russia’s borders. Now this is a full-scale invasion of Ukraine. Clearly, he is not bluffing [and] I cannot see a scenario where he will pull back. The comments came as Ukraine’s top diplomat in Australia called for more financial, military and humanitarian assistance for his country as Russia’s invasion continued overnight. An emotional charge d’affaires Volodomyr Shalkivskyi said Ukrainians remained shocked as residents desperately fight for their country or try to flee to the country’s west. He told the Nine Network on Friday: It’s really painful to see the places where you spent your time usually with your family that’s right now the place for the fighting. It’s our country and we need to defend it ourselves. But what we need is mounting pressure on Kremlin. The most disadvantaged areas of Melbourne have been hit hardest by Covid-19 deaths during Victoria’s Omicron wave, further underscoring the pandemic’s disproportionate effect on communities with lower employment and income levels, and poorer access to services. Data obtained exclusively by Guardian Australia shows that in Melbourne’s most disadvantaged local government areas (LGAs), Covid deaths occurred at a rate of 26 deaths per 100,000 residents. This substantially outweighs deaths in areas of greater socio-economic advantage. The local government areas of Brimbank, Greater Dandenong and Kingston accounted for 134 of the 943 Covid deaths in the state between 8 December 2021 and 21 February 2022. You can read the full report from Stephanie Convery and Josh Nicholas below: Torrential rain is expected to continue on the north coast of New South Wales as Sydney rounds out what is likely to be its wettest summer in three decades, reports AAP. The mid north coast and central coast copped the brunt of the rain on Thursday with more than 100mm of rain falling in several areas in the space of 24 hours. On the central coast, Bateau Bay recorded 116mm, Erina Heights 136mm, Mount Elliott 115mm, and Wamberal Reservoir 140mm since 9am on Thursday. Further north, Bellingen recorded 173mm, Bowraville 112mm, Dorrigo 103mm, Glennifer 135mm, and Gosford 136mm. An offshore surface trough near the Qld-NSW border is expected to bring further downpours to south-east Queensland and northern NSW on Friday. Bureau of Meteorology meteorologist Dean Narramore says isolated rainfall totals in some areas stretching from Byron Bay in NSW up to K’Gari Island in Queensland could exceed 300mm in the coming days. This is a dangerous set up as very heavy rainfall falls over already saturated soils. He warned people living near rivers or creeks their homes could be inundated and there was a risk of dangerous flash flooding. The SES has issued an evacuation warning for low-lying areas along the Nambucca River and door-knocked homes around there overnight. Some 630 callouts were received by the SES in the 24 hours up to 6am Thursday, with 27 flood rescues, predominantly from vehicles. Many of the calls for help were for sandbagging to protect against flooding and for damaged roofs. The Northern Rivers, mid north coast and Central Coast are the areas of concern for the SES on Friday. SES assistant commissioner Dean Storey told the ABC on Thursday there is a “very concerning weather system ... sitting just off the coast and due to make landfall”. European share markets have largely borne the initial brunt of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, with steep falls in stocks, while Wall Street has so far avoided following suit. Russia’s main share index plunged by a third, erasing some $US200bn in value, in a record rout for that country’s bourse, Bloomberg reported. The pan‑European STOXX 600 index sank 3.3% to nine‑month lows, a decline echoed in major financial centres from London to Paris and Frankfurt, with those markets all losing about 4%. Wall Street, though, rebounded with the Nasdaq index recently up 3.3%, the S&amp;P 500 1.4% ahead and the Dow Jones Industrial average gaining about 0.3%. That sets up Australian stocks for a rise at the open, with futures up about 1.3%, a gain that would start to claw back some of Thursday’s 3% retreat that wiped out more than $70bn in market value. On currency markets, the euro lost as much as 1.8% against the US dollar, touching its weakest level of $US1.11 since June 2020, according to Bloomberg data. Russia’s ruble hit fresh record lows against the US dollar of about 84 rubles per greenback. Crude oil, meanwhile, pared its earlier advances, with Brent dropping back below the $US100 a barrel level that it reached earlier on Thursday. Still, oil remains near its highest levels since 2014. The invasion of Ukraine, a major wheat exporter, also pushed up food commodity prices, with wheat rising 5% to hit decade highs. Rabobank, an agribusiness specialist, estimates that some 5 million tonnes of Ukraine’s wheat crop had still to be shipped before the invasion, creating a shortfall that would likely be made up by US and European suppliers. The Australian dollar, meanwhile, is hovering around US71.75c, where we last saw it on Thursday evening, local time. Let’s return briefly to Peter Dutton’s comments a short time ago about China. (The defence minister urged China to use its “special relationship” with Russia to urge it to pull back from war in Ukraine.) It’s true that the Chinese government has not clearly condemned Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. That’s despite China’s long-standing and repeated position that “all countries’ sovereignty and territorial integrity should be respected” (a position it raises to essentially urge other countries not to speak up about Taiwan, which is a self-governed democracy of 24 million people but which Beijing regards as its breakaway territory). At a daily press conference in Beijing overnight, China’s foreign ministry spokesperson, Hua Chunying, declined to use the word “invasion” in relation to Russia’s actions. She said the situation in Ukraine had “a complicated historical background and context” and added: The current state of affairs is not what we would hope to see. Hua called on “all sides to exercise restraint and prevent the situation from getting out of control”. Hua said it was “quite offensive” to ask whether China’s Xi Jinping had given Russia’s Vladimir Putin his blessing to attack Ukraine, insisting that Russia “makes its foreign policy decisions independently” and China was not a direct party to the conflict. The collapse of construction giant Probuild could be just the start of financial trouble across the Covid-ravaged industry as it struggles with soaring costs and project delays, the construction sector’s peak body warns. Probuild, which directly employed about 750 people and had annual revenues of more than $1.4bn, was placed into voluntary liquidation by its South African owners Wilson Bayly Holmes-Ovcon (WBHO) late on Wednesday. Contractors and other workers turned up at sites on Thursday in several Australian cities to collect equipment, including at CSL’s $750m proposed new headquarters in Melbourne. You can read the full report below: Dutton has told ABC radio that it may be necessary for some Australians in Ukraine to “stay in a bunker” until it’s safer to move to the border and leave the country. We’ve been very clear for a period of time that people, Australian citizens or those close family members, should leave immediately and we had been encouraging that... There are Australian citizens dual citizens who have arrangements in Ukraine, deeply embedded family, there are numerous reasons as to why they haven’t wanted to move but if people can make their way to the border our advice would be for them to do that. Depending on where they are, it might be safe for them to stay in a bunker, or stay where they are in situ, because it’s obviously a very volatile environment. Dutton says it is now “very clear to us” that Russia’s accusation of Ukrainian aggression in the separatist Donbas regions was “all a ruse”. It’s very clear to us already that, you know, the false flag activities, the claimed provocations, protecting regions etc, was all a ruse. The defence minister was asked if the Russian troops’ capture of the Chernobyl power plant raised a “whole new element of danger” in the conflict. There’s no question it does and there will be other key facilities that are significant for various reasons that would also come into question. It’s deeply disturbing ... the most important consideration of course is for those people who are innocent, for women and children in particular, who will be victims of this dreadful move. Dutton has called out China as one of the only major world powers who haven’t taken a clear stand against Russia. The world has been united in its view against Putin, except for China ... they’re not prepared to do that it seems, which is deeply concerning ... they’re probably watching the world reaction, so they can make their calculations down the track in relation to Taiwan. The Australian defence minister, Peter Dutton, says Russia’s actions should “raise alarm bells” around the world. It’s clear the president has had this invasion in mind for some time. And it should be an alarm bell. It should be a wake-up call to all of Europe but to the rest of the world, including Australia, that we shouldn’t take the peace that we’ve had since the cold war for granted. Morning everyone. It’s Matilda Boseley here, coming to you today from the wonderful city of Sydney. That’s right, I’m in the Sydney office! But here’s the thing, I don’t know how to make the coffee machine here work, so if the blog seems a little slower this morning, you know why. OK, there is a lot to get through so why don’t we jump right in. The mask mandate in NSW has been dramatically scaled back this morning, with Victoria to follow at midnight tonight, only required in limited indoor situations, such as on public transport, taxis, and in airports and hospitals and, in NSW, at indoor music festivals with more than 1,000 people. In Victoria, some groups of workers will also have to keep wearing masks, including hospitality and retail workers, people who work in primary schools and early childhood centres, and justice and correctional facility staff. Queensland is set to join its eastern state colleagues in relaxing mask mandates next Friday 4 March. Speaking of Queensland, there has also been some tragic news, two people now killed in floods caused by a weather system that has been drenching the state and is set to keep pouring down today. A 54-year-old man was killed when trying to ride a motorbike through rising water at Gympie and a 63-year-old woman’s body was found in a submerged car on the Sunshine Coast. The Bureau of Meteorology say more heavy rainfall and potentially “life-threatening flash flooding” are set to peak today in the state’s southeast and possibly extend into northern NSW. BOM’s Brooke Pagel told AAP that up to 300mm of rain may inundate the region where the trough crosses the east coast. Judging by satellite images the system is likely to impact the coast by Friday morning. We don’t know the exact location, whether it is Sunshine Coast, Gold Coast or down towards the NSW border. But because it is so slow moving, intense rainfalls are likely to be wherever it makes landfall so there is the risk of flooding as well. Now, I will also be bringing you all the Australian reactions to the ongoing invasion of Ukraine by Russia, but you can also follow along more closely on the Guardian’s live blog dedicated to covering the crisis. You can find that below: With that, why don’t we jump right into the day?Social media users could be cut off from other accounts on platforms such as Twitter if they do not sign up for ID verification, under government proposals to tackle anonymous trolls. Popular services including Twitter, Facebook and Instagram will be required to give users the option to opt in or opt out from receiving messages, replies and content from unverified or anonymous accounts. Verified users could also block unverified or anonymous accounts from seeing their content under the opt in/opt out proposals. This means people or organisations without verified accounts – symbolised by a blue tick on Twitter and Instagram – would be blocked from communicating with, or being seen by, accounts that have opted out from interactions with unverified sources. The Department for Culture, Media and Sport said platforms had a number of options for verifying users, including using government-issued ID such as a passport to open an account or using two-factor authentication, where a platform sends a prompt to a user’s mobile phone. The new system will be introduced under the online safety bill, which requires tech firms to protect users from harmful content or face the threat of substantial fines imposed by Ofcom, the communications regulator. The culture secretary, Nadine Dorries, said: “Tech firms have a responsibility to stop anonymous trolls polluting their platforms.” She added: “People will now have more control over who can contact them and be able to stop the tidal wave of hate served up to them by rogue algorithms.” The government has ruled out banning anonymity online entirely, acknowledging that it would be damaging for domestic abuse victims, activists living in authoritarian countries or young people exploring their sexuality. The ID move was welcomed by the Football Association, which has called for action against racist and abusive online trolls who often operate anonymously. Edleen John, the director of corporate affairs and co-partner for equality, diversity and inclusion at the FA, said: “On behalf of English football, we welcome the news that the government will be strengthening the online safety bill to protect users from anonymous online abuse. For too long, footballers and other participants across the game have been subjected to abhorrent discriminatory abuse from those who hide behind a cloak of anonymity, which has perpetuated a culture of impunity online. This needs to stop.” However, Big Brother Watch, a privacy campaign group, said the proposed change represented another move towards an ID scheme for the internet. “The government’s plans to undermine online anonymity will do untold damage to privacy and free speech rights in the UK. This move towards ID for the internet is unnecessary and will have no discernible impact on the tone of conversations online,” said Mark Johnson, BBW’s legal and policy officer. In a further change to the online safety bill, the government is also proposing to introduce a requirement for popular social media sites to give users an option for blocking “legal but harmful” content such as the promotion of eating disorders and vaccine misinformation. The online safety bill will be introduced to parliament in the coming weeks.At the grand old age of 82, legendary folkie Judy Collins is releasing her first ever collection of entirely original songs. After more than 60 years spent crafting stellar interpretations of classics by the likes of Leonard Cohen, Bob Dylan, Joni Mitchell and Stephen Sondheim, the pandemic gave her the opportunity to sit down at the piano and delve into her treasure trove of poems, turning favourites into song. Mostly, these find her in understandably wistful mood, gazing back over a life lived. Grand Canyon and When I Was a Girl in Colorado reminisce about cowboys and calming wild horses. Uptempo country rocker Hell on Wheels offers sobering snapshots of more riotous times on the road. Happy memories collide with sad ones, sometimes in the same song. In the exquisite So Alive, she recalls a pair of young musicians in the Greenwich village folk explosion, their heads filled with dreams of rock’n’roll, but one of whom “left the world too early. Your spirit died too young.” There are ethereally lovely songs of people and places: Idaho (in Prairie Dream) or Arizona, “where antelope climb the ravine” and the passage of time brings the realisation that “everything sings and moves on, and all that’s forgiven is gone”. Some of the arrangements are too middle of the road, but her piano runs are glorious, her voice still as pure as mountain air and – with a second collection apparently following – she is far from done.Members of the Ukrainian diaspora across the United States have been responding with grief, rage and solidarity with their compatriots as Russian president Vladimir Putin ordered an invasion of their country. Ukrainian-Americans from New York City to Sacramento have been expressing their growing anxiousness towards the escalating conflict, singing prayers, launching fundraisers and organizing solidarity rallies. Currently, there are more than 1.1 million members of the Ukrainian-American diaspora. Ukrainians have been immigrating to the United States since the late 19th century when many arrived in 1877 to work in the Pennsylvania mines. However, the largest immigration wave came after the second world war where thousands of displaced Ukrainians sought refuge in large American cities including New York, Philadelphia, Detroit and Chicago. Many more fled during the cold war and also its aftermath, immigrating to the United States and Canada. In 2019, Ukrainians were one of the top groups resettled as refugees in the United States under the Donald Trump administration. In the Ukrainian American community in Detroit, one of the country’s largest and most active Ukrainian diasporas, people have been organizing prayer services and speaking with elected officials to urge them to speak up against Russian aggression. According to Mykola Murskyj, chair of the Ukrainian-American Crisis Response Committee of Michigan, there are about a dozen Ukrainian churches in southeastern Michigan, with many more Ukrainian Saturday schools, credit unions, grade schools and cultural centers in metro Detroit. These organizations have already been hosting rallies and launching fundraisers, said Murskyj, whose grandparents emigrated from Ukraine which was then part of the Soviet Union. “There’s a lot of anxiety and there’s a lot of determination,” she told the Detroit Free Press. Olena Danylyuk, vice chair of the Ukrainian-American Crisis Response Committee said she watched in horror as Russia invaded Ukraine on early Thursday morning. “It is hard to watch … We are extremely disturbed, saddened, and angered by the senseless violence,” she said. Danylyuk, a Ukrainian immigrant herself, told the Detroit newspaper that one of her sisters and her children have fled Kyiv, Ukraine’s capital and are hiding in a small town. In New York City, members of the Ukrainian diaspora said their friends and families in Ukraine are prepared to fight. Oleksandr Matsuka, a retired United Nations diplomat whose stepson recently enlisted in Ukraine’s territorial defense forces and whose wife’s brother was preparing to leave retirement and return to the army, said, “Everyone does whatever he can.” “Ukrainians are not panicking. They are prepared to fight,” he said to members of the Self-Reliance Association of Ukrainian Americans, a seminar group nestled in the city’s East Village. New York’s East Village is home to the city’s largest Ukrainian diaspora and was once known as Little Ukraine, as over 60,000 Ukrainian immigrants lived in the community at one point. Andrij Dobriansky, co-chair of the United Ukrainian-American Organizations of New York has been inundated with text messages from Ukrainian friends who are in shock. “I have so many just single texts in my phone from people who are like, ‘I have no words’ and that’s it. This is not something anybody imagined could happen – to roll back the independence of a country,” Dobriansky said. In Sacramento, California, which is home to approximately 100,000 Slavic immigrants – most of whom came from Ukraine, many Ukrainian-Americans are finding solace through prayers. Yuri Shimko, who arrived in the US when he was six years old, is a part of a local Ukrainian church and has been praying for peace since the Russian invasion. “It’s sad to hear that it’s happening to our own people. As a church, we’re praying for them. We’re thinking about them,” he told Sacramento’s ABC10. Erik Latkovskii, the lead pastor secretary at Sacramento’s Spring of Life church, has opened up the church as a space for support and solidarity for Ukrainian Americans. “I’m far away. And it’s hard for me to do something right now, but I will pray to God,” Latkovskii said. Other members of the diaspora in Sacramento are fraught with confusion and fear. According to Ruslan Gurzhiy, editor-in-chief of Slavic Sacramento, “People are confused. People are fighting in comments with each other, arguing with each other, a lot of anger, a lot of fear, a lot of blaming each other.” As Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskiy asks for donations to the Ukrainian military and the country’s billionaires return to Ukraine to pledge their support, numerous Ukrainian-Americans have also been launching fundraisers stateside to assist with relief efforts. The Revived Soldiers Ukraine campaign, based in Orlando, Florida has been raising funds for Ukrainian soldiers injured on the frontlines. “I want our Ukrainian army to know that we, the Ukrainian diaspora of the United States, stand with them shoulder to shoulder,” said Irina Discipio, the campaign’s organizer. In Belmont, Massachusetts, Katya Malakhova is organizing the Sunflower of Peace fundraiser in which tactical backpacks filled with medical supplies are provided to Ukrainian marines and special forces units. Nova Ukraine, a non-profit organization based in Palo Alto, California has been identifying areas in Ukraine that are most in need of humanitarian efforts and has been raising funds to provide relief including gasoline, candles, diapers and food. Currently, the organization is raising money to buy dry food for children at the Donetsk Oblast orphanage in Donetsk. “We need your support as never before,” the group posted on their Facebook page. Across the country, numerous solidarity rallies have also been planned by Ukrainian diaspora communities, with many set to take place in major cities including Atlanta, Houston, Los Angeles, Miami, Philadelphia and Washington DC in the coming days. Nataliia Onyskiv, head of the Georgia branch of the Ukrainian Congress Committee of America, told the Atlanta Journal Constitution that she has been touched by all the support coming in from beyond the Ukrainian community in the city. “From my personal experience, it means a lot. If you know a Ukrainian, make sure to tell them your heart is with them,” she said.Charities have urged the UK government to welcome refugees from the conflict in Ukraine on the same scale as the thousands of families from the Balkans resettled during the Yugoslav wars in the 1990s. In a letter to the Times, the charities, which include Save the Children, Amnesty International and the Refugee Council, asked the UK to lead international cooperation to “handle a sudden increase in the number of people forced to flee” the conflict, which threatens to be the most significant in Europe since the collapse of Yugoslavia. The US has warned that 5 million people could be displaced by the conflict. The UK government said its priority was to support British nationals and their families in Ukraine, and the government position was that people fleeing persecution should seek safety in the first safe country they reach. An estimated 100,000 Ukrainians are already internally displaced after fleeing their homes to escape attack, while footage on social media shows lines of cars heading west into neighbouring Poland, Moldova, Romania, Slovakia and Hungary. The UN has appealed to neighbouring countries to keep their borders open to people seeking safety. The letter from dozens of charities urged the government to implement a “well-resourced initiative working with councils across the country” to support Ukrainians in search of sanctuary, similar to the evacuation and resettlement programme during the Balkan conflict. Visa applications from Ukraine for people who are not related to British nationals are currently suspended, meaning there is no legal route for them to enter the UK and claim asylum. A source told the BBC the government was “scenario-planning” for an increase in asylum seekers from Ukraine. The charities said the crisis “illuminates the crucial flaw” in the nationality and borders bill, which discriminates against refugees who reach UK shores by illegal means, such as by boat across the channel. The charities wrote: “We urge the government to rethink this harmful bill and uphold our proud record of helping those fleeing war and oppression.” The prime minister has announced that the UK has 1,000 military troops on standby to support a humanitarian crisis in Europe, should they need to be called upon. On Thursday, the Home Office confirmed that work, study or visit visas would be temporarily extended for some Ukrainians in the UK, or they would be able to apply for family visas or points-based immigration without leaving the country. This would grant them additional time to potentially find a job and stay in the UK for longer. Those already on the point-based system will be able to stay longer and seasonal agricultural workers will have their visas automatically extended until the end of the year. A government spokesperson said: “Our priority has been to support British nationals and their families in Ukraine. This has included temporarily waiving application fees for those eligible under the family migration route, allowing entry for 12 months for others who did not meet the requirements and fast-tracking visas. “We continue to work with our international partners on a range of issues as the situation develops, including migration.”It’s nearly two years since the prime minister, Boris Johnson, announced the first national Covid lockdown and, for many Britons, life feels close to normal. As of Thursday, there are no longer any restrictions in England – no legal requirement to wear masks or to self-isolate after a positive Covid test. But have our lives changed in other ways that will outlive the pandemic? Have our habits changed for good? Working from home The pandemic has given us a new shorthand: WFH. And it’s here to stay, with one-third of people still working from home at least some of the time. Many companies are now planning to introduce a hybrid model that combines days in the office with time spent working at home. The government’s guidance that Britons should work from home where possible was scrapped in January after a few false starts. But not everyone is in a rush back to conversations around the water cooler. People in the UK are still spending more time at home and less time in offices, according to data from Google’s community mobility reports. There has been some recovery in footfall at stations and workplaces since the first lockdown. However, the latest figures for the week to 11 February 2022 show that activity still remains 29% and 21% below pre-pandemic levels. ONS data shows that around a third of working adults did their jobs from home in 2022. That figure fell from 36% at the end of January to 31% in mid-February, suggesting that some employers are encouraging their employees to return to the office. Many employers plan to implement a hybrid model in future to respond to their employees’ demands for more flexible schedules following the pandemic. Daniel Wheatley, a researcher specialising in work-life balance at Birmingham University, thinks this is a good idea, since workers benefit from extra personal time and employers from improved morale and retention. But he said this would only work in the long term if employers redesign jobs, for instance by focusing office time on collaboration and teamwork and home-working on task completion, and if they trust their employees to perform. Some employers are likely to be resistant, especially those who are driven by “micro-management and assumptions that effort has to be extracted from workers rather than them offering it willingly”, he said. Although the exact blend of home and office is a personal preference, one thing is clear: working from home will be a feature of some jobs for a long time after the pandemic has ended. Escape to the country? The pandemic prompted an exodus to the country as people working from home became eager for bigger living and garden spaces, which resulted in rural house prices and rents shooting up. However, there are early signs that people are returning to cities. Covid and lockdowns made many rethink their work/life arrangements. Rural house prices in England and Wales soared, resulting in fears of an affordability crisis in some areas. This was especially true of London-dwellers who fled the capital in large numbers and helped push prices outside the capital to record levels. Londoners spent an average of £487,000 on properties outside the capital last year, according to estate agents Hamptons. They also benefited from a temporary stamp duty holiday introduced by the government to buoy the housing market after the first lockdown, which gave would-be movers an incentive to buy in late 2020 and early 2021. David Fell, a senior analyst with Hamptons, said 2021 marked “the single largest migration out of London in a generation”. He predicted that this year numbers would return closer to 2019 levels as a result of fewer sales taking place and a lack of available countryside properties, but that they would remain higher than pre-Covid times. “We’re also expecting the price gap between London and the commuter belt to continue shrinking, meaning London equity will go less far than five years ago,” he said. Fell says early data from 2022 indicates that London’s first-time buyers are more open to moving further out to take advantage of cheaper property prices as they spend more time working from home. Just under half of first-time buyers living in London have bought outside the capital in the year to date, more than double the proportion 10 years ago. While a long-term exodus from big cities may not materialise, the shift from offices to home working may shape the future of the housing market. Struggling or saving? While lockdown allowed people in stable office jobs to work from home and save money on commuting and sandwich-shop lunches, others burned through their savings. The result is a growing divide in the financial health of the nation, with more families than ever living in the red. With lockdown spelling a temporary end to restaurants, pubs, clubs, cultural venues and foreign travel, lots of people unexpectedly found it easier to save. Estimates by Capital Economics and Refinitiv suggest Britons collectively saved £4.6bn a month in 2019. But between March 2020 and the end of 2021, the average amount saved each month climbed to 2.6 times the 2019 average. However, these gains were far from universal. A Bank of England survey from autumn 2020 found that 42% of workers in high-income households had increased their savings since the beginning of the pandemic compared with just 22% of those on low incomes. Jonquil Lowe, an economist specialising in personal finance at the Open University, said the reason for this disparity was that low-income households spend a higher proportion of their income on essentials, which can’t be cut back. ONS data suggests the poorest tenth of households usually spend 43% of their income on food, housing and bills, compared with 24% for the richest tenth. This has “exacerbat[ed] the inequalities that already existed in the UK economy” and the savings gap would only grow wider in the coming years given rampant price inflation, she said. Lowe said that constructive solutions to the savings gap would be for the government to pay for the pandemic by taxing the income and wealth of richer people, instead of replicating the response to the 2008 financial crisis and cutting benefits, public services and public sector pay, or offering “hollow advice” to poorer households to build up their savings. “Despite being battered by Brexit and the pandemic, the UK is still one of the wealthiest economies in the world and it is shameful that 11.7 million are living in absolute poverty,” she said. International travel Foreign holidays were banned or curtailed for much of the pandemic, while business travel ground to a halt. Will our taste for domestic holidays and Zoom conferences endure? Alongside hospitality, travel was one of the sectors hardest hit by the pandemic, underlined this week by Heathrow’s passenger numbers falling to their lowest level in almost 50 years. Planes were grounded in early 2020 as countries imposed tough international travel restrictions. This was followed by constantly shifting international travel policies, such as testing regimes and the UK’s traffic-light system, that confused many travellers. Daily UK flights – both international and domestic – stood at an average of 664 between April and June 2020, according to ONS data. This was just 10% of the daily average for the same months in 2019. Two years on, flight numbers have not returned to previous levels. The latest ONS data shows that in the month to 13 February 2022, there was a daily average of 3,067 flights. While this is an improvement on 865 in that same period in 2020, it is still just 61% of the pre-pandemic level of the 2019 figure of 5,039. Indeed, industry predictions suggest that there won’t be a return to pre-Covid numbers until 2023-24. Leon Davis, an academic at Teesside University researching the impact of Covid on tourism, said that although the UK government was predicting an earlier return, consumer confidence had been knocked by the Omicron variant, and people remain confused by countries’ differing entry rules. “This will continue in the winter of 2022/23 as it is highly unlikely there will be a full global lifting of restrictions, and particularly if cases rise in different parts of the globe,” he said. Lots of people opted for UK-based holidays during the pandemic, and a 25% increase in visitors is expected this year compared with 2019, but Davis expects that the cost of UK travel and accommodation, and its limited availability, will encourage people to return to overseas trips. While lots of businesses have adapted to hybrid conference models, many will return to in-person attendance since this tends to be better for marketing and advertising, he added. Shopping habits The pandemic has changed the way we shop. More people do grocery shopping online and demand for delivery services has shot up. Since lockdown has lifted, footfall in shops remains below pre-pandemic levels. Brits already loved to shop online pre-pandemic, but during lockdown – when non-essential businesses were closed and we were advised to avoid leaving home – ordering groceries and luxuries online became even more popular. While official figures show a recent fall, online sales still account for over a quarter of total retail sales. According to the ONS, online sales jumped from 21% to 31.5% of total retail sales between the first and second quarter of 2020. This peaked at 36% in early 2021 after England’s third national lockdown. This was the highest level recorded since the data was first collected in 2007. In January, the share of internet sales within retail fell to 27%, continuing a broad downward trend since its peak in January 2021. Retail analyst Bryan Roberts said the popularity of online shopping was plateauing as people returned to their pre-pandemic behaviours. “A decent chunk of shoppers will continue to allocate more of their spending online, but we need to remember that shopping is also a fundamental leisure activity, with trips to high streets and shopping centres still part of people’s routines,” he said. “Some of the online shift, both in food and non-food, will be permanent. Many shoppers tried online food for the first time and will have liked what they found in terms of convenience. Other shoppers will have joined schemes like Amazon Prime and will continue to shop for the majority of general merchandise through Amazon and other retailers. “That said, online will continue to decelerate as people return to pre-pandemic behaviours such as trawling round the shops at the weekend. Also, online is supremely convenient if you’re at home seven days a week, less so if you’re back in the office three or four days a week.” Not going out We watched more TV than ever before, and industry experts warn that cinemas and theatres may never be as popular again. Meanwhile, people replaced pubs and restaurants with home cooking and takeaways. Will they ever go back? Lockdown massively disrupted our social lives, with after-work pints, restaurant visits, cinema trips and music gigs all ending abruptly. Data published by the ONS from OpenTable show that bookings evaporated in March 2020, then rose as lockdown was lifted and reached a 2020 peak at the time of Rishi Sunak’s “eat out to help out” scheme in late August. They dried up again in December as Delta hit, before recovering slowly but steadily as summer 2021 approached. In mid-December 2021, there was a sharp dip when people cancelled Christmas bookings due to the Omicron variant. The latest data indicates that Britons have fully regained their appetite for indoor dining, with bookings exceeding 2019 levels before and after the Omicron peak. Cinemas also suffered during the pandemic. After several months of no attendance as a result of their forced closure, data from the UK Cinema Association shows that they enjoyed a bounceback in December, with monthly attendance figures exceeding 13.5m. Yet this represents just 73% of the audience cinemas attracted in December 2019, and ticket sales in January were only 49% of those sold in January 2020. Cinemas’ losses were streaming platforms’ gains as viewers shifted indoors. Streaming was already growing in popularity pre-pandemic with a total of 24m subscriptions to platforms in 2019, rising to 33m a year later. Projections by Ampere suggest that figure will rise further, boosted by the UK launch of Disney+ in the first national lockdown in March 2020. As TV critic and broadcaster Scott Bryan notes, “the pandemic resulted in five years’ worth of trends in about one year”. “Streaming services saw substantial growth as many of us were having to spend our days staying in. Disney+ and Netflix were clearly big winners and there’s also been a change of mindset. We’re now more used to watching television when it suits us, rather than rotating our lives around the television schedules.” However, he noted that cost of living increases, plus the fact that people are now going out a bit more, mean we might not be willing to pay for this into the future. “Even though it is easier to unsubscribe from streaming services rather than cable or satellite, it can become prohibitively expensive to pay for them all individually. The growth of some streaming services has also slowed to a crawl, with Netflix announcing underwhelming growth in late 2021 and projecting equally underwhelming growth in 2022.” Zooming in Physical distancing rules meant that we socialised a lot less during the pandemic. Video calls replaced face-to-face meetings for work, while lots of social activities moved outdoors or online. But was any of this good for us? When the first lockdown hit and people were asked to stay indoors, most people drastically cut down the number of people they encountered unless they worked in a frontline job. Some of the biggest winners in this brave new world were video-conferencing platforms, with one company ruling them all: Zoom. As people were asked to reduce face-to-face contact, the company’s fortunes went through the roof, although they have since declined as normal life has resumed. While many people have been able to continue socialising during the pandemic by shifting communication online, psychologist Doreen Dodgen-Magee warns that this was not the case for everybody, which could have a lasting impact on mental health. “Technology enabled people to connect regardless of where they live, thus expanding social circles. But for those sheltering entirely alone, uncomfortable in the digital domain or lacking reliable access to it, feelings of loneliness have grown since Covid,” she said. She added that as our work and social activity migrated to Zoom, the lines between our in-person and digital lives increasingly became blurred. “We’ve been able to toggle between digital spaces – between school or work screens, video games and Netflix – but doing so impacts the way our brain can help us get settled and focus on one thing at a time. We’ve also overstimulated ourselves, when what we really thought we were doing was soothing ourselves.” Many people were glad to see the back of Zoom catch-ups as restrictions on socialising were eased, since most people do not consider them a genuine replacement for in-person contact, though people who are vulnerable or anxious about Covid have been left with no other option. Two years later, most people are gradually returning to face-to-face contact, according to ONS data. Although no comparison is available with levels before the pandemic, the figures show that most people are happy to meet with friends and family indoors. But Darian Nugent, senior strategic foresight writer at futures consultancy the Future Laboratory, says that a widespread shift in our work, living and socialising routines means that “the future of our working lives is a hybrid one”. “Across Europe, the majority of those that adopted a hybrid routine note huge improvements in their flexibility, free time and relaxation, and its technology – and the growing sophistication of platforms like Zoom and Teams – that is really facilitating that. “IRL meetings and conferences will return – these are still crucial to our relationships and wellbeing – ... [but] businesses know that virtual processes have allowed them to make huge strides in accessibility, inclusivity and global reach.” Looking to the future Many people planned for the worst during the pandemic, with a sharp rise in the numbers writing a will. With restrictions lifted and the prime minister heralding a new era of living with Covid, ONS data shows people are still not optimistic about the future, with a third saying they expect the pandemic to continue for another year. With the vaccine rollout at the start of 2021 came hope that the pandemic would soon come to an end. However, an ONS survey designed to capture the public’s attitudes throughout the pandemic shows that this optimism has since dissipated. The latest data from the ONS shows that, by the year’s end, more people thought it would take over a year for life to return to normal than in 2020. ONS data also revealed that, in the two weeks leading to 13 January 2022, 13% of British adults thought life would never return to normal, while just 7% thought it would take less than six months for life to return to normal. One indicator of the pessimism felt by people during the pandemic was how many wrote their wills to ensure that if they died people would know what to do and where to distribute their savings. According to Farewill, which says it is the UK’s biggest will writer, the number of Britons making financial plans for after they die almost tripled in 2020. The biggest increase was among under-35s, with a 23% increase in will-writing among Generation Z, those aged 10-25. Dan Garrett, CEO and co-founder of online will provider Farewill, said: “Writing your will is a task people always want to put off – but the pandemic gave people a reason to plan their will and funeral, because they were worried about dying. This will have an irreversible and positive impact on people’s attitudes towards death, dispelling the stigma.” Farewill analysis found a strong connection between news events and will writing. For example, Prince Philip’s admission to hospital last year resulted in a 148% increase in people penning their wills, and the day the most wills were written in 2020 was when Boris Johnson was taken into intensive care. Charity donations in people’s wills surged, too. “People are being more generous and selfless than they were before. During the pandemic, most conversations were about protecting other people,” said Garrett. Methodological notes Working from home: Google’s community mobility reports compare each day’s movement to a “baseline day”, which represents a normal value for that day of the week. This is the median value from the five-week period from 3 January to 6 February 2020. Not going out: the streaming platforms covered by the Ampere analysis were Lovefilm, Netflix, Now TV, Amazon, Disney Life, ITV Hub+, Discovery+, Disney+ and BritBox.The owner of British Airways, International Airlines Group, more than halved losses to €3.5bn in 2021 and expects to return to profit this year as long as operations are not significantly disrupted by Covid-19 or the invasion of Ukraine. The company, which made a record €7.4bn (£6.4bn) loss in 2020, said that passenger levels were still only 36% of pre-Covid levels last year. The company said that the impact of Omicron on traveller confidence has hit bookings in January and February, meaning it will make a “significant” loss in the first quarter. Passenger capacity is expected to be at 65% of pre-pandemic levels in the first three months of the year. However, it expects to return to profit in the second quarter, driven by an increase in bookings for Easter and summer that will underpin “significantly positive” operating profit and cashflows for 2022. Capacity is expected to hit 85% of pre-pandemic levels across the year. “This assumes no further setbacks related to Covid-19 and government-imposed travel restrictions or material impact from recent geopolitical developments,” the company said. Luis Gallego, IAG’s chief executive, said the company is “monitoring events closely to manage any potential impact”. He said: “We are confident that a strong recovery is under way. We expect a robust summer with IAG returning to around 85% of its 2019 capacity for the full year. Our model enables us to capture revenue and cost synergies while maximising efficiencies, which means we are set up to return to profitability in 2022.” On Friday, Russia’s state civil aviation regulator banned British airlines from landing at its airports or crossing its airspace. The move follows the UK’s ban on the flights of the Russian flag carrier Aeroflot. British Airways said it had suspended flights to Moscow, and warned customers that some flights to destinations east of Russia would take longer because of rerouting. It operated to the Russian capital three times a week but did not fly to any other destinations in Russia or Ukraine – nor did it use Ukrainian airspace. However, the move by Russia will increase escalating fuel costs and pose more headaches for the national carrier’s long-haul services. A BA spokesperson said: “We apologise for the inconvenience but this is clearly a matter beyond our control. We are notifying customers on cancelled services and are offering a full refund.” Shares in IAG fell 6% on Thursday after Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, as the price of oil rose to more than $100 (£75) a barrel for the first time since 2014, and fears that the conflict could impact the travel and aviation sector sparked an investor sell down. The company’s shares received a boost of about 3% in early trading on Friday, as investors took cheer at the news of a return to profitability this year. However, IAG’s shares still remain down a fifth over the past year. Richard Hunter, the head of markets at Interactive Investor, said: “There is little question that IAG has taken some formidable steps to ensure survival but from the company’s own outlook it appears unlikely that a full return to normality will land until 2023, and even then the company will be markedly different from the one which entered the crisis.”By the end of the 19th century, the Sassoon family were regularly referred to as “the Rothschilds of the East”. This wasn’t just lazy, it was wrong. For one thing the Sassoons’ interests and influence stretched right around the world from Shanghai via Bombay, London and Lancashire, all the way to the Atlantic coastal plain of the United States. Then there was the fact that, unlike the Rothschilds, the Sassoons were not bankers but traders, specialising in opium, cotton and oil. What perhaps the late Victorians really meant when they compared the Sassoons to the Rothschilds was simply this: they were very rich and they were Jewish, a combination that conjured ambivalent feelings not just in “polite” society through which antisemitism flowed like a subterranean river but, over time, in the Sassoons themselves. Joseph Sassoon, who is a descendant of the dynasty’s founder David, believes that it was his family’s experience as serial immigrants that drove their success and explains their decline. Their original role as treasurers to the pashas of Baghdad meant that they seamlessly acquired the Arabic, Turkish, Hebrew and Persian that equipped them to do business throughout the vast Ottoman empire. When in 1828 they were forced to flee to Bombay as a result of a pogrom, they quickly added Hindustani to their repertoire and settled down to rebuild their lives, using their tried and tested methods of exemplary ethics and ferocious hard work. In order to avoid a repeat of that first expulsion, though, the family needed to become adept at reading the political landscape and adapting accordingly. Joseph Sassoon points out that the treaty marking the passing of India’s governance from the East India Company to Queen Victoria in 1859 was signed not in the residence of the outgoing governor but in “Sans Souci”, the home owned by the man whom the Illustrated London News described as “Mr David Sassoon, the well-known wealthy Jew Merchant of Bombay and China”. In the face of such antisemitic sneers, these early Sassoons were careful not to draw unwanted attention to themselves. While their fortune was one of the great wonders of the industrialising world, it was offset by a thoughtful philanthropy that built hospitals, libraries and schools for the whole community. These productive years as “good immigrants” did not last, and it is the Sassoons’ fall from fortune that gives this somewhat dry family history its emotional heart and narrative pace. Within a hundred years of hosting diplomatic milestones, younger members of the family were pawning their jewellery and filing for bankruptcy. It is, Joseph Sassoon thinks, a story of assimilation and gentrification going hand in hand with the dissipation of cultural capital. A case in point: Siegfried Sassoon, great-grandson of David Sassoon and the writer of some of the most blistering war poetry of the 20th century, was lip-curling about what he called his “Semitic sovereigns”, ignoring the fact that it was this patrimony that gave him the time and space to write. It need not have been this way. Joseph Sassoon, who is a professor of history and political economy at Georgetown University, points out that other families made the transition from active business to genteel philanthropy while still managing to protect their fortune through the deployment of trusts, strategic successions and careful financial planning. The Sassoons, by contrast, went on subdividing their money among their increasingly shiftless descendants, none of whom had a business-like bone in their body. It was all a far cry from the administrative brilliance of the original Sassoons of Baghdad and the mercantile sophistication of the following generation. They built, Joseph suggests, the first truly global business, able to grasp the connection between the silk harvest in France and the price of rice in Shanghai, or the way that sugar in Java could be sold at a profit in India. That they lost this panoptic capacity, settling instead for a cosy and blinkered parochialism, is the great tragedy that underpins this fascinating book. • The Global Merchants: The Enterprise and Extravagance of the Sassoon Dynasty is published by Allen Lane (£30). To support the Guardian and the Observer buy a copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Pick of the week Knives Out Rian Johnson’s twisty homage to the Agatha Christie-patented murder mystery is also a satirical tease, forever teetering on the edge of the ridiculous. The usual suspects have been rounded up: a country house setting; a possible murder (of Christopher Plummer’s thriller writer); an all-star cast of family members bearing grudges; and an eccentric gentleman sleuth. Amid the flashbacks and unreliable witnesses, Daniel Craig enjoys himself tremendously as private eye Benoit Blanc, probing the motives of Jamie Lee Curtis, Chris Evans, Toni Collette et al; while Ana de Armas’s nurse vomits if she tells a lie, but still has something to hide … Saturday 26 February, 9pm, Channel 4 *** The Apartment In Billy Wilder’s heartbreaking comedy, Jack Lemmon plays nervy accountant CC Baxter, “a good sport” who lets his insurance company bosses use his flat for their adulterous liaisons, with the promise of promotion in return. Slowly and subtly, Wilder draws out the loneliness in Lemmon’s character, as getting his own office fails to make up for the distress caused by enabling executive Fred MacMurray’s affair with Shirley MacLaine’s sweet but clear-eyed lift operator Fran. The delay in getting to the romance makes it all the sweeter. Saturday 26 February, 1pm, BBC Two *** Chi-Raq Imaginatively transposing the ancient Greek comedy Lysistrata by Aristophanes to present-day Chicago, Spike Lee’s 2015 musical drama is both topical in its denunciation of Black-on-Black gang violence and timeless in its themes of love and respect. Teyonah Parris plays Lysistrata, girlfriend of gang boss Chi-Raq (Nick Cannon), who is inspired by the death of a child to initiate a sex strike by all women in the city until the male-initiated killing stops. Lee’s caps-lock visual style melds potent musical numbers and rhymed dialogue to fine effect. Saturday 26 February, 9pm, AMC *** In the Earth Writer-director Ben Wheatley revisits the hallucinogenic folk horror realm of A Field in England in this intoxicating lockdown-shot drama. Scientist Martin (Joel Fry) and guide Alma (Ellora Torchia) head deep into a forest to check on his old boss Olivia (Hayley Squires), who is researching the mysteries of fungi but hasn’t been heard from in months. However, Reece Shearsmith’s creepy nature worshipper Zach has plans of his own, as the boundaries between real and shroom-induced life begin to blur. Sunday 27 February, 10.45am, 8pm, Sky Cinema Premiere *** A Bigger Splash Tilda Swinton reunited with director Luca Guadagnino after the exquisite I Am Love for this dark tale of passion under the Mediterranean sun – but it’s Ralph Fiennes who steals the film. His impetuous music producer, plus daughter (Dakota Johnson), turn up at the Italian island getaway of Swinton’s rock singer – who is recovering from vocal surgery – and her younger lover (Matthias Schoenaerts). The newcomers bring fun, energy and dangerous emotions. Wednesday 2 March, 1.55am, Channel 4 *** Fresh Daisy Edgar-Jones pivots here from the emotional nuances of Normal People to gristly horror, though the perils of dating are a common thread. Singleton Noa seems to have found her ideal man through a supermarket meet-cute with Steve (Sebastian Stan). However, his absence from Instagram – a red flag for best mate Mollie (Jojo T Gibbs) – is only the first in a string of events suggesting there is something off about him. The plot twist half an hour in (no spoilers!) flips Mimi Cave’s film into a state of black comedy it sustains gleefully for the rest of its potboiling story, as Noa fights for her survival. Friday 4 March, Disney+ *** Lucy and Desi One of the funniest women today, Amy Poehler, pays tribute to one of the funniest women of yesteryear, Lucille Ball, in her fascinating new documentary. Ball’s will to succeed and comic skill are to the fore as we see her turn a middling Hollywood career into record-busting TV stardom in the 1950s, alongside her co-star and producer husband, Cuban bandleader Desi Arnaz Jr. Their love story is central to a tale that also touches on male power and female agency, the immigrant experience, communist witch-hunts and, crucially, Ball’s legacy for female performers. Friday 4 March, Amazon Prime Video ***In Haitian Vodou, the potomitan is the central pillar that holds up the temple. At its base is where ritual sacrifices and offerings take place; along its shaft are carved the foundational images of the religion, encouraging spirits to pass through its structure and transmute into the bodies of the faithful who surround it. It is an apt symbol for jazz bassist and vocalist Sélène Saint-Aimé’s second album. Written largely during the pandemic, when Saint-Aimé left Paris for her native Martinique to be with family, there is something deeply enigmatic and yet solidly structural about these 11 compositions. First: structure. Guadeloupean ka drummer Sonny Troupé and Martiniquan bèlè drummer Boris Reine-Adélaïde anchor Saint-Aimé’s composition with their undulating improvisations, providing rhythmic resistance and a sense of form to her operatic soprano, along with the horns of trumpeter Hermon Mehari and saxophonist Irving Acao. Arawak Uhuru centres on the triplet structure of the drummers, while on Bezaudin, the drums even play the melody as their skins are pressed taut and then released to create bending pitches. And on tracks such as Indigo Bay and Charlie Parker cover Bird, Saint-Aimé’s bass provides a rhythmic substitute, as she chooses her notes and placement with delicate care to create a hip-swaying swing. If the drums and the bass are the structural object, it is Saint-Aimé’s voice that lends Potomitan its spiritual quality. Her vocals mostly eschew lyrics for a personal, improvised form of language – a kind of otherworldly scat. Switching easily from a crystalline falsetto to bassy, staccato tones, Saint-Aimé’s formidable yet deeply human range may remind listeners of Beverly Glenn-Copeland. Her warm tone draws us into whispered intimacies on the tender, yearning Mélisande (a theme from Sibelius’ Pelléas et Mélisande orchestral suite), while on Akaye, her vibrato echoes the breathy horn melody. The title track condenses the album’s essence into 90 seconds of vocals, bass and drums, Saint-Aimé’s yearning a capella swiftly embellished with double-time, polyrhythmic drum beats. To listen to Potomitan is to be immersed in this fluid world of Saint-Aimé’s making – harnessing her Martiniquan roots to create music that is as grounded as it is malleable, as earthly as it is spiritual. Also out this month Ugandan rapper Ecko Bazz releases his second LP, Mmaso (Hakuna Kulala), combining jittering footwork and 808 beats with a guttural screech that would make Danny Brown proud. Turkish singer-songwriter Anadol touches on woozy pop, fragmented jazz and psychedelia on her latest, freewheeling release Felicita (Pingipung). Vocalist Somi produces a charming, starry tribute to the late South African singer Miriam Makeba on Zenzile: The Reimagination of Miriam Makeba (Salon Africana), featuring Gregory Porter, Seun Kuti and Angelique Kidjo.The Ukraine crisis has plunged Germany into an intense debate about how it will heat its homes and power its industry in future, summed up in the short question: can Europe’s largest economy function without Vladimir Putin’s gas? The Green federal economics minister, Robert Habeck, answered with a decisive “yes it can”, a day after the chancellor, Olaf Scholz, announced the suspension of the Nord Stream 2 pipeline, which was meant to deliver from Russia as much as 70% of Germany’s gas requirements. There are considerable doubts as to whether the $11bn project will ever now go ahead. But even before Russian troops invaded Ukraine on Thursday morning, NS2 was just a small part of the wider discussion some say Germany has been far too slow to have. At stake is nothing less than the future of German – and by extension European – energy security. Germany announced its withdrawal from nuclear power after the 2011 Fukushima disaster, and in 2019 said it would pull the plug on coal-fired plants, leaving observers wondering how the country was planning to make its energy policy workable and future-proof. Sceptics have questioned how it made sense for Germany to make itself so dependent on Russian gas when it should be distancing itself from Putin’s autocratic machinery. Until recently, the answer from the top of government was that this was an economic project, not a political one. The robotically repeated mantra now sounds at the best naive, and at the worst, given the current turn of events, a self-defeating decision which has helped fund Putin’s war. Habeck admitted “we face turbulent days ahead”, as he promised on Wednesday that the government would provide relief where necessary to compensate for the expected rise in gas prices. One of the government’s main predicaments is whether it can deliver on its promise to make a switch to renewable energy sources in order to reach its climate goal to become carbon neutral by 2045. Gas is seen as the vital bridge in that endeavour, which, while seen as ambitious by international standards, is viewed by many climate experts as barely adequate. Importing liquified natural gas (LNG) has been viewed as one option as part of a diversification strategy. However, this has been beset by numerous problems – not least the lack of a terminal in Germany necessary to handle LNG imports. Neither would available LNG supplies be able to fully replace Russian gas and it is also an expensive alternative. Gas already comes from Norway, but those supplies cannot be increased as it is already producing to capacity. Leonhard Birnbaum, the CEO of Germany’s biggest gas and electricity provider E.ON, said that while energy supplies for this winter were secure, next year could be more of a challenge. “If Russian gas imports were to break down completely, the immediate effect wouldn’t be so dramatic as we’re almost at the end of the heating season. But next winter it could be the case that we’re not able to meet the supply demands of all the industrial customers. Some of them may have to turn off the power. It is utopian to believe that Russian gas can be completely replaced from one day to the next by other sources,” he told Die Zeit. Other critics have said Germany only has itself to blame, having dillydallied on its much vaunted plans to switch from fossil fuels to renewables. A positive headline to emerge from the recent heavy storms which hit much of northern Europe, was the record amount of energy fed into the grid by its wind turbines on Sunday. But it also served to underline how slow the development of renewables has been. Beyond Germany’s borders the short-term answer is thought to be simple: why not reverse the decisions, or at least prolong the use of coal-fired power plants and temporarily restart the nuclear reactors? But these options are seen as politically suicidal in Berlin – in particular the reactivation of nuclear plants (as well as being highly impractical and disastrous from a legal point of view). Opposition to nuclear was the founding principal of the Green party – two of whose former leaders, Habeck and the foreign minister, Annalena Baerbock, are now in government. Both have always opposed the pipeline. There is no evidence of ordinary Germans panicking, although heating installation companies say there has been a considerable increase in inquiries about heat pumps from people keen to find an alternative to the gas central heating. “In the short term it won’t be easy to move away from natural gas,” Hans-Martin Henning, the head of the Fraunhofer Institute for Solar Energy Systems, told Tagesspiegel. “But in the medium term this must be part of the concept of speeding up the energy source switch in the heat sector and wherever possible electrical heat pumps should be used as a way of becoming more independent from natural gas.” Andreas Löschel, an energy economist, told the same newspaper that even before the Ukraine crisis, Russia had destroyed its own narrative about being a reliable provider of cheap gas. “The trust is no longer there,” he said. “Russia has shot itself in the foot”. Just days ago at a press briefing with Scholz in Moscow, Putin heaped praise on Scholz’s fellow Social Democrat Gerhard Schröder, the former German chancellor turned lobbyist for Gazprom, saying he was responsible for brokering generous fuel rates. It was one of Schröder’s final acts in office in 2005 to sign the NS2 deal before he was appointed chairman of the company behind it. On Thursday calls were growing for the government to remove Schröder’s privileges as a former chancellor, including an office and staff, amid reports they cost the taxpayer more than €400,000 (£344,244) a year, on top of his considerable earnings from lobbying for companies including Rosneft and Gazprom. An online petition said a “former chancellor who is financed by autocrats, and makes himself dependent on them, in so doing ridiculing German interests, should no longer be financed by the German taxpayer”. Some politicians called for him to be added to the list of individuals facing sanctions. Writing on the LinkedIn platform, Schröder said although “many mistakes” had “been made on both sides” in the relationship between the west and Russia, Russia’s “security interests did not justify its intervention by military means”. He called on the Russian government to “end the suffering of the people in Ukraine as soon as possible”. He also warned against “cutting the remaining political, economic and societal connections” between Europe and Russia.Russian forces have attacked Ukraine on the orders of Vladimir Putin who announced a “special operation” at dawn on Thursday. World leaders have denounced the invasion and warned that it could ignite the largest war since 1945. Though many Russians may support their president’s actions in Ukraine, others are against the conflict. A new poll released by the independent Levada Centre showed only 45% of Russians were in favour of Putin’s recognition move that preceded the invasion. There were protests against the war in town and cities across Russia on Thursday night. A Guardian callout asking for Russian views about the situation with Ukraine received scores of submissions from people across the country, though the majority came from respondents living in Moscow. Many of those who contacted the Guardian did so to express their concern over the escalation. Among the submissions were younger Russians who had got in touch to say that they were opposed to their government’s actions in Ukraine, with many emphasising they had family, friends and partners in Ukraine. “Russian youth are devastated by the prospect of war between Russia and Ukraine,” Dmitry, a 21-year-old student in Moscow, said. “All of my friends and I, who live in Moscow and other Russian cities, are extremely scared. No one expected that the war would really break out.” I went to sleep about five o’clock [on Thursday morning after watching Putin’s address to the nation]. I spoke to my friend from western Ukraine, as he was discussing the possibility of leaving the country, and when I woke up at nine, I realised it [the attack on Ukraine] had happened.” Dmitry, who was one of more than 150 people who responded to the reader callout, said there was a “clear generational divide”. “I would say that almost all of my friends oppose Putin’s actions. There are numerous posts on social media,” he said. “I fear Putin is unstoppable. This time he’s not concerned about public opinion. There was an overall euphoria [in Russia] after the annexation of Crimea in 2014 but now literally nobody supports the war. People may support Luhansk and Donetsk regions as they’re Russian-speaking but nobody wanted us to invade Ukraine. For the younger generation, we’re worried about what’s going to happen with our future.” Several Russians who got in contact with the Guardian spoke about a lack of desire for conflict and a sense that the government was not representative of its people. Natalia, a 52-year-old teacher in St Petersburg, said: “I am totally devastated about the tragic events unfolding in Ukraine. I know that many people living in Russia experience a deep sense of guilt and shame for the actions and hostile rhetoric of the Russian leaders many of us have never even voted for.” Natalia said that she viewed Putin’s military actions in Ukraine “as an extreme act of aggression and hostility towards an independent country” and believed harsher sanctions should have been imposed in 2014. The teacher said that while some Ukrainians “quite justly” blamed Russians for not speaking out against their government, the crackdown on political protest had intensified in the past decade. Many Russians lived with a “fear of imprisonment, which nowadays, has become a sad reality”, Natalia said, adding: “There’s little resemblance between Russia of 2022 and Russia of 2011 when hundreds of thousands of people took to streets to protest against the rigged elections. However, Russians are not silent – we are being silenced.” Some view the crisis in Ukraine as being fuelled by pressure from the west. Ilya from Sochi believes Putin’s actions are “following the feelings of insecurity” among Russians. “It seems to me that Russian society feels under siege by Nato and the US and feels it needs to defend itself,” he said. “Ukrainian nationalists … want to align Ukraine with the west, while disregarding shared history, cultural and familial ties between nations.” He feels the entire situation is unfair but hopes that a peaceful resolution can be found. Another concern raised was one of the Russian economy and the impact sanctions would have on the country’s citizens. “We’re economically dependent on other countries and apart from the financial hardship caused by the pandemic, we’re still feeling the consequences of the sanctions from 2014,” said Kristina from Kaliningrad. She said with the onset of a war, prices would rise the “regular” citizens of Russia would be affected, not the “oligarchs”. “Our economy is still developing and we are not recovering. These latest sanctions will just make it even worse for everyone,” she said. Kristina spoke about the psychological pressure many Russians were under amid the rapidly escalating crisis in Ukraine. “It’s impossible to overestimate the amount of stress ordinary Russian people are under right now. One of the most stressful things is the rest of the world thinking Russia is evil and that this was the people’s decision. It wasn’t and we are not equal to our leader.” “For a regular citizen it is hard to understand what is true and what is false, who is right and who is wrong,” she said. Kristina said that most people she knew were “harsh critics of Putin’s actions” and sympathised with Ukraine “where some of us have friends and families”, while others were confused by the situation. “What I know for sure is that no one wants any kind of war.”It’s the fingers that get to me. Bitten and weathered, the skin worn down in places, they are incredibly detailed and utterly convincing. I’m looking up close at an animatronic, or robot, of the German writer Thomas Melle. The show proper – a lecture delivered by this robot – has finished and the audience has been invited on stage to study our automated actor. It feels like viewing time at the zoo and I can’t shake the feeling that this robot is somehow going to wake up, reach out and grab me. The animatronic, created by Chiscreatures Filmeffects GmbH, is an enthralling production in itself. It looks and sounds like a slightly flattened but fascinating human being. His features seem smudged, his face animated yet oddly deflated. His eyes look trapped inside his skin and when he turns, with slow and deliberate movements, we spot – with a shock – wires dangling from the back of his head. The lecture doesn’t quite deliver. Written by Stefan Kaegi of the German theatre group Rimini Protokoll, in collaboration with Melle, it’s a dense and earnest monologue penned from the perspective of this thoughtful writer. Big reverberating questions are posed: how much control do we have over our lives? What sets us apart from robots? If we eliminate life’s uncertainty, what are we left with? They’re pertinent ideas but seem somehow beside the point. The show’s most meaningful moments are much less deliberate. As we file into the theatre, Melle’s animatronic sits in the shadows. Is he switched off, or is he waiting? Later, Melle’s monologue discusses his manic depression. The robot’s face stays exactly the same … doesn’t it? Then how does he suddenly look so sad? At Battersea Arts Centre, London, until 26 February.The hack Struggling to apply your eyeliner? Try using kirby hair grips, sticky tape and a YouTube tutorial. The promise Winged eyeliner is hard enough to achieve on one eyelid, let alone getting it symmetrical on two. This YouTube trick uses hair grips or sticky tape to stencil on your liquid liner. The test I’ve worn liquid eyeliner since I was 14, but so rarely achieve that sharp, symmetrical flick I crave. I start with the kirby grip method, which involves coating the forked end of a grip (the flat side) with liquid eyeliner. Then I line the fork up with the corner of my eye and press. The result? A wonky, hollow arrow shape that looks dire. Next up, the sticky-tape approach. I take two 5cm-long pieces to create a V-shaped stencil on the corner of my eye. I fill in the gap using liner and connect the flick to the rest of my eyeliner. Finally, I remember a technique I saw backstage at fashion week. I draw along the outer tape edge to create a flick, finish the rest of the liner and, once it’s dry – otherwise it will smudge – peel off the tape. This might be the best my liner has ever looked. The verdict The sticky-tape trick is fiddly but effective. Try cosmetic tape (Makeup Revolution’s one is £3), which is kinder to the skin and avoids any eyelash-taping incidents.In September, Ford stunned Michigan when it announced plans to build two massive electric vehicle (EV) plants in the nation’s southeast instead of its midwestern back yard. Fearing the future of the automotive industry was leaving Detroit, the state’s political class swung into action. Four months later, lawmakers responded by handing a staggering new subsidy deal to GM that they claimed would fortify the Motor City’s standing as the world’s auto capitol during industry electrification: In exchange for $1bn in tax incentives, the Detroit-based automaker promised $7bn in investment for new battery and EV plants that could create 4,000 new jobs. “This news is great for us and for Michigan, the epicenter of where we’re developing EVs,” GM president Mark Reuss said during the announcement. But what’s good for GM may make less sense for state taxpayers, a Guardian analysis of the deal finds. Once again large corporate subsidies – paid for by taxpayers – look set to benefit the corporations while leaving taxpayers out of pocket. Michigan has effectively agreed to compensate GM more than $310,000 for each job created, but during the next 20 years, the positions are unlikely to generate more than $100,000 in tax revenue in the very best case scenarios. Collectively, the plants’ jobs will probably return less than $300m of the state’s $1b investment when contributions to state income, sales, property and other taxes are factored in. The state also claimed the direct and indirect jobs created by the project will generate $29bn in new income over 20 years, or the equivalent of 29,000 jobs paying $50,000 annually. Economists from across the ideological spectrum who reviewed the analysis said that level of job creation is highly unlikely and pointed to a US Commerce Department report that labels such claims “suspicious”. Moreover, a state memo shows GM agreed to create only 3,200 positions – 800 fewer than it publicly promised, and the deal also allows it to close the plants within several years but keep most of the money. The package is “a really bad deal for Michigan taxpayers”, said Greg LeRoy, executive director of corporate subsidy watchdog Good Jobs First. Michigan isn’t alone: The deal is among a new wave of colossal corporate subsidy packages that lawmakers across the country are cooking up to lure EV manufacturing and more giveaways are in the works. And like other huge corporate sweeteners – notably the $4.8bn used to lure Taiwanese manufacturer Foxconn to Wisconsin – LeRoy warns these “trophy deal” announcements may help political campaigns, but are also reckless deals that threaten to blow holes in states’ budgets in the coming decades. As the combustion engine is phased out, tax revenue from its production and use will drop off, and states will need EV revenue to replace it. EV manufacturing requires fewer direct and indirect jobs and adding generous subsidy deals further limits its financial returns. Already, Michigan has handed out more subsidy deals, worth at least $50m, than any other state, and it has struggled with budget shortfalls stemming from billions it owes on combustion engine tax incentives that have yielded questionable job and revenue returns. “You would think after all that history Michigan would be gun shy to do something like this that could bite them,” LeRoy said. GM and the Michigan Economic Development Corporation, a quasi-public agency that negotiates the state’s subsidy deals, didn’t respond to specific questions about the package and keeps its math secret. But the MEDC wrote in an email that it’s up to taxpayers to “de-risk” large projects for corporations, and the subsidies are essential for landing auto investment. “We cannot take for granted that they will stay in Michigan if we aren’t keeping up with our competitors,” a spokesperson said. GM added, “It is always up to the government entities to determine if and when incentives are granted, but our experience has shown that incentives are an important part of supporting the business case.” Critics say history also shows automakers are proficient in igniting economic war among states, a strategy former Ford and Chrysler CEO Lee Iacocca detailed in a 1990 interview: “Ford, General Motors, Chrysler, all over the world, we would pit Ohio versus Michigan. We would pit Canada versus the US.” GM is planning to spend $35bn on EV and autonomous production through 2025, and Michigan lawmakers say they are competing against the southeast. Though Ford pointed to the southeast’s cheaper electricity, geography, available land and geological advantages as motivating its decision, “Michigan lawmakers found themselves embarrassed by the loss and reacted swiftly,” said Michael LaFaive, fiscal policy director with the right-leaning Mackinac Center for Public Policy, which tracks corporate subsidies. “These funds have more to do with job announcements than they do real jobs,” LaFaive said. ‘They turned their back on our state’ Between 2002 and 2006, Michigan taxpayers contributed incentives worth about $110m to fund expansions of GM’s Ypsilanti township and Warren transmission plants near Detroit. State documents show the company and MEDC projected hefty returns: about 20,000 new or retained jobs and $2bn in new state tax revenue by 2027. Within several years, GM had created new transmission line jobs – in Mexico. The automaker shuttered the Ypsilanti township plant in 2009 and shipped its few hundred remaining jobs to Ohio or overseas. Less than a decade later, GM pulled the plug on the Warren transmission plant. For decades, Michigan automakers and the MEDC have hyped similarly extravagant subsidy packages as job- and revenue-creation troves, but MEDC documents obtained by the Mackinac Center and analyzed by the Guardian reveal a pattern of anemic returns on taxpayer investment in GM. Perhaps most infamously, the company in 1981 took $460m in subsidies while convincing Michigan leaders to raze a Detroit neighborhood so it could build its Poletown plant, which leaders claimed would create 6,000 direct positions and 19,000 indirect jobs. Poletown briefly employed 5,300 workers in 1985, but that figure quickly declined, and it never came close to achieving its promised productivity. Similarly, Ford took billions in Michigan tax incentives over the last 20 years before announcing its southeast EV plans. Michiganders have spent decades “investing in [automakers’] factories and what have they given us in return?” asked state Democratic floor leader, Yousef Rabhi. “They’ve abandoned those factories, fired thousands of hard working Michiganders who they left out in the cold with no remorse and moved those jobs to China, to Mexico,” Rabhi said. “Frankly, they turned their back on our state.” The new generation of EV factory incentives are effectively the same as those used to attract combustion plant investment in past decades, one of which the state auditor general found created about only 21% of its promised jobs, while LaFaive noted a large body of scholarly and other independent analysis that “demonstrate repeatedly that these programs have zero to negative economic impact”. The MEDC disagreed, and said it is “grateful” for GM’s history of investment in the state while noting that the automaker employs nearly 50,000 people in Michigan. When GM’s manufacturing job creation numbers in the state failed to live up to the subsidy package hype, the MEDC in 2020 changed the math to include more white collar jobs created at the company’s corporate headquarters in downtown Detroit. Meanwhile, GM has recorded $70bn in profits since 2010 while taking $8bn in subsidies in recent decades – more than all but one company nationwide. The idea that it needed incentives to invest in Michigan “is absurd”, said Matt Gardner, a senior fellow at the progressive-leaning Institute on Taxation and Economic Policy (ITEP). Businesses report that tax subsidies infrequently determine where they invest, and Gardner pointed to Amazon’s decision to build its second headquarters in New York City even after the city yanked a proposed subsidy package worth billions. “GM has the money: If they see the need to invest, then they’re going to do it with or without the incentives,” Gardner said. Anatomy of a subsidy package The value of local and state incentives for GM’s two new plants totals at least $1b and may generate 3,200 direct jobs – or about $312,000 for each direct job created. GM says the positions will pay an average of $56,000 and $46,000 annually. For those earners, the conservative Tax Foundation and ITEP estimated an effective Michigan tax rate of between 9.2% and 10%, based on state tax law and IRS returns. At that rate, the plants’ workers could contribute about $4,600 in taxes each year, and over 20 years, the time period the MEDC used in its analysis, they could collectively generate about $294m – well shy of the state’s $1b investment. However, several economists called the analysis “very generous” to GM and the MEDC because it assumes the plants’ employees will provide new tax revenue. In other words, it posits “that these people didn’t have any jobs previously, that they weren’t spending any money”, Gardner said. With unemployment low, GM is unlikely to hire many unemployed workers, so the jobs will probably generate much less than $294m in new tax revenue over 20 years, economists say. In January, the state also slashed electric rates for some large users, like automakers, which may shift the utility grid’s cost burden on to residential customers. However, the analysis doesn’t include construction jobs or increases in GM’s state corporate taxes. The company and MEDC didn’t respond to questions about state taxes, but it’s unlikely to push the needle much: GM’s 2021 SEC filings show it paid between $102m and $272m in all 50 states in recent years. Meanwhile, economists said they strongly doubted MEDC’s claim that the plants’ direct and indirect positions will generate 29,000 new jobs and $29b in new income over the next 20 years. Many indirect jobs are low-paying, and the program that industry and the MEDC uses to develop economic impact projections is easily and commonly manipulated. Forecasting 20 years of economic impacts is nearly impossible, LaFaive said, and the MEDC’s job projection “strains credulity”. “They can’t tell the future because they can’t tell the future,” he said.My earliest reading memory Before I could read, I was seduced by Beatrix Potter’s The Tailor of Gloucester. Embroidered poppies and pansies, “Alack, I am worn to a ravelling”, and especially the explosion of colour when the mayor’s cherry coat is flung across a table. My favourite book growing up The Dark Is Rising by Susan Cooper was set a few miles from where I grew up in the Chilterns, deep country then and no doubt now ravaged by HS2. It’s a time-slip story, in which ordinary 1980s domesticity continually gives way to other eras, and it nourished my obsession with how history lodges in physical places. The book that changed me as a teenager My cousin is 10 years and a day older than me, and she took my countercultural education very seriously. When I was 15 she sent me Walking Through Clear Water in a Pool Painted Black by Cookie Mueller. It was a doorway into a Technicolor world of experimental art and high-risk adventure, a model I followed a bit too assiduously in my 20s. The writer who changed my mind I did media studies A-level at sixth form college, and had one of those life-changing teachers, Jeremy Points. He lent me Roland Barthes. S/Z flipped my lid. It had never occurred to me that novels might contain so many hidden layers of meanings, or that prising them open could reveal secrets about the culture from which they’d emerged. The book that made me want to be a writer William Burroughs was the first writer I encountered where narrative was totally superseded by something else: an autonomous zone built out of language and atmosphere. I didn’t know how it worked but it made me start to write, first just by copying his hypnotic, disarticulated sentences – “Dead leaves in the pissoir” – on to my teenage bedroom wall. The book I came back to I just read Paradise Lost for the first time, and aside from its world-building majesty, no one ever told me how funny it was, or how weird. Angelic sex, proto-smoothies, Adam’s disquisition on the importance of keeping paths clear … I chased it with Milton’s God by William Empson, which is witty, rigorous and eye-opening: a model of how good criticism should be. The book I could never read again I was wild for Charlotte Brontë’s Jane Eyre as a child but I went back to it in the pandemic after rereading all of Austen, and I’m sorry, but Jane Eyre is a horrendous little hysteric. Lock her in the red room! I found the heightened emotional temperature unbearable. Give me Austen’s coolness, irony, ambiguity any day. The book I reread Virginia Woolf’s diary. Fleet, multiple, shifting, inordinate. The book I discovered later in life Last summer I interviewed Neil Tennant and he recommended Hadrian the Seventh by Frederick Rolfe, a novel about an embittered, impoverished writer who becomes pope and has a very jolly time punishing his enemies and dressing up. It’s one of the most grandiloquent books ever written, and is hilarious as well as quite agonising for anyone with an ounce of overblown ego. It led me on to the The Quest for Corvo, a gripping biography of Rolfe, whose gift for grudges and taste for decadence was unparalleled outside the Roman empire. The book I am currently reading Bloms Bulbs spring catalogue. My comfort read When times are tough I turn to Tom Ripley, especially the later novels of the Ripliad where he has an enormous house in France and there are lots of long digressions about his dahlias and dressing gowns, before he bumps off another stranger unlucky enough to cross his path. Tom’s queer but not queer, and the books throb with the terrible anxiety of being found out. They’re the greatest novels about the closet that have ever existed. • Olivia Laing’s Everybody is published by Macmillan (£20). To support the Guardian and the Observer buy a copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Randy Blythe, frontman of the US metal band Lamb of God, remembers the first time he performed live sober. It was 18 October 2010, and the band were opening for Metallica in Brisbane, Australia. “I was thrown into the lion’s den,” he says. “On stage in front of 14,000 people, weeping uncontrollably – thank God I had long hair so it covered my face. I got sober on tour, surrounded by free drugs and alcohol. I felt if I could do it out there, I’d be able to maintain it anywhere.” Substance abuse and addiction can affect anyone. But with its tendency towards hedonism, the music industry can be dangerous for those who struggle with alcohol and drugs. We have watched many stars succumb to addiction, not to mention those who work behind the scenes. My own alcohol problem started before I became a music journalist, but I took full advantage of the late nights and heavy-drinking culture that came with the territory before I finally stopped. Now, as Covid-19 has forced a pause, change is afoot to help those who need it. Music Support, a UK charity that specialises in mental health and addiction in the music industry, runs a regular training course on mental health first aid. Part of the course touches on substance abuse. During the pandemic, the Tour Production Group (TPG), an association of live music touring professionals, asked Music Support if they could develop a course devoted to this issue. The result was a four-hour addiction and recovery training workshop, designed to help people working in music to understand addiction and feel confident about helping others. Since the workshops began in 2021, Music Support has trained more than 100 people, and heightened interest has led to the number of sessions doubling, from monthly to fortnightly. “This is something the industry is now demanding,” says Matt Thomas, co-founder of Music Support and a music industry veteran who struggled with addiction himself. “If we want to continue to be this creative, wonderful industry, we’re going to have to start getting better at [supporting mental health], or we’ll lose more people.” “So much is misunderstood and not said about addiction in the music industry,” says Norman Beecher, the senior learning and development specialist at Music Support, who runs the workshop. “There’s almost this unwritten rule that drugs and alcohol are a necessity if you’re a musician or in the music industry. It’s a narrative that needs to change.” Part of that change means challenging cliches, such as the romanticised image of the intoxicated musician. “It’s the glorification of rock’n’roll,” says Aðalbjörn “Addi” Tryggvason, frontman of the Icelandic metal band Sólstafir, who got sober in 2013. “You think you’re supposed to drink a bottle of bourbon a night. I thought you couldn’t be confident, or into it, without being drunk or high on drugs.” “There’s this cultural mythos of the artist as an alcoholic, a drug addict,” says Blythe. “I was nervous at first [when sober] that I wouldn’t be able to write. In fact, it unlocked sort of a creative switch in my brain.” Mike Kerr, of Royal Blood, agrees: “I had an entrenched belief that being hungover or intoxicated was great for creativity.” But once sober, he wrote the rock duo’s third album, Typhoons, an expansion of the band’s sound that continued their streak of UK No 1 albums. “People could hear I was using my whole brain,” he says. The music industry is full of high-risk situations when it comes to substance abuse and addiction. For many, touring is the most challenging aspect of what they do. “I didn’t start drinking until I started playing music,” says country music singer Morgan Wade. “Touring is lonely: you go out and kind of cut yourself open for all these people. It’s loud and fun, then you go back to your bus, you’re hyped up and alone. That can be hard.” “It’s been six and a half years now, and I’m still not used to it,” says Nita Strauss, the guitarist in Alice Cooper’s band, of being sober on the road. “On my solo tours we have instituted a ‘no alcohol on the bus’ policy. I don’t mind if my band and crew drink. But if I open the fridge and it’s full of it, it’s very difficult.” While the artist has to deal with the highs and lows of attention, it’s important to remember those not in the spotlight. “There are a lot of people on crews, in management companies and record labels, who have died,” says Thomas. “It wouldn’t even be known that this is what they died from because there’s so much shame and stigma around it. It’s covered up.” Duff Battye runs a PR company, Duff Press, representing bands such as Def Leppard, Kiss and Slash. “I felt like I had to go away from the music industry when I got sober,” he says. “My perception was that partying was part of the job. I wasn’t sure people would understand.” “I recall going to an awards show and they came round with 10 glasses of champagne and one glass of juice,” says Beecher. “That needs to change. It needs to be 50:50. So people start thinking, OK, I have a choice here.” Beecher says he moulded the workshop to promote understanding that not everyone who drinks to excess is an addict. “We’re not saying people shouldn’t drink,” he says. “What we’re saying is, let’s have a balance and not glorify this.” “We’re not anti-alcohol, anti-hedonism, anti-anything,” adds Thomas. “What we are is pro-education – and choice.” The music industry was hit hard by the pandemic. But, for many, one silver lining of the global crisis has been connections made online. “The ability to jump into a meeting with people in five different parts of the planet is powerful,” says Christopher Tait, the keyboardist in Electric Six. Christopher runs his own organisation, Passenger, which supports sober musicians on tour in the US midwest. “I think people are connected in ways they never have been.” Another online support group started up during the pandemic is the Back Lounge, created by Suzi Green, a tour manager who has worked with artists such as PJ Harvey, Placebo and Katie Melua. Green is also part of the TPG and helped to get the addiction and recovery workshop going. “The back lounge on the tour bus is where all the interesting conversations happen,” Green says. “It’s mostly people who work in touring and events, from all over the world. Sometimes it can go deep and dark, but it always ends with people laughing; it’s meant to be uplifting. Addiction came up a lot, and the stigma of being in recovery.” As Thomas says, it’s also crucial to quash the stigma of addiction as a “moral failure” within the music industry. “The idea that someone who is in recovery is a liability is probably the biggest misconception. Someone in a healthy recovery will be the most reliable employee of the lot.” Opening up communication, challenging stigmas and making people aware that help is available all bode well for the future. Meanwhile, attitudes are shifting. “As a kid, I remember hearing about Aerosmith being sober and laughing – ‘What a bunch of losers!’” says Tryggvason. “Nobody is laughing about this today.” “I’m glad I got sober in 2010 and not 1990,” says Battye. “When I came into the industry it was like the wild west. I was told off for not going out enough; part of my job was get journalists drunk at lunchtime. Now I can’t remember the last time someone had a drink at a work lunch.” “I think there’s more awareness among young people today that it’s not cool to be a drunken mess,” says Blythe. “It’s rare that I see a really hard-partying younger band in our scene. They are the outliers, whereas before they were more the norm.” “I used to get applauded for downing a drink on stage and fooled myself into thinking that was part of what people came for,” says Kerr. “But ultimately, people come to watch us play and have a good time – and how I have a good time has changed. “It’s gone full circle: the reason I started playing is because I love it. Now I’m back to where I started – where people can come to watch me just lose myself in the music.”I’m most excited about … Douglas Costa. “I’ll bring the flash that LA expects,” the 31-year-old winger declares in a curiously dark and menacing video announcing his transfer to the Galaxy. Carnival has never looked so sinister. Unlike that studio, MLS stadiums should be lit when one of the world’s best dribblers graces the field. A serial winner with Shakhtar Donetsk, Bayern Munich and Juventus, Costa has 31 Brazil caps and ought to supply Javier Hernández with plenty of chances. TD Lorenzo Insigne. The Italy international could eclipse Sebastian Giovinco as the player to have reached the highest peak in MLS history. But what condition will Toronto FC’s season be in by the time he pitches up at BMO Field at the start of July? GR MLS as a legitimate haven for global talents. While a late-prime Lorenzo Insigne and Xherdan Shaqiri will bring extra interest to the league, it’s the talents at the beginning of their careers that should garner the most intrigue. The year-old U22 Initiative has already gone a long way to loosening the stranglehold of MLS cap rules and it will continue to pay dividends for years to come. The Argentinian duo of Thiago Almada (Atlanta) and Alan Velasco (FC Dallas) should set the standard for young foreign stars in the league. TR The offseason featured big name veteran signings Insigne and Costa. But the trend of young South American players like Thiago Almada seeking development in MLS – and homegrown talents stepping on the scene – will bolster the league in the longer term. MS Young player European clubs will be scouting … Gabriel Slonina, Chicago Fire. The tradition of American goalkeepers heading to Europe will continue when Matt Turner joins Arsenal this summer, and the Illinois-born Slonina may not be too far behind. The 6ft 4in 17-year-old became the youngest-ever starting MLS goalkeeper last August. A lot more sensible than his “Gaga” nickname implies, he made 11 starts last season for the Fire and was called into the US senior squad. TD Cade Cowell, San Jose Earthquakes. The 18-year-old featured in 33 games for the Quakes in 2021, registering five goals and five assists in the process. The retirement of Chris Wondolowski will place more responsibility on Cowell, who is already a full USA international, to produce big numbers in the final third. 2022 could be the year the teenager becomes a serious attacking force for San Jose. GR Gabriel Slonina, Chicago Fire. Enjoy him while you can because he’ll be off to Europe sooner than you think. The US goalkeeping assembly line keeps producing gems and there’s an argument that Slonina may be the most talented yet. TR European clubs have made overtures for Valentin Castellanos, expressed interest in Jesus Ferreira, and confirmed they’re monitoring Paxten Aaronson. But for reasons of timing, contract or price tag, all remain in MLS. 2022 could be their year but I predict the next player to draw interest from across the Atlantic will be Philadelphia’s Jack McGlynn. MS One bold prediction … A radically-reshaped Toronto fail to gel. Under-fire head coach Bob Bradley declares he has unfinished business in Wales after his brief stint with Swansea and leaves for a gig managing ambitious American/Canadian-owned Wrexham. His son, veteran TFC midfielder Michael Bradley, replaces him as interim boss. TD The Ronny Deila strip-show will become a tradition for MLS Cup-winning managers in much the same way Super Bowl-winning coaches receive a Gatorade bath. Press-ups, as Deila performed in front of the New York City FC support at Providence Park, are optional. Who’s ready to see Brian Schmetzer or Bruce Arena stripped down to their underwear this October? GR Somehow FC Cincinnati won’t collect a record fourth consecutive wooden spoon. Since joining MLS in 2019 the rocky road to stability has been more of a treacherous cliff for FC Cincinnati. If you added up the club’s point totals from all three MLS seasons so far they would still finish far behind New England Revolution last year. This is the season they break the trend (this theory is based on nothing but hope, belief in the human spirit and undying faith in Brenner.) TR Bob Bradley will turn Toronto FC around. After a lackluster year with LAFC, Bradley is off to Canada to coach a team that finished 2021 13th in the East. They won’t finish front of the pack but I think we’ll see Bradley’s team in the playoffs this autumn. MS Your MVP will be … Josef Martínez, Atlanta United. Last year’s Golden Boot winner, Taty Castellanos, is the obvious candidate – but with intense interest from overseas it’s doubtful he’ll see out the season at NYC FC. So, two years after his torn ACL, how about a fully fit Martínez scoring like it’s 2018 again for a resurgent Atlanta United and winning his second MVP? TD Raul Ruidiaz, Seattle Sounders. Ruidiaz could be in line for the award on the back of a big season given the number of chances the Sounders will create for him. The Peruvian scored 17 goals in 26 games last season. It won’t be surprising if he betters that tally in 2022. GR Albert Rusnák, Seattle Sounders. Rusnák is at the peak of his powers and will thrive in a very deep and experienced Seattle Sounders side. Over the past five seasons, Rusnák totaled 41 goals and 39 assists in 140 appearances for Real Salt Lake and with the attacking talent on display at Seattle, his contributions should go even further. TR Hany Mukhtar, Nashville. Mukhtar will play a key role in Nashville’s transition to the Western Conference. The German international has scored 20 goals across 46 games in his two MLS seasons. My prediction? That count climbs higher as Mukhtar leads Nashville toward the top of the West in 2022. MS Eastern Conference playoff teams New England, NYC FC, Atlanta, Philadelphia, Columbus, Chicago, NY Red Bulls. TD Philadelphia, New England, NYC FC, Atlanta, Toronto, Montreal, Orlando. GR New England, Atlanta, Toronto, Philadelphia, NYC FC, Columbus, Orlando. TR NYC FC, Philadelphia, New England, Atlanta, Columbus, Orlando, Toronto. MS Western Conference playoff teams Seattle, Nashville, LAFC, Portland, Colorado, LA Galaxy, Kansas City. TD Seattle, Colorado, Nashville, Kansas City, Vancouver, LAFC, Minnesota. GR LAFC, Seattle, Nashville, Kansas City, Portland, Colorado, LA Galaxy TR Seattle, Nashville, Kansas City, LAFC, Minnesota, Portland, LA Galaxy. MS Your MLS Cup champions will be … New England Revolution. Postseason drama – the defining bug/feature of MLS – was in full-effect last year as the best team (ever!) over 34 regular-season games fizzled in their only playoff match, losing on penalties to eventual winners NYC FC. A trio of veteran arrivals – Sebastian Lletget, Jozy Altidore and Omar Gonzalez – could help Bruce Arena’s side go all the way this time, with the 32-year-old Altidore surely motivated to upgrade his international status from “former” star to “current” in a World Cup year. TD Seattle Sounders. The 2016 and 2019 champions have assembled one of the most complete squads in MLS history. The off-season addition of Rusnák has bolstered an attack that already included Ruidiaz, Nicolas Lodeiro and Jordan Morris with the midfield double pivot of Joao Paulo and Cristian Roldan providing a solid base. From back to front, they have a good combination of youth, experience and different skill sets. The Sounders will take some beating in 2022. GR Nashville SC. There’s a certain solidity about Nashville that can pay dividends in the playoffs. Clean-sheet specialist Joe Willis is a daunting presence in goal and the experienced Walker Zimmerman keeps things very organized at the back. Sleeper MVP candidate Mukhtar is poised to take off in his third season with the club but their attack will have to carry a bit more of the burden overall. As long as CJ Sapong and Randall Leal are firing on all cylinders, this could be their year. TR Seattle Sounders. The stars are aligned for the Sounders this season. An already stacked roster was given more depth in the off-season, as the team snagged players like Albert Rusnák from Real Salt Lake. Morris and Lodeiro are now healthy. Nouhou is in top form following the Africa Cup of Nations with Cameroon. Add to this standout players like Joao Paulo and Ruidiaz and we’ve got a lethal Sounders team on our hands. MSThere is a particular experience that comes from living in close proximity to, but total separation from, people whose tastes may presage our tastes in future. In my neighbourhood in New York, a mile or so from the city’s downtown and Brooklyn, no one is striving to be on trend. People are, for the most part, striving to be on time, in a state of ball-park togetherness, with all their children accounted for. If I have time to look in a mirror, my thought isn’t: do I look cool? It’s, do I look normal? In keeping with the rest of the neighbourhood, it is thrillingly, absolvingly lame. These observations are a predictably late response to the conversation around A Vibe Shift Is Coming, an article – for the benefit of those even further from the epicentre than me – published in New York magazine’s the Cut 10 days ago, which has been roiling social media ever since. In it, the writer Allison P Davis reports from the bleeding edge (irredeemably middle-aged phrasing!) of the country’s trend forecasters, who predict an imminent change in cultural trends. Jeans may go low rise, the last of hipsterdom may die and the appetite for political division and posturing, with the totemic language – “cancel culture”, “virtue signalling” – that came with it, may wither. If the pandemic acts, structurally, a little like the first world war, and with a big caveat around Russia, then the 2020s may be about to usher in a new jazz age. We may, predicts the article, lose our heads and lighten up. As with all these things, it’s hard to look out of the window and pin this discussion to any concrete reality – although, even away from the trend hubs of downtown New York and LA, there are indicators of large-scale change. The Great Resignation, in which record numbers of largely 30- to 45-year-olds quit their jobs in the wake of the pandemic, is a vibe shift of sorts, as is disaffection with big tech. This last indicator is readable via lots of “does anyone still post on here?” exchanges between middle-aged people on Facebook. To view but not be part of a trend shift is the horror of the young and the consolation of the middle aged, where any discovery of potentially untapped energy reserves – things I used to worry about and don’t worry about now! – is pathetically welcome. What constitutes, per phrasing in the article, being “left behind” to one group falls into the category of blissful ignorance to the other. Fear of missing out edges into the nihilism-tinged joy of not caring. What’s odd about these kinds of trend pieces, of course, is the certainty that whatever your relationship with fashion, you can’t ever wholly opt out. Any rejection of a trend is as shaped by its dynamic as a full embrace. My claims to not caring are disingenuous, too. Those of us living in the lame, middle-aged neighbourhoods of major cities can benefit from trend-adjacency while still wearing high-waisted jeans from the Gap. In the 2010s, I sneered at hipsters as energetically as all the other thirtysomethings, but I did quite like their hipstery glow. I could be part of that, I thought, it’s right on my doorstep; I simply choose not to. Like a stopped clock, if you live for long enough you will inadvertently find your regular style right on trend, which is why normcore was so exciting for people who only ever go out in their running shoes. I’m hoping, with this in mind, for a future in which Gore-Tex outerwear finally has its moment; we celebrate big white sneakers, Jerry Seinfeld-style; and unbrushed hair, last-minute decision-making and a 9pm bedtime have their long overdue moment in the sun. Emma Brockes is a Guardian columnistOn Monday the US supreme court will hear arguments in a group of cases that could have an immediate impact on the American government’s ability to respond to the climate emergency. The consequences could be even more substantial, however, reaching deep into the Biden administration’s authority to govern. The court will be considering the 2015 Clean Power Plan, a signature Obama program requiring states to lower greenhouse gas emissions from power plants. It was touted as critical to the achievement of the landmark Paris climate agreement, but its existence was short-lived: a coalition of states and energy groups sued to stop it, the supreme court blocked it and Donald Trump, self-professed lover of coal, repealed it when he took office. The Biden administration said it would not reinstate the Clean Power Plan, even after a federal court invalidated Trump’s repeal, because the goals of the plan had already been met through market forces, and because it was considering a new rule to replace it. So it came as a surprise when the supreme court announced it would review the lower court’s decision. Why is the court hearing a challenge to a plan that has never really been in effect, and never will be? Richard Lazarus, a professor of environmental law at Harvard University, thinks the court may be interested in a preemptive strike against ambitious environmental regulation. “This is a shot across the bow,” he says. “We’re going to tell you what you can’t do in case you’re even thinking about it.” But some court observers believe the case, West Virginia v EPA, may be an opportunity for the court’s conservative supermajority to take an even bigger hammer to the government’s regulatory power, helping to see through a Trump administration objective: the “deconstruction of the administrative state”. A muscular decision could help upend the power of the government to regulate a range of issues, from air quality to workplace protections to drug safety, and mean an effective supreme court veto over Joe Biden’s agenda. There are a number of ways the justices could rule in the EPA case. They could restrict the EPA’s powers under the Clean Air Act, the legal foundation for the Obama plan. They could more broadly target its power to address environmental concerns. They could also dismiss the case outright since the Clean Power Plan doesn’t actually exist. Or they could rule in a manner with implications beyond the EPA, as a who’s who of rightwing groups, many linked by funding from billionaire Charles Koch, have urged them to do in briefs filed in the case. By some counts, at least five justices have expressed interest in reviving a legal doctrine dormant since the 1930s, until recently considered fringe, which views much of the authority of the executive branch as illegitimate. Under an expansive version of that view, “most of government is unconstitutional”, Justice Elena Kagan has warned. The case “could be extraordinarily important, it could be moderately important, or it could be a case the court just dismisses on a belated realization that there’s no live controversy at all,” says Kate Shaw, professor at the Cardozo School of Law and co-host of the Strict Scrutiny podcast, which covers the supreme court. “The fact that the court took the case at all is concerning to me and suggests the court may want to use this case as a vehicle to really change the law,” she says. Some believe the case could undo the US government as we know it. In the 1930s, Franklin Delano Roosevelt’s New Deal created dozens of government programs and agencies to improve the US economy and create a social safety net. But the supreme court, in those years famously pro-business and prone to strike down social welfare legislation, thwarted him at every turn. In two decisions, it invoked a principle of “nondelegation” – a doctrine that says the constitution forbids Congress from transferring power to federal agencies to make rules. In 1937, faced with FDR’s threats to expand the court in order to push his legislation through, the court did an about-face and began upholding New Deal laws. The nondelegation doctrine faded into obscurity and the administrative state flourished. Ever since, the delegation of authority from Congress to agencies has been core to the functioning of government. Congress passes broad legislation enshrining certain principles and instructs agencies to fill in and update the details. The Clean Air Act, for example, instructs the EPA to regulate harmful emissions, but leaves it up to the agency to determine how to do so. The Occupational Safety and Health Act gives the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) the authority – recently restricted by the court – to issue standards regulating workplace safety. Particularly central in an age of congressional gridlock, this model of government allows experts in federal agencies to issue rules without Congress needing to regularly pass detailed laws. “Whether we’re talking about energy regulation, environmental regulation, workplace health and safety regulation, labor regulation – in each of those areas, Congress has passed broad statutes and given agencies a lot of discretion to implement those statutory directives,” says Shaw. “Depending on what the court says if it does reach the merits in this case, that could throw into question the permissibility of all of those delegations, which are in many ways the foundation of modern governance.” In the last two decades, and with particular fervor since the Obama presidency, the nondelegation doctrine has gained traction among originalists – jurists who claim to adhere to a meaning of the constitution fixed at the time of its drafting – who insist America’s founders were opposed to Congress delegating regulatory power to agencies. (Scholars respond that the doctrine has no basis in history or in the constitution). “Congress cannot duck its responsibility for making hard choices requiring compromise … by passing the buck to unelected, politically unaccountable administrative agents. The Constitution flatly prohibits Congress from delegating any of its legislative power to other entities,” according to a brief filed by the Koch-backed political advocacy group Americans for Prosperity. “As Justice Thomas has observed: ‘The end result may be trains that run on time (although I doubt it), but the cost is to our Constitution and the individual liberty it protects,’” the brief continues. Americans for Prosperity campaigned aggressively for the confirmation of Trump’s three supreme court nominees. Conservatives on the supreme court have expressed varying degrees of sympathy for this view, most recently when they blocked the Biden administration’s vaccine-or-testing mandate for large employers. In that case, three justices – Neil Gorsuch, Thomas and Samuel Alito – signed a concurring opinion, invoking both the nondelegation doctrine and the major questions doctrine, a related theory that says matters of major economic or political importance must be mandated by Congress. In a different case, Chief Justice John Roberts joined a dissent asserting the doctrine. Add to that signals from Brett Kavanaugh, and there are five justices who have voiced at least some support for using this arcane theory to undo the post-New Deal arrangement undergirding American government. Lazarus, the environmental law professor, has some sympathy for a principled view that major agency action should have backing from Congress. “The problem is, what do you do with that if you know Congress isn’t going to pass anything? We have a climate problem that if we don’t address [it] in the near term, it’s just an irreversible disaster at some point,” he says. “One is hard pressed to contend that the constitution requires such a catastrophic result.”This piece first appeared in Down to Earth, the Guardian’s climate crisis newsletter. Sign up here to read more exclusive pieces like this and for a digest of the week’s biggest environment stories every Thursday How do you solve a problem like the global fashion industry? From the declining lifespan of clothes to the lightning metabolism of fashion consumerism and the increased reliance on petroleum-based synthetic fibres, this is one industry desperate for an ecological plan. London fashion week – which ended this week – showed there still isn’t one. Coverage was dominated by the launch of a new collection from one of the fastest models of production and e-retail, Pretty Little Thing, owned by the Boohoo group. It didn’t seem to matter that this show was not officially part of fashion week – it had all the ingredients of a smash hit, including a social media superstar turned creative director, Molly-Mae Hague. And, in something of a plot twist, alongside the brand’s runway show came the announcement that it will launch a pre-owned resale marketplace later this year “in a bid to encourage its shoppers to embrace sustainability”. Of course reselling, reusing and extending the lifespan of garments is critical in the fight to bring some sanity into the fashion cycle. But to push out more fast fashion and then recirculate it later seems like the fashion equivalent of carbon capture storage. It may help soothe investors, but it is unlikely to decarbonise fashion. Room for rent Meanwhile, around the same time as PLT’s announcement a genuinely important fashion industry innovator – rental platform Onloan – announced that it was pressing pause, leaving a gap in the sustainable fashion ecosystem. Fashion rental platforms all have slightly different business models. Byrotation is a peer to peer lending app, charging a borrower per loan and taking a percentage from lender and renter. There’s MyWardrobe – from former Whistles CEO Jane Shepherdson, who has said she wants renting clothes to be as commonplace as renting a car; HURR, who have teamed up with Selfridges and Hirestreet, which aims to take things mainstream, providing rental for M&amp;S. Onloan, meanwhile, offered a subscription model. Users could rent two or four pieces a month for £69 or £99. Unusually, the company bought and held stock. For co-founder Tamsin Chislett, who has a background running a fairtrade cotton project in Uganda, this is key to re-engineering the industry. “The fashion supply chain is riven with underpayment. For us it was important to pay for actual, finished garments to allow the manufacturing part of the supply chain to work,” she says. Onloan was prepared to invest in buying wholesale, offering a royalty fee every time the piece was rented and winning the trust and partnership of prestigious yet traditional designers, such as Joseph. The theory is that getting access to these brands at a fraction of the cost is part of the alchemy that can turn consumers to renters and take the heat (and carbon) out of the system. ‘Risky’ business Not everyone is convinced, though. In particular, a report published in May 2021 by respected Finnish academics put the boot in, concluding that renting clothes was less green than other options, including throwing them away. It got a lot of coverage, including in the Guardian. Not a good day for rental. But there were flaws in that study, beginning with the fact that researchers assessed the impact of renting a pair of jeans, which are rarely borrowed from such platforms. Moreover, assumptions made on logistics and garment care (the study factors in high use of dry cleaning) were not representative of the way the business works either, with many companies using new, low-impact technology. Fashion rental entrepreneurs believe they are getting to the point when they’ll soon have the data to prove that renting is the more sustainable option. But blunt analysis also fails to recognise the really big win that platforms like Onloan have achieved. They have changed the way people think about pre-worn clothes. The stigma is disappearing (something brands like PLT are no doubt fully aware of and keen to capitalise on). But, in the end, it wasn’t an unfavourable study or even the global pandemic that did for Onloan. It was a quirk of HMRC’s tax breaks for investors in ‘risky’ startups. In effect, these exclude models that hold stock, deterring investors from Onloan’s models. (As Chislett puts it, “you want to disrupt the fashion system to make it sustainable, not to fit in with HMRC’s plans to have investors pay less tax”). And so we must say goodbye to Onloan: we shall miss you from the sustainable fashion ecosystem, but we should not forget you.Ukrainian soldiers who died defending an island in the Black Sea from an air and sea bombardment reportedly told an officer on board a Russian navy warship to “go fuck yourself” when asked to surrender. There were 13 border guards stationed on Snake Island, a roughly 16-hectare (40-acre) rocky island owned by Ukraine that sits about 186 miles (300km) west of Crimea, when Russian troops bombed the island on Thursday. All 13 soldiers died after refusing to surrender, Ukrainian officials announced. In his address after the first day of the invasion of his country, President Volodymyr Zelenskiy announced he would posthumously award all of the soldiers the Hero of Ukraine award. “All border guards died heroically but did not give up,” Zelenskiy said. Audio has emerged that is purported to have captured an exchange between Ukrainian border guards on Snake Island and an approaching Russian navy vessel, in which a Russian officer told the Ukrainian forces on the island to “lay down your weapons”. “This is a military warship. This is a Russian military warship. I suggest you lay down your weapons and surrender to avoid bloodshed and needless casualties. Otherwise, you will be bombed,” the Russian office was recorded as saying on a naval radio channel. After a short period of silence in the recording, a Ukrainian officer reportedly responded: “Russian warship, go fuck yourself.” The audio has been published by multiple media outlets including the Ukrainian online newspaper Ukrayinska Pravda, and was shared on social media by Anton Herashchenko, an adviser to the Ukrainian interior ministry. The Russian navy is reported to have bombarded the island with deck guns before sending soldiers on board to take control, according to Maritime Executive citing local media reports. Snake Island – known as Zmiinyi Island in Ukrainian – is situated near the Ukrainian and Romanian coasts along the Black Sea, and has previously been the subject of a territorial dispute between the two countries. A marine research station is situated on the island, and its maritime borders take in an area understood to be strategically important for resources including petroleum.Gunfire has been heard in central Kyiv and there are reports of heavy fighting in the city’s northern suburbs after Ukraine said it expected a Russian armoured attack on the capital and its outskirts on Friday. The defence ministry urged citizens to resist when Russian forces entered Kyiv, telling residents to inform authorities of all troop movements, and “make molotov cocktails and neutralise the enemy”. Explosions rocked Kyiv in the early hours in preparations for the Russian advance, with Ukraine claiming it had shot down a Russian military aircraft flying over the capital. Officials said a tower block had been set on fire. Russian forces have taken the city of Sumy in north-eastern Ukraine, according to a resident who said there were Russian military vehicles in the streets. Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, said “no one is planning to occupy Ukraine”, adding that Moscow was ready for talks if Ukrainian forces laid down their arms. Russia banned UK flights from its airspace after the British government said Russia’s national carrier, Aeroflot, would be banned from British airspace as part of the UK’s package of sanctions. The US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, warned that “all evidence suggests that Russia intends to encircle and threaten” Kyiv. Russian troops entered the country from the north, east and south on Thursday. The Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, confirmed reports of Russian missile strikes in a national address early on Friday, also calling for Nato defence support and tougher sanctions against Russia. Late on Thursday, he said 137 people inside Ukraine had been killed and 316 wounded. Russian troops have seized the Chernobyl nuclear power plant in the north of Ukraine and there were credible reports they were holding staff there hostage, the White House said. Ukraine decreed a full military mobilisation against the Russian invasion. Ukrainian men aged 18-60 are now forbidden to leave Ukraine. Zelenskiy has declared martial law. The president said he would remain in Kyiv, despite saying he was Russia’s primary target. “We are not afraid. We are not afraid of anything,” he said. Thousands attempted to flee Kyiv, leading to large traffic queues. Pictures have emerged of Kyiv residents crowding into underground metro stations where they are taking shelter from further Russian attacks. Anti-war protests have attracted thousands of people in cities across Russia, with local authorities swiftly cracking down on the unsanctioned rallies. Police had made at least 1,702 arrests in 53 Russian cities. The US president, Joe Biden, and the UK prime minister, Boris Johnson, imposed more sanctions on Russia, including pushing to end Russia’s use of the Swift international payment systems. Ukraine’s foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, voiced his anger as EU leaders appeared to hold back from imposing the potentially most damaging sanction on Russia. Kuleba warned that European and US politicians would have “blood on their hands” if they decided against the sanction.John Lewis is ditching its “never knowingly undersold” price match pledge after almost a century, saying it has lost relevance at a time when it faces stiff competition from online retailers such as Amazon. The staff-owned department store chain said it had made the decision to retire the well-known slogan this summer because its price promise did not apply to online-only retailers, and shoppers were increasingly buying online. John Lewis said it would, however, invest £500m this year, £100m more than in 2021, in lowering prices to offer customers “everyday quality and value”. That investment comes at time when consumers are facing a squeeze on disposable incomes as bills rise and pay growth fails to keep pace with inflation. It will also expand its Anyday cut-price range. Under the never knowingly undersold slogan, which John Lewis introduced in 1925, the chain commits to refund customers the difference if they find the same item on sale elsewhere for a lower price within 28 days. The retailer first revealed the pledge was under review in March 2020, a month after Sharon White joined as chair. Analysts said John Lewis was likely to introduce a new marketing slogan when the NKU pledge was phased out this summer. Department stores are facing heavy competition from Amazon and other online specialists and the never knowingly undersold scheme cost millions of pounds, as the retailer was forced to cut prices whenever a rival held a sale. The change in tactics comes amid increasing pressure from inflation, driven by increases in the prices of energy, raw materials and transport, which has made shoppers increasingly price-conscious. Pippa Wicks, an executive director of John Lewis, said: “Customers are tightening their belts and we’re responding so John Lewis is more affordable for every customer, every day, whether shopping in-store or online. “Never knowingly undersold has been a cherished sign of trust for John Lewis for a century but it doesn’t fit with how customers shop today as more purchases are made online. Our new £500m investment means all our customers can trust they’re getting the quality, style and service they expect from John Lewis at great value prices.” John Lewis said it expected to invest more in its Anyday cut-price range, which it introduced in April last year and which has notched up £125m of sales since then. John Lewis said a quarter of the 2 million shoppers who had bought the brand over the past nine months were new to its stores. This year the brand will extend to swimwear, children’s clothing and an extended range of outdoor furniture. Martin Lewis, the founder of MoneySavingExpert, said the change would largely affect the few people buying electrical goods who were prepared to check prices against John Lewis’s rivals and then benefit from the department store’s two-year guarantees. He said: “This is a historic change for the John Lewis brand but won’t have much practical impact for many. The ‘never knowingly undersold’ promise has always been a bit of a psychological sop to consumers, giving an arguably false impression that John Lewis is cheap. “In reality, it allows the store to charge what it likes and know that, for a few price-sensitive shoppers – less than 1% last year – who are bothered to check prices elsewhere after making a purchase, John Lewis will reduce its price but only to that of its high street competitors.” Nick Bubb, an independent retail analyst, said the change was “long overdue, as a policy devised back in 1925 was hardly likely to last long into the internet age and nobody quite understood what it meant anyway”. He expects John Lewis to protect its profit margins despite the increase in investment on price and quality promised by the business.Brighton and Aston Villa will see this fixture as a chance to find some much-needed form. Both sides are potentially staring a third successive defeat in the face while neither have scored in their two defeats. Brighton have one win from their past six and Villa one from seven so the early purple patch for Steve Gerrard is well and truly over. The key Brighton defender Adam Webster missing out may give Villa the edge, though, and confidence may be at its lowest for Graham Potter’s side. They have put together a stellar season but a 3-0 drubbing by rock-bottom (before kick-off) Burnley could really knock the stuffing out of a charge to make it truly special. Graham Searles Saturday 3pm Venue Amex Stadium Last season Brighton 0 Aston Villa 0 Referee John Brooks This season G2 Y7 R0 3.5 cards/game Odds H 15-11 A 12-5 D 12-5 BRIGHTON Subs from Steele, McGill, Alzate, Ferguson, March, Veltman, Caicedo, Offiah, Welbeck, Mac Aliister Doubtful None Injured Webster (groin, 5 Mar), Sarmiento (hamstring, 12 Mar), Mwepu (hamstring, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y43 R2 Form DDDWLL Leading scorer Maupay 8 ASTON VILLA Subs from Sinisalo, Carney Chukwuemeka, Young, Smith, Olsen, Hause, Buendía, Sanson, Chambers, Traoré Doubtful Traoré (hamstring) Injured Nakamba (knee, Apr) Suspended None Discipline Y52 R2 Form LDWDLL Leading scorers Ramsey, Watkins 5Would you like coffee?” Clio Barnard asks. “Is goat’s milk OK?” Ooh, that sounds exciting, I say. “There’s oat milk, too.” Barnard is scouring the fridge. “We’ve even got regular cow milk.” It’s early morning when I arrive at her house. Though, as she explains repeatedly, it’s not her house – she’s just renting it while working in London and Essex. It reminds me of Ali &amp; Ava, her lovely new film. Every time Ali tells his friends that Ava is a teacher, she corrects him with “teaching assistant”. Details are important to Barnard. “Right, would you like some breakfast?” She couldn’t be a warmer host. Then we sit down to talk, and suddenly she’s a bag of nerves. She loses her words, apologises for going blank, and looks to her producer Tracy O’Riordan for support. She eyes my recorder enviously. “I’d much rather be the person with the tape machine on the table asking you questions.” She pauses. “I’m quite a shy person, Simon.” Barnard is also one of Britain’s most talented and original directors, largely responsible for putting Bradford on the movie map. All four of her films have been set in Yorkshire, three in Bradford. On the surface, the Bradford films are very different. The Arbor is an experimental docudrama about the life of playwright Andrea Dunbar (best known for Rita, Sue and Bob Too), who grew up on a tough estate, mothered three children with three fathers by her early 20s, was undone by addiction, and died of a brain haemorrhage at 29. The Selfish Giant, loosely based on the Oscar Wilde short story, focuses on two boys excluded from school who set themselves up as scrap dealers selling to a ruthless merchant. Ali &amp; Ava is a feelgood love story about a couple (wonderfully played by Adeel Akhtar and Claire Rushbrook) who find each other in their 40s while emerging from the wreckage of failed relationships. Ali is Bradford-born and from a Pakistani Muslim family. Ava is Bradford-born, white, and from an Irish Catholic family. Ali works for his property-owning parents, and is something of a one-off – a landlord loved by his tenants. They meet when he delivers the daughter of his friends/tenants to the school where Ava is working as a teaching assistant. As their relationship flourishes, Barnard subtly explores themes around race, religion and older love without telling you she’s doing so. It seems such a simple film, but it is fantastically nuanced. Put The Arbor, The Selfish Giant and Ali &amp; Ava together and they form a magnificent trilogy about life on the margins. Barnard’s Bradford is bleak and beautiful, antiquated (horses and carts abound) and modern (few communities are as mixed). Smart, feisty characters are undone by circumstance or fate, in ways that nod to Ken Loach and Thomas Hardy. Her films celebrate resilience and critique capitalism without making grand statements. They show rather than tell; images trump speech – in Ali &amp; Ava a lengthy monologue is about 10 words long. Perhaps the most remarkable thing about her films is the way they echo each other. So the lead character in The Selfish Giant is called Arbor, after her first film. In Ali &amp; Ava, Ava walks past the Arbor, the area of the Buttershaw estate where Dunbar lived, and in the distance we glimpse a blue plaque on the playwright’s old house. Listen closely and in the background you can hear the ghostly whisper “Andrea, Andrea”. Dunbar’s influence is still huge on her, Barnard says. Making The Arbor, meeting the people she did, changed her life. Barnard, 57, grew up in “the middle of nowhere”, about 10 miles from Bradford. Her father, John Barnard, is a Keats scholar, now married to the acclaimed biographer Hermione Lee. Her mother Kate, an artist and singer, left the family for the jazz musician Mike Westbrook when Barnard was eight years old. She and her two siblings were brought up by their father. The separation was “painful”, but now she says she considers herself lucky to have four great parents. Her love affair with film began at the age of 14 when she watched Mick Jagger in Donald Cammell and Nicolas Roeg’s acid trip of a movie, Performance. It was on TV late at night, and she viewed it on a black-and-white portable in her bedroom with the volume turned down. What amazed her was its ability to mess with her head. “Here’s this real rock star pretending to be one, whose sort-of girlfriend is also in the film in this crazy threesome. There was something about the real and the fictional that was really fascinating. It blew my tiny mind.” Her love affair with the city where most of her films are set began around the same time, when she had a birthday party at Bradford ice rink. “There’s a little corridor that leads off to the DJ booth and I was whisked off the ice by this boy, taken down the corridor and kissed. It was great. It was a very romantic kiss.” Bradford was another world – exciting, risky, unpredictable. After school, Barnard went on to art college in Leeds and Newcastle upon Tyne, where she initially drew and painted. Then she started to work with cameras, filming the images she created. Barnard moved to London, worked at MTV creating motion graphics, made experimental shorts films and taught film studies at Maidstone College of Art. In 2001, she and her then partner, the artist Adam Chodzko, had their first child (they have two boys aged 21 and 17, and co-parent) and moved to Kent because they couldn’t afford a place in London. Barnard then started teaching film at the University of Kent. She was as fascinated by theory as practice, and wondered how she could weave the two together. She was still obsessed with the same thing that had struck her when first watching Performance – representations of reality, particularly in documentaries that claim to tell the objective truth. As far as Barnard was concerned, that simply doesn’t exist; truth and reality are dictated by what film-makers allow us to see. Before filming The Arbor she spent 18 months with friends and family of Dunbar, forging relationships and building trust. “There were 80 hours of audio when I met Clio, so the first thing I said to her was: ‘Stop recording,’” O’Riordan remembers. Is that an obsessive thing? “Sometimes I think I do get a bit obsessive, yeah,” Barnard says. “Brokering these relationships takes time,” O’Riordan says. ‘The first time I went up to Buttershaw, people were just so welcoming. It was just the time you’d invested in those relationships.” Barnard’s approach to film-making was journalistic, but she also wanted viewers to question the veracity of what they were watching. In Barnard’s case, necessity was the mother of invention. Those close to Dunbar were happy to be taped, but would not be filmed. So Barnard got the cast to lip-sync to the tapes of Dunbar’s family. The end result was haunting – the voices were genuine, while the lip-syncing constantly reminded us that what we were watching wasn’t real. Dunbar’s Bradford became Barnard’s spiritual home. “The people I have met there are extraordinary. They are incredibly welcoming and generous, warm and open. Making The Arbor opened my eyes to a reality of some people’s lives that we don’t often see on the big screen.” “We could have probably made eight films out of the Arbor,” O’Riordan says. Barnard nods. “Scratch the surface of so-called ordinary lives and you find extraordinary lives.” She constructs her films by improvising scenes in workshops, then tightly scripting them and finally allowing the actors a degree of improvisational freedom in filming. The radical thing is that characters are based on specific individuals who then contribute to the making of the film via the workshops. Local people play small parts alongside professional actors. In The Selfish Giant, this was reversed – her two brilliant leads were local boys, Conner Chapman and Shaun Thomas. (Nine years on Thomas is a professional actor, playing Ava’s son in Ali &amp; Ava.) It’s an unusually collaborative, community-minded way of working. One of the first people they met when making The Arbor was Matty Bailey, who became the inspiration for Arbor in The Selfish Giant. He was a hyperactive, streetwise 14-year-old chancer, always searching for scrap. Barnard went out scrapping with him, talked to his mother at length, and brought him on board for The Selfish Giant. When he failed to turn up to workshops, they simply moved the workshop to his family home. In one memorable scene, the police arrive at Arbor’s house to interview him under caution, and he insists they take their shoes off before entering the premises. That came direct from Matty – it’s what he always did when the police came knocking. While filming The Arbor, Barnard and O’Riordan also met Moey Hassan – a DJ, actor and landlord. Moey ended up with a small part in the film, but Barnard had already decided she wanted to base a character on Hassan. When making The Selfish Giant she met a teaching assistant called Rio who had walked out of an abusive relationship with the father of her son. Moey and Rio were the inspiration for Ali &amp; Ava, though they have not fallen in love with each other in real life. Until recently, they hadn’t even met. In her new film, Barnard turns her camera on Holme Wood, another of Bradford’s vilified estates. Ali &amp; Ava is a story told almost entirely through music. Ali is into bhangra, electro and Holme Wood hero MC Innes, while Ava adores country and folk. Ali gives her a lift home just after they meet, and is horrified to discover she likes country music. He thinks their friendship is over before it’s begun. “Oh that’s it,” he tells her. “I’ll pull up. That’s it for me.” They start to understand each other, fall in love and overcome obstacles, all through music. At one point they swap headphones, listen to each other’s songs, start singing and dancing to tunes they thought they hated, and find themselves connected in a moment of blissful chaos. Barnard says she was determined that Ali &amp; Ava would be a hopeful film. “I wanted to make something that honoured the people on Holme Wood and the city they live in, and the relationship Tracy and I have got with the city because we’ve been making films there since 2008.” She says it was particularly important to make something positive in a time when we so rarely hear good news. “The way Adeel talks about it is joy is an act of resistance, and kindness is a courageous act. And we’ve seen a lot of divisiveness from politicians for their own gain, but what I’ve witnessed on the ground is people actually being extraordinarily kind and supportive to each other. And I wanted to celebrate that.” Despite the success of The Selfish Giant, Barnard has slightly fallen off the radar in recent years. When I mention it, she says she wasn’t really aware of ever having been on the radar. Again, she tells me how much she hates talking about herself. In a follow-up call a few days later, she’s the one who brings the subject up. “You know you mentioned there was a lull after The Selfish Giant. It was partly because I just wanted to be with my kids. My partner and I had recently split up, and it was so important for me to be a good mum as well as do good work.” Barnard’s last film, Dark River, was, for me, her least successful. The grim subject matter of her previous work had always been countered by the exuberance of her characters. But Dark River felt like miserablism by numbers. It had a bigger budget, a starrier cast (notably Ruth Wilson) and the Yorkshire it portrayed felt more generic than The Arbor and The Selfish Giant. Does she like Dark River as much as the Bradford trilogy? She pauses. “No,” she eventually answers. “But I stand by it.” Barnard says she was adversely affected by “a weight of expectation”. She struggles to find the right words, but suggests that the film did not grow organically like the others. “It was like trying to fit a round peg into a square hole.” Barnard believes she has learned from that experience. Now she is adapting Sarah Perry’s The Essex Serpent for TV, again with a starry cast including Tom Hiddleston and Claire Danes. Is she worried that she’s moving away from what she knows best? “No, it’s just a totally different thing; a different beast.” She laughs. “It’s a different serpent I’m wrangling.” I get the feeling that she’s not yet done with her favourite city, though – that she may never be. As I leave she tells me how remarkable Rio is, and that Ali &amp; Ava barely touches on the way she went to university, got a first-class degree and became a fully qualified teacher after leaving her abusive husband. Yes, there’s definitely unfinished business back in Bradford. • Ali &amp; Ava is in cinemas 4 March.There’s nothing like parenting to open your eyes to how you were parented, and I’ve discovered that I have an avoidant attachment style. As a mother of two, I know I’m passing on the damaging legacy of being emotionally distant. I push my older child away, keeping them at arm’s length. With the youngest, who is still a baby, it’s completely different: I know they are securely attached to me … for now, at least. My mum had to retire at the age I am now (40s), as she was ill – she was later diagnosed with bipolar disorder. Despite having had counselling before lockdown – and having read about all possible attachment styles in books – I feel patterns repeating themselves. I want to be a warm, loving mother, and an affectionate, gregarious wife, but I don’t seem capable. My husband has said he is struggling with me “closing him down” when he tries to tell me his feelings. He is right. I do it with him and my child. If they come to me with a problem, I immediately downplay it. I am crying out for help with my fear of repeating the awful inheritance of avoidant attachment with my own children. And I want to be a better friend to myself. Your original letter was long and detailed, but at the heart of it was confusion, sadness and loneliness. I wonder if it is significant that you are the same age as your mother was when she had to give up work? But you are not your mother, and you are in control of your life, even if you don’t feel like you are. Your (self-?) diagnosis might be a barrier to allowing yourself to really feel. Analysis is useful, but it can be also be a great anaesthetic against pain; when we are constantly thinking about an issue, we don’t have to feel. Is this another defence against opening yourself up and making yourself vulnerable? I contacted psychoanalytic psychotherapist Susanna Abse. We both felt you may have some misunderstandings about attachment styles. “They’re not fixed; people’s style can vary in different situations,” Abse says. This is why some people can make us feel safe, and some don’t. “It’s in our most intimate relationships that we are most likely to be most fearful about being hurt, and this leads to us finding ways to defend ourselves,” she adds. Abse didn’t think you were avoidant: “The opposite – you seem preoccupied with how people find you, and what others will do and think. On top of that, you have a nasty internal critic which further undermines you.” She suggested: “Stop reading.” And while we noted you had tried counselling, she thought you might try a “particular kind of therapy, psychoanalytic or dynamic. One that isn’t necessarily about getting answers but where the therapist will help you work through, in real time, some of the anxious feelings that drive both the preoccupation and the remoteness.” Could you allow yourself to be a bit less guarded and more curious? This may sound simplistic, but how much exercise do you do? Doing something physical is a great antidote to thinking: it can take you out of your head. Next time your child or your husband comes to you with a problem, give yourself permission to say very little. Take a deep breath and just listen. You can even say, “I’m just going to think about that.” The “roles” of mother and wife that you hold up are ideals, but not realistic – we are human after all. • Every week Annalisa Barbieri addresses a family-related problem sent in by a reader. If you would like advice from Annalisa on a family matter, please send your problem to ask.annalisa@theguardian.com. Annalisa regrets she cannot enter into personal correspondence. Submissions are subject to our terms and conditions. • Conversations With Annalisa Barbieri, a new podcast series, is available here. • Comments on this piece are premoderated to ensure the discussion remains on the topics raised by the article. Please be aware that there may be a short delay in comments appearing on the site.Russia’s invasion of Ukraine has exposed a schism in the Republican party between “hawks” who condemn Vladimir Putin and “America first” followers who express admiration for the strongman. But what has united the two wings so far is an opportunity to score political points by casting Joe Biden as weak and paying the price of failure in Afghanistan. The split was evident on Thursday as Republicans in Washington condemned Putin as a “war criminal” while many grassroots conservatives attending a conference in Florida agreed with former president Donald Trump that the Russian autocrat is “savvy”. Mitch McConnell, the Senate minority leader, described Putin as a “thug” and criticized Biden for being too slow to impose tough sanctions. “Sadly, deterrence after the fact is not deterrence at all,” he said. Senator Lindsey Graham, who is both a Trump ally and traditional hawk, added: “The Biden administration continues to misread the moment ... We should move ahead forcefully against Putin, a war criminal, and demand our allies join us.” Even Kevin McCarthy, the minority leader in the House of Representatives who is typically loyal to Trump, focused his statement on Putin’s invasion as “reckless and evil” and echoed Biden by saying the Russian president “must be held accountable for his actions”. But 850 miles away in Orlando, there was less sense of urgency at the Conservative Political Action Conference (CPAC), an annual gathering dominated by Trump where party stalwarts such as McConnell and Senator Mitt Romney have long been persona non grata. The Ukraine crisis did feature in some speeches and panel discussions but played second fiddle to domestic issues such as “cancel culture”, mask and vaccine mandates in the coronavirus pandemic and the teaching of “critical race theory” in schools. Anyone listening to diatribes by Ted Cruz, senator for Texas, or Ron DeSantis, governor of Florida, would never have guessed that Europe’s biggest military conflagration since 1945 was taking place. But Josh Hawley, a rightwing senator from Missouri who backed Trump’s false claim of a stolen election, did cut through the apathy to address the crisis, suggesting that it was down to “weakness on the part of Joe Biden”. He said: “He comes to office and what does he do? He shuts down American energy production and greenlights Russian energy production. He greenlights Putin’s pipeline and he shuts down American pipelines. Is it any wonder that Vladimir Putin feels emboldened to do whatever the heck it is he wants to do?” Hawley used this argument to call on Biden to “open up American energy” production with no mention of the climate crisis. He added: “We are the number one energy producing nation in the world – or we should be. Joe Biden gave that away. “It’s time to take it back. And if you want to send a message to Vladimir Putin, here’s a message to send him: ‘We are going to be the ones who supply the oil and gas to the world. We’re going to shut down your energy sector and we’re going to open ourselves like you’ve never seen it before.’” Earlier, the conference heard a similar message from K T McFarland, who served as Trump’s deputy national security adviser. Wearing yellow as an expression of solidarity with the Ukrainian people, she claimed that energy independence had been a key part of Trump’s strategy. “We could replace Russia, we could replace other countries in the world as the world’s dominant energy supplier, but it would also drive the price of oil down. That’s key for Russia. If oil is at $40 a barrel, which it was when president Trump left office, the Russians are broke. They can’t afford to go to war, war is expensive.” McFarland added: “Now, president Biden comes in, what does he do? Well, if president Trump liked it, Biden hated it, so he immediately shut down the American energy industry. Oil and natural gas, the energy that we were exporting to other countries, stopped as well. What happened? The price of oil went sky high. Vladimir Putin’s rich, he gets to choose when to invade.” Trump, who has frequently expressed admiration for authoritarians, this week praised Putin’s invasion of separatist areas of Ukraine as “genius”, “savvy” and “smart”. Mike Pompeo, his former secretary of state, has called Putin “talented”, “savvy” and a “capable statesman”. And Tucker Carlson, a leading host on the conservative Fox News channel, told viewers: “It may be worth asking yourself, since it is getting pretty serious, what is this really about? Why do I hate Putin so much? Has Putin ever called me a racist? Has he threatened to get me fired for disagreeing with him?” Interviews with attendees at CPAC found sympathy for such views. Marnie Allen, 51, said of Putin: “Obviously he is much more savvy than Joe Biden or else he wouldn’t have walked into Ukraine and taken over an entire country with barely a shot fired so far. You can be a military genius and a jerk at the same time.” Allen, a higher education manager who lives in Orlando, was wearing a “Let’s Go Brandon” (rightwing code for insulting Biden) t-shirt and a “DeSantisLand” cap. She said he used to be a hawk but was “shown the right way” and now considers herself “America first”. She said of the invasion: “One tweet under President Trump, it wouldn’t have happened.” Tom Freeman, 66, vice-president of a retail company and a self-described “studier of history”, agreed: “I don’t think they would have done it had Trump been the president.” Asked about Trump’s descriptions of Putin as “genius,” “savvy” and “smart”, Freeman, from Jupiter, Florida, replied: “Well, I don’t think any of those are falsehoods. Putin’s always been full of shit but he’s very powerful and he’s certainly more savvy than our President Joe Biden.” Others at CPAC appeared ready to understand Putin’s point of view. Sam Leiter, 56, said: “I guess you could say he’s following his interest. The reason why Putin is popular in Russia is because he flexes Russian muscle: he acts like a tough guy. He’s kind of Russia’s Al Capone, I guess, but he’s doing what’s in their best interests.” Leiter, a speech therapist from Baltimore, Maryland, elaborated: “If you’re Vladimir Putin and you want a fresh water port and you want access to the land that Ukraine has and you see what Biden did in Afghanistan, you have to be an idiot – really stupid – not to take this opportunity to go and do whatever you think it is in your country’s interest.” Lauren Lamp, 22, from New York, said: “It’s a perfect storm for him. You have Biden who’s like, ‘You did this, let’s put sanctions.’ They’re not going to undo what’s already happened. Putin’s not going to be like, ‘Oh, you know what? We’re just going to pull back now.’ No, they’re going in for all of Ukraine and maybe farther and it’s very strategic on his part because there’s nobody to stop him, especially now that they’re friends with China.” Many here are convinced that, had Trump served a second term, the war would not have happened. Lamp, who works in corporate bankruptcy, asked: “Would Putin have ever done this when Trump was in office? Absolutely no, and that’s because Trump in himself was a big enough deterrent and Putin was like, ‘You know, we don’t want to mess with that bear’.” In reality Trump lavished praise on autocrats such as Putin and infamously exchanged “love letters” with North Korean dictator Kim Jong-un. But some analysts felt that Trump embodied “madman theory” of foreign policy and there were benefits to his volatile unpredictability. Nikki Murphy, 35, a healthcare worker in Winter Haven, Florida, said: “When your mother disciplines you and has rules and boundaries, you’re going to listen to her, you’re going to not cross those boundaries. That’s how Trump treated foreign countries with an iron fist. They knew that he was probably crazy enough to go through with his threats, so they did not try him.” In the CPAC corridors and exhibitor halls, there was little sense of a global tragedy unfolding. Asked if she fears escalation into a third world war, Rachel Sheley, 53, a chief information security officer from northern Kentucky, said with a laugh: “Well, if it does, it might be a good opportunity to get certain people out of power. You know what I mean?”When the pandemic started, most of us naively assumed it would have an end: if not a formal declaration of victory over Covid-19, with pubs running dry and strangers kissing in the street, then at the very least surely a sense of relief. We would know it was over, and could then make sense of how this collective near-death experience had changed us as a country. Unfortunately, life is never quite that neat. This week’s scrapping of England’s last remaining Covid restrictions is a choice that vaccines, antivirals and a milder Omicron variant have, arguably, allowed us to make, although it’s by no means clear that future variants will be so obliging. But the virus isn’t over, and we’re some way from making sense of anything. A much-loved face missing at dinner; an emptiness that cannot be filled. The changes wreaked by these extraordinary past two years are painfully obvious to the bereaved, those who lost livelihoods in lockdown and medical staff who saw things they won’t forget. Many parents also sense something different in their children, from the shyness of toddlers reared in lockdown to the social awkwardness of teens who spent too long interacting mainly through their phones. And too many formerly active older people are now visibly scared to go out, or hobbled by chronic illness that worsened during lockdown. But when the Pew Research thinktank asked ordinary Americans to explain in their own words how Covid had changed them last spring, what came back was a confusing mishmash. Some had positively enjoyed hunkering down at home, while others felt frustrated and lonely. Some had saved money but others piled up debt. Some loved home working and were gleefully never returning to the office, while others never left. Almost nine in 10 people described at least one change for the worse in their lives and three-quarters an unexpected upside, but most experienced both at once. The overall pattern was that there wasn’t really a pattern; the pandemic, researchers concluded, had “affected Americans’ lives in a variety of ways, of which there is no ‘typical’ experience”. But the one thing almost everyone felt was that society had gone downhill, with responses describing how Covid brought the best out in people so rare they couldn’t be reliably measured. While it’s natural to imagine that seismic social change must follow epoch-defining events, all the most dramatic predictions have so far been wrong. Employment did not collapse, triggering another Great Depression. People didn’t riot in the streets over being told to stay home. But nor did we “build back better”, constructing a greener and fairer future from the ashes. An analysis of the post-lockdown mood in Britain published this week by the authoritative social research body NatCen concludes bluntly that it “cannot be said that the pandemic has left a legacy of a public that is looking more intently to government to create a more equal society”. Support for raising taxes to spend more on health or education has fallen slightly, with no surge of enthusiasm for redistribution from rich to poor. In times of threat and hardship, people typically feel more inclined to hang on to every penny they’ve got. But if there has been no “great reset” moment, NatCen did identify a gentle acceleration of shifts that have quietly been under way for years. Back in 2010, the year they voted in the austerity government of David Cameron, 56% of Britons agreed that “if welfare benefits weren’t so generous, people would learn to stand on their own two feet”. By last summer, that was 36%. People aren’t blind to their neighbours’ struggles. Hostility to immigration has faded too, with 53% now agreeing it’s good for the economy and 49% that it’s enriched Britain culturally – up from a miserly 21% and 26% respectively a decade ago. Focus groups run by More in Common (which campaigns for social cohesion) found an enduring warmth towards NHS staff, supermarket workers, delivery drivers and people who got vaccinated to protect others. There is a better country in here somewhere trying to get out, but it needed moral leadership from a government that has repeatedly provided the reverse. (A separate study from King’s College London this week finds public trust collapsing over the past year; by the beginning of December, 62% weren’t sure they could believe what their government said.) And the angels of our better natures are struggling against the only other defining post-pandemic trend: a widespread sense of cynicism, even gloom. Even before police began investigating lockdown-busting parties at No 10, NatCen found two-thirds of Britons thought there was “one law for the rich and another for the poor”. More in Common found only 26% of Britons agreeing last November that “in this country we look after each other”, down from 46% in the summer of 2020; most now think the national mood is “everyone for themselves”. More Britons also now believe society is rigged in favour of the rich and powerful, the kind of pervasive hopelessness that fuels populism. If the past two years were sometimes frightening, it’s the next five that scare me. The lesson of the banking crash – when dramatic predictions of cashpoints running dry and society descending into anarchy also proved thankfully unfounded – is to beware the aftermath, not just the immediate crisis. It was the ensuing decade of spending cuts, stagnating wages and soaring assets that really hurt, breeding resentment, division and a politics of extremes. The looming post-pandemic cost of living crisis, which is only likely to be deepened by the fallout from Russian aggression in Europe, looks like following a worryingly familiar path. Britain is still a calmer and more pragmatic country than it sometimes looks. But while the rabble of anti-vaxxers, conspiracy theorists and far-right agitators brought on to the streets by Covid remains a tiny minority, it’s a warning sign of something bubbling under the surface, which will find new grievances to latch on to now that restrictions have been lifted. The earthquake may be over; the aftershock, unfortunately, has still to begin. Gaby Hinsliff is a Guardian columnistPollution by toxic PFAS “forever chemicals” in America’s aquifer system has led to widespread contamination of private and public drinking water wells, data from a new study by the US Geological Survey finds. The study, published in Environmental Science and Technology, detected PFAS chemicals in 20% of private wells and 60% of public wells sampled in 16 eastern states, and offered new insights on how to predict which drinking water sources may be contaminated. Previous analyses have detailed the chemicals’ ubiquity in municipal water systems, but less is known about the scope of the problem in the nation’s private wells, from which about 43 million people get their water. “This should set off alarm bells for anyone relying on private well water,” said Scott Faber, vice-president of government affairs with the Environmental Working Group, which tracks PFAS issues. “One out of five people getting their water from wells could be drinking PFAS – that’s a big number.” PFAS, or per-and poly-fluorakyl substances, are a class of more than 9,000 compounds typically used across dozens of industries to make products water-, stain- or heat-resistant. They’re in thousands of everyday consumer products such as stain guards, cookware and waterproof clothing, and are common in industrial manufacturing. The chemicals are linked to cancer, birth defects, liver disease, thyroid disease, decreased immunity, hormone disruption and a range of other serious health problems. They’re dubbed “forever chemicals” because they do not naturally break down, and they also easily move through the environment, often ending up in drinking water. Analyses of public utility records have found the chemicals to be contaminating water supplies for well over 100 million Americans, though estimates largely don’t cover private wells. No comprehensive private well monitoring system exists, many water quality standards don’t apply to them and filters installed in private wells often aren’t designed to capture PFAS. “Well owners are flying blind,” Faber said. The USGS undertook the analysis to provide data that could help regulators identify areas and wells that are at higher risk for PFAS contamination, though the data won’t automatically trigger new testing. Broadly, the research found higher concentrations in areas “affected by modern human activity” like urbanization, said Peter McMahon, one of the study’s co-authors. The chemicals were also found at a higher rate near facilities that commonly use PFAS products, like airports, military bases and chemical plants, or landfills that often leak the compounds into groundwater. Wells’ depth also plays a role, McMahon noted. Those drawing from deeper and “older” groundwater shielded from contaminated precipitation had less PFAS, while wells pulling from shallow, “modern” aquifers that cycle in contaminated surface water or rain have higher concentrations. Though wells near Memphis, Tennessee are in an urbanized area, the region’s deep, old water aquifer is largely clean, while nearly every well tested that relies on shallow aquifers in the Ohio Valley or New England regions had some PFAS in it. Aquifers with higher levels of pharmaceuticals and organic material also had elevated PFAS levels. The USGS took 254 samples from drinking water wells that draw from a network of five groundwater aquifers stretching from Maine to Illinois to Florida. The study looked for 24 kinds of PFAS and detected 14. Levels in a public West Virginia well reached about 1,500 parts per trillion (ppt), which is well above a level that public health advocates warn could cause health problems. The Environmental Protection Agency set a health advisory limit of 70ppt, though some states have limits as low as 1ppt. The study’s authors noted most samples found multiple types of PFAS, though little is known about how those toxic mixes impact health, and contamination levels could be much higher because thousands of PFAS compounds exist, but regulators typically only check for about 30. Though the PFAS crisis has come into sharper focus in recent years and the chemicals’ health risks have been clear for decades, the EPA has so far failed to act on setting enforceable water limits. The agency is proposing to set limits on two types of PFAS compounds in drinking water by 2023, but that still leaves thousands unaccounted for, and the agency has previously missed similar deadlines. In the absence of meaningful federal oversight, many states have begun setting drinking water limits. But most of the 16 states from which the USGS checked samples don’t have any standards in place, which leaves it up to well owners to protect themselves. That underscores how regulators have “failed us”, Faber said, and highlights the need to ban further PFAS production. “This is the kind of regulatory failure that should upset every American,” he added. “It should light a fire under legislators who represent rural states with contaminated military bases and industrial facilities.”For Black History Month, I conducted a panel discussion with Athletes For Hope and sponsored by Jesse Jackson’s Rainbow Push Coalition. The panel consisted of family members of victims of police violence, whom I had spoken with for my recent book, Police Brutality And White Supremacy: The Fight Against American Tradition. They included Emerald Garner, whose father Eric was choked to death by NYPD officer Daniel Pantaleo; Michelle Monterrosa, whose brother Sean was killed in Vallejo, California by Detective Jarrett Tonn, who fired shots from an unmarked vehicle; and Ashley Carr, sister of Atatiana Jefferson who was shot dead by officer Aaron Dene in her home in Texas as she looked after her nephew. Also on the panel was hammer thrower Gwen Berry, who created a stir last year when she turned away from the flag during the anthem at the US Olympic trials. Berry listened to the painful stories of the panelists, their continued fight for justice for their loved ones and their gratitude to athletes like Berry, LeBron James and Colin Kaepernick, who use their platforms to bring awareness to police brutality in the US. Berry’s stand at the Olympic trials caused a predictable backlash from the right. Republican congressman Dan Crenshaw called for Berry to be “removed from the [US Olympic] team.” Nikki Haley, the former South Carolina governor who was US ambassador to the UN in the Trump administration, said that the United States Olympic and Paralympic Committee “should make sure that no one should go to the Olympics that does not want to represent America.” Fox News brought in Jack Brewer, a former NFL player, to condemn Berry. Brewer, who is Black, compared her unfavorably to Jesse Owens and said that there are Black people who experience “real racism” in the US but are thankful to be in this country. Berry told me that her critics’ attacks did not bother her. “I owe my critics nothing. A lot of people don’t know about these women’s stories, the families of people who died at the hands of police brutality and they are survivors, so what do I owe them [critics]? I owe them nothing, I owe these women something. I owe their families something. I owe their stories something. That’s where I stand,” she said. “Listening to these stories is heartbreaking. There are so many people who are either ignorant or blinded to what’s really happening in America. So many corporations claim they support Black Lives Matter but they do nothing to actually hold police or the justice system accountable.” Berry had experienced backlash even before her protest at the Olympic trials. At the 2019 Pan American Games, she raised a fist on the podium, and duly lost sponsors and a large part of her income. If anything, Berry’s sacrifice was more severe than those of LeBron and Kaepernick, who at least had millions in the bank from lucrative professional careers when they made their stands. “The Pan American Games are a much smaller Olympic Games, and since it was in an ‘underdeveloped country’ I didn’t know if it was going to be broadcast. But the world had an immediate reaction. I was immediately defunded by two of my biggest sponsors, Nike being one. I actually made another championship team and throughout that process they were trying to keep me from the team. They didn’t want me to participate and labeled me anti-American. But I was actually exercising my constitutional right,” Berry said. “Too often when athletes stand up for the communities they come from, they’re punished. So they shut up, and the other athletes see what happened to you and they say ‘Well, we aren’t going to say anything’ because when I lost 80% of my salary, it shut everybody up on the Olympic team. And that was done on purpose … but I have no regrets.” While there are those who still tell athletes to “shut up and dribble” or question the significance of an athlete using their platform for social justice, it’s important that we consider the opinion of people who have been directly impacted. And that doesn’t just apply to police killings. Muhammad Ali stood up for those affected by the Vietnam War and MLB player Carlos Delgado did the same for the US invasion of Iraq. Just this week Formula One driver Sebastian Vettel has boycotted the Russian Grand Prix over Vladimir Putin’s invasion of Ukraine. As Emerald Garner told the panel about the comfort the likes of Berry, LeBron and Kaepernick gave her: “I want to thank all athletes like Ms Berry for standing with us. It really means a lot. Without these athletes using their platform, a lot of people wouldn’t know what happened to our loved ones. It took athletes like Ms Berry, LeBron, Colin Kaepernick to bring this to the stadiums, these arenas, these platforms where you get millions and millions of views and sometimes it leads to officers being held accountable for what they did because of the attention they brought to it. So yes it means everything.”Mike Ashley’s Frasers Group has bought Studio Retail out of administration for £26.8m, saving almost 1,500 jobs after its shareholding in the online specialist was wiped out. Frasers, which owns Sports Direct, House of Fraser department stores, Evans Cycles and the Flannels designer fashion chain, said the acquisition would provide the group with the “expertise and synergies” that would help its ambition to provide more flexible payment options. Studio Retail, which sells a mix of cut-price own-brand products from clothing and furnishings to gifts and cards, offers shoppers an account where they can choose to spread payments over many months. The group, formerly known as Findel, called in administrators to its publicly listed holding company last Thursday, wiping out shareholders led by Fraser Group, which had held a near 30% stake. That came after shares in the group, which had a market value of about £100m, were suspended last week when the group said a request for a £25m loan had been turned down by its bank HSBC. The collapse of Studio Retail marks the latest in a sorry list of stock market investments for Ashley’s retail empire. The group took a hit of at least £150m on its near 30% stake in Debenhams when the then-listed department store called in administrators in 2019 while its 19% stake in Goals Soccer centre was wiped out when the five-a-side football pitch operator delisted after an accounting scandal. Ashley’s empire also bought out Game Digital, the games retailer, where it built a near 40% stake as sales fell because gamers were increasingly bypassing physical stores to buy online.The pictures this morning of Russian tanks rolling across the Ukrainian countryside seemed both surreal – a flashback to a Europe that we’ve seen only in newsreels – and inevitable. It’s been clear for years that Vladimir Putin was both evil and driven and that eventually we might come to a moment like this. One of the worst parts of facing today’s reality is our impotence in its face. Yes, America is imposing sanctions, and yes, that may eventually hamper Putin. But the Russian leader made his move knowing we could not actually fight him in the Ukraine – and indeed that his hinted willingness to use nuclear weapons will make it hard to fight him anywhere, though one supposes we will have no choice if he attacks a Nato member. But that doesn’t mean there aren’t ways to dramatically reduce Putin’s power. One way, in particular: to get off oil and gas. This is not a “war for oil and gas” in the sense that too many of America’s Middle East misadventures might plausibly be described. But it is a war underwritten by oil and gas, a war whose most crucial weapon may be oil and gas, a war we can’t fully engage because we remain dependent on oil and gas. If you want to stand with the brave people of Ukraine, you need to find a way to stand against oil and gas. Russia has a pathetic economy – you can verify that for yourself by looking around your house and seeing how many of the things you use were made within its borders. Today, 60% of its exports are oil and gas; they supply the money that powers the country’s military machine. And, alongside that military machine, control of oil and gas supplies is Russia’s main weapon. They have, time and again, threatened to turn off the flow of hydrocarbons to western Europe. When the Germans finally this week stopped the planned Nordstream 2 pipeline, Putin’s president Dimtry Medvedyev said, “Welcome to the new world where Europeans will soon have to pay 2,000 euros ($2,270) per thousand cubic meters!” His not very subtle notion: if the price of keeping houses warm doubles, Europe will have no choice but to fold. Finally, even the Biden administration – which has been playing its hand wisely in the lead up to the invasion – is constrained by oil and gas. As we impose sanctions, everyone’s looking for an out: the Italians want to exempt high-end luxury goods and the Belgians diamonds, but America has made it clear that it it doesn’t want to seriously interrupt the flow of Russian oil for fear of driving up gas prices and thus weakening American resolve. As one “senior state deparment official” told the Wall Street Journal this week, “doing anything that affects … or halts energy transactions would have a great impact on the United States, American citizens and our allies. So our intention here is to impose the hardest sanctions we can while trying to safeguard the American public and the rest of the world from those measures,” the official said. It’s obviously not an idle fear: as of this morning Tucker Carlson was attacking Russia hawk Lindsay Graham for supporting a conflict that will bring “higher gas prices” while he has a “generous Congressional pension”. If you’re an apologist for fascism, high gas prices are your first go-to move. So now is the moment to remind ourselves that, in the last decade, scientists and engineers have dropped the cost of solar and windpower by an order of magnitude, to the point where it is some of the cheapest power on earth. The best reason to deploy it immediately is to ward off the existential crisis that is climate change, and the second best is to stop the killing of nine million people annually who die from breathing in the particulates that fossil fuel combustion produces. But the third best reason – and perhaps the most plausible for rousing our leaders to action – is that it dramatically reduces the power of autocrats, dictators, and thugs. Imagine a Europe that ran on solar and wind power: whose cars ran on locally provided electricity, and whose homes were heated by electric air-source heat pumps. That Europe would not be funding Putin’s Russia, and it would be far less scared of Putin’s Russia – it could impose every kind of sanction, and keep them in place until the country buckled. Imagine an America where the cost of gas was not a political tripwire, because if people had to have a pickup to make them feel sufficiently manly, that pickup ran on electricity that came from the sun and wind. It would take an evil-er genius than Vladimir Putin to figure out how to embargo the sun. These are not novel technologies – they exist, are growing, and could be scaled up quickly. In the years after Hitler invaded the Sudetenland, America turned its industrial prowess to building tanks, bombers, and destroyers. In 1941, in Ypsilanti, the world’s largest industrial plant went up in six month’s time, and soon it was churning out a B-24 bomber every hour. A bomber is a complicated machine with more than a million parts; a wind turbine is, by contrast, relatively simple. In Michigan alone (“the arsenal of democracy”), a radiator company retooled to make 20m steel helmets and a rubber factory retooled to produce the liners for those helmets; the company that made the fabric for Ford’s seat cushions stopped doing that and started pushing out parachutes. Do we think that it’s beyond us to quickly produce the solar panels and the batteries required to end our dependence on fossil fuel? It’s not easy – among other things, Russia has a good deal of some of the minerals that help in renewable energy production. (Nickel, for example.) But, here again, the example of the second world war is helpful – with the Axis in control of commodities like rubber, we quickly figured out how to mass produce substitutes. It’s true that we could produce carbon free energy with nuclear power too, as long as we were willing to pay the heavy premium that technology requires – and right now Germany is probably regretting its decision to hastily shutting down its reactors in the wake of the Fukushima accident. But if you think about the scenario now unfolding across Europe, you’re reminded of another of the advantages of renewable power, which is that it’s widely distributed. There are far fewer central nodes to attack with cruise missiles and artillery shells – targeting reactors is pretty easy, but driving your tank across Europe from one solar panel to the next so you can get out to smash it with a hammer is comical. At the moment, big oil is using the fighting in Ukraine as an excuse to try to expand its footprint – reliable industry ally Kristi Noem, the governor of South Dakota, went on Fox this week to argue that stopping the Keystone XL pipeline had empowered the Russian leader, for instance, and the American Petroleum Institute today called for more oil and gas development. But this is absurd – we may need, for the remaining weeks of this winter, to insure gas supplies for Europe, but by next winter we need to remove that lever. That means an all-out effort to decarbonize that continent, and then our own. It’s not impossible. We have to do it anyway, if we’re to have any hope of slowing climate change. And we can do it fast if we want: huge offshore windfarms in Europe have been built inside of 18 months without any wartime pressure. We should be in agony today – people are dying because they want to live in a democracy, want to determine their own affairs. But that agony should, and can, produce real change. (And not just in Europe. Imagine not having to worry about what the king of Saudia Arabia thought, or the Koch brothers – access to fossil fuel riches so often produces retrograde thuggery). Caring about the people of Ukraine means caring about an end to oil and gas. Bill McKibben is the Schumann distinguished scholar at Middlebury College, Vermont, and leader of the climate campaign group 350.orgFighting has reached the northern suburbs of Kyiv after a night of missile attacks on the Ukrainian capital to prepare for a major Russian assault, as president Volodymyr Zelenskiy pleaded for more international help and tougher sanctions. Air raid sirens wailed over the city of 3 million people and heavy gunfire and explosions were heard in a residential district on Friday morning. Ukrainian officials warned that Russian military vehicles were approaching the city from the north-west. A day after the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, launched an invasion that shocked the world, a senior Ukrainian official said Russian forces would enter the city limits later in the day, adding that Ukrainian troops were defending positions on four fronts. Pre-dawn blasts in Kyiv set off a second day of violence after Putin on Thursday defied western warnings to unleash the biggest attack on a European state since the second world war. It has so far claimed at least 150 lives and displaced more than 100,000. “Horrific Russian rocket strikes on Kyiv,” Ukraine’s foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, tweeted. “Last time our capital experienced anything like this was in 1941 when it was attacked by Nazi Germany. Ukraine defeated that evil and will defeat this one.” Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, said Moscow was ready for talks if Ukraine’s military surrendered, as he insisted the invading forces were seeking to free the country from “oppression” and would not seek to occupy it. The Ukrainian defence ministry said Russian forces had entered the Obolonskyi district of Kyiv, about six miles from the centre of the city. In a statement posted online, it advised residents to report the movements of Russian troops and “prepare molotov cocktails in order to neutralise the enemy”. Cleaning broken glass from her room, one Kyiv resident, Oxana Gulenko, said: “How we can live through it in our time? What should we think. Putin should be burnt in hell along with his whole family.” Witnesses said loud explosions could also be heard in Kharkiv, Ukraine’s second-biggest city, close to Russia’s border, while air raid sirens sounded over Lviv in the west. A resident told the Guardian the eastern city of Sumy had been taken. Ukrainian officials said a Russian aircraft had been shot down and crashed into a building in Kyiv overnight, setting it ablaze. An unverified recording shows a Russian warship ordering a Ukrainian Black Sea outpost to surrender. The Ukrainians reply: “Russian warship, go fuck yourself.” In the Ukrainian village of Starognativka near the frontline where separatists have faced off against Kyiv’s forces for years, a local official, Volodymyr Veselkin, said missiles had been raining down all morning and the power was out. “They are trying to wipe the village off the face of the earth,” he said. The UN’s refugee agency said about 100,000 people were already displaced inside Ukraine, while thousands of others fled across the border. Streams of people in cars and on foot were seen crossing into Hungary, Poland and Romania at border points where queues were lasting up to 15 hours. Zelenskiy said in a televised address early on Friday that Putin was targeting civilian as well as military sites. “They say that civilian objects are not a target for them. It is a lie; they do not distinguish in which areas to operate,” he said, vowing to continue defending his country. The president, who also criticised world leaders for “watching from afar”, spoke after large explosions were heard in the capital, and after a warning from the US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, that “all evidence suggests that Russia intends to encircle and threaten” the city. Zelenskiy has vowed to stay in the capital. The UK defence secretary, Ben Wallace, has said it is the view of British intelligence that Russia intends to invade the whole of Ukraine, but that its army failed to deliver on the first day of its invasion. The international criminal court said on Friday it might investigate possible war crimes, though did not provide any further details. Putin says Ukraine is an illegitimate state carved out of Russia, although his ultimate aims remain obscure. Blinken told a meeting of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe on Thursday that the US believed Moscow had “developed plans to inflict widespread human rights abuses – and potentially worse – on the Ukrainian people”. Ukraine announced it had lost control of the Chernobyl nuclear site near the country’s northern border with Belarus hours after Russian troops began an invasion on Thursday, and the White House said it was “outraged” by credible reports that Russian forces were holding facility staff there hostage. The International Atomic Energy Agency said it was following the situation “with grave concern” and appealed for maximum restraint to avoid any action that might put Ukraine’s nuclear facilities at risk. In Russia, thousands of people defied tough anti-protest legislation to stage anti-war rallies across the country. OVD-Info, which monitors arrests at opposition protests, said that more than 1,800 people in 59 cities had been detained. The west scrambled to respond to Putin’s aggression with a range of new sanctions against Moscow, with the US also announcing it would send 7,000 more troops to Germany to shore up Nato’s eastern borders. But even after the invasion there were divisions on the strength of the response. The EU faced furious remonstrations from Kyiv after Europe’s leaders held back from imposing the potentially most damaging sanction on Russia: blocking Russia from the international payments system through which it receives foreign currency. Ukraine’s foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, said European and US politicians would have “blood on their hands” if they failed to impose the heaviest toll on Moscow by cutting Russia from the Swift payments system. France’s finance minister, Bruno Le Maire, said cutting Russia off from Swift was “a very last resort”. The president of the European Commission, Ursula von der Leyen, said the EU was united after discussions of the five-pillar sanctions package targeting the financial, energy, transport and export industries and visa controls. She said: “Today’s events are a watershed moment for Europe. Bombs are falling on innocent women, men and children. They fear for their lives and many are dying. All of this happens in 2022 – in the very heart of Europe. President Putin chose to bring back war to Europe. “Let me stress that these events, indeed, mark the beginning of a new era. We must be very clear in our analysis: Putin is trying to subjugate a friendly European country. And he is trying to redraw the maps of Europe by force. He must, and he will, fail.” Leaders of the 30 Nato allied nations will meet on Friday, the US president, Joe Biden, confirmed, as they come under pressure to go further than the two rounds of sanctions already announced, after what the British prime minister, Boris Johnson, described as a “dark day in the history of our continent”. The UN security council will also vote on Friday on a draft resolution condemning Russia’s invasion and requiring Moscow’s immediate withdrawal. However, Moscow can veto the measure, and it was unclear how China, which has rejected calling Russia’s move an invasion, would vote.Good morning. Ukrainians are being urged to resist as Russian tanks close in on Kyiv, in a day which could become the hardest day in the war, an adviser to Ukraine’s interior minister has said. Explosions and gunfire have been heard in the Obolonskyi area, a northern district of Kyiv, as invading Russian forces approached. Anton Herashchenko said the city’s defenders were waiting with anti-tank missiles as reports came in that tanks were advancing on the city of almost 3 million from all sides. The Ministry of Defence’s Facebook page urged civilians to resist, saying: “We urge citizens to inform us of troop movements, to make Molotov cocktails, and neutralise the enemy.” Kyiv residents were woken by the sound of explosions as reports circulated that Russia had launched a series of missile strikes on the city. What we know so far The UN refugee agency has predicted that 4 million people may flee Ukraine “if the situation escalates further”. The death toll in Ukraine has risen to 137 people, while 316 had been wounded by Russia’s invasion and attacks, the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, said in an address late on Thursday. All men aged 18-60 have been forbidden from leaving Ukraine as the military mobilises, with Zelenskiy declaring martial law. Russian forces have taken the city of Sumy in north-eastern Ukraine. The city is about 200km west of the Russian border. Kyiv was shaken by explosions in the early hours of Friday, with Ukraine claiming it had shot down a Russian military aircraft over the city. The interior ministry said a residential tower block had been set alight by the falling debris. Cars queued for up to 15 hours as thousands attempted to flee Ukraine into Hungary and Poland. Fuel is in short supply, with a 20-litre fuel restriction imposed at six petrol stations and huge queues. Internal flights have been suspended. Thousands of Russians have protested against the war in dozens of cities including Moscow and St Petersburg, with police arresting at least 1,702 in 53 cities. Ukraine urges west to toughen up sanctions Zelenskiy has pleaded with western countries to ramp up their sanctions on Russia and send more military support. In an address to the nation just after midnight, the president said: “We have been left alone to defend our state. Who is ready to fight alongside us? I don’t see anyone. Who is ready to give Ukraine a guarantee of Nato membership? Everyone is afraid.” On Thursday evening, Ukraine’s foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, voiced his fury shortly before the EU decided against blocking Russia from Swift, an international payments system through which it receives foreign currency – potentially the most effective sanction the bloc could impose. “I will not be diplomatic on this,” he tweeted. “Everyone who now doubts whether Russia should be banned from Swift has to understand that the blood of innocent Ukrainian men, women and children will be on their hands too. BAN RUSSIA FROM SWIFT.” Is Swift bound by sanctions? The network has resisted calls to impose bans on certain countries, but there is precedent. In 2012, the EU banned Swift from serving Iranian firms and individuals sanctioned in relation to Tehran’s nuclear programme. Russia’s ministry for the economy has responded to sanctions by saying it is developing measures to minimise their impact, with plans to expand trade with Asia. In other news … Three former Minneapolis police officers have been convicted for violating George Floyd’s civil rights. A juror in Ghislaine Maxwell’s trial who might not have disclosed childhood sexual abuse during jury selection will now be questioned publicly as Maxwell’s team seeks a retrial. The Dominican Republic has begun construction on a controversial border wall with Haiti, with officials claiming it will limit the flow of migrants, drugs and weapons. Stat of the day: Just 9% of plastic waste is recycled Only 9% of plastic waste is recycled, meaning microplastics are everywhere. The material is difficult to recycle and slow to decay. A summit of world leaders is being held online and in Nairobi, Kenya, next week, with hopes that the first ever global legally binding treaty to combat plastic waste could be agreed upon. Don’t miss this: how the music industry sobered up Musicians touring used to mean one thing: a hedonistic party life, fueled by booze and drugs. But the culture is starting to change, music journalist Hannah May Kilroy writes, with growing availability of support for those who want to stay sober. “There’s almost this unwritten rule that drugs and alcohol are a necessity if you’re a musician or in the music industry,” says Norman Beecher, who runs a workshop at Music Support, a charity specialising in mental health and addiction in the industry. “It’s a narrative that needs to change.” Climate check: big oil is all talk and no action on clean energy Major oil companies are largely all talk and no act when it comes to the clean energy initiatives they espouse, a comprehensive peer-reviewed study has found. Researchers compared rhetoric with action taken from 2009 to 2020 from the world’s four largest oil companies, ExxonMobil, Chevron, Shell and BP, finding that the firms were not transitioning their business models to clean energy. Last Thing: London’s ‘Boris bikes’ being spotted around the world Twelve years since they first appeared on London’s streets, “Boris bikes” – named after Boris Johnson, who was mayor at the time of their introduction – have been hailed as an eco-friendly way of getting around the city. Or perhaps a bit further: a Freedom of Information request showed that the bicycles have turned up in places as far from the capital as Australia, Jamaica and Turkey. Sign up First Thing is delivered to thousands of inboxes every weekday. If you’re not already signed up, subscribe now. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.comThe UK has said it will work “all day” to persuade fellow European states to cut Russia off from the international Swift payment system. The UK defence secretary, Ben Wallace, ended the pretence that Britain was not at odds with its fellow European leaders over the issue. He said there was still time for Russia to be excluded, and the foreign secretary, Liz Truss, said: “The UK is working with allies to exclude Russia from the Swift financial system.” Wallace added: “We will work all the magic, do everything we can in diplomacy.” Truss is to undertake a round of shuttle diplomacy to try to rally support for the British position after the EU refused to adopt what has been billed as the “nuclear option” of sanctions. British officials said that the EU, reflecting the divisions at its council meeting on Thursday, kept the Swift option on the table. UK diplomats are arguing that with Ukrainian forces mounting a defence of their country, and scattered signs of unease in Russian cities, this is the moment to try to get ahead of Putin for once and surprise him with a move that would send the Russian economy straight into the deep freeze. The British position has the support of Canada and some US senators. British officials insist they will keep up the pressure for the policy even if Kyiv falls. Boris Johnson lobbied the German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, on Wednesday on the issue but made no progress. Johnson’s position, also raised at a virtual meeting of the G7, is backed by the Labour leader, Keir Starmer. The Swift payment system (the Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunication) is the main secure messaging system that banks use to make rapid and secure cross-border payments, allowing international trade to flow smoothly. It has become the principal mechanism for financing international trade. In 2020, about 38m transactions were sent each day over the Swift platform, facilitating trillions of dollars’ worth of deals. Swift is incorporated under Belgian law and, although supervised by a complex web of central banks, it was forced in 2012 to comply with an EU regulation, as confirmed by its home country government, that had cut Iran off from the banking system. Wallace said: “We would like to go further. We’d like to do the Swift system – that is the financial system that allows the Russians to move money around the world to receive payments for its gas – but … these are international organisations and if not every country wants them to be thrown out of the Swift system, it becomes difficult.” Opponents of the move argue that it would incentivise Russia to try to use an alternative fledgling scheme. They also say it would be dangerous for countries highly dependent on Russia for their energy, principally Italy. The Biden administration privately supports the Swift cutoff, but is also focused on maintaining transatlantic unity. Biden highlighted the other swingeing sanctions that the EU had agreed to take, arguing that they were more effective than Swift. He said: “It is always an option, but right now that’s not the position the rest of Europe wishes to take.” Scholz said before an EU meeting to decide on sanctions late on Thursday night that it was important for the EU to hold measures in reserve to punish Russia further. “It’s very important that we decide on measures that have been prepared in recent weeks and reserve everything else for a situation where it is necessary to do other things as well,” he said. The former European Council president Donald Tusk said on Friday that some EU governments had “disgraced themselves” by refusing to impose the toughest possible sanctions on Russia even as Vladimir Putin was bombing Kyiv. The remarkable rebuke by Tusk, who led meetings of the council as president from 2014 to 2019, revealed deep divisions among Europe’s political elite at what is perhaps the continent’s most acute moment of crisis since the second world war. “In this war everything is real: Putin’s madness and cruelty, Ukrainian victims, bombs falling on Kyiv,” Tusk posted on Twitter. “Only your sanctions are pretended [sic]. Those EU governments which blocked tough decisions (i.a. Germany, Hungary, Italy) have disgraced themselves.”Guardian Australia has won two Walkley awards for excellence in journalism for political editor Katharine Murphy’s commentary and reporter Naaman Zhou’s series on the dangers faced by food delivery drivers. Murphy took out the commentary, analysis, opinion and critique category for three of her columns on the gendered dynamics in federal parliament. In her article on former Liberal staffer Brittany Higgins finding her voice after an alleged rape in Parliament House, Murphy argued the revelations about the incident needed to spark a moment of profound change. “This story, the gut-wrenching story of Higgins and the grotesque indignity she believes she suffered on a couch in the people’s house late at night – coming after a succession of stories about women struggling in a professional culture that remains institutionally hostile to women – has opened a wound in the building I’ve worked in for more than two decades,” Murphy wrote. “Women who work in politics to serve their country have had enough.” In early March, Murphy argued that the men in the halls of parliament were missing the moment – just as they had when Julia Gillard delivered her famous misogyny speech in 2012. Later that same month, in the wake of an interview with Scott Morrison on A Current Affair, she described how the prime minister was attempting to appeal to a particular cohort of women. “Perhaps for the foreseeable future Morrison’s prime ministership will now have two objectives: speaking to men who might vote Labor, and women inclined to pity unreconstructed men. Perhaps there was always some crossover with these two cohorts,” Murphy wrote. Samantha Maiden, the political editor of news.com.au, won the Gold Walkley for revealing allegations that Higgins had been raped in Parliament House. Reporter Naaman Zhou, who left Guardian Australia in 2021 to work at the New Yorker, won the all-media public service journalism Walkley for a series of reports on the dangers faced by food delivery drivers. In a feature in early November 2020, Zhou profiled three food delivery drivers who died while delivering meals for DoorDash, Hungry Panda and Uber Eats. In one case, the driver Chow Khai Shien’s death did not officially register in Australia for two and a half days. His follow-up news story in late November revealed that food delivery companies did not check whether their delivery riders had working bikes – or whether they could even ride a bike – before approving them to work. Zhou continued his coverage of the issue with a story in May last year, exposing the alarmingly low rates of pay Uber Eats riders in Australia were earning for long deliveries across multiple suburbs. Guardian Australia was a finalist in three other categories: Indigenous affairs, innovation and press photography. Reporter Matilda Boseley was nominated in the innovation category for her vibrant and informative TikTok news videos, including her viral explainer on Afghanistan. The category was won by Kylie Boltin, Ella Rubeli, Ravi Vasavan and Emma Anderson, from SBS for Ravi and Emma, an “interactive documentary” in Southern Dialect Auslan. Laura Murphy-Oates, Lorena Allam, David Maurice Smith and Jeremy Worrall were nominated in the Indigenous affairs category for Childhood in Custody, a series about the overrepresentation of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander children in the justice system. That category was won by Karla Grant, Julie Nimmo, Michael Carey, Mark Bannerman and the team from NITV’s Living Black program. Guardian contributor Christopher Hopkins was named a finalist in the press photographer of the year category, which was won by Brook Mitchell of the Sydney Morning Herald. Entries for this year’s Walkleys needed to have been published between 1 September 2020 and 31 August 2021. The 66th annual Walkley awards were held in Sydney on Friday night, after being moved from Tamworth due to Covid-19 concerns. The chair of the Walkley Judging Board, Michael Brissenden, said: “The judges had a difficult job picking winners among so many high quality entries across the 30 award categories that covered an incredibly broad range of subjects; from Covid-19 to the war in Afghanistan, mental health, underprivileged Australians, sexual harassment, racism and the Tokyo Olympics.” “The winning entries showcase the pinnacle of Australian journalism, long-form writing and photojournalism.”Slowly, we are returning to something resembling a pre-Covid state. In England, Northern Ireland, Scotland and Wales at least, the final remaining restrictions have been lifted, or are likely to be lifted in the coming weeks. Offices are filling up, the queues at your chosen sandwich shop chain are getting longer, and for many the dreaded commute to work has returned. Which, in turn – for some of us – means the return of something else: the strange looks from other commuters as we try (and fail) not to laugh at podcasts. I felt that familiar rush of embarrassment earlier this week when, on The Always Sunny Podcast, Rob McElhenney recalled how, as a child, his mother would spray him with vinegar at the beach. I’m still not entirely sure why McElhenney’s mother sprayed him with vinegar on the beach – something to do with horseflies I think – but his description, and the comedic savaging he received from co-hosts Glenn Howerton and Charlie Day started me snorting. The Always Sunny Podcast is nominally a companion piece to It’s Always Sunny in Philadelphia, the long-running, much-loved sitcom starring McElhenney, Howerton and Day, as well as Kaitlin Olson and our lord Danny DeVito. I say nominally a companion piece: while each instalment of the pod is supposed to be a discussion on a corresponding episode of the sitcom – which, if you haven’t seen it follows the truly reprehensible owners of a decaying Irish pub in Philadelphia – the hosts usually abandon that premise a couple of minutes in to instead ramble about weird subjects, argue with each other, attempt bizarre impressions and generally try to make each other laugh. In fact, sometimes they don’t even bother to cover an episode of the show at all: last week they hosted a phone-in with members of the public, which not only managed to include a touching call with a woman who had recently undergone brain surgery, but also an eye-wateringly scatological convo with someone who was on the loo at the time. What’s particularly fun about the podcast, if you’re familiar with the show (I doubt the pod makes much sense if you aren’t, so it’s worth taking in the two in tandem), is how McElhenney, Howerton and Day resemble the mannerisms of their characters, without ever reaching the heights of their awfulness. The trio were friends before the pitched the sitcom to US network FX, and the podcast gives a glimpse into how they built the series from their own interactions: the bickering, the teasing, and the enjoyment of being in each other’s company. In short, The Always Sunny Podcast is fantastic, but it does present a bit of a problem on public transport. Do I just try to stifle a laugh? Or try to bury it in my sleeve as if I’m sneezing? Or do I just full-throatedly own the laughter, and risk the weird looks? Any advice from experienced comedy podcast commuters would be gratefully received! If you want to read the complete version of this newsletter please subscribe to receive The Guide in your inbox every Friday.What a difference a week makes. Burnley have gone from the darkest depths of the table to three points from safety in the space of two brilliant performances. Sean Dyche’s side seemed to have forgotten themselves but Wout Weghorst’s destruction of Brighton and a masterful 1-0 over an over-confident Tottenham has them back grinding for survival. A third successive win (last seen in April 2019) could incredibly move them out of danger. So can Crystal Palace survive an encounter with this reconfigured behemoth? Patrick Vieira’s only recent successes have come when punching down and after putting four past Watford the Frenchman will hope he has found an attacking combination that truly clicks after Palace’s early fire appeared extinguished. Graham Searles Saturday 3pm Venue Selhurst Park Last season Crystal Palace 0 Burnley 3 Referee Jon Moss This season G17 Y36 R4 2.35 cards/game Odds H Evens A 10-3 D 27-10 CRYSTAL PALACE Subs from Matthews, Milivojevic, Benteke, Kelly, Banks, Hannam, Riedewald, Rak-Sakyi, Clyne, Tomkins, Eze, Schlupp, Hughes, Édouard, Ayew Doubtful None Injured Ferguson (hamstring, Apr), Guaita (knee, unknown), Ward (knock, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y44 R1 Form DLDDLW Leading scorers Gallagher, Zaha 8 BURNLEY Subs from Hennessey, Norris, Bardsley, Thomas, Collins, Lowton, Stephens, Long, Barnes, Rodriguez, Westwood, Taylor Doubtful Westwood (match fitness), Taylor (ankle), Cornet (foot) Injured Vydra (groin, 12 Mar), Gudmundsson (calf, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y43 R0 Form DDDLWW Leading scorer Cornet 6Recently appointed associate artist with the London Symphony Orchestra, soprano-conductor Barbara Hannigan has made much of her dual role, often singing and conducting simultaneously, with uneven results, both live and on disc. Her latest venture, first unveiled in Paris in January last year, juxtaposes Strauss’s Metamorphosen with a multimedia version of La Voix Humaine, Poulenc’s one-act opera depicting the final phone conversation between a desperate woman, Elle (“She”), and the unseen lover who is dumping her for someone else. Her take on the work is idiosyncratic. At several points, Elle admits to lying, and Hannigan, in a video talk before her performance, posits the idea that the opera itself is a lie, arguing that Elle’s lover doesn’t really exist, and that “all this is a fantasy in her mind”. She notes Elle’s need to control her world, much as she herself controls the orchestra. “Perhaps she imagines that she is me,” she tells us. Hannigan conducts and sings the opera largely with her back to us, while live footage of her face and torso, directed by Clemens Malinowski, is projected from multiple platform cameras on to a large screen behind the orchestra. Rhythmic gestures are dramatically integrated as she pounds the air in fury at a crossed line on her now nonexistent phone, or claws her face in self-pity. Though she is amplified, the role suits her well vocally, and there is plenty of the underlying orchestral sensuality that Poulenc demanded. Yet it remains misguided. Conducting yourself on film seems quite literally self-regarding, I’m afraid. And if Elle’s lover doesn’t exist then Poulenc’s heroine becomes a delusional narcissist, which plays havoc with the balance of sympathies. Video was also promised for Metamorphosen, but didn’t, for whatever reason, materialise. Strauss’s great lament for the collapse of European culture in the last days of the second world war needs no visual accompaniment, and in this instance gained terrible resonance from being played on the day of the invasion of Ukraine. The performance, though, was overly restrained and understated, rarely attaining the harrowing immediacy the work ideally needs, which was a shame.About 5,000 miles away from the violence in Ukraine, shock waves from Russia’s invasion are being felt in Taiwan. Until recently, Taiwan was considered to be one of the world’s most significant potential flashpoints for a multination war. It was heralded – albeit with some exaggeration – as “the most dangerous place on Earth”, under growing threat of invasion by Xi Jinping’s China, which considers the independently governed democracy to be a Chinese province. This week its people have watched their fears play out in eastern Europe, as Russian forces – ordered by Xi’s ally Vladimir Putin – attacked in the pre-dawn hours of Thursday. The invasion prompted solidarity from Taiwan. The government proclaimed it stood with Ukraine, and announced unspecified economic sanctions against Russia. “The principle of self-determination cannot be erased by brute force,” said Taiwan’s vice-president, Lai Ching-te. It also prompted fear. There is speculation about whether Beijing might use this crisis to make its move, while the world is focused on Ukraine. “China may think about using military action against Taiwan at any moment,” Taiwan’s foreign minister, Joseph Wu, said earlier this month. The UK prime minister, Boris Johnson, warned “the shock will echo around the world” if Ukraine was endangered, specifically citing Taiwan. On Thursday, Beijing sent nine warplanes into Taiwan’s air defence zone – a slightly larger than average sortie among the near daily incursions of the last two years. On Wednesday, President Tsai Ing-wen ordered Taiwan’s military and national security apparatus to boost its defences, surveillance, and early warning systems, and to strengthen its already sophisticated responses to cognitive warfare. Analysts and China watchers say it is unlikely an attack is imminent. This year is politically sensitive for Xi with a once-in-five-years leadership congress, and Taiwan is both more easily defended than Ukraine and more important – strategically and economically – to world powers such as the US. “The Chinese leadership continues to emphasise that time is on China’s side for cross strait [unification], that trends are favouring China,” says Brookings Institute scholar on China and Asia, Ryan Hass. “That’s an alibi for maintaining the status quo throughout a turbulent year.” But J Michael Cole, a Taiwan-based China expert, warns there is a danger in assuming autocratic leaders like Putin and Xi are making decisions rationally. “The unimaginable is possible, even if, from our perspective, taking action, in this case launching a war of choice despite the threat of major sanctions, seems irrational.” In Taiwan feelings are mixed. The crisis has raised questions about Taiwan’s preparedness and the commitment of its friends. The threat of invasion has loomed for decades, but when the day comes Taiwan will need help to survive, and so people are watching closely how the international community is responding to Ukraine. In the bustle of a Taipei morning market, women are flitting from stall to stall, filling their trolley bags with produce, while sellers shout across the lanes to each other. Bebe, a fruit and vegetable seller, is unloading bags of cabbages from a blue truck onto her bicycle. It is a busy day before the long weekend, but Ukraine is at the top of her mind. “I’m really concerned about it,” she says from behind a wide straw hat and a face mask bearing the flags of Taiwan, the US, Lithuania, and Japan, with the message: “Thank you my friends.” “I don’t know if the US is strong enough to help protect Ukraine, so of course I worry about Taiwan.” Lannie, a 20-year-old student, says she fears that China appears to be helping Russia, and that could mean Russia helps China later on. “I don’t think we will have war today, but now I see everything happening I’m a little bit worried.” The moment is a litmus test for the US, several analysts say. “If the US is perceived as indecisive or incoherent or otherwise indifferent to western Europe’s concern about Russia, then that may diminish western Europe’s intention and willingness to help the US in the Indo-Pacific theatre as well,” says Wen-ti Sung, a political scientist at the Australian National University. Several analysts argue that this week is a wake-up call for all western governments that have been strong on the rhetoric about Taiwan but haven’t yet really had to act. “International volatility is compelling countries to speak out more clearly about the importance they attach to Taiwan security,” says Hass. “To a certain extent events are providing a bit of a catalyst for coordination.” Online, many Taiwanese commenters fear those governments have already shown how far they are willing to go, and it is not enough. “I just hope that the president will strengthen Taiwan’s national defence,” wrote one person on Tsai’s Facebook page. “[In Ukraine] many big countries have done nothing at all except for sanctioning and praying! These countries are unreliable.” Taiwan’s military is no match for China’s despite billions of dollars in arms purchases from the US. Civilian urban warfare training programmes, similar to those that Ukrainians were filmed practising this week, are still in pilot mode. On Taiwan’s north-east coast in Yilan, a Ukrainian restaurant owner, Sergei Balagov, is watching the invasion of his home from afar. Balagov’s family are still there: a nephew is in Kharkiv, one of the first cities targeted, an uncle and aunt elsewhere in Ukraine. His brother is in Russia. “People are ready to meet the invaders,” he says just hours before Russian missiles hit Ukraine. He fears Taiwan’s people are not. “My feeling is the situation will change drastically in their mind if there are invaders stepping on their country and try to force their will,” he says. “But they need to be more able to fight. Right now … they are quite laid back.” Recent polling tends to support his concern. A survey taken just prior to the invasion showed more than half of respondents did not fear a war over Ukraine, and 63% did not think Xi would use the distraction to move on Taiwan. Cole says the crisis could make the threat of war less abstract to the Taiwanese public, and the government should use it to push for a viable reserve force and to encourage citizens to “perhaps dedicate a few weeks/months of their time learning skills that would come in handy in time of emergency”. Bebe believes it is up to Taiwan to defend itself. “Don’t depend on other nations,” she says, putting her faith in “a strong president” and the will of the people “to protect our country”. “Taiwan is not China. Absolutely not. That’s very important.”UK airlines face higher fuel costs and longer journey times on flights to Asia and beyond after Russia banned British carriers from its airspace. The move came in swift response to Boris Johnson’s decision to ban Russian national carrier Aeroflot from landing in the UK as part of a range of new sanctions against Moscow. British Airways, the only UK airline flying to Moscow prior to the ban, said it was warning customers that some flights to destinations east of Russia would now take longer due to rerouting. BA usually operates three flights a week to the Russian capital but does not fly to any other destinations in Russia or Ukraine. The retaliatory move from Russia will increase already escalating jet fuel costs and pose more headaches for the national carrier’s long-haul services. A BA spokesperson said: “We apologise for the inconvenience but this is clearly a matter beyond our control. We are notifying customers on cancelled services and are offering a full refund. “We will continue to monitor the situation closely.” Virgin Atlantic said that the flight ban would increase flight times to India and Pakistan by up to an hour. The airline had decided from Thursday evening to avoid Russian airspace before Moscow’s edict confirming the ban. A spokesperson said: “We apologise for any inconvenience caused to customers by slightly longer flight times. “The safety and security of our customers and people always comes first and we’re monitoring the situation in Ukraine and Russia extremely carefully following the escalation of conflict, continuing to operate in full compliance with relevant safety regulators, authorities and governments.” The longer flight paths will affect four Virgin routes, between London Heathrow to Islamabad, Lahore and Delhi, and between Manchester and Islamabad. Virgin has not flown in Ukraine airspace since 2014, on its own risk assessments, above and beyond official guidance, and said it had further increased distances from the hostilities at the Russia-Ukraine border since December. All airlines remain acutely conscious of the fate of Malaysian Airlines flight MH17, shot down over Ukraine in 2014 by what investigators concluded was a Russian-made missile fired by pro-Moscow forces, killing all 298 people aboard. The US and the EU have yet to follow suit on any flight ban. Aeroflot currently operates as part of the SkyTeam alliance, and has codeshare flights in and out of the US with Delta. Wizz and Ryanair were the only airlines operating direct flights from Ukraine to the UK. All flights have been suspended. Wizz, the only airline with bases in Ukraine, was on Thursday trying to evacuate its remaining aircraft and crew from Kyiv and Lviv.Orford Ness is a narrow shingle and marsh spit off the Suffolk coastline that “speaks gull, speaks wave, speaks bracken &amp; lapwing, speaks bullet, ruin, gale, deception”. Now a nature reserve, it was previously the site of secret military activity from the first world war onwards, and retains the squat concrete structures that were used for military testing during the cold war. Narrated with great seriousness and portent by actor Stephen Dillane, Ness – a collaboration between nature writer Robert Macfarlane and artist Stanley Donwood – is a wonderfully weird prose poem and ecological parable in which a group of scientists including the Armourer, the Physicist, the Engineer and the Ornithologist gather at the decaying concrete Green Chapel. There they sing a hymn of ruination called “The Firing Song” and plot the end of the world. Meanwhile, five natural forces called “it”, “he”, “she”, “they” and “us” converge on the chapel to reclaim the land and avert catastrophe. “She” comprises lichen, moss and fungi; “it” is drift, with plastic bones and a body of pallet slat and bottle tops held together with fishing line. Listeners of Ness will miss out on Donwood’s eerie pen-and-ink drawings, but they gain a gently sinister score courtesy of composer Hugh Brunt, recorded at London’s Abbey Road studios. With its mythical atmosphere and rhythmic pleas to “Listen to the pasts of Ness. Listen inland to the long-gone wood, which rings with the cries of wildcat &amp; brock, heorte &amp; hind, doe &amp; bocke”, this is a work that is best heard out loud. • Ness is available on Penguin Audio, 47 min Further listening The Sound at the End Kirsty Logan, Audible Originals, 10hr 37min An immersive story written exclusively for audio by the Scottish novelist and poet. A newcomer arrives on a remote Arctic research base to investigate a wrecked ship under the ice. Unrequited Infatuations Stevie Van Zandt, White Rabbit, 14hr 26min The musician and actor“Little Steven” reads his memoir recalling his career as guitarist in Bruce Springsteen’s E Street Band and playing Silvio Dante in The Sopranos.On a bright, lunchtime drive to Haywards in Epping, I thought how, over recent years, Essex has transformed as a lifestyle concept. Essex folk doing “Essexy” things – winebars, brunch, nail appointments, wearing leather leggings – is the winning formula for multiple award-winning TV shows. Rarely, however, do we see Essex’s fancier fine-dining side, which is a shame as the county excels at fantastic, old-school, multi-course, finesse-in-heaps hospitality, with places such as Dunmow, Dedham, Chatham Green and Bell Common all being destination dining spots for earnest foodie types. Essex hospitality’s bigger problem, of course, is it’s just too darn close to Soho, where the fine-dining scene transmogrifies weekly, overshadowing the likes of chef Jahdre Hayward, his wife Amanda and his small, friendly team. This is a great shame, because since Haywards opened in 2013, people who love a good lunch have pointed me there, talking of a renovated coach house and skittle alley, close to a 17th century pub, serving ornate plates of venison with parsnip and quince or fig with Pedro Ximénez souffle. During the grimmest days of the pandemic, I wondered if independents like Haywards could remain afloat, so it was pleasing to enter its dining room of a Friday noon and be reminded how many ladies who like a three-course lunch live in the environs of Epping Forest, because it was fizzing with the kind of gossip about errant grandchildren and neighbourhood disputes that makes me want to pull up a chair and say things like: “She didn’t?” and “Not with those ankles”. Stylewise, Haywards felt, and I mean this in the nicest sense, like being on the set of MasterChef: the Professionals – a pale room with strategic pops of tasteful marine blue, a wooden floor, single flowers in rectangular mini-vases, unframed aerial friezes of the countryside on the walls and a grey menu where the modern-European fine dining is revealed with scant clues as to how it may look; eg: “monkfish, leek, mussels”. On telly, this gives Jay Rayner and me the opportunity to explain airily how we expect the dish to look, only to be heroically wrong when our lunch finally bowls in. We opted for three courses from the small, yet meaningful à la carte, kicking off with a very good, fresh-from-the-oven sourdough loaf and a plentiful wodge of salted butter, plus a surprise of veloute of pumpkin and a crisp, aerated cod-skin cracker dotted with delicate taramasalata, perched on rocks. By this stage, I knew Haywards was a great choice. It may not be as throbbingly of-the-moment as the newest multi-million-pound London or Lake District venture, but it has assured, ambitious dishes, using stellar produce, served by warm-hearted ladies whose feet never seem to touch the floor. A starter of glorious cured mackerel arrived, skin glossy, flanked by puddles of mackerel tartare in a clear dashi broth, made pretty with radish. A starter of quail was both roast breast and confit leg with crisp skin, a poached quail egg arranged dreamily around heavenly artichoke puree and deeply moreish pickled mushrooms. Things only got brighter over mains with a beguiling plate of roast lamb rump, crisp belly and croquette of shank, with aubergine puree. Unusually for restaurants like this, Haywards offered a plentiful side dish filled with steamed carrots, baby potatoes and hispi cabbage, lest anyone grumble that they left hungry. Oh how I have quietly pined for a potato at some world-class restaurants. Not here. The hero dish was a roast loin of venison, with a homemade venison sausage surrounded by satellites of quince puree and shooting stars of roast artichoke. A further mini-saucepan of venison ragu appeared to spoon over the buttered baby potatoes and add to the fun. Having eshewed booze and drunk only quince and ginger fizz, I had the perfect right to order a souffle all to myself. Tired of souffle, tired of life, I say. There will never be a time anyone presents me with one of these wobbly, featherlight highlights of pudding architecture and I don’t react like the Queen if you show her a racehorse. “Souffle,” I will gasp, as I did when a cream-coloured fig-flavoured souffle with caramel quivered as it neared my table, bringing along its friend, fresh almond ice-cream. It was five spoons of ecstasy that will rule me out of ever wearing leather leggings – without having to be cut out of them two minutes later in a changing room – but it was absolutely worth it. Haywards wasn’t the coolest, newest or the most experimental place I ate at during that week, but it lives on in my memory as fantastic, and that makes all the difference. • Haywards, 111 Bell Common, Epping, Essex CM16 4DZ, 01992 577350. Open for dinner Thurs 6pm-11.30pm; lunch Fri and Sat noon-5pm, dinner 6pm-midnight; lunch Sun 12.30pm–6pm. A la carte from £40 a head plus drinks and service.Across 9 realistic R(ubber) in SILICATE (anag) 10 Romeo ME in ’ROO 11 belch B(ook)/(w)ELCH [Raquel] 12 boatswain BOAT + SWAIN 13 witches WIT + CHES(s) 14 Ich dien 1/CH(urch) + D&lt;1&gt;EN 17 tutor TUT(ankhamun)/OR 19 Goa GOA(l) 20 Niger RE/GIN (rev) 21 red deer REDD&lt;(tre)E&gt;ER 22 tribune T  UNE 24 phonogram P(ublic)H(ouse)  RAM 26 harpy HARP/(heav)Y 28 cleft C(ocaine)/LEFT 29 detonator ROT/A(1)/NOTED (rev) Down 1 crib BIRC(h) (rev) 2 hamlet HA  T 3 light horse LIGHT + HORSE 4 Stubbs stubs (hom) [George Stubbs} 5 sciatica CIA in ACTS IS (anag) 6 Iris (sat)IRIS(e) [Iris Murdoch] 7 smearing S  EARING 8 John/john double def [John Major] 13 water WATER(loo) 15 hand in hand IN (elected) in HAND/HAND 16 nurse double def 18 tide over double def 19 Gertrude R(ex) in GET RUDE 22 tomato TO  O 23 uprate U/PRATE 24 puck CUP (rev) + (luc)k [ice hockey] 25 oath limbO A THought (hidden) 27YorkYOR(i/c)K (royal house)Don’t Ask the Dragon by Lemn Sissay and Greg Stobbs (Canongate, £12.99) In poet Lemn Sissay’s debut picture book, little Alem, alone on his birthday, wonders where he can call home – but bears, foxes and assorted wildlife all tell him just one thing: not to ask the dragon. A warm-hearted, richly coloured, peril-spiced quest, culminating in the poignant realisation that “home was always inside him”. Can Bears Ski? by Raymond Antrobus and Polly Dunbar (Walker, £7.99) Another first picture book from an acclaimed poet, in which a small bear is baffled by people asking “Can bears ski?” until he visits an audiologist, and discovers they were really saying: “Can you hear me?” Drawing vividly on Antrobus’s childhood experience with undiagnosed deafness, this new paperback edition comes with a BSL alphabet, as well as Polly Dunbar’s inimitably cuddly illustrations. Mayor Bunny’s Chocolate Town by Elys Dolan (OUP, £11.99) Dolan’s rascally rabbit is back, with political ambitions. He claims chocolate will act as a fox repellant and can be used to build delicious new homes – but what will happen when his words are put to the test? A hilarious, all-too-relevant satire of dirty tricks and comeuppance, with engaging comic-style details. It Fell from the Sky by the Fan Brothers (Quarto, £12.99) When a curious object falls from the sky, the garden insects all have theories about it, while unscrupulous Spider detects a business opportunity and begins charging his neighbours to view it. With its few words and gorgeous illustration – intricate monochrome enlivened by acid-bright touches of colour – this sophisticated picture book will prompt lively discussion among readers of 5-plus. Luma and the Pet Dragon by Leah Mohammed, illustrated by Loretta Schauer (Welbeck Flame, £6.99) Luma is thrilled to be getting a puppy on her birthday – but after a muddle at the shelter, she welcomes Timir, a mischievous dragon, instead. Though Timir can disguise himself as a little dog, Luma will need her Nani’s help to keep the big secret. Warm, sweet wish-fulfilment, with cute illustrations perfectly pitched for 6-plus. Elisabeth and the Box of Colours by Katherine Woodfine, illustrated by Rebecca Cobb (Barrington Stoke, £6.99) Élisabeth Louise Vigée le Brun was the portrait painter to Marie Antoinette. Beautifully told in spare, resonant words, this account of her life is full of Cobb’s delightful images, contrasting the shadowy grey of boarding-school routine and crushing grief with the riotous colours of artistic expression. A transporting little tale for 7-plus. The Boy Whose Wishes Came True by Helen Rutter (Scholastic, £6.99) Archie’s mum is too sad to take care of him; his dad, focused on his new family, doesn’t seem to care; at school, he’s picked on by everyone except his friend Mouse. But when Archie bumps his head and his favourite footballer appears to grant him nine wishes, everything is about to change … A funny, sad and inspiring story for 8-plus, with an enormously likable and convincing young protagonist. Loki: A Bad God’s Guide to Being Good by Louie Stowell (Walker, £7.99) Ideal for 9-plus, this outrageously funny illustrated diary chronicles the complaints of the Trickster God, exiled to Earth in a schoolboy’s body and given a month to redeem himself by showing “moral improvement”. That won’t be easy for a cunning and incredibly snarky Norse deity, who is thousands of years old and clearly shouldn’t have a bedtime. Sharp wit, ethical dilemmas, sly mythological references and oodles of doodles are a recipe for the purest reading pleasure. Like a Charm by Elle McNicoll (Knights Of, £6.99) Ramya is one of the few who can see the magical creatures filling Edinburgh’s streets. When her beloved grandfather dies, however, he leaves her a book with a brief, cryptic warning: Beware the Sirens. Another fiercely gripping, superbly original story from McNicoll, asking again why neurodivergent people (Ramya is dyspraxic) should be judged by the rigid standards of a neurotypical world. Mark My Words by Muhammad Khan (Macmillan, £7.99) When her school merges with affluent Minerva College, ambitious Dua Iqbal is furious to be denied a place on the prestigious Minerva Chronicle. When she starts a rival paper, though, she and her student journalists uncover alarming stories about drugs that those in authority would prefer to remain buried. Khan’s writing is occasionally overemphatic, but his dynamic heroine’s determination to speak truth to power at whatever cost makes for a compelling YA thriller. Kemosha of the Caribbean by Alex Wheatle (Andersen, £7.99) Kemosha was born into slavery – but when she is sold away from her brother to work in Port Royal, a lucky chance changes her fate. Learning swordfighting from the charismatic Ravenhide, she signs on as a ship’s cook with the notorious Captain Morgan. Will she ever earn enough to buy her brother’s freedom? A thrilling YA pirate adventure, filled with the grimmest details of history and a joyous sense of what happens when the oppressed are empowered. The Cats We Meet Along the Way by Nadia Mikail (Guppy, £7.99) Until the Announcement, 17-year-old Aisha thought she had a lifetime ahead of her. Now, knowing the world will end in a few months, she and her mother set out on a road trip across Malaysia, accompanied by her boyfriend, his parents and a newly acquired cat, looking for Aisha’s estranged sister. This moving, unique, incredibly assured YA debut is full of life’s slow richness, the lagging toll of grief and the brightness of unconditional love.Exhibition of the week Whistler’s Woman in White: Joanna Hiffernan A hugely enjoyable story of art, passion and the birth of modernism that is full of beauty and boldness. • Royal Academy, London, 26 February to 22 May. Also showing Postwar Modern: New Art in Britain 1945-1965 Bacon, Auerbach, Hamilton, Hockney … this survey of Britain’s unlikely art boom should be full of brilliance. • Barbican, London, from 3 March to 26 June. Britta Marakatt-Labba: Under the Vast Sky Contemporary art from the Arctic Circle that captures the world of the Sami people and the climate crisis engulfing the region. • Ikon Gallery, Birmingham, until 29 May. Pissarro: Father of Impressionism One of the quiet greats of modern art gets an intimate survey with friends such as Gauguin and Signac. • Ashmolean Museum, Oxford, until 12 June. Julien Ceccaldi: Gourmandises Gross, perverse and wittily surreal paintings by this New York-based Canadian artist. • Modern Art, London, from 24 February to 19 March. Image of the week In 19th-century Iran, beauty ideals were unconstrained by gender norms so facial hair was considered fashionable for women, while men wore feminine clothes and makeup. Shirin Fathi, artist in residence at the Sarabande Foundation in London, transformed herself into three Persian archetypes for her project Heart Throbs. “A non-binary perspective on gender and androgyny has been around for centuries,” says Fathi. See the full gallery here. What we learned A Manchester art gallery director was forced quit over a Palestinian solidarity statement More than a century after they were pillaged by the British, two Benin bronzes were returned to Nigeria The National Portrait Gallery in London and BP are to cut ties after 30 years Tate Modern’s Surrealism Beyond Borders is a raging sea of strangeness David Hockney’s latest self-portrait will go on show in Cambridge The children’s book illustrator Jan Pieńkowski has died Carlo Crivelli was the rogue of the Renaissance A mellow yellow brick may revive a decaying housing estate A property magnate’s divorce means modern masterpieces by Rothko, Warhol and others will be auctioned Artist Shirin Fathi found less rigidly gendered ideas of beauty in 19th-century Iran. Masterpiece of the week Portrait of a Man by Hans Baldung Grien, 1514 You can see age and decay starting to eat at this portrait. It’s not just the sharply observed face of the unknown man with his time-hewn skin and the grey in his beard and hair. In spite of the gold insignia that he wears, his fur collar looks a little the worse for wear. Perhaps this is not much. But the strange sheen of that hair is vividly reminiscent of Hans Baldung Grien’s similarly silvery images in other works including pictures of witches at the sabbath, or his painting The Ages of Woman and Death, in the Prado. There too, aged hair is emphasised – including the horrible matted hair of a skeleton that holds an hourglass. Here, with terrible irony, the man’s name is lost but the year is known, 1514, as his time ticks away. This is a subtle and self-controlled, yet haunting image by an artist just about holding his macabre imagination in check. • National Gallery, London Don’t forget To follow us on Twitter: @GdnArtandDesign. Sign up to the Art Weekly newsletter If you don’t already receive our regular roundup of art and design news via email, please sign up here. Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.comFrom yams to chocho to ackee, a new exhibition is shining a light on south London’s Caribbean gardens, created by the Windrush generation who moved to Britain after the second world war. The Sowing Roots exhibition at the Garden Museum in Lambeth explores how Caribbean horticultural heritage has enriched British gardening. It tells the stories of 15 individuals through interview extracts, photographs and artefacts – including a pair of dirty gardening gloves, horticulture books and herbal teas. The idea for the exhibition came after the Windrush scandal in 2018, which exposed how thousands of Caribbean people who had been invited to the UK as British citizens had been wrongly targeted with deportation. The exhibition looks at how cultivating land has helped Caribbean communities to feel at home and rooted in the UK. “The resulting oral histories shed light on the varied traditions that Caribbean people carried with them when they moved to Britain,” a panel at the start of the exhibition reads. “We hope to have unearthed the inventiveness, creativity and power at the heart of Caribbean gardening that has shaped families, communities and empire across time and space.” Through gardening, people in the diaspora have been able to connect with their cultural heritage. “The exhibition filled the spot for me, and I know for many gardeners of colour. It’s shone a light on what we’ve been doing for a long time, and given us a little platform,” says Ras Prince Morgan, who was born in Rock River in Clarendon, Jamaica, and migrated to London in 1969 when he was seven years old. Morgan created his garden 16 years ago on disused land filled with Japanese knotweed on the edge of playing fields in Lewisham, south-east London. He initially just wanted to grow some fruit trees so his children would know where their food came from; now he grows plants from all over the world and runs horticultural and educational projects. One of Morgan’s inspirations is Alan Titchmarsh. He loves London’s Kew and Hampton Court Gardens, the Eden Project in Cornwall, and many other European-led institutions, but is frustrated by the lack of visibility of Africans involved in creating this rich history. “Gardening has been such a very European-led institution,” he says. “It paints the picture that Africans were never involved, but that is the furthest thing from the truth. It’s only when you do your research, then you realise we were the backbone of the industry. [White people] were in control, passing the orders and instructions down the line, where we were to carry them out.” Part of Morgan’s motivation for growing things was to increase diversity in gardening in the UK. He now has more than 10 volunteers helping him, and most are people of colour. He has noticed the climate getting warmer over the past 10 years, meaning he is able to grow more heat-loving plants outside, such as bananas, avocados, sugar cane and angel’s trumpet. “I grew yam on my veranda and had dinner from it. That just blew my mind. People say you can’t grow yam over here, it’s not hot enough, but I grew a piece of yam on my veranda!” he says. Morgan gardens according to the cycles of the moon and uses a horoscope book called Old Moore’s Almanack, which has information on lunar rising and setting times and when is the right time to plant what. His mother – and probably his grandmother too – used the same book. Another story included in the exhibition is that of Earline Hilda Castillo Binger, who was born in Trinidad and moved to the UK in 1971 and became a nurse. She is now a community gardener and leads gardening sessions on land belonging to GP surgeries in Lambeth. “There’s a bush for everything. Every ailment you have, there’s a bush,” she says in her interview for the exhibition. “You know, this gardening has taken me on a journey, a very interesting journey.” Subsistence and small-scale farming occupies a unique place in the history of Caribbean peoples, says historian Dr Elizabeth Cooper, who curated the exhibition. “Sowing Roots taps into this history and the ways that migrants from the Caribbean carried meanings and traditions of gardening with them when they moved to the UK – and in turn transformed the uses and meanings of green spaces in south London,” she says. • The Sowing Roots exhibition is at the Garden Museum until 6 March Find more age of extinction coverage here, and follow biodiversity reporters Phoebe Weston and Patrick Greenfield on Twitter for all the latest news and featuresThe news came as a surprise to many in Beijing. Barely 24 hours ago, Chinese pundits predicted that a war in Ukraine was not inevitable. In New York, as Russia geared up for a full-on assault on its neighbour, China’s UN envoy, Zhang Jun, urged in a security council meeting that “the door to a peaceful solution to the Ukraine issue is not fully shut, nor should it be shut”. But when people in Kyiv woke up to sound of bombs in what the Nato chief called a “deliberate, cold-blooded” invasion, the door had clearly been closed. China’s state media, however, insisted it was a “special military action” by Russia. Quoting Vladimir Putin, China’s central television tweeted: “Russia was left with no other choice.” Chinese netizens were fascinated by Russia’s move. Three weeks ago, Putin was the guest of honour at the Beijing Winter Olympics. On 4 February, he and Xi Jinping pledged that there would be “no ‘forbidden’ areas of cooperation” in their bilateral relationship. On Thursday, millions took to the social media site Weibo to discuss it. So much so, a new phrase was coined: Wu Xin Gong Zuo（乌心工作）to describe those who were so concerned with the situation in Ukraine they could not focus on work. The reality on the ground contrasted with the official Chinese media narrative, yet it also offered a glimpse into the tightrope Beijing is walking. On Thursday, as she refused to use the word “invasion” to describe Russia’s action, the foreign ministry spokesperson, Hua Chunying, also indicated that China would not provide arms to Russia. “I believe that as a strong country, Russia doesn’t need China or other countries to provide weapons to it,” she said. Bonny Lin, the director of the China Power Project at the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington DC, said “Besides China’s effort to balance its various goals, all indications point to the fact that China prioritises its relationship with Russia at the moment,”, adding that Moscow’s action also posed a problem for Beijing. In public, Beijing advocates the position that sovereignty is sacrosanct. This is a discourse it often deploys when it talks about Taiwan, which it regards as a breakaway province. On the other hand, the Ukraine crisis offers Beijing the opportunity to express grievances against its common adversaries with Russia: the US and Nato. So far, the latter appears to be weighing heavier in Beijing’s messaging. This explains why Hua on Thursday invoked the memories of a diplomatic incident from more than 20 years ago. On 7 May 1999, Nato missiles struck the Chinese embassy in Belgrade and set it ablaze in a predawn strike, killing three Chinese nationals. The US claimed it was a “mistake” caused by an out-of-date map, but China was never convinced. “Chinese elites operate in a way that political gains can be prioritised over economic gains,” according to Zeno Leoni, a defence expert at King’s College London. “Right now China’s political goal is to weaken the US-led liberal order. This means that it could accept some economic disruption and continue to publicly support Russia – a marriage of convenience – for the sake of a political objective.” Lin said the further escalation of events was likely to worsen China’s relationship with the US and the EU and push countries such as Japan and Australia further away from China. “In the near term, China will be impacted by secondary sanctions and these costs for China will likely increase as the situation in Ukraine deteriorates.” In unveiling the latest round of sanctions on Thursday, Joe Biden took a swipe at Beijing, saying any country that backed Russia’s onslaught in Ukraine would be “stained by association”. “Putin will be a pariah on the international stage,” he declared. The impression will further deepen as China on the same day announced it was fully open to Russian wheat imports. But Leoni said that if military tensions were to escalate across Europe – where China has major economic interests – Beijing’s attitude might still change. “We have seen recently how both Nato’s and Russia’s naval assets have been positioning or involved in trainings in the Mediterranean Sea: Beijing might change its calculus about Russia should military hostilities extend, even mildly, to this region where the bulk of China’s trade with Europe travels through.” Western leaders are alarmed by Beijing’s response as they see the implications for the US-led postwar world order being fundamentally reshaped as a result of Russia’s action. “What we need to make sure in our response today is that we don’t just have a tactical response … But we have a long-term response to the threat to the democratic order,” Jeremy Hunt, a former British foreign secretary, told BBC Radio 4. “There are now two very big powers, Russia and China, that are absolutely committed to upending that order. And that is why we have to think long and hard and smart about what to do next.” Beijing is aware of the diplomatic fallout such a response would cause. But a government researcher, who wished to remain anonymous due to the sensitivity of the matter, quipped: “Even if China joined the west in sanctioning Russia or criticising Russia, will the US-China relations improve?” “We don’t want to face such a difficult choice, either,” he added, admitting Beijing’s dilemma but insisting its policy had to be pragmatic. “After all, China and Russia share a 4,000km-long border. In the long run, China has to be on good terms with Russia.” To realist Chinese foreign policy thinkers, geography and history continue to be relevant in their reasoning of the new world order. The deadly Soviet-China border conflict in 1969 still casts a shadow for Beijing particularly as Biden frames America’s China challenge as “democracy v autocracy”. “We are in the middle of massive changes [in geopolitics] and if you look around, many countries have been adventurous in recent years. For China, it is an opportunity as well as a challenge,” the Beijing- based government researcher said. “Adding the pandemic factor, it’s going to be very chaotic in the years to come.”London-listed Ferrexpo, the world’s third-largest exporter of iron ore pellets for the steel industry, has issued force majeure notices telling some customers supplies have been cut off after the port it operates from in Ukraine suspended operations. The trading and mining company’s headquarters are in Switzerland but it operates in Ukraine, where it has three mines and a production facility. It said that export facilities at the port of Pivdennyi in the south-west of Ukraine have been “temporarily suspended following notification from the port authorities”. The company said: “As a result, the group’s marketing department has issued force majeure notices to certain customers that were due to receive the group’s products via oceangoing vessels in the near term.” The group, which on Thursday said that the Ukrainian government had suspended rail transportation, said its mining operations near the city of Horishni Plavni in central Ukraine, were continuing to operate. “The group has the ability to stockpile its iron ore pellets at site while Ukraine’s logistic networks continue to experience disruption,” the company said. “The group’s continued primary focus remains the safety of its workforce in Ukraine.” Ferrexpo shares were down 2% in London on Friday morning. The London-listed Russian mining group Evraz, in which the billionaire and Chelsea football club owner, Roman Abramovich, owns a 29% stake, warned investors of the risk of potential sanctions because of the conflict. However, the company’s shares, which fell by a quarter on Thursday, climbed 17% in morning trading on Friday, making it the top FTSE 100 riser, after it reported an increase in profits for 2021. “The major part of the group is based in the Russian Federation and is consequently exposed to the economic and political effects of the policies adopted by the Russian government,” the company said on Friday. “The worsening situation related to Ukraine has further increased the economic uncertainty and the risk of the imposition of sanctions.” Evraz announced a net profit of £3.1bn for 2021, up from £858m the previous year.What is happening right now? Russian forces have reached Kyiv, a day after attacking Ukraine from three sides on a massive scale. Air raid sirens wailed over the city and heavy gunfire and explosions were heard in a number of districts, as Russian military vehicles approached from the north-west. There was also significant fighting near Ivankiv, about 40 miles north-west of Kyiv, and Russian troops entered the city of Sumy, which sits on a highway leading to Kyiv from the east. What happened on Thursday? Russia attacked Ukraine on multiple axes, bringing to a calamitous end weeks of fruitless diplomatic efforts by western leaders to avert war. Fighting and other military activity took place around and on the way to Kyiv, including an ambitious attack by helicopters on the Hostomel military airbase. Ukraine lost control of the Chernobyl nuclear site in the north, where fighting raged after Russian troops crossed the border from Belarus. One Russian line came through the Senkivka border crossing near Chernihiv. A substantial attack was also aimed towards the eastern city of Kharkiv. Russian forces also headed north and east from Crimea. Social media footage showed them reaching Kherson on the Dnieper, 130km inside Ukraine. How did we get here? Over the past few months Russia has forward-deployed hundreds of tanks, self-propelled artillery and even short-range ballistic missiles from as far away as Siberia to within striking range of Ukraine. Moscow’s rhetoric also grew more belligerent. Putin demanded legal guarantees that Ukraine would never join Nato or host its missile strike systems, concessions he was unlikely to receive. A flurry of diplomatic activity did little to ease tensions. The second half of February was long seen as the most likely period for a potential offensive. Russian soldiers stayed on in Belarus beyond the end of planned military exercises, and the Winter Olympics, hosted by ally China, concluded. The invasion was preceded on 22 February by Putin saying Russia would recognise the territorial claims of its two proxy states in east Ukraine. He had already ordered his forces into Russian-controlled territory in Ukraine. On 22 February a Reuters witness saw columns of military vehicles including tanks and APCs on the outskirts of Donetsk, the capital of one of the territories claimed by Russia: What do we know about Russia’s deployments? Scores of battalion tactical groups – the smallest operational unit in Moscow’s army, consisting of around 800-1,000 troops – were put in place near the borders of Ukraine in both Russia and latterly Belarus prior to the invasion. As of 18 February the US estimated that Russia had between 169,000 and 190,000 personnel in and around Ukraine. An estimated 32,000 separatist forces were already operating in the breakaway areas of Donetsk and Luhansk – some of whom were likely to be unacknowledged Russian forces – before the invasion. Many of the heavy weapons stationed near Ukraine arrived as far back as spring 2021. Over the new year Russia also began to move tanks, artillery, air-defence systems and fighter jets to Belarus for joint exercises in February. That deployment has since grown. Half of Russia’s air force is now deployed near Ukraine, according to western estimates. Russian warships conducted training exercises in the Black Sea in the run-up to the invasion. This footage released by the Russian Ministry of Defence shows a Ka-27PS helicopter taking off and landing on the deck of a frigate during exercises on 22 February: These satellite image composites show the buildup of troops in Yelnya and Pogonovo over the new year: Satellite photographs also show increased deployments in Novoozernoye in western Crimea. The US estimates 10,000 troops moved into Crimea in late January and early February. This image from 18 February shows deployments including armour, helicopters and field hospitals in Novoozernoye: Satellite images taken on 20 February showed troops and equipment being moved from holding areas to what the UK defence secretary described as potential launch locations. How do the militaries compare? Russia’s invasion pits the Kremlin’s large, recently modernised military against an adversary largely using older versions of the same or similar equipment, dating back to the Soviet era. Russia has significant numerical advantages on land and in particular in air and at sea, although the Ukrainians are defending their homeland. What is the historical context? In 2014 Putin sent troops to annex Crimea, a mainly Russian-speaking region of Ukraine. Russia also incited a separatist uprising in Ukraine’s south-east, clandestinely sending soldiers and weapons to provoke a conflict that grew into a full-blown war. A 2015 peace deal established a line of demarcation and called on both sides to make concessions. Since then low-level fighting has continued along the front, and both sides have accused the other of violating the agreement. Going back further, Russia has long opposed any attempts by Ukraine to move towards the EU and Nato. One of Putin’s often repeated demands is a guarantee that Ukraine never joins Nato, the alliance of 30 countries that has expanded eastwards since the end of the cold war. What is the role of Nord Stream 2? On 22 February, the German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, stopped the certification process for the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline in response to Russia’s recognition of the two self-proclaimed republics. First announced in 2015, the $11bn (£8.3bn) pipeline owned by Russia’s state-backed energy giant Gazprom has been built to carry gas from western Siberia to Lubmin in Germany’s north-east, doubling the existing capacity of the Nord Stream 1 pipeline and keeping 26m German homes warm at an affordable price. Europe’s most divisive energy project, Nord Stream 2 bypasses the traditional gas transit nation of Ukraine by running along the bed of the Baltic Sea. It has faced resistance within the EU, and from the US as well as Ukraine, on the grounds that it increases Europe’s energy dependence on Russia, denies Ukraine transit fees and makes it more vulnerable to Russian invasion.A subsidiary of Russia’s second largest bank, VTB, has been suspended from trading on the London Stock Exchange after the UK’s imposition of sanctions over Vladimir Putin’s invasion of Ukraine. The London Stock Exchange Group said on Friday it had suspended VTB Capital’s membership with immediate effect, meaning it can no longer trade in the British capital. The move comes after Boris Johnson announced what he called the “largest ever” range of sanctions against Russian firms and individuals, freezing the assets of all the main Russian banks, including VTB. VTB, which is majority owned by the state and has interests in banking assets across eastern Europe, has assets totalling £154bn. Legislation is expected to be tabled next week to ban major Russian companies from raising finance on UK markets and to prevent Moscow from raising sovereign debt in London. “Sanctions are a reality for us over the last few years and another round of politically motivated anti-Russian sanctions did not come as a surprise,” VTB said in a statement. There are a number of VTB executives, and those with links to the bank, who feature in the government’s list of individuals against whom it has levelled sanctions. These include VTB’s president-chair, Andrey Kostin, who is also a member of the supreme council of the United Russia political party, as well as high-ranking executives Andrey Puchkov and Yuri Alekseyevich Soloviev. Denis Bortnikov, the deputy chair of VTB Bank’s management board, is also on the sanctions list. He is a deputy president of VTB Bank and chair of its management board. As well as this, he is the son of Aleksandr Bortnikov, a director of the Federal Security Service (FSB), who has been on the sanctions list since March 2021. Russian politicians involved with the bank who also feature on the sanctions list include the deputy prime minister and chief of the government staff, Dmitry Grigorenko, who is chair of the supervisory council of VTB Bank. As a former director of the Russian tax service, he set up a new tax system in Crimea after its annexation. Also featured is Maxim Reshetnikov, the minister of economic development, who is a member of the supervisory council of the VTB Bank.An estimated 450 Russian soldiers have died in the conflict in Ukraine so far and Vladimir Putin failed in his military objectives on the first day of fighting, the UK defence secretary has said. Wallace also rebuffed pleas from Ukrainian and some Conservative politicians for the UK to implement a no-fly zone over Ukraine, arguing that introducing one would amount to declaring war on Russia. “Our assessment as of this morning is that Russia has not taken any of its major objectives, in fact it is behind its hoped-for timetable,” Wallace told Sky News. “They have lost over 450 personnel. One of the significant airports they were trying to capture with their elite Spetsnaz [special forces] has failed to be taken. In fact, the Ukrainians have taken it back. “So, I think contrary to great Russian claims, and indeed President Putin’s sort of vision that somehow the Ukrainians would be liberated and would be flocking to his cause – he’s got that completely wrong. The Russian army has failed to deliver on day one its main objective.” In a later exchange on BBC’s Radio 4 Today programme, the Ukrainian MP Lesia Vasylenko pleaded with Wallace for the UK and the US to close airspace above Ukraine “in order for these casualties not to escalate”. However Wallace said this would constitute a direct act of aggression towards Russia, which would prompt a response, and result in “war across Europe” as any attack on the UK would implicate all other Nato members. Wallace said: “To do a no-fly zone I would have to put British fighter jets against Russian; Nato would have to declare war on Russia.” He added: “I cannot and won’t trigger a European war but I will help Ukraine fight every street with every piece of equipment we can support them.” Vasylenko warned that Europe is already at war, since “if Ukraine is allowed to fall others will follow”, and other democratic nations should seek to protect a fellow sovereign country. “What you are witnessing is a restructuring of the defence and security framework we are so used to,” she said. She said present sanctions were “not enough” and Ukrainians were disappointed by the lack of support. “We are going into over 24 hours of full-on war with the biggest military power in Europe and still nothing.” Later in the House of Commons, James Heappey, a junior defence minister, said the UK would send extra troops to Estonia “earlier than planned” to reinforce the Nato ally in the wake of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. The Royal Welsh battlegroup will be arriving in Estonia to double force levels in the country, he said. Heappey also echoed warnings against any potential clash between Russian and Nato troops, saying it could become “existential”. “We must all in this house be clear that British and Nato troops should not, must not, play an active role in Ukraine,” he said. “We must all be clear what the risk of miscalculation could be and how existential that could very quickly become if people miscalculate and things escalate unnecessarily.” Wallace said the UK had supported accelerating Ukraine’s Nato membership, which would have triggered military intervention from fellow members, but that other countries had been concerned by the pace. He added that other democratic countries have a “moral duty” to continue to arm the Ukrainian forces since it is widely acknowledged that Putin “won’t stop at Ukraine” and will train his sights on Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania after, since he “doesn’t believe the Baltic states are countries”. He told Sky News: “What you’re seeing on your cameras today is illogical. Putin didn’t need to do this, he didn’t need to occupy a sovereign country. None of the reasons why he would do that stack up. He’s not doing something that’s logical, he’s doing something about his ego and his legacy.” In that interview, he added that Putin and Russian military commanders of all rankings “will be held responsible” for their involvement. “Putin has to fail … because he’s fighting our values and all the human rights that we stand for. I don’t know if he’ll fail in Ukraine, we’ll do everything to make sure he does, but if he doesn’t we’ll make sure he fails after that.”Up in the posh seats, one extremely astute judge of talent was watching with interest. Chelsea were taking on Al-Hilal in the semi-finals of the Club World Cup and, as far as Arsène Wenger was concerned, the chance to have a close look at Kai Havertz was not to be missed. For those near Wenger at the Mohammed Bin Zayed Stadium, it was impossible not to notice how much the former Arsenal manager appreciated Havertz’s game: the elusive movement, the way he kept popping up in unexpected positions, the sense that the Chelsea attacker was always on the verge of producing something special. But it never quite happened for the young German. When he charged down the left and lifted a cross into the area in the 32nd minute, it required a defensive mix-up from Al-Hilal to gift Romelu Lukaku the winning goal. Then, when the former Bayer Leveruksen player tore through midway through the second half, he hit the post when he had the chance to score a magnificent solo goal. It was another one of those nearly moments from Havertz. Sometimes it seems his curse is almost scoring great goals. He can be indulgent with his finishing and for all his elegant movement there are times when he seems reluctant to push the limits, which has stopped him from becoming a more dominant figure for Chelsea. Nonetheless the depth of Havertz’s ability is obvious. Wenger glimpsed it from afar and Thomas Tuchel has seen it up close. So, too, have Havertz’s Chelsea teammates. They had faith even when he was struggling to adapt to English football last season. Seasoned players saw in training that Havertz was capable of moments of individual brilliance. Yet he remains a work in progress: a £62m star who finds himself in the weird position of having secured his place in Chelsea’s history, only to find that nobody is quite sure whether he is going to make the most of his vast potential. Havertz’s time at Chelsea has not been spectacular, but it has been special. It is not clear whether he is best as a false nine or a classic No 10. But what do you focus on more? The disappointment of six goals in 44 league appearances or the glory of scoring the winner against Manchester City in last season’s Champions League final? An inability to become a mandatory pick or the nerveless penalty that saw off Palmeiras when Chelsea became world champions for the first time this month? The positive take is that Havertz, now 22, thrives under pressure. Based on his big-game record, he should be in his element when Chelsea face Liverpool in the Carabao Cup final. Havertz has already scored against Jürgen Klopp’s side this season – a clever header in front of the Kop last August – and Chelsea are more fluid and aggressive when he is up front instead of Lukaku, who was dropped against Lille last Tuesday. Havertz took his chance against Lille. He pressed energetically, moved cleverly, linked the play and scored a good goal, so there is little reason for Tuchel to restore Lukaku to the lineup on Sunday. However Havertz’s inconsistency means there are no guarantees he will rise to the occasion. He has not developed the relentlessness of Liverpool’s Mohamed Salah, whose productivity puts Chelsea’s misfiring forwards to shame. This could be a galling experience for the Chelsea hierarchy. They have decent attacking players, but none belong to the elite. There is, as one staff member privately acknowledged this season, nobody in the class of Salah or Manchester City’s Kevin De Bruyne. That, of course, is on Chelsea. “Thanks, José!” was how one figure put it recently, pointing out that Mourinho, during his second spell at Stamford Bridge, sold two players who are now among the Premier League’s best. Salah was 21 when Chelsea signed him from Basel in 2014. The Egyptian was exciting but Mourinho did not take to him or De Bruyne. Both were banished to the sidelines and players from that era remember feeling embarrassed by Mourinho’s treatment of Salah. Chelsea cannot head down that path again. This is the first time they will have faced Salah in a major final and one look at him in a red shirt should be enough to convince them not to let Liverpool profit from their impatience again. Of course, too many expensive forwards are underperforming at Chelsea and it is not a surprise that some have grown unhappy. It is not just about Lukaku, who is probably going nowhere given that he cost £97.5m last summer. Tuchel also has to think about Timo Werner, who would probably benefit from a change of scenery, and there could be another difficult conversation if Christian Pulisic wants to leave. Pulisic, under contract until 2024, could well turn out to be another Salah. The 23-year-old has not lived up to the hype since his £58m move from Borussia Dortmund in 2019 but he is not a lost cause. The American is a dynamic threat when confident and his goal against Lille, who could not handle his speed and directness, was a reminder of what he can do when fully fit. These are complicated times for Chelsea. The summer could bring change but the memory of losing Salah and De Bruyne adds a layer of intrigue to the decision-making process. It is a cautionary tale; one that tells Chelsea it would be wise to give Havertz room to grow. He has not pushed on as expected after his heroics against City last May, but he is heading in the right direction. After all, one of the reasons Chelsea have made it to Wembley is because of Havertz scoring in the semi-final against Tottenham. Maybe Arsène still knows.Formula One has cancelled the Russian Grand Prix after the state’s invasion of Ukraine. The sport did not issue any condemnation of Russia but cited the “impossibility” of holding the race under the current circumstances. The meeting was set to take place on 25 September and as things stand F1 has made no suggestion of which country might replace the meeting. Turkey has been mooted as a potential replacement having been used twice in the last two years, stepping in for races cancelled due to the Covid pandemic but F1 is understood to not be considering the Istanbul Park Circuit as an option this time. On Thursday evening F1’s CEO Stefano Domenicali held a meeting with the team principals and the FIA to discuss the Russian GP, with clear, widespread opinion that the sport could not go to Russia while it engaged in an invasion of Ukraine. Red Bull’s team principal Christian Horner had described the idea of going to Russia as simply untenable and the world champion Max Verstappen had decried the idea of going racing in a country that had declared war on a neighbouring state. Aston Martin’s Sebastian Vettel was the first driver to declare he would boycott the race if it went ahead. A statement from F1 read: “The FIA Formula 1 World Championship visits countries all over the world with a positive vision to unite people, bringing nations together. We are watching the developments in Ukraine with sadness and shock and hope for a swift and peaceful resolution to the present situation. On Thursday evening Formula One, the FIA, and the teams discussed the position of our sport, and the conclusion is, including the view of all relevant stakeholders, that it is impossible to hold the Russian Grand Prix in the current circumstances.” On Friday Uefa dropped Russia as host of the Champions League final in St Petersburg, replacing it with the Stade de France in Paris. The teams are completing the third and final day of their first test in Barcelona on Friday, where the Haas team removed the Russian flag-based livery of its title sponsor Uralkali from their cars, trucks and motorhomes. Uralkali is a Russian chemical company with Dmitry Mazepin as deputy chairman of the Uralkali board and Uralchem CEO. He is the father of Haas driver Nikita Mazepin and is an associate of Vladimir Putin, attending the Kremlin for a meeting called by Putin on Thursday. The future of the team’s association with Uralkali remains in doubt, according to sanctions that may be imposed, raising questions over the team’s financial stability. Michael Schumacher’s son Mick is currently entering his second season in F1 with Haas. Equally Mazepin’s status as a driver may be under threat with the potential for visa bans being imposed on Russian nationals. Only three countries that host F1 meetings currently admit Russians without a visa, Azerbaijan, Brazil and the United Arab Emirates. The Haas owner Gene Haas was at the Circuit de Catalunya on Friday with team principal Guenther Steiner, who insisted the team were not at risk should they end their association with Uralkali, a decision on which would be made in the next few weeks. “It is a headache but it’s not something that disturbs the team,” he said. “Financially we are ok. It has no implementation on the team, how we are running, how we plan the season, there are more ways to get the funding, we have no issues with that.” Steiner did concede that he was unaware how the removal of Russia from the Swift payment network, should it occur, impact on the team but was expectant they were well placed to work around any issues and be ready to compete at the first race of the season in Bahrain on 20 March. “We had to take a decision and I think this was the right decision to take,” he said of removing the Uralkali sponsorship in Barcelona. “There is no setback on the competition side of the team because of this, we just need to go through the commercial issues and we will go through that in the next few weeks but it is a to-do list, nothing more.”A United spokesperson said: In light of events in Ukraine, we have withdrawn Aeroflot’s sponsorship rights. We share the concerns of our fans around the world and extend our sympathies to those affected. Aeroflot have been sponsor of United since 2013, the club and airline company signed an agreement to extend the sponsorship in 2017. Remember these golden days? Graeme Souness’ strike collected the last of the quartet, a real turn and lash. Good, generic stuff from the Leicester social media team. Leicester v Rennes Marseille v FC Basel PAOK v Gent Vitesse v Roma PSV Eindhoven v FC Copenhagen Slavia Prague v LASK Bodø Glimt v AZ Alkmaar Partizan Belgrade v Feyenoord Ties to be played 10 and 17 March Partizan Belgrade will play...Feyenoord. And that concludes the draw. Bodø/Glimt will play AZ Alkmaar.... Slavia Prague will play...LASK, of Austria. PSV Eindhoven will play...FC Copenhagen. Vitesse Arnhem will play...Roma, José Mourinho’s Roma. PAOK will play...KAA Gent. Leicester will play...Rennes. Here we go....Marseille will play...FC Basel. Before we begin, here’s the last 16. Seeded teams: AZ Alkmaar Copenhagen Gent Roma Basel Feyenoord LASK Rennes Unseeded teams: Bodo/Glimt Marseille PAOK Slavia Prague Leicester Partizan Belgrade PSV Eindhoven Vitesse Altin Lala is the Tirana delegate. He won 79 caps for Albania, and played in Germany for Hannover and Bayern Munich II. He’s picked Leicester City as a team he’d like to see in the Albanian capital. Altin Dodë Lala (born 18 November 1975) is an Albanian former professionalfootballer who played as a defensive midfielder and former manager. He spent his entire playing career in Germany and represented the Albania national football team. Pedro Pinto is back in harness and that means it’s time for the draw, after a video segue of the clubs still left in the competition, featuring some Prodigy-lite music. “The road to Tirana continues”, says Pedro. On comes Giorgio Marchetti, who expresses solidarity with the Ukrainian people and then sings the praises of the Conference League. Right, I’m going to grab some lunch but John Brewin will guide you through the lunchtime football news and the Europa Conference League draw, which is due to start shortly. I’ll be back later. Here’s a reminder of the teams that are involved in a tournament you all care deeply about: After shipping 10 goals in four days, it’s little wonder Marcelo Bielsa says he is “very worried” by Leeds’ form. But El Loco says he will not change his footballing philosophy. Leeds have slipped to within three points of the relegation zone after a run of four defeats from their last five games and resembled a naive boxer walking on to punch after punch in the 6-0 thrashing at Anfield. Bielsa – and his translator – have been speaking before the upcoming match against Spurs – and an on the boil Antonio Conte – at Elland Road (12.30pm on Saturday). [I am] very worried. The worry is proportional to the results that we’ve obtained. I am used to living through these situations. In these four years, I have received criticisms or demands that are exactly the same. In this case they are a lot more justified as the consequences of what’s being done badly are a lot bigger. But they are the same problems that at some point we have already suffered and we were able to overcome. In moments like this when the confidence is lost in [the manager], which is natural and logical, how can I defend myself with a team that has conceded the most goals in the Premier League? I daily try to resolve it. As I reiterate, when you are the conductor in a bad situation, nobody trusts in what you say. What I am also sure of is that, if I stop doing what I believe in, which is what you are asking me, the situation instead of improving is going to be even worse. Of one thing I am convinced, what I will try is to do what we do but better. These players have already demonstrated they have the level to play in the Premier League. The style, the model has already shown it can work in the Premier League. He really does need to try and tighten up at the back though doesn’t he? Jürgen Klopp is going to stick to his word and start with Caoimhín Kelleher in goal for Liverpool instead of Alisson Becker in the Carabao Cup final against Chelsea. How do you feel about this Liverpool fans? Personally, I think it’s a smart move that will help Klopp keep hold of a high quality second-choice goalkeeper for a little longer. Here’s Andy Hunter’s profile on the young stopper from Cork who used to be a striker: Sid Lowe gets his pun on: One of the more surprising football stories of the past few days was the return to management of Mark Hughes … at League Two Bradford City. In case you missed it, Aaron Bower followed the story of how it came to be that Hughes’s email was fished out of Bantams CEO Ryan Sparks’ junk email and resulted in the former Manchester United striker being appointed. West Ham fans have got a huge tie there. They will be the underdogs for sure, given Sevilla’s fine form in La Liga. They trail leaders Real Madrid by six points and are the only real side pushing Carlo Ancelotti’s side for the title. The first legs of all the ties are scheduled for 10 March, though the first legs of Porto v Lyon and Betis v Eintracht will be on Wednesday 9 March to avoid a clash with Braga and Sevilla, respectively. The second legs take place on 17 March. Rangers v Crvena Zvezda (Red Star Belgrade) Braga v Monaco Porto v Lyon Atalanta v Bayer Leverkusen Sevilla v West Ham Barcelona v Galatasaray Leipzig v Spartak Moscow Real Betis v Eintracht Frankfurt Completing the draw it’s Real Betis v Eintracht Frankfurt. Betis will hope to get to the final to play in their home city too – though they might would be playing on their hated rival’s ground. Leipzig v Spartak Moscow. So Spartak will have to play their home leg on neutral ground. It’s Barcelona v Galatasaray! It’s Sevilla v West Ham! What a tie for the Hammers. They face the record six-times winners who will hope to get to the final so they can play it in their home city. Now we have: Atalanta v Bayer Leverkusen. Gian Piero Gasperini’s side are a decent shout to go all the way aren’t they? It’s Porto v Lyon. Porto, of course, were knocked out of the Champions League in dramatic fashion by Atlético Madrid. Next up is: Braga v Monaco The first tie out of the pot is: Rangers v Crvena Zvezda. That’s Red Star Belgrade in old money. Uefa will hope this draw goes better than the Champions League round of 16 one, which it made a right mess of in December. Former goalkeeper Andrés Palop, who won the Uefa Cup three times with Sevilla and Valencia, is going to help pluck the balls out of the pot. (Insert your own safe pair of hands gag here). The Europa League final is in Seville, hence the link with Palop. Uefa general secretary Giorgio Marchetti is introducing us all to the draw and he takes time to express his solidarity with the people of Ukraine. It’s almost time for the Europa League draw. A reminder, too, that the Conference League draw will follow it at noon. What? You forgot about the Conference League. How dare you. Leicester and Roma will be in the bag for that one and could face each other. Brighton have struggled of late after a fine start to the season in which they were in the top four for a number of weeks. They shouldn’t have any relegation concerns given they have already got 33 points to sleep comfortably on at night. The Seagulls, who have won only one of their last six games, face Aston Villa, who have hit a similarly sticky patch with just one win in seven, and Graham Potter reckons his side’s slump shows how tough the Premier League is. Richard Masters will love these Potter quotes: Apart from the top three, getting points in this league consistently is very, very difficult. Previous to the Burnley game we have had some good performances. We are Brighton and Hove Albion, we have no divine right to win in the Premier League. There are bigger and better clubs than us suffering for points as well. The margins you need in this league haven’t gone our way. Apart from the top three, who hasn’t struggled? It is the best league in the world and it is difficult to get points. You can see what Villa are trying to do, you can see the performances, the structure of the team, on another day they could have won the games they lost. But the margins of this competition, this is the highest level of football in the world, so by definition it is not easy to win. After making a bright start to life in the Premier League, Brentford have slipped down the table after an awful run of form, suffering six defeats and one draw in their last seven league games. Some good news for the Bees is that Christian Eriksen has been in fine form in friendly games he has played in the past fortnight and might be ready to make a remarkable return to competitive action after his on-pitch cardiac arrest at Euro 2020. The Bees play 17th-placed Newcastle, who are only two points behind them with two games in hand, and their manager, Eddie Howe, would love to see Eriksen back on the pitch. I was watching the game where he collapsed and my thoughts and prayers were with him and his family hoping that he made a healthy recovery from that really tough situation, and thank God he has. It would be great to see him back on a football pitch. From our side, during the game, we can have no emotion towards that, we all have to concentrate on our jobs. But certainly it’s great to see him fit and healthy and enjoying his football again. Howe will make a late call on Allan Saint-Maximin’s fitness after sending him to Monaco for intensive treatment. Here’s a reminder of the remaining teams in the Europa League: Seeded teams Red Star Belgrade (SRB) Eintracht Frankfurt (GER) Galatasaray (TUR) Leverkusen (GER) Lyon (FRA) Monaco (FRA) Spartak Moskow (RUS) West Ham (ENG) Unseeded teams Atalanta (ITA) Barcelona (ESP) Betis (ESP) Braga (POR) Leipzig (GER) Porto (POR) Rangers (SCO) Sevilla (ESP) Spartak will have to play their home game at a neutral ground after Uefa said that Ukraine’s and Russia’s national and club teams will play outside their home nations “until further notice”. Welcome to our live Friday blog, in which we count down to the weekend’s action and keep you up to speed with all the latest news in the world of football. There has been some early breaking – and not unexpected – news this morning as Russia’s invasion of Ukraine has prompted Uefa to strip St Petersburg of the Champions League final. European club football’s showpiece event on Saturday 28 May will now be played at the Stade de France. You can read more about that here: Away from the troubling conflict in Ukraine, we have the Europa League round of 16 draw at 11am GMT. Rangers are in the pot for that after their mighty impressive 6-4 aggregate defeat of Dortmund on Thursday night. There’s the small matter of the Carabao Cup final on Sunday as Chelsea and Liverpool clash at Wembley for the right to win English football’s first trophy of the season. Will Romelu Lukaku play? How will Chelsea’s defence nullify Liverpool’s rampant frontline? We’ll hear off Thomas Tuchel and Jürgen Klopp today. And the Premier League continues apace this weekend, too, with Manchester City looking to extend their lead over Liverpool to six points again when they visit Everton. Will Antonio Conte simmer down after his midweek outburst after Spurs’ defeat at Burnley? There are important matches in the race for the top four and the battle against relegation. Here is the full list of fixtures: Friday Southampton v Norwich 8pm Saturday Leeds v Spurs 12.30pm Brentford v Newcastle 3pm Brighton v Aston Villa 3pm Crystal Palace v Burnley 3pm Man Utd v Watford 3pm Everton v Man City 5.30pm Sunday West Ham v Wolves 2pmMore news on the sports front: Manchester United have cancelled their £40m sponsorship deal with the Russian airline Aeroflot, the Daily Mail reports. This in response to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine yesterday, and comes after United flew to Madrid on Tuesday with the British charter airline Titan Airways. A United Spokesperson said: “In light of events in Ukraine, we have withdrawn Aeroflot’s sponsorship rights.” While the price of Brent crude has dipped below $100 a barrel today after rising to over $105 yesterday, the price has risen from around $93 at the start of the week. This has pushed up petrol and diesel prices at British forecourts. The average price of both petrol and diesel rose to new record highs for the fourth time this week, the RAC motoring group reported. Unleaded rose to 149.67p yesterday, moving closer to the 155p a litre milestone, while diesel topped 153p, rising to to an average of 153.05p, for the first time ever. RAC fuel spokesman Simon Williams said: Sadly, more increases are on the way as a result of oil hitting $106 a barrel and the pound weakening, making wholesale fuel more expensive to buy for retailers in the UK. This is the worst possible combination for drivers as it will push already rising prices higher still and worsen the cost of living crisis. Drivers need to brace themselves for what’s to come, with many on lower incomes having to make difficult choices as a result of needing to put fuel in their cars. Russia has been stripped of the men’s Champions League final, which will now be held in Paris rather than St Petersburg. And Formula One has cancelled the Russian Grand Prix in Sochi after the country’s invasion of Ukraine. The sport did not issue any condemnation of Russia but cited the “impossibility” of holding the race under the current circumstances. The Russian Grand Prix is an annual motor racing event held at Sochi Autodrom as part of the Formula One World Championship. As a reminder, you can follow the latest developments on the ground on our Ukraine crisis live blog: My colleague Mark Sweney has the latest on VTB Bank and VTB Capital. VTB Capital, a subsidiary of Russia’s second largest bank, VTB, has been suspended from trading on the London Stock Exchange following the UK implementing sanctions over Vladimir Putin’s move to invade Ukraine. The London Stock Exchange Group said on Friday that it has suspended VTB Capital’s membership with “immediate effect” which means that it can no longer trade in the capital. The move comes following Boris Johnson announcing the “largest ever” range of sanctions against Russian firms and individuals including freezing the assets of all major Russian banks, including VTB. VTB, which is majority-owned by the state and has interests in banking assets across Eastern Europe, has assets totalling £154bn. Legislation is expected to be tabled next week to ban major Russian companies from raising finance on UK markets and to prevent Moscow from raising sovereign debt in London. “Sanctions are a reality for us over the last few years and another round of politically motivated anti-Russian sanctions did not come as a surprise,” VTB said in a statement. There are a number of VTB executives, and those with links to the bank, who feature in the government’s list of individuals that it has levelled sanctions. These include VTB’s president-chair Andrey Kostin, who is also a member of the Supreme Council of the “United Russia” political party, as well as high-ranking executives Andrey Puchkov and Yuriy Alekseyevich Soloviev. And Denis Bortnikov, the deputy chair of VTB Bank’s management board. He is a deputy president of VTB Bank and chair of its management board. Son of Aleksandr Bortnikov, a director of the Federal Security Service (FSB), who has been on the sanctions list since March 2021. Global stocks have bounced back, but not enough to make up the steep losses run up yesterday. The UK’s FTSE 100 index has advanced 155 points, or 2.2%, to 7,363 while the other main European indices have gained between 1.3% (Germany) and 16.% (France). Brent crude has fallen back below $100 a barrel, trading 0.37% lower at $98.71. US light crude has retreated to $92.3 a barrel. Gas prices have also declined today after yesterday’s surge. The British Gas benchmark is 19% lower at 261p per therm, while the European benchmark has fallen by a similar amount to €108 per megawatt hour. London-listed Russian companies have seen their shares recover after yesterday’s steep losses. Among the state-backed oil and gas producers, Rosneft has jumped nearly 66% after tumbling 50% on Thursday, while Gazprom is up 3.3% after yesterday’s 25% drop and Lukoil is 28% ahead this morning. As for Russia’s two biggest banks, VTB Bank gained 9.3% and Sberbank has jumped nearly 60%. The London Stock Exchange said it had suspended VTB Capital, a subsidiary of VTB Bank. British Airways said it had suspended flights to Moscow, and warned customers that some flights to destinations east of Russia would now take longer due to rerouting, reports our transport correspondent Gwyn Topham. It operated to the Russian capital three times a week but currently did not fly to any other destinations in Russia or Ukraine - nor used Ukrainian airspace. However, the move will increase escalating fuel costs and pose more headaches for the national carrier’s long-haul services. A spokesperson said: We have suspended our flights to Moscow and also the use of Russian airspace, following the confirmation of Russian government restrictions. We apologise for the inconvenience but this is clearly a matter beyond our control. We are notifying customers on cancelled services and are offering a full refund. We will continue to monitor the situation closely. France has published inflation figures this morning. Inflation came in at 3.6% in January, up from 2.9% and a bit stronger than expected. ING economist Charlotte de Montpellier reckons inflation “remains reasonable”. It certainly is, compared with other countries –– in the UK and Germany, inflation is above 5%. She said: So although inflation is rising strongly in France, it is still lower than inflation in other European countries. This difference between France and its European neighbours is mainly explained by energy prices, which did not increase as much in France as elsewhere. This is due to the actions put in place by the French government to limit the impact of rising energy prices on households, including the “tariff shield” which locks the price of gas at its 2021 level. In addition, the capping of the price of electricity at a maximum increase of 4% in 2022 also plays an important role: the electricity component in the harmonised index of consumer prices is up by only 4% in France compared to an average of more than 27% in the eurozone. Ultimately, the smaller rise in gas and electricity prices leads to less inflationary pressure on all sectors of the French economy than in the eurozone area, and therefore also to lower non-energy inflation. We expect inflation in France to remain below inflation in the eurozone throughout the year. Brent crude is now hovering just above $100 a barrel, after rising above $105 yesterday when markets were rattled by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. Gas prices surged more than 40% yesterday but have fallen back today. The price of the British March gas contract has fallen 24% to 246p. On the Dutch exchange, the European benchmark natural gas contract dropped 20.7% to €106.50 per megawatt hour. Russia’s civil aviation authority has banned UK flights to and over Russia in retaliation for the British ban on Aeroflot flights, PA reports. Rosaviatsiya said that all flights by UK carriers to Russia as well as transit flights have been banned as of today. It said the measure was taken in response to the “unfriendly decisions” by the British authorities who banned flights to the UK by Russian flag carrier Aeroflot as part of sanctions over Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. Here’s a round-up of today’s other main stories. The owner of British Airways, International Airlines Group, more than halved losses to €3.5bn in 2021 and expects to return to profit this year as long as operations are not significantly disrupted by Covid-19 or the invasion of Ukraine. The company, which made a record €7.4bn (£6.4bn) loss in 2020, said that passenger levels were still only 36% of pre-Covid levels last year. The Ukraine crisis has plunged Germany into an intense debate about how it will heat its homes and power its industry in future, summed up in the short question: can Europe’s largest economy function without Vladimir Putin’s gas? News from last night: Two former European leaders quit the boards of Russian companies yesterday in response to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. Finland’s former prime minister Esko Aho said he had resigned as a director of Russia’s largest bank, Sberbank, while the former Italian prime minister Matteo Renzi announced he had quit the board of Russia’s largest car-sharing service, Delimobil. Brompton has revealed plans to invest as much as £100m in a new UK factory that will secure its place as the UK’s biggest bicycle manufacturer. In an added twist it has decided to reject the normal grey shed, instead opting to build its plant on stilts amid a newly restored wetland. The folding bike maker plans for the new site at Ashford in Kent to be open by 2027, on a 40 hectare (100 acre) floodplain. The stilts will be needed to prevent the factory being regularly inundated. It will also have no new car parking, instead relying on new pedestrian and cycle paths from the train station. And John Lewis is ditching its “Never Knowingly Undersold” price pledge after nearly a century, saying it had lost relevance at a time when it faces stiff competition from online retailers such as Amazon, reports our retail correspondent Sarah Butler. The staff-owned department store chain said it had made the decisions to retire the well-known slogan this summer as its price promise only referred to like-for-like items sold by national retailers who sold both online and in store and shoppers were increasingly buying online. Neil Wilson, chief market analyst at Markets.com, has looked at the reasons behind the turnaround in stock markets. The US dollar is gaining a bit of ground this morning though as risk mood remains very much on edge…Russia does not seem to have done as much in its first day as it would have hoped and fears grow for more protracted, bloody battles ahead. Reasons for the turnaround? Chiefly we can say that markets sold off aggressively early yesterday on fear – fear of sanctions rather than a fear for the future of Ukraine. The absence of any sanctions on Russia oil and gas, and decision to not exclude the country from the Swift payments network left the market breathing a sigh of relief as to the global economic impact the invasion might have. It’s sad to say the market does not care particularly about the plight of Ukrainians. We could also say that the market looked oversold and buy the dip still pervades...many think invasion is the time to be buying not selling. It’s hard to get a real handle on where we are right now – the market reaction reflects wide range of potential outcomes, ie uncertainty over what happens on the ground as well as sanctions. Truth is most market participants are not experienced in what we face today: War + inflation...this is late 70s/early 80s type territory. Big question right now is whether central banks slam the brakes on their nascent hiking cycles. This could give some relief to tech/growth but could unleash further inflation pressures on the demand side, adding to the increasing cost-push supply side inflation we are encountering. A snap on Reuters: The London Stock Exchange has suspended membership of Russia’s VTB bank, following the package of sanctions announced by the UK government yesterday. VTB is one of Russia’s biggest banks and has a secondary listing in London. It is among 31 Russian companies listed on the London stock exchange. Russia’s 22 richest individuals saw their net worths plunge by a combined $39bn in less than 24 hours after their country invaded Ukraine, according to the Bloomberg Billionaires Index. The wealth wipeout came after Moscow’s benchmark MOEX Russia Index crashed 45% in early trading, and closed 33% lower on Thursday. The Russian billionaires lost more money on Thursday than they had lost year-to-date up until Wednesday, according to Bloomberg. The biggest loser was Vagit Alekperov, chairman of Moscow-based oil company Lukoil, who saw his wealth fall by a third in one day as the company’s share price plummeted 32% on Thursday. Alekperov now has a net worth of $13bn, down from $19.2bn, according to Bloomberg. Vladimir Potanin, Russia’s richest known man (no one knows for certain just how rich Russian president Vladimir Putin is), lost $3bn after the share price of Norilsk Nickel, where he is the president, crashed 26%. The west has held back from the potentially most severe sanction, blocking Russia from an international payments system through which it receives foreign currency (SWIFT). Russian and Ukrainian sovereign dollar-denominated bonds are also making a comeback after yesterday’s sell-off. Russian bonds gained as much as 5 cents, while Ukrainian bonds rose 22.2 cents. The Russian 10-year rouble government bond has stabilised, with the yield steady at 12.69% after hitting a seven-year high of 14.09% on Thursday. (When bond prices fall, yields rise.) A yield is the return an investor will get from a bond, calculated by dividing its face value by the amount of interest it pays. Russian stock markets have also bounced back from yesterday’s heavy losses. The dollar-denominated RTS index in Moscow has gained 25% while the rouble-based Moex index rose nearly 20%. Record declines dragged the indices to their lowest levels since 2016 on Thursday. The rouble has firmed 2.2% against the dollar to 83.41, after hitting a record low of 89.60 yesterday. Against the euro, it has gained 1.8% to 93.46, after falling to an all-time low of 101.03 yesterday. The Russian central bank intervened in the currency markets yesterday and bought millions of roubles to shore up the beleaguered currency. Analysts believe the central bank could also carry out an unscheduled interest rate hike as it did in late 2014 (the year when Russia annexed Crimea from Ukraine), when it raised the key rate to 17% from 10.5% late at night to stem heavy losses in the rouble. Analysts at Morgan Stanley said: We think a prompt out-of-schedule 400 basis points or bigger by the Central Bank of Russia is likely with the key rate exceeding 13%. The central bank raised its key interest rate by 100 basis points to a five-year high of 9.5% two weeks ago and hinted at further hikes, as inflation is far above its 4% target. In January inflation hit 8.7%. The UK and German stock markets have opened more than 1% higher. UK’s FTSE 100 up 82 points, or 1.1%, at 7,289 Germany’s Dax up 1.3% France’s CAC up 0.8% Spain’s Ibex up 0.3% Italy’s FTSE MiB up 0.6%. On the FTSE 100, the Russian mining companies Evraz and Polymetal are the biggest risers, after heavy losses in recent days. Evraz has bounced back with a 38% gain, while Polymetal rose 11% initially and is now trading 6% higher, after yesterday’s 38% plunge. Ipek Ozkardeskaya, senior analyst at the bank Swissquote, said: What’s happening in Ukraine is a Black Swan event; it’s worse than the worst-case scenario that has been put on paper over the past couple of months, and it’s clearly not a limited military operation, it’s really a full invasion of a country, that no one could explain other than Putin’s regret for the Soviet Union’s demise and his unacceptance of the post-Cold War security architecture. Sanctions are being imposed on Russian financial sectors, transport, and exports. Major economies will stop financing the Russian debt and cut the provision of semiconductors. Taiwan’s chipmaker TSMC said it’s fully committed to complying with new export rules. But there are sanctions that didn’t go through. Europe for example opposed to leave the Russian banks out of Swift, and Biden won’t impose sanctions on Russian energy, aluminum, and wheat industries to avoid penalizing the rest of the world. Still, the Russian energy companies are taking a very heavy toll right now. Gazprom shares dived up to 50% yesterday before closing the session 25% lower. Lukoil sank near 45% and closed almost 23% down, while the Moscow Exchange lost up to 30% before closing 20% lower. That’s understandable as Russian companies will be cut off from the rest of the world in terms of business and financing. But it is also said that only about 16% of the Russian companies’ cash holdings are in US dollars, the rest is in Chinese yuan, euro and gold, to help the companies carry on, at least for a while, as the crisis extends. Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. Yesterday we woke up to the bleak news that Russia had invaded Ukraine. Today we are expecting a Russian tank attack on its capital, Kyiv, which could become the hardest day in the war, an adviser to Ukraine’s interior minister said. Russian troops are advancing on Kyiv and Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy pleaded with the international community to do more, saying the sanctions announced so far are not enough. An estimated 100,000 people have fled as explosions and gunfire rocked major cities, and dozens have been reported killed, according to Reuters. You can follow the latest on our Ukraine live blog here: Ukrainian officials are angry that European leaders have held back from imposing the potentially most damaging sanction on Russia, blocking Russia from an international payments system through which it receives foreign currency. However, other new sanctions have been imposed by the UK, US, the European Union and other countries. The UK has frozen the assets and imposed a travel ban on eight named individuals and 11 businesses, including six banks. Hundreds more individuals sitting on Russia’s Dumas will also face sanctions. Michael Hewson, chief market analyst at CMC Markets UK, said: While the sanctions set to be imposed are on a significantly stronger scale than any previous ones announced, they are unlikely to be enough to change Putin’s calculus in the short term, given that Russia’s energy markets, along with other key exports, and access to Swift were left out. This perhaps helps explain why US markets reversed course after European markets closed, to finish the day strongly higher, with the Nasdaq 100 leading the way with a gain of over 3%, only hours after having been down 3%, soon after the market opened. Yesterday’s surge in oil prices up to $105 a barrel also proved to be short-lived, as prices slid back after it became clear that the sanctioning of exports of Russian energy were also off the table for the moment, although prices are still elevated, with Brent back above $100 a barrel, while agricultural commodities like corn and wheat also continued to rise. Asian shares mostly bounced back from the previous day’s losses: Japan’s Nikkei closed nearly 2% higher while South Korea’s Kospi rose 1% and Hong Kong’s Hang Seng was down 0.5%. European markets are expected to open higher after yesterday’s heavy losses. While stock markets appear calmer, wheat prices have jumped to the highest level since 2008, threatening to push up food prices. Ukraine is a major wheat exporter and is known as the bread basket of Europe. Together, Russia and Ukraine account for a third of the world’s wheat supply. Wheat futures in Chicago rose 2.8% to $9.6075 a bushel in early Asian trading, after surging by the maximum allowed by the exchange yesterday, while corn and soybeans also rose, Bloomberg reported. Corn rose 1.2% to $6.9825 a bushel, and soybeans were 0.8% higher. Crude oil is trading at $101.98 a barrel, up 2.9%, after touching $105 for the first time since August 2014 yesterday. US light crude is 2.6% higher at $95.21 a barrel. Gold, a safe-haven investment, continues to climb, rising 0.7% to $1,916 an ounce. The Russian rouble has recovered somewhat after hitting a record low of 89.60 against the dollar yesterday. It has risen nearly 2% to 83.60. The Agenda 10am GMT: Eurozone consumer confidence final for February (forecast: 8.8) 11.15am GMT: European Central Bank president Christine Lagarde speaks 1.30pm GMT: US core PCE price index for January (forecast: 5.1%) 1.30pm GMT: US Durable goods for January 3pm GMT: US Michigan consumer sentiment final for February (forecast: 61.7)The EU is preparing to freeze the assets of Russia’s president Vladimir Putin and foreign minister Sergei Lavrov as part of a third round of sanctions against Russia, the Financial Times reports. Foreign ministers are planning to approve the sanctions package this afternoon, along with a number of measures against Russian banks and industry, the paper quotes three people familiar with the matter. Putin and Lavrov will not be subject to a ban on travelling under the measures, the FT writes, underlining the EU’s willingness to keep symbolic diplomatic possibilities open. An EU official, speaking under condition of anonymity, told Reuters: “We are moving as quickly as we can,” adding the bloc could also target “many more” oligarchs. Russian forces have taken control of Hostomel airfield near Kyiv and landed paratroopers in the area, Russia’s Interfax news agency is reporting. Russia’s defence ministry said the Russian military “eliminated” more than 200 people from Ukraine’s special units during the capture of the strategic aerodrome. It said forces had blocked access to Kyiv from the west, and separatist forces in eastern Ukraine had attacked Ukrainian army positions with Russian army support. Kyiv has entered into “a defensive phase”, the mayor of the Ukrainian capital Vitali Klitschko says. Speaking at a news briefing, Klitschko said: The city has gone into a defensive phase. Shots and explosions are ringing out in some neighbourhoods saboteurs have already entered Kyiv. The enemy wants to put the capital on its knees and destroy us. The Russian news agency TASS reports that the Russian defence ministry says forces will not strike residential areas of Kyiv. Formula One has cancelled the Russian Grand Prix after the state’s invasion of Ukraine, the Guardian’s Giles Richards reports. The sport did not issue any condemnation of Russia but cited the “impossibility” of holding the race under the current circumstances. The meeting, set to take place in September, is expected to be provisionally replaced on the calendar by Turkey, with the Istanbul Park Circuit already on standby as a replacement for potential Covid-related cancellations. On Thursday evening F1’s CEO Stefano Domenicali held a meeting with the team principals and the FIA to discuss the Russian GP, with clear, widespread opinion that the sport could not go to Russia while it engaged in an invasion of Ukraine. Red Bull’s team principal Christian Horner had described the idea of going to Russia as simply untenable and the world champion Max Verstappen had decried the idea of going racing in a country that had declared war on a neighbouring state. Aston Martin’s Sebastian Vettel was the first driver to declare he would boycott the race if it went ahead. A statement from F1 read: The FIA Formula 1 World Championship visits countries all over the world with a positive vision to unite people, bringing nations together. We are watching the developments in Ukraine with sadness and shock and hope for a swift and peaceful resolution to the present situation. On Thursday evening Formula One, the FIA, and the teams discussed the position of our sport, and the conclusion is, including the view of all relevant stakeholders, that it is impossible to hold the Russian Grand Prix in the current circumstances. China’s president Xi Jinping told Vladimir Putin that China supports Russia in efforts to resolve the Ukraine crisis via dialogue, Chinese state media is reporting. In a readout of the call on state broadcaster CCTV, Xi pointed out that the situation in eastern Ukraine has undergone rapid changes... (and) China supports Russia and Ukraine to resolve the issue through negotiation. According to the Chinese media readout, Putin outlined the reasons for Russia launching the “special military operation”, and told Xi that NATO and the United States had “long ignored Russia’s reasonable security concerns”. He also told Xi on the call that Russia was ready to hold “high-level” talks with Ukraine. According to the CCTV readout, Xi said China was willing to work with all parties in the international community to advocate a common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security concept, and firmly safeguard the international system with the United Nations at the core. Here’s more on Ukraine’s president Volodymyr Zelenskiy’s recent comments as he called on Vladimir Putin to sit return to the negotiation table. In a televised statement today, Zelenskiy said he is calling on the Russian leader to negotiate to put an end to the fighting. I would like to address the president of Russia once again: fighting is happening all over Ukraine, let’s sit down for talks to stop deaths. The Ukrainian leader urged Europe to act more quickly and forcefully in imposing sanctions on Moscow for invading Ukraine, accusing western allies of politicking as Moscow’s forces advanced on Kyiv. “Europe has enough strength to stop this aggression,” Zelenskiy said, adding that everything from banning Russians from entering the European Union to cutting Moscow off from Swift to an oil embargo should be on the table. You still can stop this aggression. You have to act swiftly. According to a leaked draft of the new sanctions agreed by EU leaders, all members of the Duma, the Russian security council and any Belarusian officials in the military and ministry of defence who “facilitated” the invasion of Ukraine will be subject to travel bans and asset freezes, the Guardian’s Daniel Boffey reports. The previous sanctions hit the 351 Duma members who had supported recognition by Russia of the self-proclaimed republics in Luhansk and Donetsk. There is a proposal to enlarge the listing criteria for sanctioning individuals as well to “better capture other forms of support to the regime, including oligarchs”. Two additional banks will be subject to sanctions: Alfa bank and Otkritie, and there will be a prohibition on EU financial service providers lending to eight companies, ranging from the owners of seaports to automobile manufacturers. There is also a proposal to prohibit new deposits of over €100,000 in EU banks by Russian nationals. Foreign ministers will meet later this afternoon to approve the draft text. “Those pictures, that footage that everybody saw, that’s literally my home... Thanks god my family is safe.” This was the moment on a live broadcast when a BBC journalist from Ukraine saw footage of her family home, partially destroyed overnight in Kyiv. Afghanistan’s Taliban have said they are “concerned” about the possibility of civilian casualties in Ukraine, reports the Guardian’s Akhtar Makoii The Taliban foreign ministry said in a statement they will remain neutral in line with their foreign policy. The Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan calls for restraint by both parties. All sides need to desist from taking positions that could intensify violence. We are closely monitoring the situation in Ukraine and express concerns about the real possibility of civilian casualties. Afghanistan’s new rulers, who have not been recognised by any country, have asked Ukraine and Russia to resolve the problem through “dialogue and peaceful means.” The statement called on parties to pay attention to safeguarding the lives of Afghan students and migrants in Ukraine. Hundreds of Afghans were evacuated to Ukraine after the country fell to the Taliban last August. Ukraine’s president Volodymyr Zelenskiy has called on Vladimir Putin to join him at the negotiating table, according to Russian newswire Ria Novosti. Zelenskiy also said Europe can still stop Russia’s aggression if it acts swiftly. Here are some of his other comments, via Reuters. UKRAINIAN PRESIDENT ACCUSES EUROPE OF INSUFFICIENT REACTION, SLOW HELP TO UKRAINE WHILE RUSSIAN UKRAINE’S ZELENSKIY SAYS RUSSIAN ASSAULT LIKE REPEAT OF WORLD WAR TWO UKRAINIAN PRESIDENT TELLS ARMED FORCES “YOU ARE ALL WE HAVE” UKRAINIAN PRESIDENT CALLS ON EUROPEAN CITIZENS TO PROTEST TO FORCE THEIR GOVERNMENTS TO MORE DECISIVELY The mayor of Milan has told Valery Gergiev, a conductor close to the Russian president Vladimir Putin, that he will not be allowed to lead an orchestra at the prestigious La Scala opera house in March unless he condemns Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, reports the Guardian’s Angela Giuffrida from Rome. Mayor Giuseppe Sala, who is also president of La Scala, said. We are asking him to take a clear position against this invasion, and in the event he doesn’t do so, we will have to renounce the collaboration. Gergiev, a music director of St Petersburg’s Mariinsky Theatre who was awarded a Hero of Labour of the Russian Federation prize by Putin, is due to return to La Scala on 5 March to finish a programme of Tchaikovsky’s ‘The Queen of Spades’. People are too scared to go out, one resident of the Black Sea port city of Odesa, told the Guardian’s Peter Beaumont. Maryna who lives in Odesa who described the situation in the Black Sea port city. I live in Odesa in Kotovsky settlement on the northern edge of the city. There are not many explosions where I am. It’s a narrow, long town along the coast and I’m in the north whereas most of the military units are in the south. The only thing near me is a training area which I can usually hear and it is quiet. One of strikes yesterday hit a residential area called 411 Battery. It’s a historic area named after the gun battery that defended Odessa in World War II but now it is residential. People in Odessa are mainly staying indoors. The shops are open but people are too scared to go out and yesterday people bought all the bread because they were worried it would run out. Asked what she thought Vladimir Putin intended for Ukraine, she answered: It doesn’t matter what I think. I don’t think anyone really knows what will happen. But what I want is for the Ukrainian armed forces to stop the invaders. I am scared and I am unhappy but I hope they can protect us. More reports of gunfire that can be heard in Kyiv’s historic city centre. Earlier on Thursday the Guardian’s Emma Graham-Harrison met Kyiv residents in an area of the city that had been hit. A selection of the most powerful images from the conflict this morning. See more in our live gallery here which will be updated through the day. India is exploring ways to set up a rupee payment mechanism for trade with Russia to soften the blow on New Delhi of Western sanctions imposed on Russia. Reuters reports that government and banking sources said Indian officials aere concerned that vital supplies of fertilizer from Russia could be disrupted as sanctions intensify, threatening India’s vast farm sector. India has called for an end to violence in Ukraine but refrained from outright condemnation of Russia, with which it has long-standing political and security ties. Fuel, cash and medical supplies are running low in parts of Ukraine after Russia’s invasion, which could drive up to five million people to flee abroad, UN aid agencies said. Reuters reports: At least 100,000 people are uprooted in Ukraine after fleeing their homes, while several thousand have already crossed into neighbouring countries including Moldova, Romania and Poland, UN refugee agency spokesperson Shabia Mantoo told a U.N. briefing in Geneva. “We are still trying to see which civilian infrastructure in Ukraine has been hit where,” Afshan Khan, Unicef’s regional director for Europe and Central Asia, told the briefing. UN human rights office spokesperson Ravina Shamdasani said that it had reports of at least 127 civilian casualties in Ukraine, including 25 killed and 102 injured, “caused by shelling and air strikes”. This was likely a significant under-estimate, she said. Turkey cannot stop Russian warships accessing the Black Sea via its straits, as Ukraine has requested, due to a clause in an international pact that allows vessels to return to their home base, the Turkish foreign minister said. Reuters reports: Ukraine has appealed to Turkey to block Russian warships from passing through the Dardanelles and Bosphorus straits which lead to the Black Sea, after Moscow on Thursday launched a full-blown assault on Ukraine from land, air and sea. Russian forces landed at Ukraine’s Black and Azov Sea ports as part of the invasion. Under the 1936 Montreux Convention, Turkey has control over the straits and can limit the passage of warships during wartime or if threatened, but the request has put the Nato member in a difficult position as it tries to manage its Western commitments and close ties with Russia. Speaking in Kazakhstan, Foreign Minister Mevlut Cavusoglu said Turkey was studying Kyiv’s request but said Russia had the right under the Convention to return ships to their home base, in this case the Black Sea. So even if Turkey decided after a legal process to accept Ukraine’s request and close the straits to Russian warships, he said, they would only be prevented from travelling in the other direction, away from their home base into the Mediterranean. The mayor of the eastern Ukrainian city of Kharkiv has urged residents to head to subway stations, bomb shelters and basements. Loud blasts were heard in the city earlier, a witness told Reuters, as missile strikes and air raid alerts were reported in a number of cities in Ukraine. There are several lines from the Kremlin coming in on Reuters: Putin will meet the UN Security Council today and hold several international phone calls Russia will impose retaliatory sanctions on western countries Russia recognises Volodymyr Zelenskiy as president of Ukraine Sanctions will cause problems but are solvable since the country has reduced its dependence on foreign imports Russia expects relations with the west to normalise once people understand it was forced to act to protect its security No comment on the duration of the military operations The Kremlin has declined to comment on possible talks between Russia’s President Vladmir Putin and Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskiy, but acknowledged the latter’s willingness to discuss a possible neutrality pledge by Ukraine. Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov said Moscow would analyse the offer and added that Moscow’s expectations of Kyiv remained unchanged, Reuters reports. Moscow has long demanded guarantees that Ukraine would never join Nato or allow the bloc to deploy troops and weapons on its territory. The Ski Association of Japan said on Friday it will pull out its team from a ski cross World Cup event in Russia after Russian forces invaded Ukraine, according to news agency Kyodo. The team also plans to ensure the safety of its athletes and bring them home from Russia, the report said. Japan joins several other nations, including Australia and Canada, in abandoning the event. The authorities in Kyiv have told citizens to stay home to avoid “active military operations” in the Obolonskyi district, just north of the city centre, Reuters reports. Meanwhile Unicef’s regional director has said the agency is still trying to see which civilian infrastructure has been hit and where. Russian independent news agency Interfax reports Russia’s foreign minister Sergey Lavrov as saying “no one is planning to occupy Ukraine”. He added that Russia still does not recognise the current government in Ukraine as democratic and that president Zelenskiy is lying when he says he is ready to discuss the neutral status of Ukraine. Lavrov said the Russian government wants the Ukrainian people to be independent and that it would ensure the demilitarisation of the country. Separately Reuters reports that Lavrov said Russia is ready for talks once Ukraine’s army stops fighting, and that no one plans to attack the Ukrainian people. “We do not want Neo-Nazis to rule Ukraine,” he said. The UN Refugee Agency has predicted that 4 million people may flee Ukraine to other countries “if the situation escalates further”, Reuters reports. Unicef, which has projected 5 million refugees, said it is strengthening its capacity to help Ukrainian refugees in Moldova, Romania and Poland as a “first call”, and “obviously Hungary and Slovakia as well”. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights denounced the arrests of some 1,800 anti-war protesters in Russia and called for the release of those unlawfully held for voicing opinions. Virgin Atlantic has announced it will avoid Russian airspace, meaning flights between Britain, India and Pakistan will take between 15 and 60 minutes longer. A spokesperson said: We apologise for any inconvenience caused to customers by slightly longer flight times. The safety and security of our customers and people always comes first and we’re monitoring the situation in Ukraine and Russia extremely carefully following the escalation of conflict, continuing to operate in full compliance with relevant safety regulators, authorities and governments. Russia’s ministry for the economy said it is working on measures to minimise the impact of the sanctions imposed by western countries following the invasion of Ukraine. The ministry said this will include plans to expand trade and economic ties with Asia, Reuters reports. The ministry said: We understand that the sanctions pressure we have faced since 2014 will now intensify. The rhetoric of some of our foreign colleagues was such that we have been ready for potential new sanctions for a long time. Thousands of people fleeing war in Ukraine are pouring into Poland, Romania, Hungary and Slovakia as Russian missiles pound the capital Kyiv, with many waiting for hours at congested border crossings in freezing temperatures. Reuters reports: A day after Russian President Vladimir Putin launched an invasion, it was mostly women and children crossing, after Ukraine restricted passage for men between 18 and 60 years old. Local media in Poland said some had waited 16-18 hours to cross into Medyka in southern Poland in freezing temperatures. Border authorities said 29,000 people had entered Poland from Ukraine on Thursday, though it was unclear how many were war refugees and not foreigners going home. Poland’s deputy interior minister Pawe* Szefernaker said Ukrainian bus drivers were unable to drive across the border as conscription-age men were being held back in Ukraine. Micha* Mielniczuk, a spokesman for the southern Polish region of Podkarpackie said temporary accommodation was being offered to people arriving. “The vast majority continue on to other places throughout Poland after receiving a warm meal,” he told the PAP news agency. On the border with northern Romania, women were crying as they bid goodbye to male loved ones, setting off to cross into Sighetu Marmatiei, a Reuters witness said. Long queues had formed as cars waited to board a ferry over the Danube river into Isaccea, a town between Moldova and the Black Sea, local media in Romania showed. Slovak authorities urged people to donate blood and set up hospitals with 5,380 beds assigned for the army or NATO use. Across central Europe, on NATO’s eastern flank, volunteers were putting up messages on social media to organise housing and transport for people arriving from the borders. Activists were setting up food and hot drink distribution points and vets were offering to take care of pets. Bulgaria started issuing passports to its citizens in Kyiv who needed travel documents and had sent four buses to the Ukrainian capital to evacuate people. The city of Sumy in northeaster Ukraine has been taken by Russian forces, a resident told the Guardian’s Peter Beaumont. He has been speaking to people across the country, as the all-out Russian attack continues. Sasha, 33, is a vet who lives in Sumy, the main city in the Sumy region, about 200km west of the Russian border, which was taken yesterday by Russian forces. She said: I live not far from the artillery training school which is where there was fighting yesterday when the Russians came. I have elderly parents and a small child, so we think it’s best to stay. A friend is also with us with her child. We have some food and from what I know from friends who tried to leave people are queuing at borders out of Ukraine and men not being allowed leave. All the traffic in the city has stopped and there is Russian armour in the streets. If the citizens don’t shoot at the Russians, they don’t shoot back. They arrived before lunchtime yesterday which is when we heard the shooting. It’s quiet now. So far it is only Russian soldiers and they are not making any proclamations. Everything is closed down and people are staying inside. People spent yesterday in cellars and shelters hiding. I can’t see the Russians... but the artillery school is near us, so we heard the fighting. I don’t know what is going to happen and I’m really scared. I think the Russians want a new Soviet Union and they want us as part of that but no one wants that. We’ve also heard that the Russians have taken Okhtyrka which is 70 kilometres from here and further west. They have put up the Russian flag. Yulia, aged 33, is a translator for an IT programme who normally lives in the centre of Kyiv but has evacuated to a village on the capital’s western outskirts. We’ve been hearing lots of explosions and shelling, mainly in the early morning and late at night. Pretty much, villages around here are now ghost villages. I’m with my mother in law. We have some supplies but my mother in law is a school director and she’s been in the bomb shelter with the children with the children since the invasion and that’s not nice. We’re close to the outskirts of Kyiv. From what I’ve heard some Russian troops have got hold of Ukrainian armed forces and uniforms and are trying to enter Kyiv [a reference to President Volodymyr Zelenskiy’s comments about “infiltrators” and other Ukrainian government statements.] I think it’s safer to stay where we are. A lot of people trying to leave, but there are attacks across the country. Asked what she thought Vladimir Putin wanted she replied: I’ve been following the Russian social media. I think honestly that their president is a sick person. He wants to restore the USSR. Their people are just following that idea. They are not living in a modern society. They are just following that idea that it is Russia against the US us and the west. It’s just showing the world. Ukraine is just a war fighting platform. I don’t even think it’s personal.” Olena Serdiuk is a 43 year old economist who lives in Dnipro, a city on the river Dnieper just over 200 km from the Black Sea coast. It’s relatively calm here. There’s no shooting and last night there were few people in the streets. There were air strikes on Thursday morning aimed at a radio tower and airfield but I don’t think this city is seen as a valuable target. I’m scared and stressed. I can’t say I feel physically threatened by invasion but I’m, worried about the future and the economy. My husband’s company is in Mariupol. I think I was more [She said she was ] more shocked and shaken by the attack in western regions because no one expected that to happen. While I say I don’t believe the Russians will come into Dnipro maybe that’s just me protecting myself because I don’t want to believe it. I do hope we can manage fight back and that we’ll get help from other countries, because the Kremlin needs to fall. Gunfire has been heard near the government quarter of Kyiv, Associated Press reports. France’s finance minister Bruno Le Maire has said cutting Russia off from the Swift global interbank payments system was “a very last resort”, Reuters reports. The European Union and US chose not to cut Russia off from interbank messaging system, as part of toughened sanctions announced on Thursday in response to the invasion of Ukraine. Ahead of a meeting of eurozone finance ministers, Le Maire said: This is the very last resort, Swift, but this is one of the options that remains on the table. His German counterpart, Christian Lindner, said “all options are on the table” in addition to those already agreed. Lithuania’s prime minister Ingrida Šimonytė has said the discussion about excluding Russia from Swift is not closed: “we know who disagrees and we continue to negotiate with them.” The debate continues to rage, after Ukraine’s government said western allies would have “blood on their hands” if they did not cut Russia out of Swift. The head of the Bundestag’s foreign affairs committee, Norbert Röttgen, is urging Germany to think again on Swift. Along with France and Italy, Germany favours what more hawkish EU diplomats call an “incrementalist” approach to sanctions. A few dozen Ukraine supporters gathered outside Moscow’s de facto diplomatic presence in Taipei, Taiwan on Friday, the Guardian’s Helen Davidson reports from the city. There is a small eastern European community in Taipei, but Taiwanese people have also expressed solidarity with Ukraine as both are self governing democracies threatened by a much larger authoritarian neighbour. Anu Hesselbaek is an Estonian woman who has lived in Taiwan for two years (pictured on the right in red). She told Helen: It’s so important we stand with Ukraine. If this continues it’s like there will be no end to what superpowers can do. Also I think about what happens next. There is a line of Baltic countries which are very afraid right now. Asked about the parallels between Ukraine and Taiwan, she said: I feel sad. If it can happen in Ukraine, why not here? Estonia and Taiwan have exactly the same area. They could both be afternoon snacks. Russia is restricting the use of its airspace for all British flights, including transit, reports news wire Ria Novosti. The report comes after the UK government announced that Russia’s national carrier Aeroflot would be banned from British airspace in a sweeping package of sanctions announced on Thursday. As Russian forces advance on Kyiv, Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has been working the phones, urging western countries to toughen up sanctions on Russia and increase military support. Explosions and gunfire have been heard in a northern district of Kyiv, as invading Russian forces closed in, AFP reports from the ground. Pedestrians ran for safety and small arms fire and explosions were heard in the Obolonskyi area. The larger blasts could be heard as far away as the city centre. Russian forces first arrived on the outskirts of Kyiv on Thursday when helicopter-borne troops assaulted an airfield just outside the city, close to Obolonskyi, AFP reports. As they arrived in Obolonskyi within the city, the Ministry of Defence’s Facebook page urged civilians to resist: We urge citizens to inform us of troop movements, to make Molotov cocktails, and neutralise the enemy. Queues of cars at the borders to leave Ukraine for Hungary and Poland now involve a wait of up to 15 hours, reports the Guardian’s Peter Beaumont in Lviv. However one of the consequences of yesterday’s general mobilisation order issued by the Ukrainian president, Voldomyr Zelenskiy, is that most men are not allowed to leave, with many dropping their families off at borders. That call-up of reservists has seen men up to the age of 60 summoned for duty. I heard of the case of one 52-year-old and his friends of similar age here in Lviv being called up yesterday to go to help with the defence of Mariupol. Also complicating the issue for those wanting to leave the country is that with internal flights suspended, and fuel in short supply, there is a 20- litre fuel restriction at six petrol stations and inevitable queues. People have been protesting against Russia’s invasion of Ukraine around the world. Here are some images from demonstrations in Madrid, Sydney and New York. Welcome to rolling updates on the Russian invasion of Ukraine. I’m Jennifer Rankin and here are the main developments of the past few hours. As dawn broke in Kyiv, air raid sirens were sounding across the Ukrainian capital amid warnings of an imminent Russian attack on the city. Ukraine expects a Russian tank attack later on Friday which could become the hardest day in the war, an adviser to Ukraine’s interior minister said. Anton Herashchenko said the defenders of Kyiv were ready with anti-tank missiles supplied by foreign allies. Earlier, Kyiv residents reported waking to the sound of explosions as reports circulated that Russia had launched a series of missile strikes on the city of just under 3 million people. Many civilians sought safety in bomb shelters and metro stations as reports of Russian tanks were moving closer to the city from all sides. The UK defence secretary, Ben Wallace, has said it is the view of British intelligence that Russia intends to invade the whole of Ukraine but its army failed to deliver on the first day of its invasion. The US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, said “all evidence suggests that Russia intends to encircle and threaten” the Ukrainian capital. The Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has confirmed multiple reports of Russian missile strikes in a national address early on Friday morning. Multiple explosions were heard in Kyiv on Friday morning as the Russian offensive entered its second day. Two buildings were on fire in the south east of the capital after a Russian plane was shot down and a border post in the south east was hit by a missile, causing casualties. Zelenskiy said 137 people have died and 316 had been wounded so far. In a video address late on Thursday, he lamented that Ukraine had been “left alone to defend our state”, but said he would stay on in the capital despite being Russia’s “target number one”. Ukraine has decreed a full military mobilisation and all men aged 18-60 have been forbidden from leaving Ukraine. I’m Samantha Lock and I’ll be handing over this live blog to my colleagues in London. You can also reach me on Twitter to share your feedback and updates on the unfolding crisis in Ukraine. Ukraine’s deputy minister of defence, Hanna Malyar, said the Russian military seized two cars of the Ukrainian armed forces before changing into the uniform of the Ukrainian military and then driving to the centre of Kyiv from Obolonskyi. Ukrainian lieutenant general Valerii Zaluzhniy appeared to confirm reports in a statement on the website of Ukraine’s armed forces. The charred remains of a residential building in Kyiv has been shared by Ukrainian media today. Early on Friday morning, two residential buildings were seen on fire in south-east Kyiv after they were hit by falling debris from an aircraft that was shot down. The fire comes after reports emerged from a Ukrainian interior ministry official who earlier said Russian aircraft had been shot down in the Darnytskyi district of Kyiv. Myanmar has said it backs Russia’s attack on Ukraine. Brig. Gen Zaw Min Tun, spokesman for the junta in Myanmar, told The New York Times by telephone: In the case of Russia and Ukraine, Russia has done its part to maintain its sovereignty, and I think it is the right thing to do. Russia is also a big country among world powers and is showing that it also plays a main role in the balance sheet of maintaining world peace.” UK defence secretary has said it is the view of British intelligence that Russia intends to invade the whole of Ukraine but its army failed to deliver on the first day of its invasion. Ben Wallace said he estimated Russia has lost more than 450 personnel and the Russian army failed to deliver its major objectives on day one of its invasion. The UK’s ministry of defence earlier released an intelligence update on the developments in Ukraine. Russian forces have likely captured the Chernobyl nuclear power plant. Workers have reportedly been detained by Russian troops. The Ukrainian Armed Forces have reportedly halted Russia’s advance towards Chernihiv. Fighting probably continues on the outskirts of the city. It is unlikely that Russia has achieved its planned day one military objectives. Ukrainian forces have presented fierce resistance across all axes of Russia’s advance.” Overnight, banking officials were also seeking to calm Russians about the effects of sanctions. Russian banks that landed on US, EU and UK sanctions lists have spent the night reassuring depositors that their money is safe, in efforts to maintain calm and prevent bank runs. VTB, Russia’s second-largest bank, said that the sanctions would not affect the ability of clients to withdraw money at any cash machine in Russia, and that the bank had not restricted foreign currency exchanges. Gazprombank, the country’s third-largest, assured customers that the sanctions against it were “not blocking (SDN) and do not affect the bank’s regular operations.” A Guardian correspondent on Monday observed tellers at Sberbank, Russia’s largest bank, telling customers they had already exchanged all their reserves of foreign currency and that they would need to come back the next day. Sberbank gave similar assurances to customers, while saying it needed to review the conditions of the new restrictions under the US Treasury sanctions. US banks have until May 25 to finalise their dealings with Sberbank, VTB, Otkritie, Sovcombank, and VEB equities, the body said. Here is a report from the Guardian’s Moscow correspondent Andrew Roth on the Kremlin’s messaging to Russians. Russian lawmakers have been busy trying to justify the country’s invasion of Ukraine, despite growing evidence of missile and rocket strikes on population centres. Valentina Matviyenko, the chairwoman of Russia’s Federation Council, said that the government had “no other choice” but to launch an attack that appears to be aimed at capturing major Ukrainian cities like Kyiv. “Russia has announced a special military operation to force Ukraine to peace, to stop its militarisation going on in the most active way,” she said in public remarks on Friday morning. Matviyenko, who was born in western Ukraine, added: “We were left with no other choice. Yes, it is not an easy choice, but it is the only way to stop the fratricidal war.” Vyacheslav Volodin, the chairman of the State Duma, repeated earlier remarks that the massive attack on their country was being carried out in the interests of Ukrainians. “Ukrainian citizens shouldn’t be afraid of the peacekeeping operation. It is solely aimed at demilitarization,” Volodin said during a visit to Nicaragua. He also repeated claims that the operation was aimed at de-Nazification: an indication that if the operation is successful, Russia may seek to carry out reprisals against Ukrainains. “Ukraine must become a free, independent, democratic and peaceful nation once it is free from the anti-popular regime with a Nazi ideology, and begin developing in the interests of its own citizens,” he said. Russian Rosgvardia troops with prisoner vans have been pictured entering Ukraine and US intelligence have warned that Russia has drawn up lists with the names of activists and others who it is planning to target. While that intelligence has not been confirmed, the US has correctly predicted the broader Russian invasion into Ukraine. And Putin has warned that he has planned to punish those guilty of violence against Russians. Photos of devastation across Ukraine have emerged from the nation’s state emergency service. A series of photos uploaded to the agency’s official Twitter account early on Friday say they show the aftermath of the shelling in Starobilsk, Luhansk, eastern Ukraine. Others show firefighting and rescue teams battling blazes from buildings. Some more powerful words from Ukraine’s president Volodymyr Zelenskiy. Addressing his country in a national address this morning, he aid: They say that civilian objects are not a target for them. It is a lie, they do not distinguish in which areas to operate.” Russian forces that entered Ukraine through Belarus are within kilometres of reaching Kyiv, according to US officials. US defence secretary Lloyd Austin told lawmakers on a phone call that Russian mechanised forces that entered from Belarus were about 20 miles (32km) from Kyiv, according to a person familiar with the call, the Associated Press reports. The call was said to have taken place about 6.30pm ET. The officials described another Russian element that entered Ukraine from Russia being a bit further away, but that both were headed toward Kyiv with the goal of encircling the city and potentially toppling the Ukrainian government, according to the lawmaker on the call. Ukraine president Volodymyr Zelenskiy earlier said the government had information that “subversive groups” were encroaching on the city, and US secretary of state Antony Blinken said Kyiv “could well be under siege”. Ukraine’s president has said his country has been left on its own to fight Russia after the Kremlin launched a large-scale invasion that killed more than 130 Ukrainians in the first day. In a video address to the nation just after midnight, Volodymyr Zelenskiy said: We have been left alone to defend our state. Who is ready to fight alongside us? I don’t see anyone. Who is ready to give Ukraine a guarantee of Nato membership? Everyone is afraid. Zelenskiy said that 137 Ukrainians, both military personnel and civilians, had been killed since the start of the attack early Thursday. Another 316 had been wounded, he said. The president added that he and his family remained in Ukraine, despite Russia identifying him as “target number one”. They want to destroy Ukraine politically by taking down the head of state. I am staying in the government quarter together with others. The enemy has designated me as the target number one, and my family as the target number two”. Ukraine’s president Volodymyr Zelenskiy has asked eastern European Nato members for defence assistance. Zelenskiy spoke with Polish counterpart Andrzej Duda on Friday to seek defence assistance from eastern European members of Nato and help in bringing Russia to the negotiating table. We need effective international assistance. Discussed this with Andrzej Duda. Appealed to the Bucharest Nine for defence aid, sanctions, pressure on the aggressor. Together we have to put Russia at the negotiating table. We need anti-war coalition.” Ukraine’s foreign minister Dmytro Kuleba earlier described the attack on Kyiv this morning as “horrific” likening the assault as akin to an attack from Nazi Germany. Last time our capital experienced anything like this was in 1941 when it was attacked by Nazi Germany. Ukraine defeated that evil and will defeat this one. Stop Putin. Isolate Russia. Severe all ties. Kick Russia out of everywhere.” Ukraine expects a Russian tank attack on its capital, Kyiv, later on Friday which could become the hardest day in the war, an adviser to Ukraine’s interior minister said. Anton Herashchenko said the defenders of Kyiv were ready with anti-tank missiles supplied by foreign allies. Ukraine’s deputy defence minister also agreed with the assessment that Russian forces may enter areas just outside Kyiv today. The minister added that Ukrainian army units are defending positions on four fronts despite being outnumbered. A Ukrainian military official also said Ukrainian forces managed to repel Russian troops near Chernihiv. This coincides with a report from Ukraine’s defence ministry which earlier said airborne assault troops have blown up a bridge over the Teteriv River at Ivankiv, located about 50km (31 miles) north of Kyiv, in an effort to prevent a Russian column of forces from advancing toward the capital. The ministry said the Russian advance was stopped. The international criminal court says it is following developments in Ukraine with increasing concern, according to a statement seen by Reuters. ICC prosecutor Karim Khan on Friday expressed his concern over the Russian invasion of Ukraine and said his court may investigate possible war crimes in the country. I remind all sides conducting hostilities on the territory of Ukraine that my office may exercise its jurisdiction and investigate any act of genocide, crime against humanity or war crime committed within Ukraine.” The ICC prosecutors office will continue to closely monitor situation in Ukraine and may investigate any crime against humanity or war crime committed in Ukraine. Images of damaged buildings, residential towers and even classrooms are beginning to filter in after Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy confirmed multiple reports of Russian missile strikes across Ukraine in a national address early on Friday morning. Zelenskiy said the strikes began at 4am local time on Friday, adding that Russian troops were stopped by Ukrainian forces from advancing in most directions. The Guardian’s Peter Beaumont in Ukraine’s western city of Lviv has given his report on the current crisis unfolding around Kyiv. On the second day of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, it has become increasingly clear what the Kremlin’s military tactics are: which is very quickly to put pressure on the capital Kyiv. Kyiv is facing threats both from its eastern edges, from the west more generally since the capture of the Chernobyl nuclear plant site, and now, according to Ukrainian officials, from the threat of infiltration into the city. While it’s unclear whether the Russian military intends to capture the Ukrainian capital or force it’s capitulation, a combination of missile attacks, a rapid airborne advance using helicopters to the outskirts, and the continuing advance by Russian armour is putting Kyiv in an increasingly difficult position. The latest update from Ukraine’s General Staff claims that the key Hostomel air base, just outside Kyiv is controlled by Kyiv forces again, however heavy fighting is going on north west of the capital. There are also reports that the Ukrainian military has destroyed at least one bridge to slow the Russian advance, although we know that Russian forces have bridge laying companies. This morning, Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskiy said the government had information that “subversive groups” were encroaching on the city, while US Secretary of State Antony Blinken said Kyiv “could well be under siege” in what U.S. officials believe is a brazen attempt by Russian President Vladimir Putin to dismantle the government and replace it with his own regime. While Zelinskiy said this morning that Russian troops had been halted in most places but even if that is the case, which seems to contradict his comments on encroachment, the situation is serious. US Defense Secretary Lloyd Austin told lawmakers on a phone call Thursday evening that Russian mechanised forces that entered from Belarus were about 20 miles from Kyiv. While there has been some focus on Russian losses inflicted by Ukrainian defenders – including helicopters, soldiers and armoured vehicles – it’s worth pointing out these are so far at the level the Russian military would have priced in for such a quick and aggressive advance and not evidence necessarily any sign so far that the Russian operation is struggling. We have more from Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy’s national address this morning. Speaking to his citizens in a video address in both Ukrainian and Russian, Zelenskiy continued to make appeals to his neighbour for a ceasefire. Russia will have to talk to us sooner or later about how to end hostilities and stop this invasion. The sooner the conversation begins, the smaller Russia’s losses will be.” Zelenskiy added that world is continuing to observe what is going on in Ukraine from afar while new sanctions have not convinced Russia to withdraw from an attack. This morning we are defending our state alone. Like yesterday, the world’s most powerful forces are watching from afar. Was Russia convinced by yesterday’s sanctions? We hear in our sky and see on our earth that this was not enough.” He added that until the attacks stop, “we will be defending our country until then”. We are receiving multiple reports from journalists on the ground in Ukraine that air raid sirens are sounding in Kyiv this morning. Guardian reporter Emma Graham-Harrison is currently in Kyiv and tells us the sirens began sounding about three hours after loud explosions first woke the city around 4.30am. Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy has confirmed multiple reports of Russian missile strikes in a national address early on Friday morning, Zelenskiy said the strikes began at 4am local time on Friday, adding that Russian troops were stopped by Ukrainian forces from advancing in most directions. The president added that Russian strikes aimed at both military and civilian targets, Reuters reports. Meanwhile, sirens rang out in the western Ukrainian city of Lviv early on Friday, a Reuters witness said. Welcome to rolling updates on the Russian invasion of Ukraine. I’m Samantha Lock and here are the main developments of the past few hours. As dawn breaks in the Ukrainian capital of Kyiv, air raid sirens are sounding across the capital. Earlier, residents reported waking to the sound of explosions as reports circulated that Russia had launched a series of missile strikes on the city of just under 3 million. Many civilians sought safety in bomb shelters and metro stations as reports of Russian tanks were moving closer to the city from all sides. Here’s what we know so far: Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy has confirmed multiple reports of Russian missile strikes in a national address early on Friday morning. Multiple explosions have been heard in Kyiv on Friday morning as the Russian offensive entered its second day. Two buildings were on fire in the south-east of the capital after a Russian plane was shot down and a border post in the south-east was hit by a missile, causing casualties. US secretary of state Antony Blinken said “all evidence suggests that Russia intends to encircle and threaten” the Ukrainian capital. Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy said 137 people have died and 316 had been wounded so far. In a video address late on Thursday, he lamented that Ukraine had been “left alone to defend our state”, but said he would stay on in the capital despite being Russia’s “target number one”. The UK said Ukrainian forces had provided “fierce resistance across all axes of Russia’s advance” and that is was unlikely Russia had achieved all its objectives for the first day of the invasion. Ukraine has decreed a full military mobilisation and all men aged 18-60 have been forbidden from leaving Ukraine. Thousands attempted to flee Kyiv, leading to large traffic queues. Meanwhile, pictures have emerged of Kyiv residents crowding into underground metro stations where they are taking shelter from further Russian attacks. Hundreds of people have been arrested in Russian cities after protests against the invasion. Police have held at least 1,702 people, according to the OVD-Info monitor, with most of the arrests made in Moscow and St Petersburg. Global leaders have decried Russia’s actions, with many announcing fresh sanctions. US president Joe Biden ordered broad new sanctions, and the UK’s prime minister, Boris Johnson, announced its “largest ever” curbs. However, there was concern that the EU was holding back from excluding Russia from the Swift international banking payments system. Officials in western capitals have expressed bewilderment about Vladimir Putin’s mindset and choice in going to war. One described him as “despotic” while Emmanuel Macron said that the Russian leader had been “duplicitous” in talks before the invasion.Uefa is in discussions with its lawyers over ending the governing body’s longstanding relationship with Gazprom, after confirming that this season’s men’s Champions League final has been moved from St Petersburg to Paris. On a day when European football began to take firm action after the invasion of Ukraine, with Manchester United ending their sponsorship deal with Aeroflot and Russian teams forced to play matches at neutral venues, Russian authorities claimed Uefa was playing politics with sport. Uefa’s showpiece fixture will be held at the Stade de France on 28 May, with the governing body thanking Emmanuel Macron for his role in facilitating the change. “Uefa wishes to express its thanks and appreciation to French Republic president Emmanuel Macron for his personal support and commitment to have European club football’s most prestigious game moved to France at a time of unparalleled crisis,” a statement said. “Together with the French government, Uefa will fully support multi-stakeholder efforts to ensure the provision of rescue for football players and their families in Ukraine who face dire human suffering, destruction and displacement.” In a further statement, Uefa confirmed there would be meetings of the ExCo soon “where additional matters will be addressed”. The Guardian understands this will include the relationship with Gazprom, the Russian gas giant, which has sponsored Uefa’s club competitions for more than a decade and is closely intertwined with football across Europe. A second decision was taken to move the home fixtures of Ukrainian and Russian club and national teams in Uefa competitions to neutral venues. In effect this applies immediately only to Spartak Moscow, who play RB Leipzig the last 16 of the Europa League. Uefa’s international competition the Nations League is scheduled to resume in June, when Russia are set to host Iceland and Albania, and Ukraine are due to be at home to Armenia and the Republic of Ireland. On Thursday the Ukrainian FA (UAF) had called for all Russian teams be excluded from Uefa competitions. Although Uefa stopped short of this, its decisions were strongly criticised by Alexander Dyukov, the head of the Russian Football Union (RFU), who sits on the Uefa ExCo and is chairman of the Gazprom subsidiary Gazprom Neft. In a statement released via the RFU, Dyukov said: “We believe that the decision to move the venue of the Champions League final was dictated by political reasons. The RFU has always adhered to the principle of ‘sport is out of politics’, and thus cannot support this decision. “The RFU also does not support the decision to transfer any matches involving Russian teams to neutral territory as it violates the sports principle and infringes on the interests of players, coaches and fans.” Andrii Pavelko, the UAF president, was also present at the meeting, after which a statement said: “The Uefa executive committee further determined to remain on standby to convene further extraordinary meetings, on a regular ongoing basis where required, to reassess the legal and factual situation as it evolves and adopt further decisions as necessary.” Russia and Ukraine are due to play in World Cup play-offs next month in fixtures that fall under Fifa’s jurisdiction. A United spokesperson said of the move to end ties with Aeroflot, the club’s official carrier: “In light of events in Ukraine, we have withdrawn Aeroflot’s sponsorship rights. We share the concerns of our fans around the world and extend our sympathies to those affected.” The decision ends a nine-year association between United and Russia’s largest airline. The contract was was due to expire next year, having been renewed in 2017. The UK government responded positively to Uefa’s actions. The culture secretary, Nadine Dorries, welcomed the move and the sports minister, Nigel Huddleston, said other sporting bodies should follow Uefa’s lead. “I appreciate that a lot of people are uncomfortable mixing sport and ‘politics’ but the situation in Ukraine is way beyond ‘politics’,” Huddleston said. “I welcome the leadership shown by Uefa and I urge other governing bodies due to host international sporting events in Russia this year to follow suit.”Mmm, cashmere. So soft and fluffy, right? As warm as toast, as light as bubble bath. What’s not to love? A lot, actually. It turns out we are doing it wrong. Which is a bit of a shock, since cashmere has been one of the high street fashion success stories of our times. Just the word – cashmere – has become a brand name, a status symbol in its own right. Like Häagen-Dazs or Chanel No 5, everyone loves cashmere. Retailers, having identified the killer shelf appeal of a neat stack of marshmallow-soft sweaters in M&amp;M colours as a weakness – one that can trigger an impulse purchase of a box-fresh lemon-yellow cardi, when you only popped into the store for a pair of tights – have enabled our cashmere habit. The thing is, cashmere can be problematic for sustainability and for animal welfare. A yarn once prized for its durability has been hijacked by fast fashion, damaging farming practices in ways that cause unnecessary suffering to goats, and creating inferior sweaters that wear out or lose shape. Like an egg-white omelette, cheap cashmere is whipped up from scant ingredients into something that looks good but is insubstantial. “Fluffy feels good, but it often covers up weaknesses,” says Tim Ewington, co-founder of cashmere label Aethel, which is pricey, but made to last. “Fluffiness is good at disguising shorter cashmere hairs, which are less well spun and heavily dyed. And it covers up the fact that there isn’t so much cashmere in the sweater, since fluffy cashmere looks bulky even if it doesn’t weigh much.” His advice? Ask about ply – “two-ply is a good mid-weight sweater” – or take your kitchen scales to the shop, and weigh the sweater before you buy. Is that such a crazy idea? This is a serious purchase, after all. (Aethel’s Big Hug knit weighs a substantial 700g.) The Good Cashmere Standard (GCS)was launched in 2020 to safeguard the welfare of goats and farmers whose traditional practices are endangered by fast fashion appetites. Belly hair is sometimes combed without waiting for the goats’ natural moulting period, causing distress to the animals. The GCS only gives its approval to farms that follow ethical practices. The White Company, where a luxurious pure cashmere sweatshirt costs £169, was the first British brand to join the initiative. “All animals farmed for their yarn should be cared for,” says Barbara Horspool, the White Company’s clothing director. “The livelihoods of remote communities depend on this trade, so it’s about educating and working with farmers.” She says responsibly sourced cashmere is a sound buy. “Handwash it, or machine wash at 30C, and it will last and last.” Boden and Cos, both GCS signatories, are excellent places to look for well-priced cashmere. Longevity is as much about design as it is about manufacture, as a Cos spokesperson pointed out: look for timeless, less trend-driven pieces. (You can’t go wrong with a Cos charcoal turtleneck, £145.) Mindful of balancing durability with the frothiness customers have come to expect, Boden sends its cashmere out for testing in real-life wardrobes “to ensure we have the right balance between handfeel and pilling performance”, says Cristina Gilkes, director of product development and buying at Boden. Its knitted tank top, £90, is a useful multi-season layering piece. Occasionally, Aethel hears from customers bemused that their new sweater doesn’t feel like candy floss. But they also get feedback that their sweaters last, and hold their shape. Ewington’s advice to cashmere shoppers is: “Weigh the piece in your hands, feel the elbows and cuffs – ask yourself whether you believe the piece will last.” Because, price aside, that is what cashmere’s famous feelgood factor really feels like.Mark Bruce has always been driven by music, feeding off it like a vulture in the desert – that’s the kind of imagery he might use, drawn to darkness, Americana and violent urges. In this triple bill, each piece takes a different musical direction. Bruce is not the only person to choreograph to the White Stripes (see: Wayne McGregor’s Chroma), but in Green Apples he does it in the spirit of the garage band themselves. Two dancers (one male, one female) are dressed in red and black like Jack and Meg White – jeans, vest, tattoos and some of that couple’s ambiguity (were they siblings or spouses?). There’s pressure and resistance, a look of relish on Bryony Harrison’s face, her body twanging with the tension of a bass guitar string (not that the two-piece had a bassist). Bruce’s choreographer father, Christopher, made Rooster to the music of the Rolling Stones; Bruce Jr seems to be working towards the rawer, scuzzier modern equivalent. The company of five dance to Martin Simpson’s folk songs in Folk Tales, brutal yarns of murder and grief, but the dance is knowing and laced with comedy. Carina Howard launches into a fantastic jig, with perfect pas de chat and sissones thrown in. Jonathan Goddard is a master at playing the haunted, hollow and insidious, but he moves like an angel, with unbelievable lightness: the silken swoop of a leg brushing the air, his sudden speed and detail, his ability to almost control the friction between his body and the air. In the programme’s main work, Phantoms, Bruce gets to live out his Nick Cave fantasies, having composed and sung the music himself. It’s a dance built on movie tropes. Loners and outcasts, a sociopathic preacher, a fallen angel; the land of Johnny Cash shooting a man in Reno just to watch him die; Lynch and Tarantino (a woman brandishing knives is pure Uma Thurman). With a sparse set, it’s hugely atmospheric, bright footlights masking scene changes where characters materialise and disappear. There’s an indulgence about it and it loses its way for a little while in the instrumentals, lost in the emptiness of these characters’ souls. Bruce is best when tied to a song, where he thrives. At Wilton’s Music Hall, London, to 5 March. Then touringYou know a show has made it when it’s prepared to say no to its main backer, especially when that backer is a megastar rapper who is singlehandedly responsible for the show even being on TV. “When we first met Drake to talk to him about helping us to revive the series, he said, ‘Look, I’d love to be in it!’” says Top Boy creator Ronan Bennett, but this offer gave him a problem. “If Drake were to appear, it would have been a distraction. It would be hard to maintain Top Boy’s level of authenticity – so it didn’t happen.” Since its launch in 2011, Top Boy has had a reputation for an unblinking depiction of the drug trade rife on inner-London estates. Soon, viewers will be treated to its second, hyper-realistic season on Netflix, nine years after it was cancelled by Channel 4 following two runs. Longtime fan Drake helped convince Netflix to commission the series, becoming executive producer along the way. It was also helped by calls from fans – including famous ones. When Kane “Kano” Robinson, the grime musician who plays gang leader Sully in the show, met Noel Gallagher, the first thing Gallagher said was: “When’s Top Boy coming back?’” “It got annoying sometimes,” says Ashley Walters, who has played Dushane, another gang leader, since the start. “I love the fans and I love how much they love the show. But you kind of get drowned by it sometimes. It’s like you can’t exist as any other character. It’s like: ‘All right, that’s good. But when’s Top Boy coming back?’ It was a relief to have it return.” This time round, the show is much bigger in scope. We follow the drug route into London from Morocco through Spain – prompting scenes of sun-dappled ocean waves gently lapping a yacht’s bow. Naturally, this being Top Boy, these scenes are followed by a naked man being shot in the head and dumped overboard. We also see into the police investigation of the various London crews, which is actually a first, even though the show has been dubbed the UK’s version of The Wire. (Bennett is quick to point out that this story has “not remotely been influenced by comparisons to The Wire.”) Plus, we see Top Boy do something it has certainly never done before – have a grime MC hang out in a bush with a fox called Roy, fork-feeding it from a tin while chuckling: “Here comes the plane!” “Ronan had been showing us videos of him feeding a fox that was living in his garden,” says Robinson. “So when I saw that in the script, I thought: ‘Oh God, you’ve stitched me up.’” This is a result of his character retreating into a less urban lifestyle after the climax of the previous series. “I was a bit nervous. I don’t like foxes. I don’t think anyone likes foxes. You normally avoid them, don’t you?” But some things have stayed the same. Just like the previous two series, this new season begins with Sully and Dushane falling out. “It’s an ongoing battle,” says Walters. “Every time we get scripts, Kane and I are like: ‘Ah man, again?’ But we’re always creatively trying to find ways to make it feel different.” Robinson adds: “It does blow my mind how long the show has been running, especially when I get a young person saying: ‘When the first series came out, I wasn’t allowed to watch it. I was 11 and my mum wouldn’t let me.’” It’s not just Top Boy fans who have grown up with the show. Its actors have, too. “I just remember everyone in school talking about it,” says Brit award-winning MC Little Simz, AKA Simbi Ajikawo, who plays Dushane’s girlfriend Shelley. Jasmine Jobson, who plays Dushane’s deputy Jaq, chips into our group Zoom call: “Everyone in class would be like: ‘Oh my God, did you see what happened in Top Boy last night?’” In the past, the show has been very male-dominated. But last month, a giant poster was unveiled in London featuring Jobson and Ajikawo. “There we are, faces as big as satellite dishes!” says Jobson. “Our boats are right there! I’m so gassed!” Ajikawo gets her own storyline, too, running a nail bar and being visited by a shadowy figure from her past. Meanwhile, as Jaq becomes a major player in the Summerhouse gang, we step into her love life and see her in the grip of a family drama that introduces a Liverpool-based crew. So is there more of a spotlight on female characters this season? “One hundred per cent,” says Jobson. “The women who live in this world aren’t often spoken about. And the female perspective was something we were lacking, but now we’re opening doors.” Ajikawo adds: “Yeah, the earlier seasons were really male-led, but we’re pushing the narrative forward now. Not just in showing that these men have sisters, girlfriends and mothers, but also that they work with women who are leading their field.” Top Boy has always been unflinching in tackling broader social issues, such as the county lines phenomenon, in which inner-city kids briefly decamp to small towns to sell drugs. Series four showcases the post-Windrush threat of deportation faced by older African-Caribbean immigrants, as well as homing in on gentrification and furious residents’ meetings whose attendees face rehousing in different cities. However, due to the series already being in production at the time of George Floyd’s murder, the Black Lives Matter movement didn’t make it in. Does that feel weird? “You have to remember what type of people the characters are,” says Robinson. “They’re violent drug dealers who come from a place that has made them that way. Are they going to Black Lives Matter marches? I doubt it. I doubt most people out there selling drugs are.” Still, it’s hard not to look at Top Boy at least through the prism of BLM. For years, it has been depicting a side of the inner-city British Black experience often overlooked by the mainstream media. And it does so by casting actors from the community it represents, initially holding open castings for kids who’d never acted before, until – by season two of its Channel 4 run – they were swamped by thousands of applicants. Casting agent Des Hamilton’s dedication to giving roles to actors with no previous experience saw him win the first ever Bafta for scripted casting. “That’s what I’m proudest of,” says Walters. “Top Boy is creating careers for people who wouldn’t otherwise have had that opportunity. You get to see new actors coming into the show, watch them flourish. That’s always been important to us.” Top Boy has launched the careers of Letitia Wright, Michaela Coel and last season’s breakout, Bafta Rising Star award-winner Micheal Ward, who has since worked with Steve McQueen on Small Axe and acted with Sharon Stone. This season, it looks set to do the same for Jobson. “Top Boy has opened so many doors for me,” she says. “But I didn’t get into acting to win awards. It’s so important that we’re showing issues like gentrification because I honestly couldn’t tell you how many estates from areas I grew up in are no longer there. It’s heartbreaking. Sometimes that’s all people know – it’s where they’ve lived their whole lives, where their whole family grew up.” Jobson’s journey to acting via her background in care was not only made possible by Top Boy but also inspired by it, in particular Wright’s shift into the Marvel universe. “Letitia is definitely a big inspiration for me. She comes from nothing. She was the lead girl in Top Boy – and now she’s smashing it.” And what about Robinson and Walters, who have been with the show from the start – when will they get their Hollywood break? “I don’t know, man,” says Robinson. “I just want to do what I believe in. Top Boy suits me artistically. If I come across another project I believe in, I’ll give it a look. But it’s not something I’m chasing.” Shunning Hollywood? Perhaps we shouldn’t be too surprised. After all, Robinson does star in Top Boy, the show that refused Drake a cameo. Top Boy returns to Netflix on 18 MarchThe UK has said it will work “all day” to persuade fellow European states to cut Russia off from the international Swift payment system. The UK defence secretary, Ben Wallace, ended the pretence that Britain was not at odds with its fellow European leaders over the issue. He said there was still time for Russia to be excluded, and the foreign secretary, Liz Truss, said: “The UK is working with allies to exclude Russia from the Swift financial system.” Wallace added: “We will work all the magic, do everything we can in diplomacy.” Truss is to undertake a round of shuttle diplomacy to try to rally support for the British position after the EU refused to adopt what has been billed as the “nuclear option” of sanctions. British officials said that the EU, reflecting the divisions at its council meeting on Thursday, kept the Swift option on the table. UK diplomats are arguing that with Ukrainian forces mounting a defence of their country, and scattered signs of unease in Russian cities, this is the moment to try to get ahead of Putin for once and surprise him with a move that would send the Russian economy straight into the deep freeze. The British position has the support of Canada and some US senators. British officials insist they will keep up the pressure for the policy even if Kyiv falls. Boris Johnson lobbied the German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, on Wednesday on the issue but made no progress. Johnson’s position, also raised at a virtual meeting of the G7, is backed by the Labour leader, Keir Starmer. The Swift payment system (the Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunication) is the main secure messaging system that banks use to make rapid and secure cross-border payments, allowing international trade to flow smoothly. It has become the principal mechanism for financing international trade. In 2020, about 38m transactions were sent each day over the Swift platform, facilitating trillions of dollars’ worth of deals. Swift is incorporated under Belgian law and, although supervised by a complex web of central banks, it was forced in 2012 to comply with an EU regulation, as confirmed by its home country government, that had cut Iran off from the banking system. Wallace said: We would like to go further. We’d like to do the Swift system – that is the financial system that allows the Russians to move money around the world to receive payments for its gas – but … these are international organisations and if not every country wants them to be thrown out of the Swift system, it becomes difficult. Opponents of the move argue that it would incentivise Russia to try to use an alternative fledgling scheme. They also say it would be dangerous for countries highly dependent on Russia for their energy, principally Italy. Read the full story here: Boris Johnson will host the leaders of the V4 countries in London next month to discuss the Ukraine crisis. No 10 said the prime minister will hold a meeting with the leaders of Poland, Hungary, the Czech Republic and Slovakia on March 8 to “discuss the situation in Ukraine and the UK’s support for security in the region”. An estimated 450 Russian soldiers have died in the conflict in Ukraine so far and Vladimir Putin failed in his military objectives on the first day of fighting, the UK defence secretary has said. Ben Wallace also rebuffed pleas on Friday morning from Ukrainian and some Conservative politicians for the UK to implement a no-fly zone over Ukraine, arguing that introducing one would amount to declaring war on Russia. “Our assessment as of this morning is that Russia has not taken any of its major objectives, in fact it is behind its hoped-for timetable,” Wallace told Sky News. They have lost over 450 personnel. One of the significant airports they were trying to capture with their elite Spetsnaz [special forces] has failed to be taken. In fact, the Ukrainians have taken it back. So, I think contrary to great Russian claims, and indeed President Putin’s sort of vision that somehow the Ukrainians would be liberated and would be flocking to his cause – he’s got that completely wrong. The Russian army has failed to deliver on day one its main objective. In a later exchange on BBC’s Radio 4 Today programme, the Ukrainian MP Lesia Vasylenko pleaded with Wallace for the UK and the US to close airspace above Ukraine “in order for these casualties not to escalate”. However Wallace said this would constitute a direct act of aggression towards Russia, which would prompt a response, and result in “war across Europe” as any attack on the UK would implicate all other Nato members. Wallace said: To do a no-fly zone I would have to put British fighter jets against Russian; Nato would have to declare war on Russia. I cannot and won’t trigger a European war but I will help Ukraine fight every street with every piece of equipment we can support them. Vasylenko warned that Europe is already at war, since “if Ukraine is allowed to fall others will follow”, and other democratic nations should seek to protect a fellow sovereign country. She said: What you are witnessing is a restructuring of the defence and security framework we are so used to. Read more from my colleagues Rachel Hall and Dan Sabbagh here: Keir Starmer is continuing his clampdown on Labour’s leftwing by cutting funds to Young Labour and cancelling its annual conference, Rachel Wearmouth of the Daily Mirror reports. A source told her: Labour will no longer tolerate the selfishness of those who aren’t focused on winning the next election. Young Labour has declared its support for Stop The War “and other pro-peace activists”. Yesterday, a group of 11 Labour MPs from the left of the party removed their names from a statement about the invasion of Ukraine, which heavily criticises Nato after being warned they risked losing the party whip. Boris Johnson is expected to raise the prospect of banning Russia from the Swift payment system with allies again on Friday, Downing Street said. A spokesman for the prime minister was asked whether the UK would be pushing for the sanction and he said: You’ll have heard the prime minister’s comments in the house on this yesterday, we will continue to work with allies to try and cut Russia off from Swift. You’ll be aware that the PM raised this in his call with G7 leaders yesterday, I expect he will raise it at the Nato leaders meeting again today. The spokesman would not be drawn on which countries were holding out on the proposal but he said: We’ve set out why we want to ensure that we can do this, as the prime minister said yesterday to ensure that we send a clear message to Vladimir Putin that his efforts will not succeed and to ensure that we can deal a severe blow to the Russian economy. As I say, the Prime Minister will raise it again later today. The government is working “incredibly closely” with Ukraine’s neighbours to support those fleeing the country, No 10 said. A spokesman for Boris Johnson said and he pointed towards the home secretary’s announcement on visa extensions. You’ll be aware that we deployed an extra 350 troops to Poland a fortnight ago to help exactly with that task. A total of 1,000 UK troops are on standby to support Ukraine’s neighbours with refugee responses, the armed forces minister has said. Labour MP Alex Davies-Jones asked: Will the 1,000 UK troops that he has placed on standby to help with the humanitarian crisis now be urgently deployed? James Heappey replied: Just to be very clear – because I think unless I am almost doing her a disservice – I might have understood her question to be will the 1,000 troops go into Ukraine as they did into Kabul into the summer to facilitate the egress of Ukrainians. I am afraid she will be disappointed. That is just not something that could realistically be done. This is a highly kinetic combat situation and the probability of Nato troops being caught up in combat with Russian armed forces is far too high and would lead to huge escalation. The 1,000 troops that are on standby are there to support Hungary, Slovakia, Romania and Poland with the expected humanitarian challenges that they will face as people make their way out of Ukraine. Conservative MP Luke Evans asked: What sanctions and steps will we take to make sure that Belarus feel the pain for what they are doing? Heappey replied: The Belarusian ambassador has been summoned to the Foreign Office today to have the views of Her Majesty’s government shared with them. Belarus has also been included in the sanctions regime. Downing Street said “nothing is off the table” in support of Ukraine. A spokesman for Boris Johnson said: We remain firmly behind Ukraine and will continue to support them. The spokesman said he could not go into detail over the support being provided but the UK had “talked about protective equipment, helmets, body armour, as well as some of the defensive lethal aid that we’ve provided in terms of anti-tank weaponry”. The public inquiry into how a British woman was fatally poisoned after being exposed to Novichok has been delayed, in a decision which has been condemned by the coroner and the victim’s family. Dawn Sturgess died in July 2018 after she unwittingly came into contact with the nerve agent on a discarded perfume bottle in Amesbury, Wiltshire. The UK government and Scotland Yard believe the Kremlin was responsible for the act, prompting Priti Patel three months ago to order the inquest into Sturgess’s death be converted into a public inquiry to better establish the extent of Russian involvement. At what was intended to be the inquiry’s first hearing on Friday at the Royal Courts of Justice, coroner Lady Heather Hallett, who has now been appointed to lead the Covid-19 inquiry, was told her successor had still not been appointed, resulting in further delays. Michael Mansfield, representing the victim’s family and Sturgess’s partner Charlie Rowley, said the Russian invasion of Ukraine this week underlined the need to progress with the inquiry without delay. He told the 30-minute hearing: As of today, or yesterday, there is a poignancy about what is happening in Ukraine and eastern Europe at the moment, for the necessity of this inquiry not losing a single day. Hallett said she had been putting “extreme pressure on, behind the scenes” to ensure her successor was appointed. She added: It is, I have to say, a disappointment to me to be sitting here today with no inquiry set up and no judge appointed to lead it. I have seen a letter from Birnberg Peirce, the solicitors who represent the Sturgess family and also Mr Rowley, expressing a degree of frustration at the delay - that is a frustration that I share. Ben Watson, counsel for the government, said a chairman was expected to be appointed in the next two weeks. He said it was “regrettable” the appointment had not been made, and added that “recent events” had increased demands on the government. Hallett concluded: Many other people have been affected (by the poisoning) and they too have the right to have these proceedings heard as soon as possible. Sturgess died in hospital after she and Rowley became seriously ill in Amesbury. It followed the attempted murder of former Russian spy Sergei Skripal, his daughter Yulia and ex-police officer Nick Bailey, who were poisoned in nearby Salisbury in March that year when members of a Russian military intelligence squad are believed to have smeared the deadly nerve agent on Skripal’s door handle in Salisbury. All three survived, as did Rowley. Moscow’s ambassador in London, has not yet been expelled from the UK, Jack Elsom of The Sun points out. A spokesperson for No 10 said: Having a Russian representative in London allows us to deliver clear and tough messages directly to Putin’s government. Responding to shadow defence secretary John Healey, James Heappey says anti-tank missiles had “already proven to be invaluable” in the conflict in Ukraine. The armed forces minister says the weapons were “high on our list of things that we are looking to supply”, adding: They are unsubstantiated reports, but nonetheless we are aware of the number of circumstances in which they have been used to defeat Russian armour, and we are therefore very aware of their utility both in open battle during the initial phase of the conflict but also in the urban domain in any resistance or insurgency that might follow. Heappey also shares insight that Russia’s invasion had not been as successful as planned. He says: Suffice to say, we are pretty certain that in the Kremlin last night there will have been some pretty urgent reflections on the speed of the advance compared to what they anticipated. I think that Russian people should be calling President Putin and the kleptocracy that surrounds him out on that, because young Russian men and women are being sacrificed in the name of President Putin’s hubris. Shadow defence secretary John Healey has pressed the government on whether the UK will provide Ukraine with short-range handheld anti-tank missiles. He says: On Wednesday, the prime minister told the house the UK will be shortly providing a further package of military support to Ukraine. We understand the minister’s comments about detail, but has this further military assistance being provided? The minister knows he has Labour’s full support for this. Healey says the “UK’s short-range handheld anti-tank missiles are working well”, adding: He knows that the Ukrainians need more of these urgently to defend Kiev and their other cities. So, can he confirm that he is willing to go that bit further? Healey concludes his remarks by saying: We’ve taken peace and security in Europe for granted since the end of the Cold War. We can no longer do that. I fear that we will be dealing with the consequences of this Russian invasion now for years to come. Nato troops must not enter Ukraine because of the “risk of miscalculation” leading to “existential” threat, the armed forces minister has said. James Heappey has told MPs that the government would “explore all that we can do to support the Ukrainians themselves over the next few days”. He adds: But we must all in this house be clear that British and Nato troops should not, must not, play an active role in Ukraine. We must all be clear what the risk of miscalculation could be and how existential that could very quickly become if people miscalculate and things escalate unnecessarily. Conservative MP Peter Bone has asked the armed forces minister to update the house on whether the UK and Western allies will institute a no-fly zone on Ukraine. Bone says: We are seeing history repeat itself, as a powerful country, headed by a mad man, is extending its territorial boundaries. First by annexing regions of sovereign countries and then invading those countries. This, of course, is what happened in the 1930s and led to World War. He adds: The Ukraine ambassador to the United Kingdom has asked for us and our allies to institute a no-fly zone of Ukraine. As the ambassador said, people are dying as we speak. This action will be a significant and a real help for the people of Ukraine. Yesterday, when I asked the Prime Minister about this request, he indicated it was not ruled out. Could the minister update the House on this request for help? James Heappey said a no-fly zone is “somewhat difficult to implement in a hostile airspace against a peer adversary”. He noted eyes must be open to the reality that “in such an event, Nato jets would not possibly, but would most certainly probably, come into a combat situation with Russian jets.” Heappey went on: The risk of miscalculation and escalation and the triggering of Article 5 could not be understated in those circumstances. In the air domain, the risk of miscalculation is greater because things are happening at Mach 2. And there is no time for political calibration. Shadow defence secretary John Healey says Europe took peace for “granted”. The Labour MP says: We’ve taken peace &amp; security in Europe for granted since the end of the Cold War. We can no longer do that. And I fear that we will be dealing with the consequences of this Russian invasion now for years to come. Britain is going through all of its military kit to see what can be sent to Ukraine, James Heappey has told MPs. The armed forces minister says: We want to see as much British kit in the hands of Ukrainians as we can manage. Asked by shadow defence secretary John Healey which specific objectives Russia failed to achieve, James Heappey won’t divulge intelligence. However, he does say: “Putin may have bitten off more than he can chew” with his Invasion of Ukraine. The armed forces minister adds he is “pretty certain” people “in the Kremlin” will be asking questions about the invasion. The UK will send further armed forces to Estonia “earlier than planned” to reinforce the Nato ally in the wake of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. Responding to an urgent question, Defence minister James Heappey told the Commons: In addition to the Royal Tank Regiment battle group that has been in place in Estonia for the last six months, the Royal Welsh battlegroup will be arriving in Estonia earlier than planned to double up our force levels and those doubled-up force levels remain indefinitely. They will be augmented by the headquarters of 12 Mechanised Brigade, meaning that the United Kingdom will have an armoured brigade in Estonia reassuring one of our closest Nato allies. Labour leader Keir Starmer has said if Boris Johnson brought forward tougher sanctions on Russia, they would be voted through Parliament “very, very quickly” with the Labour Party’s support. He also strengthened his appeal for Russia to be banned from international financial system Swift, describing the move as a “now decision” which should be made as soon as possible. He told BBC Breakfast: That is a now decision and the Labour Party would support it in full. We think it should happen now. Starmer called for shell companies in the UK supporting Vladimir Putin’s regime to be targeted, saying there was “frustration” in parliament that the government hasn’t “got on with this”. He continued: What I’ve said to the prime minister is whatever criticism I’ve got for you, not having done it now, do it now. If you bring forward legislation, I said to the prime minister on Monday, we the Labour party will vote for it. We could bring this through parliament very, very quickly because those shell companies are hiding assets that are supporting Putin and we have to get our house in order and there’s such a will in parliament at the moment. Defence minister Baroness Goldie said there is currently no indication Russia intends to “directly target” UK or Nato forces, but they “remain on guard”, with cyber attacks expected. Opening a debate in the House of Lords, Lady Goldie said 1,000 troops are on stand-by to deal with the exodus of people from Ukraine. She told peers: It goes without saying that our thoughts and prayers remain with the Ukrainian people, many of whom have family and friends in the UK, and will now find themselves under attack for no reason whatsoever. But at the same time we remain on guard. While there is no indication at present that Russia intends to directly target British or Nato forces, we should expect their forces and proxies to launch cyber attacks and misinformation campaigns, seeking opportunities to embarrass the UK or Nato and to undermine our resolve. We stand ready to protect our country against any threats, whether conventional or in cyberspace. However, I’m afraid there’s no disguising the fact that a dark new chapter has opened in our history. Culture secretary Nadine Dorries welcomed Uefa’s decision to strip St Petersburg of the Champions League final over the Russian invasion of Ukraine. She said: I welcome Uefa’s decisive action to strip St Petersburg of staging this year’s Champions League Final. Russia must not be allowed to exploit sporting and cultural events on the world stage to legitimise its unprovoked, premeditated and needless attack against a sovereign democratic state. More on that story from my colleagues on the sports desk here: The government has been pressed to give an update on China’s position on Ukraine and on missiles “arriving in Serbia ready to destabilise” peace in Bosnia. As the Commons began a Friday sitting, Conservative MP Sir Bernard Jenkin said: I appreciate there is an urgent question on Ukraine later on, but I wonder if the government has given any indication about whether they are going to make a statement about our relations with China, given that China has done nothing to condemn the Ukrainian incursion, and whether the government will also make a statement about what is happening in the Balkans where I understand that missiles are arriving in Serbia ready to destabilise the Dayton Agreement and create a new crisis there. Commons Speaker Sir Lindsay Hoyle said he was sure the government would take Jenkin’s comments “very seriously”. Hoyle said: I have been given no notification that anything is forthcoming. What I would say is that we do have the urgent question and I am sure that he may be able to press the minister if he were able to catch my eye. Ben Wallace said Britain will “work all day” to try to get the Swift international payment system “turned off for Russia”. He told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: Britain wants the Swift system to be turned off for Russia. But unfortunately the Swift system is not in our control - it’s not a unilateral decision. Wallace said the system is used “to move money around”, explaining: When you pay Russia for its gas, it probably goes through the Swift system, for example. It is based in Belgium. It has a number of partners that control it, or nation states.” We want it switched off. Other countries do not. We only have so many options. We are going to work all day to try and get it (switched off for Russia). An urgent question on the military situation in Ukraine will take place in the House of Commons from 11am. It has been tabled by Conservative MP Peter Bone. Defence minister James Heappey is expected to respond to the urgent question. The House of Lords will be debating Ukraine and Russia from 10am. Ben Wallace said Vladimir Putin “won’t stop” after invading Ukraine. He said the decision not to “put British service personnel in direct fighting” was not about “risk”, but to avoid triggering a “war across Europe”. “It’s not about risk, as much as I care for my personnel. It’s not about risk,” he told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. It’s about if we were to directly attack Russian aircraft, we would have a war across Europe. I have said continually for a long time, as has Britain, and the prime minister has supported this position, that Putin is not rational. He is trying to invade Ukraine. He won’t stop after he’s ... with Ukraine. He will use everything in the Baltic states. He doesn’t believe the Baltic states are really countries. And we will have to stand up to it. Now, I cannot trigger a European war and I won’t trigger a European war. But what I will do is help Ukraine fight every street with every piece of equipment we can get to them, and we will support them, and that is the reality. Boris Johnson committed to providing further support to Ukraine after receiving an update from president Volodymyr Zelensky on the “terrible developments” in Kyiv. A Downing Street statement said: The prime minister spoke to president Zelensky this morning to express his solidarity with Ukraine. President Zelensky updated the prime minister on the most recent Russian military advances, including missile and artillery strikes on Ukrainian cities and the terrible developments in Kyiv in the early hours of this morning. The prime minister assured president Zelensky that the world is united in its horror at what Putin his doing. He paid tribute to the bravery and heroism of the Ukrainian people in standing up to Russia’s campaign of violence, and expressed his deep condolences for those who have been killed. The prime minister committed to provide further UK support to Ukraine in the coming days as the people of Ukraine and the world continue to demonstrate that Putin cannot act with impunity. Meanwhile, Zelensky said after the call that Ukraine demands “effective counteraction” from allies against Russia including further sanctions. The Ukrainian leader tweeted: Held talks with PM BorisJohnson. Reported on the course of (Ukraine’s) defence and insidious attacks on Kyiv by the aggressor. Today (Ukraine) needs the support of partners more than ever. He later tweeted about a conversation he had with the president of Finland Sauli Niinistö, adding “We need to increase sanctions &amp; [Ukrainian flag] defense support.” Ben Wallace has said British troops will not be sent to fight “directly” with the Russians. The defence secretary told BBC Breakfast they had provided training for more than 20,000 Ukrainians, which he described as “the next best thing”. He said sending troops in would trigger a European war. I said very clearly about a month ago that we are not going to be sending British troops to fight directly with Russian troops. We are going to hold the line in Nato. We’ve always supported Ukraine’s application to Nato over the last 15 years, not every country has wanted them to join. We’ve done the next best thing, which is train over 20,000 Ukrainians, provided them with lethal capabilities, which they are using right now. But I’m not putting British troops directly to fight Russian troops. That would trigger a European war, because we are a Nato country, and Russia would therefore be attacking Nato. Labour leader Keir Starmer has said Jeremy Corbyn was wrong about Nato and the party itself has “never wavered” in its support for the alliance. Asked on Sky News about the former Labour leader’s stance on stopping the expansion of Nato, Starmer said: Jeremy Corbyn was wrong about that but the Labour Party’s policy never shifted under his leadership and I’ve been very clear. He added that the “collective failure of the West” in the past response to Vladimir Putin may have emboldened the Russian president but described the party’s support for Nato as “unshakeable”. He said: I do think that the failure, the collective failure, of you know, the West... in relation to action he’s taken in the past, so many examples - Georgia, Crimea, Donbas - have given him the sense that as I say the benefits of aggression outweigh the costs. We have to be clear that that isn’t the case here in relation to Ukraine and that that response package from the rest of the world will be so strong that it will not only isolate Russia but also cripple its ability to function. For anyone who missed it, a group of 11 Labour MPs from the left of the party removed their names yesterday from a statement about the invasion of Ukraine, which heavily criticises Nato after being warned they risked losing the party whip. In a rapid victory for Starmer over MPs still linked to Corbyn, the Labour chief whip wrote to the 11 backbenchers asking them to remove their signatures from a statement drawn up by the Stop the War group. A party spokesperson later said all the MPs had agreed to do so. The Stop the War statement, which accuses the UK government of “sabre-rattling” over Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, also criticises it for saying Ukraine has a right to join Nato if it wishes. Read more on that by my colleague Peter Walker here: Keir Starmer has said he believes “further financial restrictions” against Russia are needed. Speaking on Good Morning Britain, the Labour leader said he supported the government’s package of sanctions announced yesterday but called for extra measures. He said the UK should “break open” shell companies in Britain providing support to Vladimir Putin and target Russia via Swift, an international financial system. Reacting to news that Russian troops were nearing Kyiv, Starmer said the situation was “extremely serious” and Britain should be “absolutely clear” in its stance. He said: We have to stand together with our allies, particularly Nato, and it’s very important we must stand together as one United Kingdom, and therefore yesterday was significant in Parliament because all political parties spoke with one voice in our support for Ukraine and our support for Nato. In relation to the sanctions, I thought what the Government put forward earlier this week was not strong enough. They came forward yesterday with a stronger package and I was able to say that we, the opposition, will support those further sanctions. I do want to go further. I think that we do need further financial restrictions, particularly the Swift mechanism. I also think we’ve got to break open the shell companies we have here in the UK that are providing financial support for Putin. In the first 24 hours of its invasion of Ukraine, Russia has not taken any of its major objectives and has lost more than 450 personnel, according to the defence secretary. However, Ben Wallace told Sky News it was the government’s view that Vladimir Putin intends “to invade the whole of Ukraine”. But he said Russia was “behind its hoped-for timetable” in the military action against its neighbour. He said: Our assessment, as of this morning, is that Russia has not taken any of its major objectives,” the defence secretary said. In fact it’s behind its hoped-for timetable. They’ve lost over 450 personnel. One of the significant airports they were trying to capture with their elite spetsnaz [special forces] has failed to be taken and, in fact, the Ukrainians have taken it back. So I think, contrary to great Russian claims and indeed President Putin’s vision that somehow the Ukrainians would be liberated and would be flocking to his cause, he’s got that completely wrong. And the Russian army has failed to deliver on day one its main objective. Welcome to today’s politics live blog. I’m Nicola Slawson and I’ll be taking the lead today. You can contact me on Twitter (@Nicola_Slawson) or via email (nicola.slawson@theguardian.com) if you have any questions or think I’m missing something. I will be covering UK elements of the crisis in Ukraine here, but for full coverage of the story, and for the global perspective, do read our dedicated live blog. It’s here. Meanwhile, our global coronavirus blog is here:Here is a brief round-up of the top Covid stories from the day so far: Sweden’s no-lockdown strategy to deal with Covid was broadly correct but early measures should have been more rigorous and intrusive, a government-appointed commission said on Friday in its final report on the country’s pandemic response. Germany does not have leeway to ease Covid restrictions more quickly, and Germans should not think that the pandemic is over as the number of new daily infections is still very high, the German health minister,, Karl Lauterbach, said on Friday. In the US, mask-wearing guidelines will be relaxed on Friday, according to two people familiar with the matter. It means most Americans will no longer be advised to wear masks in indoor public settings. At least 5.2 million children around the world have lost a parent, grandparent or family member who helped care for them to Covid, according to a new study. In the UK, almost 5 million Covid shots have been thrown away, according to an official report. The UK’s data watchdog has reprimanded the Scottish government and NHS National Services Scotland over their failure to inform people how their personal information is used by the NHS Scotland Covid Status app. Emergency room visits for eating disorders among 12- to 17-year-old girls doubled during the coronavirus pandemic, according to new research from the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention – a troubling existing trend that is likely to have been worsened by the stress of living through the prolonged crisis. China reported its highest daily count of Covid cases arriving from outside the mainland in nearly two years, with infections mostly from Hong Kong. Hong Kong has contracted the mainland firm China State Construction International Holdings Ltd to build eight isolation and treatment facilities to help the global financial hub fight a worsening Covid outbreak, its government said. At least 5.2 million children around the world have lost a parent, grandparent or family member who helped care for them to Covid, according to a new study. The research looked at coronavirus mortality data across 21 countries from the start of the pandemic between March 2020 and October 2021. The number of children affected rose by 90% from the end of April 2020 to the end of October 2021, reports CNN. Sweden’s no-lockdown strategy to deal with Covid was broadly correct but early measures should have been more rigorous and intrusive, a government-appointed commission said on Friday in its final report on the country’s pandemic response. Sweden polarised opinion at home and abroad with its handling of the pandemic, opting against the lockdowns implemented by many countries and adopting a largely voluntary approach of promoting social distancing and good hygiene. “The government should have assumed leadership of all aspects of crisis management from the outset,” the commission said in the report, adding that the government had too one-sided a dependence on assessments made by the Public Health Agency. “In February-March 2020, Sweden should have opted for more rigorous and intrusive disease prevention and control measures.” In the UK, almost 5m Covid shots have been thrown away, according to an official report. The Daily Telegraph reported this morning that AstraZeneca vaccines were the most likely to be wasted. It estimates that the cost of the wasted jabs could be as much as £70.5m, according to the National Audit Office (NAO). The Telegraph reported: An evaluation by the NAO of the Government’s vaccination programme up to the end of October 2021 found it “met stretching and unprecedented targets”. Some 85 per cent of over-18s in England had received two doses of a Covid-19 jab by the end of October. Evidence shows the programme “saved lives and reduced the incidence of serious illness and hospitalisation”, the report said. But it also found some 4.7 million vaccine doses were wasted in England during the rollout, including 1.9 million AstraZeneca jabs. It’s nearly two years since the UK prime minister, Boris Johnson, announced the first national Covid lockdown and, for many Britons, life feels close to normal. As of Thursday, there are no longer any restrictions in England – no legal requirement to wear masks or to self-isolate after a positive Covid test. But have our lives changed in other ways that will outlive the pandemic? Have our habits changed for good? Germany does not have leeway to ease Covid restrictions more quickly, and Germans should not think that the pandemic is over as the number of new daily infections is still very high, German Health Minister Karl Lauterbach said on Friday. “We have absolutely no scope for an accelerated opening,” Lauterbach said, adding that it was an unacceptable situation that COVID-19 deaths were between 200 and 300 every day. Germany reported 210,743 new infections on Friday, with the 7-day incidence rate slightly dropping to 1,259.5 infections per 100,000 people, from 1,265 a day earlier. The UK’s data watchdog has reprimanded the Scottish Government and NHS National Services Scotland over their failure to inform people how their personal information is used by the NHS Scotland Covid Status app. The app is one method people can use to demonstrate their vaccination status for mandatory Covid status checks that are still in place for large events and nightclubs, though the vaccine passport scheme will end on Monday. The Information Commissioner’s Office (ICO) has issued a reprimand to both bodies over their initial failure to provide adequate privacy information within the NHS Scotland Covid Status app when it launched to explain how people’s information is being used. It said there has also been an ongoing failure to provide concise privacy information so that the average person can realistically understand how the NHS Scotland Covid Status app is using their information. The ICO said it now expects the Scottish Government and NHS National Services Scotland to act swiftly on the findings and that if they fail to take action it will consider whether further regulatory action is required. Emergency room visits for eating disorders among 12- to 17-year-old girls doubled during the coronavirus pandemic, according to new research from the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention – a troubling existing trend that was likely worsened by the stress of living through the prolonged crisis. “We are seeing such a high volume of patients in need of eating disorder care as well as worsening severity,” said Tracy Richmond, a physician and the director of the eating disorder program at Boston Children’s Hospital, who was not involved in the CDC study. “It feels really clear for those of us who take care of teenagers that there is an absolute second pandemic of mental health needs in adolescents.” After a decade of increasing concern, the American Academy of Pediatrics declared a national mental health emergency among children and teens in 2021, and the US surgeon general warned in December of a youth mental health crisis that began building before the pandemic. In 2020, kids actually made fewer visits to emergency departments than the year before – a decline of 21%, the CDC report found. In 2021, there was a decrease of 8% compared to 2019. But the reason for those visits changed dramatically during the early months of the pandemic, with the proportion of emergency visits for mental health among kids rising by 24% in 5- to 11-year-olds and 31% in 12- to 17-year-old, as compared with the year before. China reported its highest daily count of Covid cases arriving from outside the mainland in nearly two years, with infections mostly from Hong Kong. The mainland detected a total of 142 imported cases with confirmed symptoms for Thursday, the National Health Commission (NHC) said on Friday. It marks the highest imported caseload since the authority began classifying domestically transmitted cases and infected travellers from outside the mainland separately, in March 2020. More than 100 imported cases came from Hong Kong, with 47 reported in the southern city of Shenzhen and 51 in the eastern municipality of Shanghai, local health authorities’ bulletins showed. The capital Beijing also detected seven symptomatic cases arriving from Hong Kong, Reuters reported. Mainland China requires most general travellers arriving from outside to be quarantined for at least 14 days, and cities have varying requirements afterwards before they can travel freely. Hong Kong has contracted mainland firm China State Construction International Holdings Ltd to build eight isolation and treatment facilities to help the global financial hub fight a worsening Covid outbreak, its government said. The temporary facilities, with a combined capacity of 50,000 beds, will be spread across Hong Kong, including on private land lent for free by developers. The move follows promises of “staunch support” from mainland Chinese authorities, with city leader Carrie Lam doubling down on the official goal of bringing infections down to zero, Reuters reported. Authorities are expected to report a new record of about 10,000 confirmed infections over the past 24 hours, up from Thursday’s 8,798, broadcaster TVB reported, citing an unidentified source. University of Hong Kong researchers predict new infections could peak at 180,000 a day next month. “The target is to maximise the site utilisation and complete the relevant works as soon as possible, equipping Hong Kong for the fight against the epidemic,” the government said in a statement late on Thursday. Sun Hung Kai Properties, New World Development and Henderson Land Development are among the developers that contributed to the scheme. Hello. Tom Ambrose here for the next few hours, bringing you all the latest Covid news from around the world as it happens. We start with the news that, in the United States, mask-wearing guidelines will be relaxed on Friday, according to two people familiar with the matter. It means most Americans will no longer be advised to wear masks in indoor public settings. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention will announce a change to the metrics it uses to determine whether to recommend face coverings, shifting from looking at Covid case counts to a more holistic view of risk from the coronavirus to a community, AP reported. Under current guidelines, masks are recommended for people residing in communities of substantial or high transmission — roughly 95% of US counties, according to the latest data. The new metrics will still consider caseloads, but also take into account hospitalisations and local hospital capacity, which have been markedly improved during the emergence of the Omicron variant. That strain is highly transmissible, but indications are that it is less severe than earlier strains, particularly for people who are fully vaccinated and boosted. Under the new guidelines, the vast majority of Americans will no longer live in areas where indoor masking in public is recommended, based on current data. The new policy comes as the Biden administration moves to shift its focus to preventing serious illness and death from Covid, rather than all instances of infection, as part of a strategy adjustment for a new “phase” in the response as the virus becomes endemic.