Police made an average of 669 child protection referrals to social services every day last year because of incidents of domestic abuse across England and Wales, a new analysis has disclosed. The NSPCC has found that data from Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of Constabulary and Fire and Rescue Services (HMICFRS) shows there were 244,197 referrals in 2020/21, an 8% increase from the previous year. The findings come as Dominic Raab, the deputy prime minister and lord chancellor, has been urged by charities to ensure all child victims of domestic abuse have access to specialist, therapeutic services in the community to support their recovery. A consultation on the victims’ bill, which aims to improve the government’s response to the victims of crime, is due to close on 3 February. Police have warned that during the pandemic, many children were trapped in homes experiencing abuse and largely cut off from vital support networks during lockdowns. Several shocking cases were reported where toddlers and young children were killed despite social services being informed that they were in danger. Details emerged in December of the murder of six-year-old Arthur Labinjo-Hughes from Solihull, West Midlands, who was poisoned, starved and beaten during a campaign of abuse by his stepmother and father. Social workers, notified of bruising to the boy, found “no safeguarding concerns” despite visiting him two months before he was murdered. In the same month, a public outcry followed the case of Star Hobson, a 16-month-old who was murdered by her mother’s partner after months of “neglect, cruelty and injury” and despite five referrals from concerned family members to social services. Last week marked the start of children being officially recognised as victims of domestic abuse as part of the Domestic Abuse Act. The NSPCC hopes this will make it more likely that their needs are considered by professionals on the frontline such as social workers and police. The change to the law came after campaigning by charities to reflect the impact experiencing domestic abuse can have on children. The NSPCC said it can decimate a child’s confidence and sense of security and can have a devastating impact on their emotional wellbeing and mental health. Local authorities currently have a statutory duty to provide accommodation-based support services, such as refuges, when families and their children need to leave their homes to escape domestic abuse. But they do not have the same requirement to provide specialist, therapeutic services in the community for victims who remain at home after suffering domestic abuse. Provision of support is already patchy across the country, and without a legal obligation this could dwindle further in the future with cash-strapped councils diverting more resources to accommodation-based services despite the majority of victims using community-based services. Anna Edmundson, NSPCC head of policy and public affairs, said: “Domestic abuse can derail a childhood and it is unacceptable that support to recover remains patchy across the country, and what is available risks being axed by cash-strapped councils. “We urge Dominic Raab to use the ‘victim’s law’ to address this and ensure young victims of domestic abuse have easy access to professional services within their community so they can rebuild their lives no matter where they live.” A government spokesperson said: “We are determined to deliver the support that victims of all ages need and through our victims’ law consultation we will ensure no one is left to suffer alone. “We are also investing £150m in support services and spending £3m this year on specialist help for children who experience domestic abuse, providing practical assistance every step of the way.”Ministers are to unveil measures to raise educational standards in 55 English target areaswith persistently poor outcomes, including the promise of elite sixth-form colleges for talented children from disadvantaged backgrounds. The new “education investment areas” will form part of the government’s levelling-up white paper and will see resources focused on schools in the north, the Midlands, the east of England and the south-west for the next decade. Ninety-five per cent of the areas that have been identified for “intensive support” are outside London and the south-east, and will include Rochdale, the Isle of Wight, Hartlepool, Walsall, Knowsley, Bury, Leeds, Luton, Norfolk and Sunderland. Labour’s education secretary, Bridget Phillipson, accused the government of recycling its 2017 opportunity areas policy. “The government is desperately trying to distract from the utter chaos at the heart of Downing Street by recycling old announcements, which shows the limits of the Conservatives’ ambition for Britain.” According to the plans, published on Tuesday, the government will also set a new goal of ensuring that 90% of children leaving primary school reach expected standards in reading, writing and maths by 2030 – in 2019 the figure was just 65%. Funding for the government’s plans is expected to come from the existing spending review settlement. Other measures will include retention payments to help schools keep high-quality teachers in priority subjects. Education investment areas will also be prioritised for new specialist sixth-form free schools “to ensure talented children from disadvantaged backgrounds have access to the highest standard of education this country offers”. In addition, schools in these areas that have been judged less than good in successive Ofsted inspections could be moved into multi-academy trusts, subject to a consultation later in the spring. The education secretary, Nadhim Zahawi, said: “This white paper sets out our blueprint for putting skills, schools and families at the heart of levelling up. “It focuses on putting great schools in every part of the country, training that sets you up for success in a high-skilled, well-paid career, and ensuring no one misses out on opportunities simply because of where they live or their family background.” The package will also include a £560m “national youth guarantee” to provide young people with access to clubs, activities, adventures away from home and volunteering opportunities, an extra £200m for supporting vulnerable families, already outlined in the spending review, and skills training for an additional 200,000 people Geoff Barton, general secretary of the Association of School and College Leaders, said: “Identifying 55 communities for intensive additional support sounds promising and we look forward to seeing exactly how this will work. We are not so sure about the idea of setting up ‘new elite sixth forms’. “This sounds like they will serve children who already do very well and could put pressure on existing provision when the simplest solution would surely be to improve the lamentable state of post-16 funding.” Kevin Courtney, joint general secretary of the National Education Union, said: “Many of the areas now targeted for support have been among the hardest hit by education cuts over the last decade – on the government’s own watch, and entirely of its own making. “If the government was serious about levelling up education, then it would restore all the money it has cut from these schools.” Natalie Perera, chief executive of the Education Policy Institute (EPI) thinktank, said: “It will be important to closely scrutinise the criteria used by the government for selecting its education investment areas, and how it intends to deliver ‘intensive’ support over so many areas.”The players’ union, Fifpro, has called for a more holistic and coordinated approach to match calendars around the world after its new report found that professional players in the women’s game are suffering from “underloading” as a result of not playing often or consistently enough, competing in an average of 22 matches in the 2019-20 season. The 2021 annual workload study has found that, even at the very top of the women’s game, the low number of games is preventing the growth and development of players and the sport generally. Data from 85 female players analysed by the Fifpro Player Workload Monitoring platform found that 14% of all minutes played by an average player came in non-competitive friendly matches, highlighting a lack of high-quality international club tournaments. The study found that players at the very top are hampered by long and quiet periods juxtaposed with bursts of overload in which they need to play an unusually high number of games in a short space of time. Fifpro’s director of global policy and strategic relations for women’s football, Sarah Gregorius, said: “One of the benefits of the international stakeholder environment in women’s football is that it’s actually pretty small and there are not that many leagues or competition organisers. “The confederations will put on a continental championship every four years and that will sometimes double up as World Cup or Olympic qualification. So, it doesn’t have to be a long conversation with lots of competing interests.” She added: “One thing the women’s football environment has inherited is that things exist in silos and that means that the expertise is a little bit diluted, and people aren’t used to talking to each other because some of the confederations don’t talk to each other and some of the political relations aren’t the best. “So, collaboration and the idea of forming a collective vision is challenging, but there’s also an opportunity. Everyone wants the players to be at their best, there’s enough space in the year and we can share, and it can be amicable.” The new report shows that 25% of match minutes for the players in the sample came from national teams, with international competition providing top-level games but also points out that this is not ideal as greater opportunities at club level provide more sustainable employment. There has been much talk of additions to the international calendar, with a potential biennial World Cup, a Club World Cup and a Europa League all touted by various stakeholders in the women’s game. Gregorius said it is “so important” that these discussions do not exist in isolation from each other and have a holistic approach to player welfare. “The World Cup, for example, let’s forget about how often it occurs, we see a stimulus and boom from it and it’s a wonderful platform. The important thing is to think about how we maximise what we do have and use any new competitions to better the game,” she said. “How can we use new competitions to stimulate participation in associations, professionalism of leagues and clubs and healthy investment into women’s football? I think Fifa and Uefa are starting to see the role they can play in the broader development of the industry and how competitions can boost that.”The England midfielder joins on a two-and-a-half year deal, with a fee somewhere between zero and £30m. It’s a strange agreement – Alli will cost £10m after 20 appearances, but can only make 18 league appearances this season. The eventual fee could be £30m, dependent on team and individual achievements. The bottom line, though, is he’s an Everton player, and another new recruit on the day Frank Lampard became their manager. My colleague Andy Hunter has a late loan deal to report: full-back Neco Williams has joined Fulham from Liverpool until the end of the season. We’re essentially just waiting on confirmation of Dele Alli to Everton, with a deal sheet in place and no issues expected. We’ll let you know when it’s official; for now, keep an eye on our transfer tracker, and catch up with all today’s stories. Not sure about the mural, but what we do know is Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang is joining Barcelona. Jeff Hendrick has left Newcastle to join QPR’s promotion push, on loan to the end of the season. Meanwhile, Matty Longstaff has joined Mansfield on loan, having spent the first half of the season at Aberdeen. In a deal that feels like both clubs just had too much time on their hands, Stoke and Reading have agreed to a loan swap deal, with Tom Ince heading to the Madejski and Liam Moore joining the Potters. Here’s more from Andy Hunter on how Liverpool ran out of time to sign Fulham’s rising star, Fabio Carvalho. Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang has completed his move to Barcelona from Arsenal on a free transfer – but the deal won’t be announced officially until 8.30am (GMT) tomorrow. Beyond Aaron Ramsey’s arrival at Ibrox, what else has been happening in Scotland? Well, Rangers also signed Poland defender Mateusz Zukowski, but failed with a bid to bring forward the signing of Hearts’ John Souttar. Elsewhere, Dundee have signed Partick forward Zak Rudden, and loaned in right-back Vontae Daley-Campbell from Leicester. Teenage Celtic midfielder Adam Montgomery has joined Aberdeen on loan, and Dundee United have brought in Arsenal midfielder Tim Akinola, also on loan. So, the deals for Alli and Aubameyang are going through – but Liverpool’s move for Fabio Carvalho has fallen through. Fabrizio Romano reports that, while the medical was done, the other paperwork was not ready in time – so he will stay at Fulham until the summer at least. Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang is a Barcelona player – we’re just waiting on the official announcement. Another deadline-day deal done at Hull ... “With their new wealthy owners it’s perhaps no surprise that Newcastle got money to Burn,” honks Peter Oh. Everton have submitted a deal sheet to the Premier League which gives them until 1am to complete the paperwork on the Dele Alli deal. The 19-year-old forward joins for £1m, but will go back on loan to Derby. There was some uncertainty about that earlier, with the Rams under a transfer embargo – but that appears to have been ironed out. “I’m very excited to be joining a big Premier League club. I’m ready to crack on,” says Plange, perhaps confusing Selhurst Park with Love Island. “Obviously I’ll be with Derby, fighting for them in the Championship, but I will be ready to go back to Crystal Palace in the summer.” On Sky, the presenter has just summarised the month’s big stories in meandering free verse. It’s that time of night. The window is closed in England, France and Spain – but not in Scotland yet, they’re going until midnight. A busy day for Bournemouth ends with the loan signing of Todd Cantwell, who is somehow surplus to requirements at Norwich. A #nicetouch from the Brighton admin after Dan Burn’s departure was confirmed. I’m sure the £12.5m deposited in the club account softened the blow. One that was basically in the books yesterday, but has only just been announced. Brighton defender Dan Burn, a boyhood Newcastle fan, has joined Eddie Howe’s side. The fee is £12.5m, taking the club’s January spending to more than £80m. But is it enough to keep them up? “How does someone go from club captain to released for nothing in half a season – does he go full Costanza?” asks Dan Christmas on Aubameyang. It’s been a decent turnaround today though – he’s gone from the new Peter Odemwingie to Barcelona’s new centre-forward. The Guardian is funded by readers like you. We are entirely independent – there is no billionaire owner or proprietor who can censor what we write about. We are also free from a paywall, and everything we publish is open and available for all, regardless of means or status. But we rely on contributions from readers like you to power our journalism. If you’d like to support our work, from as little as £1, you can do so here. Another arrival at Brighton! English winger Benicio Baker-Boaitey has joined on loan from Porto, and will spend a year with the Seagulls’s under-23 side. Hull City, who are under new ownership, have made some deadline day moves. Midfielder Ryan Longman has joined permanently from Brighton after a loan spell, and Iranian forward Allahyar Sayyadmanesh arrives on loan from Fenerbahce. Forward Marcus Forss could still join on loan from Brentford, but a move for Fulham’s Steven Sessegnon has broken down – he’s joined Plymouth instead. 11pm (GMT) also marks the end of the window in Spain and France. Not many big deals in the works, although Lyon splashed out for Brest’s Romain Faivre earlier today, and will let Islam Slimani return to Sporting for free. Atlético Madrid have signed Mozambique full-back Reinaldo Mandava for €3m from Lille. There was already a deal in place for him to join in summer, but it’s now been brought forward. Forty-five minutes for Premier League teams to get deals done, or reach for the dreaded deal sheet. Blows my mind that it happens every time, when they’ve had weeks to get their act together. Anyway – our transfer tracker just keeps ticking over: Josh Maja loves a late January move – he left Sunderland for Bordeaux in January 2019, then joined Fulham on loan last deadline day. Now he’s off to Stoke on loan, joining a decent group of January signings including Taylor Harwood-Bellis, Lewis Baker and Jaden Philogene-Bidace. Forward Jean-Philippe Mateta has signed a four-and-a-half-year deal with Crystal Palace after the club decided to make his loan move permanent. The fee is reportedly in the region of £10m. Winger Josh Bowler will be staying at Blackpool after Nottingham Forest were priced out of a deal for the player. Bournemouth also showed interest in the former Everton man but decided to look elsewhere. It doesn’t look like Ousmane Dembélé is going anywhere tonight. Bournemouth clearly don’t fancy another year in the Championship – they’ve signed winger Siriki Dembélé from Peterborough, paid Cardiff £3.5m for striker Kieffer Moore and secured loan deals for Newcastle keeper Freddie Woodman and Liverpool defender Nat Phillips. What’s more – they’re still working on a move for Norwich’s Todd Cantwell. Liverpool have agreed a fee with Fulham for Fabio Carvalho after a complicated day of negotiations. They still have to finalise personal terms and the player needs to pass a medical before the 11pm deadline, however, so it could be close. Here’s our story on arguably the surprise move of deadline day: What about Crystal Palace, I hear you ask. Well, they are working on two late deals – a permanent move for on-loan forward Jean-Philippe Mateta, and a £1m move for Derby prospect Luke Plange. A long, long Overground ride away in Stratford, it’s been a frustrating window for West Ham, with no major signings despite interest in Kalvin Phillips, Raphinha, Darwin Nuñez, Jesse Lingard etc etc. A small piece of business at Chelsea – they’re trying to get a deal for Charlton Athletic striker Mason Burstow over the line. The 18-year-old would be a signing for the academy. Transfer doyen Fabrizio Romano reports that Dele Alli will be announced imminently. Everton also tried to get their hands on Real Madrid striker Luka Jovic today, but to no avail. Rangers didn’t waste any time getting this one announced, and I for one am grateful. Aaron Ramsey arrives on loan from Juventus, and will be quite the signing if he can stay fit. Ousmane Dembélé is still a Barcelona player, despite links with PSG, Chelsea, Spurs and more in the last few days. Here’s Sid Lowe on a sorry situation: Aaron Ramsey is at Ibrox! Rangers have until midnight to get him signed up – the Scottish window is open for an extra hour. “I’m 40 tomorrow, I really shouldn’t still be as engrossed in this merry-go-round as I am. Still hoping for a last minute surprise birthday present from Tottenham though! Mind you, this window should beat Zeki Fryers for my 30th.” Happy birthday, Nick Dent. Nobody’s been busier than Tottenham today, with two players in, three out and Dele Alli leaving for good: Two hours to go! We’re waiting on confirmation of Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang’s move to Barcelona, Dele Alli joining Everton, and Dan Burn being added to Newcastle’s January basket. Plus, there’s still time for a late twist, or for someone, somewhere to sign Ousmane Dembélé. Stick around! “It boggles the mind how Barcelona have managed to craft a financial plan that allows them to sign Aubameyang,” notes Edward Graves. “For a club that is over a billion euros in debt, how exactly are they finding the funds to pay his salary?” Who knows – and I can’t help but feel that a forward line of Aubameyang, Adama Traoré and Ferran Torres is going to take a while to click. Don’t forget – you can catch up with all the day’s transfers around Europe with our interactive tracker: Dele Alli is close to being announced as an Everton player. Despite rumours of other Premier League clubs trying to hijack the deal (looking at you, Newcastle), he is going to join Big Frank’s Goodison revolution. “I don’t suppose the Aubameyang negotiations include any discussion of downgrading his Mr 10% to a much more sensible Mr 3%?” wonders Peter Oh. I dread to think of the expenses tab that’s been run up at the airport this afternoon. A trio of outgoings from the fringes of the Manchester City squad: Defender Sammy Robinson has joined Port Vale, winger Luke Bolton is heading for Salford, and midfielder Matt Smith has signed for MK Dons. Arsenal sign a player! It’s one for the future, though – Colorado Rapids defender Auston Trusty, who certainly sounds reliable. Here’s our latest take on the Aubameyang situation. It looks like the forward is leaving on a free transfer. “Honeymoon period isn’t over yet, so if Conte wants them he gets them,” says Yash Gupta. “What he says, club follows and most fans nod in agreement unconditionally. Personally I’m excited for new signings and can’t wait to see them play.” A fair point, but were these the players Conte wanted at the start of the window? Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang looks set to become a Barcelona player this evening, on a free transfer. Arsenal are happy to let him go with 18 months left on his contract – according to Sky’s number-crunchers, it will save them £25m in wages. A busy day for Bournemouth, who have brought in keeper Freddie Woodman and centre-back Nat Phillips on loan – and they’ve now secured a permanent deal for Cardiff and Wales forward, Kieffer Moore. A little more background on Brighton’s new signing, Deniz Undav, from Edward Ricketts, who I’m appointing as our Belgian league roving reporter. “Brighton and Union Saint-Gilloise are both owned by Tony Bloom, with a host of players shuttling between the clubs in recent years. More remarkably Union, from southeast Brussels, are currently nine points clear at the top of the Belgian First Division having just been promoted – and have been wholeheartedly adopted by Brussels hipster types of late.” Undav has played a major role in the club’s rise, scoring 35 goals in 52 games for the hipster favourites. Two players who appear to be going nowhere tonight are Steven Bergwijn, who had been linked with a move to Ajax ... and Jesse Lingard. West Ham and Newcastle had been trying to get a move over the line, but Lingard will stay and see out his Manchester United contract. Liverpool are still hoping to get a deal over the line tonight for Fulham’s Fabio Carvalho: It’s being reported by the Athletic and now Sky Sports News that Barcelona have agreed a deal for Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang! It’s either a six-month loan and then a permanent move, or a free transfer, depending on who you ask. Either way, it seems he’s played his last game for Arsenal. “Curious about Spurs dealings today,” writes Shawn Grant. “Are Bentancur and Kulusevski that much of an upgrade, talent-wise, on Ndombele and Lo Celso (and I suppose throw Dele in there too), or is this Paratici and Conte dipping into a market familiar to them, hoping some fresh blood will give them a kick up the backside?” I would imagine the latter, but Serie A heads might disagree. Get in touch... If you’re enjoying our coverage, you can make a deadline-day transaction of your own below: The Guardian is funded by readers like you. We are entirely independent – there is no billionaire owner or proprietor who can censor what we write about. We are also free from a paywall, and everything we publish is open and available for all, regardless of means or status. But we rely on contributions from readers like you to power our journalism. If you’d like to support our work, from as little as £1, you can do so here. Newcastle are expected to tie up a deal for Dan Burn tonight, but any faint hopes of signing Reims striker Hugo Ekitike have been extinguished. The Ligue 1 club and their forward “have decided by mutual agreement to continue the adventure together,” according to an official statement. The defender left Chelsea for Monaco in 2018 and has also played for Cercle Brugge. Forest are also hoping to close a £2m deal for Stoke striker Sam Surridge. Joan Laporta has given an update on Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang, and he seems quietly confident. Laporta also says that “an English club” (thought to be Chelsea) are trying to sign Ousmane Dembélé. That seems like a lot of wages to negotiate with three and a half hours to go, but we’ll see. Thanks, Daniel and happy deadline day, everyone. I’ll be here until the window shuts at 11pm (GMT) and beyond. Here are today’s top stories: Spurs have signed Juventus duo Dejan Kulusevski (on loan) and Rodrigo Bentancur, with a host of players leaving on loan. Dele Alli is set for a permanent move to Everton, with Donny van der Beek also joining on loan as Frank Lampard checks in. Newcastle have secured a loan deal for Matt Targett and are still wrangling with Manchester United over Jesse Lingard. Manchester City have signed River Plate forward Julian Alvarez, who will stay in Argentina until the summer. Wolfsburg striker Wout Weghorst has joined Burnley, and Christian Eriksen has agreed a short-term deal at Brentford. Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang is perusing the gift shop at Barcelona airport as talks continue over a loan move. Anyhow, I’ll leave you with that because Niall McVeigh is here, yellow tie resplendent, to take over. Ta-ra. The bottom of the Premier League table looks like a laugh. Burnley are well behind but have games in hand, Watford look done for, Newcastle have spent loads but who knows how they’ll integrate, Norwich are somehow out of the relegation zone, Everton should have enough but have a manager who’s never been in the scrap, Leeds should also have enough and Brentford might get sucked in. I’ve no idea how it’ll shake out. I forgot to say, earlier in the day, Anton Ferdinand used the phrase “When I was in my pomp”. He’s lucky Roy Keane was on with him. Alli, meanwhile, is about to have his Everton medical. On the one hand, if Alli was going to Everton to play under Lampard, then that’s not changed. But if he helps Newcastle stay up, he might reckon himself in a better spot to earn money and play in big games by staying there. Skullduggery afoot! Liverpool are still trying to nab Fabio Carvalho from Fulham, and their offer is apparently £5m. There’s meant to be sumer interest in him from Dortmund, but if he goes there then, the fee will be nominal. Liverpool, meanwhile, don’t want the aggravation of the tribunal that’d set his fee if goes to them in the next window. He’s a striker. Not directly transfer-related, but Nike have suspended their relationship with Mason Greenwood: “We have suspended our relationship with Mason Greenwood,” they told BBC. “We are deeply concerned by the disturbing allegations and will continue to closely monitor the situation.” On which point, Greater Manchester police have also put out a statement: “Detectives have been granted additional time to speak to a man in his 20s who is being held on suspicion of rape and assault of a woman. The suspect was arrested yesterday (Sunday 30 January) afternoon and remains in custody. Enquiries are ongoing and the victim is being offered specialist support. If you’re a victim of domestic abuse, or are concerned about someone you know, please use our online reporting facility or use our LiveChat facility on our website, or call 101. In an emergency that’s on-going or life is in danger, always dial 999. Some victims may not feel comfortable speaking with the police, or may feel they need support to come forward and make a report. Greater Manchester Victims’ Services can provide independent emotional and practical support for anyone affected by crime. You can contact the service by visiting the website on https://www.gmvictims.org.uk/ or calling 0161 200 1950.” Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang’s proposed loan from Arsenal to Barcelona still has a pulse! (And the punctuation is necessary because it is becoming one of those back-and-forth sagas so beloved on deadline day.) The deal had looked dead in the afternoon with the clubs unable to reach an agreement on how to split his £300,000-a-week wage but it is understood that conversations are continuing. “You’d think,” says David Mooney, “that Mikel Arteta had reached the last straw with Aubameyang, and that given his druthers, PEA would be training with the U12s until his contract runs out. But if the Kroenkes don’t want to pay £175k/week for Aubameyang not to be playing for Arsenal (Barca option) they’re definitely not going to want to be paying £350k/week for him not to be playing for Arsenal (frozen out in London option). Oh to be able to listen in on the manager’s phone call from his boss at 11:01pm this evening.” Yup, it looks like player and manager need to broker an uneasy peace. “Bryan Gil is very raw,” says Yash Gupta. “It depends on the player, some develop quicker than most, others take longer like Felix at Atletico Madrid. Gil has promise and, dare I say, in little moments he has really excited. A loan move suits him fine if he’s going to play. I have seen some who aren’t happy he isn’t getting a loan in England, but personally I’ve no problem as long as he’s playing regularly. He can play through the middle or in inside-left channel and if he’s good he’ll force his way back in.” I’d be interested to know the plan when he was bought; did they think he was ready? “It’s old news about the United Board’s apathy towards footballing matters, particularly those that make no sense,” says James Kelly. “Too long a list to rhyme off. This transfer window is a perfect example of why they didn’t go Conte. He’d never put up with it. I venture they also half promised Ralf a player, maybe depending on permanent outgoings which haven’t happened, Well if you offer silly wages to fringe players and all that… That said, a few pounds have been saved with the loans. But why use that? Would make too much sense. Oh and an absolute blinder replacing the CEO, who has overseen the transfers for eight years, the day AFTER the window closes. I didn’t expect anything this window. But then again you live in hope competency will prevail.” What I find odd about the Glazers isn’t that they aren’t fussed about winning the league – that’s a speculation for not that much extra money, and they could toss everything they’ve got at it and still finish behind City and Liverpool, who have the two best managers in the world. But not making sure to get top four every season I don’t understand on a financial level. Check the fax machine is in good working order... Villa’s signing of Lucas Digne presumably made the difference here. “With the suspension of Greenwood ‘until further notice’,” email Womancraft Publishing, “surely it makes sense for Rangnick to hold on to Lingard for the rest of the season? He’d likely be first replacement for that position now.” Perhaps, but Rangnick apparently told Lingard he could go, so I’m not sure that’s what it is – my guess is that there’s a number to which Joel Glazer would’ve said yes. As for first reserve, Anthony Elanga can play on the right and would, I imagine, be given a go ahead of Lingard as he’s as United for the long term. Gosh, Spurs has been an enervating place since Pochettino left: Ndombele, Gil and Lo Celso out – temporarily at least. I wondered if Lo Celso might work well in the kind of box midfield Conte used at Chelsea, and he looked a really exciting buy when he first arrived in England, but injuries and constant flux aren’t helpful to any player. Sky, meanwhile, report that Jermain Defoe is very close to a Sunderland return. They lost 6-0 to Bolton at the weekend, a result which cost Lee Johnson his job, but they’re third in League One and well-placed to make the play-offs at least. David Ornstein of the Athletic now reports that Lingard has been told he’s staying at Manchester United. I don’t know, that seems fairly strange behaviour to me. I wonder what Conte’s plan is for Bryan Gil. I’m surprised by how little we’ve seen of him, especially given how badly things have gone at Spurs, but on the other hand, where do you put a wispy winger in a 3-5-2 or a 3-4-3? He’ll have to do very well to earn himself a future, would be my guess. Breaking: excellent “in and around” usage from Anton Ferdinand on Aaron Ramsey who, if he does well at Rangers, will be “a king in and around Glasgow”. On Ramsey’s wages, Sky reckon he’s on £200,000 a week. Rangers won’t be giving him that, you’d assume, but I imagine Juventus think whatever happens, this loan means they’ll get shot of him in the summer. “Though it doesn’t really make a difference,” Matt Burtz says gallantly prior to correcting me, “Dele Alli is cup tied, so he can’t play 20 games this season no matter how far advance Everton in the FA Cup. On these terms I like the deal for someone who only turns 26 in April.” Of course! And I agree, on the face of it it’s a really good deal for Everton, but you never really know until you see what happens. “Still no sign of a defensive midfielder for Manyoo?” asks Dean Kinsella. Er, apparently not. It can be rationalised: the manager won’t be in charge next season so they don’t want to buy someone in case new kid doesn’t fancy him, and/or the player they want – Declan Rice – isn’t available now. Reports in Germany said this, but also said that Ralf Rangnick responded by asking to add Haidara to his squad and for Ten Hag to succeed him, as he knew they’d be a good match ... only to be rebuffed. Thing is, if United found the right player, they’d be close to a lock four fourth place and have a very good chance of beating Atlético in Europe, so not a mindless speculation. But the owners aren’t especially fussed about footballing matters. Sky reckon Aubameyang to Barca isn’t happening. Ultimately, Arsenal could really use him just as he could use playing instead of sitting about, so I wonder if there’ll be some kind of rapprochement. Craig Hope of the Daily Mail says the Lingard numbers are £3m for the loan and £4m for the survival bonus, along with wages. That sounds alright for a player who can leave for free in June, who the manager isn’t into, but perhaps someone wants to gamble that £7m guaranteed isn’t worth it relative to Newcastle going down, given they’ll be top-four rivals in the near future if they don’t. “Re Juventus are laughing,” says Ben Hayward, “For the 3v2 at negligible cost to work out then you’re assuming that Spurs end up buying Kulusevski, otherwise they are banking €29m (is there a fee for Ramsey?), that’s quite a lot of downside vs the €80m layout on Vlahovic and Zakaria … it’s not exactly money in the bank.” No, but Spurs have to buy Kulusevski in certain circumstances and Ramsey was free so will be on colossal wages. Newcastle have made an offer to take Jesse Lingard on loan from Manchester United. West Ham want the midfielder back at the London Stadium, but it seems United won’t deal with a rival for a top four place. Looks like Newcastle or nothing for Lingard. Sky are now saying that Newcastle have offered a loan fee, full wages and a survival bonus for Lingard, but United haven’t responded. That deal, they now think, won’t happen. “I guess Dele Alli will have an Everton career lasting exactly 19 games,” chortles Ian Copestake. Everton have 18 games left this season, plus Brentford in the cup. They can probably defer it until August if they want to. Lampard was, though, key to getting Alli to Goodison, which makes some sense. Despite what happened at Chelsea, Lampard speaks well and had to think hard about his own game, so even if still can’t build a coherent team, he should be able to coach Alli to play midfield. Here’s today’s Fiver... Dele Alli for free sounds pretty decent. Well, obviously it won’t actually be for free, but Spurs must’ve been pretty keen on getting shot. Detail on Kulusevski: Juventus are laughing. They’ve shifted three players they didn’t want – Ramsey, Kulusevski and Bentancur – and replacing them with two they do want – Vlahovic and Zakaria – at negligible cost. On top of this, Sky’s West Ham reporter thinks Lingard is going to Newcastle or nowhere. Phew, that little burst has exhausted energised me. A fabled double-swoop, whatever next? More on Kulusevski: he’s signed on an 18-month loan, for a €10m fee, rising to €35m if Spurs take up their option to make the move permanent. “Wholeheartedly disagree with you with your Hojbjerg/Skipp comment,” tweets Graeme Appleton. “PEH is far more mobile and forward-thinking than OS. I was hoping the latter would be shipped out before deadline tonight, alas.” Fair enough. I’m certain Hojbjerg isn’t good enough for where Spurs want to go, whereas Skipp has plenty of time to improve. Ousmane Dembele has, apparently, been told to leave Barca this month, but his mooted loan to PSG is not happening. Sky’s man just told us he’s hearing Chelsea is his most likely destination, but who knows. Phew, what a day! Bentancur’s contract is until 2026, by the way. It’s been a tricky few years for Bentancur, but at 24 he’s got plenty of time to come again. I fear for Pierre-Emile Hojbjerg, whose place is now under threat – Oliver Skipp and an attacker look likely to play ahead of him too – but Spurs need more mobility and forward-thinking than he offers. More on Alli: the fee is heavily incentivised, but might rise as high as £40m if he does stuff. “Julián Álvarez is one of the most exciting players to come out of South America in a while,” tweets @CiutadàGlobal. “He’s won everything in Argentina, including the Libertadores. The future of Argentina. Man City managed to land a gem, and as a Barça fan, I’m extremely jealous.” On Ramsey, Sky are reporting that there’s no buy option for Rangers, which makes more sense. He may get there and love it, but I can’t imagine he’d commit to that without having checked it out first. No more Álvarez intel as yet, but Giulio Ongaro has some thoughts on Aaron Ramsey: “The news of Ramsey’s loan to Rangers was greeted with hysterical joy by all Juve fans. He has not been contributing and often has dealt with physical issues that disappears magically a week later when he is called up by his national team, only to reappear (also magically) the moment he lands at the airport in Turin… Good riddance! He has never put in the effort we expect of Juve players.” I’m not sure about that. I’d never want to accuse a player of shirking, especially not one like Ramsey, who’s had bad injuries. I can see that he wasn’t a good fit for Juve, and that his is a particular skillset – if he’s not scoring, he doesn’t do loads else – but he is a good player. “I know it is tempting to United-bash at every opportunity,” says Rick Harris, “but I’m not sure that Martial is entirely their fault. At times he has looked the part only to get injured just when he was on a decent run. The other issue of course is that few European clubs can match PL wages, and that means a player will have to accept a big pay cut in order to ply his trade elsewhere so it is understandable why a player might choose to see out their contracts. Lingard could have been sold to West Ham in the summer but he chose not to go, thinking that his West Ham form would get him more starts this season. Van de Beek is the one that really takes some explaining. It will look even more baffling if he shines at Goodison.” I’m not sure. Martial didn’t kick on after that good run during lockdown and has had enough chances – he’s a good player, but it’s been clear for two years that he wasn’t the answer – while Lingard could have been told he’d never play and that he had to leave. I guess it’s possible Solskjær didn’t trust the board to deliver on targets so thought he’d hold onto what he had, but if he’d shifted a few he might’ve had money for a midfielder. Thinking more about Everton, I guess there’s room for Alli and Van de Beek if they play 3-5-2 – though I can’t see Demarai Grey and Andros Townsend as wing-backs. I suppose Van de Beek might be tried deeper, or Alli might become a box-to-boxer, but otherwise a struggling team will struggle to make room for both. Liverpool defender Nat Phillips has joined promotion-chasing Bournemouth on loan until the end of the season. The 24-year-old has been the subject of widespread interest this month, with Liverpool receiving two permanent bids of £7m plus inquiries from Newcastle and Leicester, but the prospect of more regular first team football with Scott Parker’s side proved more attractive to Phillips and the Anfield club. Newcastle’s offer was a loan deal with a commitment to buy if they avoided relegation. Leicester also made an approach but Liverpool believed the defender would be only a back-up option for both Premier League suitors. Burnley were keen on Phillips in the event of James Tarkowski leaving but that has not materialised. Liverpool will receive a loan fee of £1.5m from Bournemouth plus an additional £250,000 if Parker’s team win promotion back to the Premier League. Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang’s proposed loan from Arsenal to Barcelona has broken down, with the clubs unable to reach an agreement on how to split his wage. The striker, who is out of the picture at Arsenal on disciplinary grounds, earns about £300,000 a week. Aubameyang had travelled to Barcelona in the hope of completing a loan until the end of the season. It is understood he also has family there. “Hope you are enjoying the transfer spectacular,” emails Matt Thomas. “Due to a quirk of fate I’ve missed a yearly spectacle that always marks the blessed end of January. Newcastle rent the parking in St James Park on match days and hundreds of us from the local hospital park there every day. For the last decade or so during the Ashley era, on this day without fail there has been a Sky Sports reporter freezing their nips off, bored out of their mind and contemplating their life choices while having roughly nothing to report on as the wind whipped into their faces off Barrack Road. I was really hoping this year to see their happy, cheerful face, nourished by the orgy of actual stuff happening this year. But sadly my own child got sick (they are now fine) and I had to stay home and miss this heart-warming spectacle. The hospital is moving all the parking back on site later this year so I’ll only have the sad memories to look back on.” Waiting for a glimpse of no one versus waiting for a glimpse of Dan Burn, there’s not loads in it. Sam Surridge will have a medical at Nottingham Forest this afternoon before joining in a £2m deal from Stoke. The club are looking to do a couple more deals before the end of the day. Any Los Millonarios fans or South American football experts reading? What can you tell us about Julián Álvarez? I don’t suppose his purchase is great news for Gabriel Jesus, who was signed to replace Sergio Agüero, couldn’t, and is still in and out now Agüero has gone. Dan Burn has agreed personal terms with Newcastle, apparently. That’s a slightly strange one – I know they apparently went for Adam Webster first – but I’m surprised they didn’t pay what it took to get him, or find someone else. Champo update: Nottingham Forest are talking to Stoke about loaning Sam Surridge, while Todd Cantwell has passed his medical at Bournemouth. “Speaking of Ramsey,” says Martin Gwynn Jones, “Rodon was pretty great for Wales in the Euros (forgetting Denmark for a second). He was so highly-rated at Swansea, it’d be great to see him get a proper go somewhere.” Tournaments aren’t always the best for judging talent, but yup, I’m surprised Rodon’s had so little football under Conte. Wout Weghorst looks a very decent buy for Burnley – and for less than they got for Chris Wood. His first game for them will be Man United at home next Tuesday night; I daresay the visiting goalkeeper and centre-backs will be tested under the high ball and from set-pieces [hilarity ensues]. Coming to the Tony Macaroni... The Athletic’s David Ornstein reports that Aubameyang to Barca is off, as the parties haven’t been able to reach agreement on wages. Things can, of course, change, but in the meantime Arsenal are stuck with a deposed captain who wants to be elsewhere, but whose goals they need, but whose goals have dried up. I don’t know, I’m probably just an idiot, but Ndombele has something special. I hope he can find it on a regular. That’s a terrific move for both parties, in theory. “Whenever Rodon has played,” returns Yash Gupta, “he never looked out of his depth other than those two mistakes at Stamford Bridge on his debut – a game in which Spurs kept a clean sheet. It’s a shame he can’t get into the team when Tanganga makes mistakes and I mean blunders every game.” I’m not sure Conte is much into Tanganga either, but he does know a fair bit about getting a defence right, so I guess we’ll see what happens. Rangers visit Celtic on Wednesday; if Ramsey was available for that, what a debut. Remember, the SPL champs go straight into the Champions League this season, so winning the title means a colossal financial windfall. Two or three consecutive years of that and we might see a rebalancing of the Old Firm. That’s a great move for Rangers – and for us if it means more shots of SSN’s reporter outside Ibrox’s magnificent main stand. Ramsey is 31, but doesn’t have too many miles on the clock, and will score a lot of goals in Scotland. More on Lingard: Sky say United have reduced their ask somewhat. Truth is, they should have ensured Lingard – and Martial, and Mata, and Van de Beek – left in the last window. It was clear then that they were never going to get the games they needed, as it was that United needed one, if not two, midfielders. Both Lingard and Martial are now likely away on loan, and will presumably move permanently for less than they’d have commanded in the summer. But there you are – that is United under the Glazers. “So the way to get Everton to sign people,” emails Ken Houghton, “is for Palace to express interest? Well, the Eagles are ahead of them in the table, so I guess it makes some sense.” Yes, I was wondering what made Van de Beek prefer Goodison. Perhaps he wanted to stay in the north west, or perhaps he wanted to play for Lampard, because otherwise Palace seemed like a better choice for him. If Lampard is still at Everton when Steven Gerrard gets the Liverpool job, does Paul Scholes have to go to Tranmere? It’d be a pretty good buzz for Aubameyang, that: breaking the rules at Arsenal and getting punished with a move to Barca. That’ll teach him. On which point, I’m a little surprised Arsenal haven’t found an alternative to him, even on loan, because they’re in the hunt for top four and might find that it’s harder to achieve that next season. Aubameyang latest: the deal hasn’t been agreed, but the player is ready to take a pay-cut and a medical. At Arsenal, there’s surprise that he’s already in Barcelona, but it makes sense to me: he’s not got much else on, and he must be absolutely ganting on this getting done. “If I were Dele Alli,” says Yash Gupta – for avoidance of doubt, he isn’t – “given they just missed out on VDB, I would go to Palace. Their manager looks a real deal.” I can see that. It’s a shame what happened to Alli, who has an amazing gift of timing. I always hoped he’d become a box-to-box player, now I just hope he sorts his career out – if that’s what he wants to do. “I don’t think City need a striker,” says Benjamin Watson. “If they do then they’re not getting Álvarez until next season anyway. They already have Cole Palmer coming through the youth setup and just seem to be laying the groundwork for the next decade. Your mentions of Mendy (injuries then criminal charges) and Aké (expensive but still a young understudy) don’t really sit with the buy and hope image Man City have. Either way, surely it’s better to prospect on young talent rather than hope to rely on fading stars?” I’m wasn’t moralising and saying what City are doing is wrong, just that if they buy a player and it doesn’t work out, there’s little to no opportunity cos because they just buy another. As for whether they need a striker, it’s fair to say that they’re doing fine without one, but they might find that they miss one against the better European teams. And I agree that Cole Palmer looks decent, but that won’t mean people who deal in absolutes will assume he’ll be good enough and not purchase alternatives. “Not sure how long it’s been since you were last in Newcastle,” emails Ben Blatch-Hanlon, “but the Ritzy hasn’t been called that since at least 2002 (and has been closed as a venue since 2015) and Circus Circus has been called Flares since at least the late noughties. Next you’ll be saying we’ll be attracting players with the prospect of visiting the floating Tuxedo Princess nightclub on the Tyne! (I’ll give you Tup Tup though, that’s still going strong).” I was harking back to my youth – I don’t think I’ve been to Ritzy since 1993, when I wore a suit because that’s what I’d seen people go out in in comics – but I’ve had some good trips to Newcastle since then. “Aaaarrggghh!” is, I imagine, roughly what Donny van de Beek will now be thinking. I don’t know, maybe Lampard will play two attacking midfielders, but it’s hard to see that working well, and Alli was there permanently, he’d presumably the first choice. Everton are looking to sign Dele Alli from Spurs today. It will have to be a permanent transfer as, once Donny van de Beek completes his loan move from Manchester United, Everton will have used their quota of domestic loan deals. Oh man, it’s good to see Christian Eriksen back. Surely that’s enough to cheer up even Thomas Frank following his recent septimana mirabilis. More Riquelme news with Andrew Clowes: “Running (ambling for a flight). Must be headed to J League!” The first two yards were in his head. Liverpool are still trying to get Fabio Carvalho out of Fulham. They’ve doing pretty well really – not long ago, you wondered about their forward-line ageing together, but they seem to have refreshed it very quickly. Obviously we don’t know how Luis Díaz will work, but he’s definitely a good player; I do wonder, though, is his arrival means the beginning of the end for Sadio Mané, whose position he plays. I wonder if Rodon will get a chance. I can’t believe Conte is overjoyed with his options at centre-back, though I suppose he’d have picked Rodon by now if he thought he was the answer. Looks like Joe Rodon will stay put at Tottenham. The 24-year-old centre-half, who has not kicked a ball under Antonio Conte in the Premier League, had been touted for a loan move this month. “The best Merson bit I ever heard ,” returns Luke McLaughlin, “was when he was talking about Ashley Barnes and his strike partners at Burnley: “It’s like walking into a bar with David Ginola – you play off him.” Remarkable, really. If Man United finish below West Ham, it’ll be because they’re incompetent, not because they loaned them a player they’ve no interest in using. West Ham and Newcastle have both come back in for Jesse Lingard, who has been told he can go on loan by Ralf Rangnick. I’d be surprised if United let him go on loan to West Ham. “It says what it says on the tin,” says Merse of Targett and Wood, who he thinks are good buys because they know the league. He’s not sure about Guimaraes, and I don’t know what it says on his tin, but I daresay it’s not “acceptable for a lower-middle to relegation-threatened side”. “Just seen Juan Riquelme in Kuala Lumpur airport, tweets Andrew Clowes, “but he seemed to be heading east and not to Spurs. I think he would miss the deadline anyway, unless he’s having an onboard medical?” Oh my days, imagine the bate on Antonio Conte after being presented with his running stats. Newcastle may not, now, be signing Hugo Ekitike from Rennes – Ekitike isn’t that keen. Which I guess makes sense as, if he’s as good as he’s said to be, he’ll have better offers and soon. However, Jesse Lingard may yet make it to Ritzi’s, Circus Circus and the Tup Tup Palace and Man United’s board may, at long last, benefit from their avaricious aversion to selling players, because the Toon still want another attacker and are running out of time to find one. West Ham, though, are also in the hunt. Back on SSN, Merse reckons Frank Lampard’s problem at Chelsea was tossing on attackers to try and win games that were 0-0 late on, then ending up losing. Bully to those who reckon a lack of organisation, consistency of selection and apparent clue as to how to build a good football team were also problematic. Huddersfield have now completed the loan signing of Chelsea’s Tino Anjorin. It will be interesting to see how the youngster gets on in the Championship. Goodness me, Mick McCarthy back at Sunderland would be something, and the mere thought of it made me go like this. It’s deja vu time at Sunderland where the former England striker Jermain Defoe is close to making an emotional return to his old club at the age of 39 and the ex manager Mick McCarthy appears to be on the shortlist to replace Lee Johnson. With Johnson having been sacked on Sunday night in the wake of the supposedly automatic promotion pursuing team’s 6-0 League One hammering at Bolton on Saturday there is considerable interest in the post with the former Celtic manager Neil Lennon an early favourite alongside McCarthy and the current Everton caretaker manager Duncan Ferguson. I’ve not seen much of Álvarez, but City certainly need a striker. I guess the thing about their model is that is doesn’t much matter if deals don’t work out – see Claudio Bravo, Nolito, Mendy, Ake and all the rest – because they just buy someone else. But they could use Álvarez working, and if he does, the rest of the league are in trouble. I thought I was going to open with news of Michael Buerk’s transfer from BBC News to adverts on SSN flogging Queen’s jubilee coins, but was overtaken by Álvarez. But now you know. Any thoughts and tips – you may, for example, have seen Niko Krancjar buying astrobelts at Happy Shopper in Aberdeen – please send them to @DanielHarris or daniel.harris.casual@theguardian.com. You can find out more about Álvarez here – he ranked 91 in our list of the world’s best 100 footballers. More news imminently. Thanks Luke and hi everyone.... That’s my lot – I shall hand you over to Daniel Harris for the rest of the afternoon. Cheers, and I hope you get all the signings you wished for. Suggestions that Aubamayeng has travelled to Barcelona under his own steam, on the off chance that Barcelona decide to sign him. Which would be amusing if true. It wouldn’t be a transfer deadline day blog without a mention of Peter Odemwingie, would it? Lys Mousset is off to Salernitana from Sheffield United. All that and more in our interactive guide: As we reported this morning in the old Rumour Mill, Dele Alli is being linked with a move to Everton ... but now Crystal Palace and Patrick Vieira appear to have joined the game. Which would make sense, if Vieira wants another midfielder, given he missed out on Van de Beek from Manchester United. The reporter on Sky Sports News said that Duncan Ferguson, who also interviewed for the Everton manager’s job along with Lampard, will remain in his assistant coaching role. No potential for a bit of tension there, then ... Middlesbrough are interested in taking Jeff Hendrick on loan from Newcastle, while Eddie Howe could also allow Jamal Lewis, the former Norwich left back, to be borrowed by a second-tier club for the rest of the season. Out story on Lampard’s confirmation as Everton manager: Quotes from Lampard after his new role at Everton was confirmed: “Very excited, it’s a huge honour for me to manage a club like Everton. I always had a great feeling as a player, playing at Goodison. I felt the atmosphere, I felt the passion of the fans and yeah, very hungry to get started. “I think there are certain clubs in England, as a young boy growing up and as a player, and now as a manager, that when you go into the stadium you can feel the passion that the fans have for their club. Very intense ... I always found it times difficult when that passion was against you ... I’m very much looking forward to representing that on their side ... the passion that they give watching their team, I’ll try and bring that as a manager.” Freddie Woodman is having a medical at Bournemouth ahead of a loan from Newcastle. Woodman had been due to join Bournemouth in August but instead, an injury to Martin Dubravka and the bad case of Covid-19 sustained by Karl Darlow dictated that Gareth Southgate’s Godson stayed at St James’ Park and began the season as first-choice goalkeeper. Woodman is clearly talented but, having lost his place to first Darlow and now Dubravka, he needs games and a spell in the Championship seems a good solution. My colleague Gregg Bakowski remarks that Everton’s Lampard announcement video looks more like a Next advert. Which is spot on. It’s official: Lampard is back in the Premier League. It seems there is still a chance that Jesse Lingard could go to Newcastle on loan from Manchester United today. As things stand, the Magpies don’t want to pay the loan fee plus his full wages ... but Newcastle fans will no doubt be thinking back to the goals he knocked in while on loan at West Ham. He could be useful in a relegation scrap. There is some noise about Yannick Carrasco, the 28-year-old Belgium international who plays his club football for Atlético Madrid. According to reports, both Newcastle and Tottenham are interested, and Spurs have already had an initial bid rejected. “Join Tottenham? Let’s reject that,” as Mirko Vučinić once memorably said. Latest from the transfer news machine Fabrizio Romano: Tanguy Ndombele is off to Lyon on loan until the end of the season. Could that deal free up Tottenham to bring someone else in? Gillingham have announced the appointment of the former striker Neil Harris as their new first-team manager. The Gills, thrashed 7-2 by Oxford on Saturday in caretaker boss Steve Lovell’s final game, are second bottom in League One and 10 points from safety. The former Millwall and Cardiff boss Harris, who had a loan spell at Priestfield during the 2005-06 season, has succeeded Steve Evans. Chairman Paul Scally told Gillingham’s official website: “It has been a difficult task over the past few weeks, interviewing and selecting the right candidate but I am delighted that with Neil’s experience, his knowledge and passion of this football club, and his desire to take the club on a new journey, that today is the start of a new tomorrow.” Reports that Bristol City have batted off a bid from Nottingham Forest for their in-form striker Antoine Semenyo. They are holding out for £20million for a player who’s under contract until 2023. Benfica have rejected West Ham’s bid for Darwin Núñez. The offer was £50m plus £10m in add-ons for the Uruguay forward – it would have been a club record for West Ham. Benfica have no intention of selling. Preston have signed the centre-back Bambo Diaby until the end of the season after a successful trial. The 24-year-old, formerly of Barnsley, has returned from a two-year ban after being found guilty of unintentionally breaching Football Association anti-doping regulations in November 2019. “I’m very excited to sign with Preston because it’s been a long time,” Diaby, who has an opportunity to earn a longer contract, told pnefc.net. “It’s been the thing I’ve been waiting for. Every day I’ve been training very hard to get to this day.” Manager Ryan Lowe has been impressed by the defender’s attitude. Lowe said: “He’s different to what we’ve got. He can play in a few different positions around the back and probably right wing back, so we’ve offered him a short-term deal until the end of the season to go and showcase what he’s got to potentially earn a longer contract. He’s had a kick in the teeth, he’s been out for two years and he’s very eager now to put that behind him and get on a streak. First and foremost [he has to] get in the squad and then get in the team and showcase what he’s about.” (PA Media) Transfer deadline day via Teletext. Those were the days. Brian Clough had never heard of Ian Woan, but when he saw on Teletext that Harry Redknapp was buying him, he got on the blower and hijacked the deal. Textbook move. Tele-textbook move? On Sky Sports News, they’re saying Donny van de Beek chose Everton instead of Crystal Palace because he didn’t want to move his family to London. Perfectly fair enough, of course, but personally I think I’d grab a chance to work with a promising young manager such as Patrick Vieira. That isn’t to say Frank Lampard isn’t a promising young manager. If you want to keep across all the deals that have been done across Europe’s major leagues in this transfer window, our interactive guide is your one-stop shop: Get it bookmarked! Christian Eriksen has issued a brief message to Brentford fans after signing with the Premier League club until the end of the season. “I’m happy to announce that I’ve signed for Brentford Football Club. I can’t wait to get started, and I’ll see you all very soon,” he said. Here’s this morning’s story, if you missed it: The Guardian is funded by readers like you. We are entirely independent – there is no billionaire owner or proprietor who can censor what we write about. We are also free from a paywall, and everything we publish is open and available for all, regardless of means or status. But we rely on contributions from readers like you to power our journalism. If you’d like to support our work, from as little as £1, you can do so here. And Fabrizio again, via the magic of Twitter: Bentancur has penned his contract with Spurs: And another! ... Morata will not be going anywhere today: Latest from Fabrizio Romano: Pierre Emerick-Aubameyang has an agreement in place to join Barcelona on loan from Arsenal but the deal is expected to go through only if the Catalan club can move at least one player out. Hertha Berlin have made an official announcement on the signing of the 19-year-old forward, Kélian Nsona, from Caen in France. Poland have named the former Legia Warsaw coach Czeslaw Michniewicz as their new manager after parting ways with Portugal’s Paulo Sousa, the Polish Football Association announced on Monday. Sousa had asked to be relieved of his duties in December after less than a year in charge and paid his release clause so he could accept an offer to manage Brazilian club Flamengo. Michniewicz has signed a deal until the end of 2022, with an option to extend, and will take charge of Poland’s World Cup playoffs against Russia in March. The former Ukraine international Andriy Shevchenko was also linked to the job, however, local media reported that he was taken out of the running due to contractual obligations with Italian Serie A club Genoa, who sacked him earlier this month. (Reuters) Will Michniewicz like the look of Matty Cash, Poland’s latest recruit? It remains to be seen. An update from Scotland, via PA, on the suggestion that Rangers may make another bid for the Hearts defender John Souttar: Souttar did not train with Hearts on Monday morning but only because he was receiving treatment after going off against Motherwell on Saturday. After confirming there had been no more offers, Neilson added: “He didn’t train today - he’s got a wee ankle knock - but should be available for tomorrow. We’re just waiting to see what happens.” Hearts are assessing potential options in case Souttar leaves late on Monday but otherwise will not be signing anyone. “We’re actively looking to see what’s out there in the market,” Neilson said. “We’ve said all along it has to be the right one that comes in. There’s no panic here because we’ve got other good defenders here but first and foremost I’d like to keep John if we can. I’m very happy with the squad. If we can keep hold of John, it will be a brilliant window.” They’re going to be getting it launched at Turf Moor after the arrival of Wout Weghorst, aren’t they? Now more than ever. Bournemouth have inquired about loaning Nat Phillips from Liverpool as well as Neco Williams. Both loan deals would be until the end of the season. This is definitely going to be a busier January transfer deadline day than last year. Ozan Kabak was the man of the moment back then, signed by Liverpool from Schalke with great fanfare to try and deal with their injury crisis in central defence. There was basically nothing else going on as clubs continued to grapple with the effects of the Covid-19 pandemic. Far from residing in the ‘Where are they now’ file, though, Kabak is at Norwich these days. Huddersfield have completed the signing of Jamal Blackman after the goalkeeper spent two weeks training with the squad. The 28-year-old is a former Chelsea graduate who was a free agent after leaving left Los Angeles FC at the end of last year, having previously played for Sheffield United and Rotherham. The 6ft 7ins Blackman has signed a contract, pending international clearance, until the end of the season. “He offers great competition for Lee Nicholls and bolsters our goalkeeping department,” said the head of goalkeeping Paul Clements. “Jamal’s arrival takes the pressure off our younger goalkeepers too. Ryan Schofield can focus on recovering from the shoulder injury he suffered at Burnley, and we can continue to prioritise the development of players like Nicholas Bilokapic and Gio Bellagambi, who have been covering Lee in recent weeks.” (PA Media) Thanks Michael and hello everyone. What’s going on, then? I’ll obviously be delving into my little black contacts book this afternoon, but you can email hot stories here or tweet me @LukeMcLaughlin ... My colleague Luke McLaughlin is taking over the blog now, enjoy the rest of your Monday. See ya! Woefully out of form, but he’s going to score loads of goals in La Liga, isn’t he. Aaron Ramsey latest, courtesy of PA Media. Rangers could sign Aaron Ramsey in a sensational transfer-deadline swoop, according to reports in Italy. Reports claim Juventus are prepared to accept Rangers’ offer for the out-of-favour Wales international, whose contract in Turin runs until the summer of 2023. The likes of Wolves, Burnley and Newcastle have also been credited with interest in the 31-year-old former Arsenal midfielder. Rangers could be busy with reports claiming the Scottish champions are close to a deal for 20-year-old Lechia Gdansk right-back Mateusz Zukowski. The Ibrox club could yet decide to go back in for pre-contract signing John Souttar following a failed bid around 10 days ago. Bild in Germany are reporting that Kylian Mbappé have agreed a deal to join Real Madrid in the summer, on a free transfer. He’s soon to be out out of contract of course, and there are various numbers flying around regarding his potential new salary, with some reporting it could be close to €1m a week … Here’s a bit more on the comings and goings at Newcastle. Maybe he could do a job up top for Arsenal. Donny van de Beek has arrived at Everton’s Finch Farm training ground to complete his loan move from Manchester United. With Anwar El Ghazi also arriving on loan from Aston Villa this month, Everton will be unable to make any more domestic loan signings should the van de Beek deal go through. They could still do business abroad, however. Today’s episode of Football Weekly has landed. Get your ears around it. While we’re on the subject of Spurs … Worth remembering that Spurs transfer guru Fabio Paratici convinced the club to part with more than £20m (and Eric Lamela) for Bryan Gil, who has shown almost nothing since his summer move from Sevilla. Another Burnley target, Mislav Orsic, turned down a move to Turf Moor last week, opting to remain at Dinamo Zagreb. Whenever I’ve seen the boy play (and at 29, he’s not really a boy), I’ve been so impressed. He scored a hat-trick to knock Spurs out of the Europa League last season and the goal he scored in the Europa League last month against West Ham was outrageous. Apparently Dinamo were willing to let him go for as little as £7m this month, before the player opted to stay. I’m shocked that bigger clubs are not in for him, even at this relatively late stage in his career. This is a great signing for Burnley, costing around £12m. It is arguably an upgrade on Chris Wood, who was sold to Newcastle for £25m and is a year older. Weghorst has shown patchy form for Wolfsburg this season, but scored a whopping 27 goals in all competitions last season, including for Holland at the Euros. Standing at 6ft6in, he’s certainly a handful and should slot straight into the Burnley way of doing things. A loan deal has been agreed for the Aston Villa left back, with talks continuing over whether it could be turned into a permanent switch in the summer. I once went to interview Jermain Defoe at his house. In his hallway, there was a lifesize painting of himself, mid-strike. He also had a soft-play ball pit in one of the bedrooms, despite not having any children. Would be an interesting signing for Sunderland! Most of the fans seem excited about it, although Oxford United are also interested. The 39-year-old is a free agent following his release from Rangers so could join outside of the transfer window, doesn’t have to be done today. Happy 30th Birthday, Jeff! Incoming Everton manager Frank Lampard has asked Duncan Ferguson to be part of his backroom team. The Scot was overlooked for the permanent manager’s job on Friday and is considering his options as he looks to become a manager in his own right. One option, however, is to stay with his beloved Everton. Ferguson has been a youth team coach, a first team coach, assistant manager and caretaker manager since returning to the club under David Moyes and a step back may not appeal at this stage. Lampard is currently putting together a backroom team that is expected to include Paul Clement, Chelsea coach Joe Edwards and former Derby and Chelsea coach Chris Jones. An email from Fulham fan Richard Hirst: “I will be, as the saying goes, gutted when Carvalho leaves. He’s the only Premier League quality player in the team. Others might make it to a PL squad, but not the first XI. And our recruitment record after our two previous promotions doesn’t give much ground for optimism.” Louise mentioned Nketiah there, and it looks like he’ll be kicking his heels for the next six months or so, especially if Arsenal do bring in a striker today. All that vitamin D absorbed during last week’s warm weather training in Jeddah seems to have energised Eddie Howe and his Newcastle board. They are now pushing their January spending over £100m with the centre half Dan Burn expected to complete his move from Brighton - for £11m or £13m depending on who you believe – shortly and a loan deal with Aston Villa in place for the left back Matt Targett. Coincidentally, Targett came very close to joining Newcastle on loan during his time at Southampton only for the clubs to run out of time. Perhaps most excitingly a deal for the 19-year-old Reims striker Hugo Ekitike has been revived. The so called ‘new Kylian Mbappé’ is set to cost somewhere, roughly, in the region of £25m. A fee has now been agreed with the French club but it could be touch and go to complete all the deal’s formalities by 11pm tonight. Even so this seems to end Newcastle’s interest in the Arsenal forward Eddie Nketiah. With the defensive midfielder Bruno Guimaraes having signed from Lyon on Sunday and Kieran Trippier and Chris Wood recruited earlier in the window, Howe is presiding over a wholesale revamp of his relegation threatened squad. That squad will now be too big so, to trim it to the Premier League’s mandatory 25, Howe is going to have to move some senior players out today - or else leave them kick their heels on the sidelines, unable to play football. Done deal: Jonas Wind joins Wolfsburg! Another Dane on the move, this time from FC Copenhagen. He’s an international striker, standing at 6ft2in. Sporting director Marcel Schäfer: “Jonas has a very good technique, both when receiving and taking the ball, finds solutions even in the tightest of spaces, has a good header game and plays very well for the team. Although he already has a lot of experience, we are convinced that his development is not over yet and that he will take the next development step with us.” Every Sunday League team has a someone with a left-foot ‘wand’ but that would be something else. An email from Joe Cass: “Not exactly headline news, but Ainsley Harriot has been spotted at a fair few Frome Town FC games this season, including last Saturday apparently. Frome are Southern League Division 1 South and Ainsley lives locally.” Our man in Poland, @MaciejSlominski, says that Lechia Gdańsk defender Mateusz Żukowski is on the brink of joining Rangers. There’s also some speculation over whether Rangers could make a sensational bid for Aaron Ramsey, Juventus are keen to get rid of the Welshman and his gargantuan wages of around £140,000 a week. He’s apparently also been offered to Wolves on loan. I’m surprised Newcastle aren’t in for the 31-year-old, to be honest. It’s likely to be fairly quiet at Chelsea today – we’re not expecting any incomings – but one deal that should happen is Tino Anjorin going on loan to Huddersfield. Southampton had looked at signing the young forward last week, but that’s probably one for summer now. Huddersfield already have the young Chelsea defender Levi Colwill on loan and are looking to get another youngster in. Chelsea turned down the Championship club’s offer for Harvey Vale as Thomas Tuchel could give opportunities to the midfield but Anjorin, who spent the first half of the season on loan at Lokomotiv Moscow, is set to leave today. An email, from reader Darrien Bold. #breakingnews “I might be a bit late to the party on this one but I’ve just spotted wily old campaigner Vinny Samways enjoying a sandwich at Lime Street Station as rumours of a switch to Everton for a cool £2 million continue to do the rounds.” As well as trying to add Fulham’s Fabio Carvalho to the eye-catching signing of Luis Díaz, Liverpool have inquiries for several of their players to consider today. Divock Origi is of interest to Atalanta, although the Serie A side’s move may rest on whether striker Duvan Zapata stays or goes. Leeds and Monaco were unable to entice Takumi Minamino away from Anfield last week but could have another go. Bournemouth want Wales international Neco Williams on loan until the end of the season while both Newcastle and Leicester have inquired about centre-half Nat Phillips. Check out our snazzy transfer interactive for all the confirmed moves in Europe’s top five leagues, which has been given a makeover to make it even snazzier. Another Brentford update. In other Championship news, it looks like Joe Rothwell is staying at Blackburn Rovers. The midfielder is out of contract in the summer and has been one of the best players in the second tier this season – one of the big reasons why Rovers are second in the table. Bournemouth reportedly tabled a few bids, the latest around £3m, but that has been rejected, owing to the Cherries being a direct promotion rival. Another unnamed Premier League club is understood to be interested so the possibility remains that he could either leave this month for a fee, leave in the summer for free, or gloriously sign a new contract when Rovers’ promotion* to the Premier League is confirmed. Looks like Bournemouth have instead turned to Norwich’s Todd Cantwell, who could join on loan with an option to buy in the summer. West Ham’s latest idea for a new striker is Benfica’s Darwin Núñez. They’re still holding on to slim hopes of signing the Uruguay forward but it sounds unlikely at the moment. Benfica won’t sell him on the cheap - it could take about £70m to get them to think about it - and it’s said there are a lot of competing interests around the player. David Moyes also wants a centre back. Marseille’s Duje Caleta-Car is a long time target but the French club are reluctant to loan him out today. An update to this Liverpool story, from Mr Romano. Here’s Andy Hunter on Lampard’s in-tray at Everton. There have been no updates on the Donny van de Beek loan from Manchester United this morning, but the Dutchman is widely expected to sign on a deal until the end of the season. Newcastle have reportedly had an offer for Hugo Ekitike accepted by Stade Reims. Eddie Howe and co have been tracking the young striker since the start of the month, with most expecting the move to be dead, following Newcastle’s signing of Chris Wood. However, it looks like we’re back on. The fee is thought to be in the region of £25m-£30m, plus add-ons. Sid Lowe on Ousmane Dembélé and a toxic ‘blackmail’ situation that could be resolved today. Two potential transfers from that Mill that make perfect sense. The first is the idea of Ruben Loftus-Cheek joining Everton and Frank Lampard. The young man is absurdly talented, but just can’t seem to get it going at Chelsea on a consistent basis. He needs regular football, and what with Conor Gallagher/the next big Chelsea summer signing incoming for next season, I can’t see how he’s ever going to play 30-40 games each year. The other is Aston Villa’s Matt Targett to Newcastle, who is thoroughly dependable and probably looking for an exit after the arrival of Lucas Digne. Targett is certainly good enough for a relegation scrap, but he’s the sort of Newcastle signing you can imagine on the scraphead in a couple of years, as the club fight their way towards … the top half! A cuppa, a crumpet and a Rumour Mill: transfer deadline day has started in earnest. Eriksen will become the eighth Danish player at Brentford, and the second signed by Thomas Frank (a Dane) this month, after Jonas Lössl. Ever prior to the Eriksen signing, despite playing just 23 matches in the Premier League, they have used more different Danes than any other side in the competition’s history. Happy Transfer Deadline Day, everyone! Such is the importance to the Gregorian Calendar these days, I’m surprised you can’t buy Hallmark cards to mark the occasion. A Fabrizio Romano mug, perhaps. I’m sure there are probably some Jim White socks somewhere. Anyway, let’s get straight down to business. Today’s news feels very Spurs-y. This is mainly due to the host of players that Tottenham have already missed out on in the past few days: Liverpool nabbed Luis Díaz from Porto before Antonio Conte got the chance, while dallied for most of January over signing Adama Traoré, only for Barcelona to beat them to it. In a further blow, over the weekend, Spurs could not even get a bloke from the Isthmian League Premier Division to sign, as talks with Lewes’ Ollie Tanner, a 19-year-old previously of Arsenal’s academy, fell flat. A statement read: Lewes Football Club would like to confirm that whilst the club and a Premier League club agreed a deal in principle for the transfer of Ollie Tanner, Ollie and the Premier Club were not ultimately able to agree personal terms and he remains a Lewes FC player.” Oh! Spurs! Well there’s still time today, and it very much looks like Dejan Kulusevski and Rodrigo Bentancur will sign on the dotted line today, as Conte raids Italy for any Juventus off-cuts. We finish this preamble with our first significant transfer of the day! Christian Eriksen, formerly of Tottenham of course, has signed for Brentford! This is very exciting, and I think the entire footballing world will be wishing him well, as he puts his cardiac arrest behind him and attempts to force his way back into the Danish World Cup squad.We have experienced many bumps in the road since 2020 and one would have to be extremely brave to predict what the pandemic may throw at us next. But, in terms of the endgame, many experts believe Covid will eventually become an endemic disease. However, what this actually means is a source of considerable confusion. One of the main reasons for this is a misunderstanding of endemicity itself, and what Covid being an endemic disease would actually look like in the real world. Let’s break it down. What does ‘epidemic’ actually mean? A disease is either epidemic or endemic. The most straightforward explanation of an epidemic disease is that it’s one in which the number of cases in the community is unusually large or unexpected. When this occurs, it signals a need for public health action to bring disease transmission under control. In the case of a pandemic – a worldwide epidemic – this occurs on a much larger scale. Depending on the infectiousness and severity of the disease, it can represent a global public health emergency, as we’ve seen with Covid. Covid has been a public health emergency. But it will eventually become an endemic disease. When you have the emergence of a completely new virus like SARS-CoV-2 that has the potential to cause severe illness while also being highly transmissible, the lack of any immunity among the population results in the drivers for disease spread being incredibly strong. A disease being epidemic indicates there’s an imbalance between these drivers of disease spread and the factors limiting spread in the community. In short, it means the drivers for disease spread overpower the factors limiting spread. As such, the disease spreads like a raging bushfire. It’s explosive and hard to bring under control once it has seeded. From epidemic to endemic However, over time, the underlying forces driving an epidemic alter. As immunity begins to increase across the population – ideally in a controlled way by vaccination, but also by natural infection – the pathogen starts to run out of fuel and its ability to transmit falls. Pathogens can include a variety of microorganisms, such as viruses, bacteria and parasites. In this case, let’s assume we’re talking about a virus. On top of immunity, we can also reduce a virus’ ability to spread by behaviour changes, such as limiting contact with others, mask wearing and improved hand hygiene. In addition to lowering the virus’ ability to transmit, immunity also reduces its ability to cause disease, meaning fewer people become really sick or die. And finally, if we are lucky, over longer periods of time, the virus may also evolve to become intrinsically less severe. The net result of this is we move from an imbalance in terms of the forces driving disease to a more steady state of equilibrium. Instead of explosive and unpredictable disease spread, we reach a point where the presence of circulating disease represents a lower threat to the community than it did at the beginning of an epidemic. Transmission becomes more predictable, but not necessarily constant – we may still see some waves, especially seasonally. But these are expected and manageable. In short, we start to live alongside the virus. This is what we mean by an endemic disease. Examples of endemic diseases include the common cold, influenza and HIV/AIDS. Endemic doesn’t mean we drop our guard The discussion around Covid becoming endemic becomes even more complicated by very different views about what this actually translates to in practice. It’s important to emphasise it doesn’t mean we drop our guard, surrender to the virus or downgrade the threat the virus poses to individuals and the community. We remain vigilant and respond to surges in cases when they occur, doing what’s needed to keep transmission as low as possible. Covid becoming endemic doesn’t mean it’s mild or that we give up. Importantly, a disease being considered endemic doesn’t mean we consider it mild. It just means it remains a part of our lives, and therefore we still protect the vulnerable from severe illness, as we do with other diseases. It’s crucial we understand living with the virus isn’t the same thing as ignoring the virus. Instead, it represents an adjustment in the way in which we respond to the disease. It’ll be a bumpy ride It’s also important to highlight this transition may not necessarily be smooth and there will no doubt be challenges along the way. One of the main obstacles we’re going to face is the possible emergence of new variants and how these will impact the infectiousness and severity of the disease. In order to reduce the likelihood of new variants emerging, it’s vital we really step up our rollout of vaccines globally to reduce virus transmission. To aid us in our transition to this next stage of the pandemic, we will, thankfully, be able to draw on many new weapons which are in the pipeline. This includes next-generation vaccines which will be more effective against the latest variants, or universal vaccines that cover all variants. We expect new vaccines will also be better at controlling transmission. We’ll also have ever-improving treatments, and better infection prevention and control engineered for specific environments. The big question, of course is when will this transition to endemicity happen? Many experts believe huge strides will be made along this path in 2022. Hassan Vally is an associate professor at Deakin University and Catherine Bennett is chair in epidemiology at Deakin University This piece was originally published in the ConversationFree public transit within Sydney’s central business district to encourage commuters to explore the city is part of an ambitious CBD revitalisation plan the New South Wales government will consider. Under the plan, Indigenous culture and history would be better integrated into the cityscape for both locals and tourists, with Aboriginal languages and stories embedded into street signs, and Indigenous art in public spaces. The ideas are key recommendations that will be delivered to the NSW government on Tuesday as part of the Future of the Sydney CBD report, a study conducted by global design and planning firm Arup with the Committee for Sydney and led by industry leaders across the business, academia, art and Indigenous communities. The Commission into the Future of the Sydney CBD was formed in late 2020, with the goal of improving Sydney’s liveability, creativity and investment issues that have existed both before and after the Covid pandemic. Of the 47 recommendations the NSW government will consider, key areas of focus include making the CBD an easier and more appealing destination to travel around and spend time in, embedding an Indigenous identity to the landscape, encouraging greater investment and reducing pollution. Light-centric art installations should also become a permanent CBD fixture, the commission believes, arguing it would harness the popularity of Sydney’s Vivid light festival and become a year-round attraction, and make the city safer. Popular pedestrian routes and crime data would be analysed to determine areas that would most benefit from permanent lighting installations. In addition to establishing a free transit zone from the harbourfront through Chinatown and down to the southern fringe of the CBD to encourage a “stay-a-while” mentality among office workers – similar to the free tram zone in Melbourne – the commission also recommends discounting travel into the city from suburban areas at night. Precincts in Sydney’s CBD should also be designated as different villages – similar to Wall Street and Broadway in New York – the commission argues, to allow areas with distinct characters to emerge. A permanent 24-hour fresh produce and street food marketplace as well as a public performance amphitheatre should also be established, and cultural institutions such as galleries should be funded to open late every night of the week, the report urges. While fostering a greater night-time economy has been a goal of NSW’s government since the reversal of the lockout laws, the commission also calls for measures to encourage more people to use the CBD during the daytime given the future of work-from-home conditions ushered in by the pandemic. The commission recommends more places for people to sit for free, including seating with tables and sufficient rain and shade cover, as well as exercise equipment and ping-pong tables. Childcare options within the CBD should also be heavily subsidised to encourage workers to come back into the office – however the commission recommends private employers pilot this initiative. Gabriel Metcalf, chief executive of the Committee for Sydney, said: “Sydney has one of the great CBDs in the world, but the question everyone’s trying to figure out now is what the changes from Covid are going to mean for it.” Metcalf said the city doesn’t need a wholesale reinvention, but rather “new layers – more reasons for more different kinds of people to visit and spend time in the city”. “That means doubling down on public space and amenity, really trying to make it a place centred on people and somewhere they can’t resist spending time,” he said. Stuart Ayres, the NSW minister for tourism, said the recommendations would complement the government’s existing revitalisation efforts, noting a $50m fund to woo people back into the CBD, which has already including a long lunch voucher scheme. Ayres said: “This is about transforming Sydney’s CBD from a nine-to-five workplace to a 24-hour global playground for innovation, entertainment and culture, and boosting new opportunities to attract investment and global talent.” While the NSW government has unveiled a $1bn support package for businesses following the explosion of the Covid over summer, the challenges facing the CBD following the Omicron wave are unclear. Movement data of Sydney commuters analysed during non-locked-down periods of 2021 found an emerging trend among workers to work from home on Monday and Friday and cluster their commuting days during the week.Frank Lampard marked his first day as Everton manager by signing Donny van de Beek from Manchester United and securing the audacious permanent transfer of Dele Alli from Tottenham. Everton negotiated an unusual deal with Spurs to sign Alli on a free with £10m payable after 20 appearances. The 25-year-old will be able to make only 18 Premier League appearances this season because he is Cup-tied. With add-ons dependent on team and individual achievements, the eventual fee could rise to about £30m over a two-and-a-half-year contract. Alli was undergoing a medical with Everton when Newcastle, having failed in an attempt to sign Jesse Lingard from United, also registered interest in the England international. But the move to Goodison Park was in the advanced stages and Everton finally confirmed it at 00:20 on Tuesday GMT. Lampard’s new club made the innovative offer having reached their quota of domestic loan signings with the Netherlands international Van de Beek. The 24-year-old was close to joining Crystal Palace until Everton made their move over the weekend. “I want to show my qualities, my strengths, to the people in England, but especially the fans from Everton,” said Van de Beek, who has made only four starts for United this season. “I had a really positive meeting with the new coach. We have the same ideas about football and he had a lot of influence on my decision.” Everton’s hectic day started with confirmation of Lampard’s appointment as manager. The 43-year-old accepted the chance to succeed Rafael Benítez and agreed a two-and-a-half-year contract at the chairman Bill Kenwright’s office in London on Sunday. He met his new squad for the first time on their return to training at Finch Farm on Monday. Lampard is joined by a backroom team comprising the former Chelsea coach Joe Edwards as assistant manager, Paul Clement as first team coach and Chris Jones as first team coach and head of performance. The former Derby and Chelsea manager had also wanted Anthony Barry to join him on Merseyside but the coach opted to remain at Stamford Bridge. Duncan Ferguson, who was overlooked for the manager’s job, and goalkeeping coach Alan Kelly have remained on the staff at the request of Lampard, who has also offered a coaching role to Ashley Cole. Lampard takes over a struggling team four points above the relegation zone, having won once in 14 Premier League games. His first match will be at home to Brentford in the FA Cup fourth round on Saturday. Lampard said: “There are things that will be my priority to improve; firstly to improve results, to try to improve confidence, the way we are playing, to try to engage with the fans. I think Everton is a unique club in that you can really understand what the fans want to see. The first thing they want is fight and desire and that must always be our baseline. “I keep saying the words passion and fight and I think it relates to Everton football club. It is probably the way I tried to build my own career as a player. I knew I had to work overly hard to be the best I could possibly be and I’m the same as a manager and want to see that in my team. I want to see a team that is confident in possession of the football, can control games with the possession but also be exciting at the top end of the pitch. On the flip side, when we don’t have the ball you have to be aggressive. That is how my teams have always set up as I’ve been coaching and I will quickly work to make sure that is how Everton is.” Lampard was chosen after a complicated two-week search that involved an initial approach for the club’s former manager Roberto Martínez and fan protests over the potential appointment of Vítor Pereira. The Portuguese coach, Lampard and Ferguson were interviewed by Everton’s majority shareholder, Farhad Moshiri, and the board on Friday. The former Everton player Tim Cahill, who could take up a technical role at Everton, was also on the interview panel and advised Moshiri during the process. Moshiri said: “Frank will give the team an immediate boost. A dressing room will always rise to someone of his character and achievement. I will provide the system to support him. The biggest thing for us – for me, for Bill, for all parts of this great and beautiful club, is to get behind this manager. Let’s unite behind the team, give the team the 12th man and start moving up the table. Our future is bright. We just need to be united. Maybe together, me and the fans should be more patient – I am also impatient. We have to get behind the manager and give him that Goodison feeling, and I think success will come with that.” Kenwright has been a target for criticism from supporters who have called for the board’s removal recently but Moshiri is adamant the chairman stays. “We are keeping the chairman as long as we can,” he insisted. “He manfully fulfils his functions and I really appreciate what the chairman does.”Antonio Conte has reshaped his midfield options at Tottenham, bringing in Rodrigo Bentancur and Dejan Kulusevski from Juventus and purging the squad of a clutch of attack-minded players. The manager has delivered a withering assessment of the abilities of the club’s most expensive signings – Tanguy Ndombele and Giovani Lo Celso – and both were ushered towards the exit on Monday. Ndombele has returned to his previous club, Lyon, while Lo Celso has gone to Villarreal, each on loan until the end of the season. Lyon paid a loan fee of €1.42m for Ndombele and they have the option to make the deal permanent for €65m. Spurs spent just under £60m when they took Ndombele in the summer of 2019 while Lo Celso cost them about £57m from Real Betis at the same time, initially on loan. Conte has sent Bryan Gil on loan to Valencia for the remainder of the season, six months after the 20-year-old winger signed from Sevilla for £21.6m – in a deal that also saw Érik Lamela move in the opposite direction. Gil has yet to start a Premier League game and Conte has used him mainly as a late substitute. Dele Alli also left the club – another player with whom Conte has not been impressed since he took over from Nuno Espírito Santo in early November. Everton have signed the former England international on a free but must pay £10m after he makes 20 appearances. Add-ons could raise the fee to about £30m. Newcastle tried to hijack the deal but Everton confirmed he had joined them at 00:20 GMT on Tuesday. Bentancur, the 24-year-old Uruguay international, who is back at home preparing for Tuesday’s World Cup qualifier against Venezuela, will offer Conte an option in central midfield, where he will compete with Pierre-Emile Højbjerg, Oliver Skipp and Harry Winks. He has signed a contract to 2026 and has cost an initial €19m with €6m in potential add-ons. Kulusevski, the 21-year-old Sweden international, is hard-working and versatile, able to play across the line behind the striker. Spurs have got him on an 18-month loan, for which they have paid €10m. There is an obligation to make the move permanent for €35m if certain objectives are met. Juventus paid €35m to Atalanta for him in January 2020.That’s it from me tonight. Here’s a recap of what we covered: Classes had to be canceled at six historically black colleges and universities today after the schools received bomb threats. All have since been found to be safe from the threats by investigators and shelter-in-place orders have been lifted but investigations into the incident are on-going. Kentucky Republican Thomas Massie criticized Anthony Fauci with a quote attributed to Voltaire but actually coined by a white supremacist convicted on child pornography charges. Mike Pence’s former chief of staff is cooperating with the committee investigating January 6, a move that suggests more of the former-vice president’s team may come forward. Officials inspected the Pittsburgh bridge just months before it collapsed and gave it a poor rating but decided to keep it in-use. A federal judge has rejected a plea deal from the justice department that would have allowed the convicted murderers of Ahmaud Arbery to avoid a hate crimes trial. Thanks for reading! See you next time. A federal judge has rejected a plea deal from the justice department that would have allowed the convicted murderers of Ahmaud Arbery to avoid a hate crimes trial. Travis McMichael and his father Gregory McMichael were found guilty on state murder charges in November and sentenced to life in prison without the possibility of parole. The agreement would enable the men to plead guilty to committing a hate crime and serve 30 years in a federal prison before returning to the Georgia Department of Corrections to finish out their sentences. Arbery’s family urged the judge to reject the deal in a hearing held Monday. “Ahmaud didn’t get the option of a plea,” his mother Wanda Cooper-Jones said. “They killed my son because he’s a Black man. I’m asking on behalf of his family, on behalf of his memory, and on the behalf of fairness that you do not grant this plea.” You can read more about the case here: The Pittsburgh bridge that collapsed last week (just hours before Biden’s scheduled speech on the dire need to invest in the country’s infrastructure) had passed inspection in September, Pennsylvania’s Department of Transportation said today — but just barely. The agency reported that there were structural issues found with the bridge but that officials deemed the deterioration to be not bad enough to close it down. They rated the bridge a four (on a zero to nine scale) which is considered to be in poor condition, according to the Associated Press. “This bridge’s design relies on the quality of frame elements alone without any back-up support (known as redundancy) and reports show deterioration that did not warrant closure, but supported the imposition of a posted weight limit to restrict the weight of loads,” PennDOT spokesperson Alexis Campbell told AP in an email. No one was killed when the 477 ft-long bridge collapsed but 10 people were injured. One person remains hospitalized. From the AP: Tyrone and Velva Perry’s windshield cracked and their airbags deployed, Erin Perry said. When Tyrone Perry saw the bridge buckling, he figured he was about to die. They watched in terror as another car flew by them and a third landed just feet away. She said the Pittsburgh couple both suffered fractured vertebrae and were in a lot of pain but good spirits. Tyrone Perry sees the collapse whenever he closes his eyes, and Velva Perry still has a feeling she is falling. ‘It’s so outrageous that this would happen; it was like a scene from an action movie,’ Erin Perry said.” The collapse occurred around 7am, before the surge in car traffic that typically crossed the bridge. Pittsburgh city council member Corey O’Connor told reporters that 15,000 cars cross each day, adding that “if it was rush hour, we would be looking at a couple hundred cars down in that valley”. More than $25 million in National Highway Performance Program funds will be spent to rebuild the bridge. Biden, who was there to promote the new bipartisan $1tn infrastructure package, noted in his formal remarks that there are 45,000 bridges in poor condition across the country and called the issue “unacceptable”. Pittsburgh has more bridges than any other city. “We’re going to fix them all,” the President said. Officials at the Federal Reserve said today that they are reeling in the economy and are expected to incrementally increase interest rates starting in March. The four Fed policymakers who spoke on Monday neglected to share a plan, however, and the policies that will follow those rate hikes remain vague. “We definitely are poised for a March increase,” San Francisco Fed President Mary Daly told Reuters. “But after that, I want to see what the data brings us.” Inflation is the highest its been in four decades and the central bank’s $9tn portfolio, which doubled in size as the Fed attempted to stave off pandemic-related economic collapse. Now the officials feel confident the economy is growing again and this level of support is no longer needed. Still, officials are relying on a wait and see approach. “We are going to need to be thinking very carefully about how things are going, how the economy responds to our first moves,” Atlanta Fed President Raphael Bostic told Yahoo Finance. “We are not set on any particular trajectory. The data will tell us what is happening.” Marc Short, who served as chief of staff to former vice-president Mike Pence, sat before the House select committee investigating the attack on the capitol last week, a signal that Pence’s people aren’t shying away from speaking. CNN, which was the first to note that the deposition took place, reported that the session was lengthy and that Short supplied documents to committee. Short attended a meeting two days before the attempted insurrection, was with Pence on 6 January, and is seen as a critical source of information on what transpired behind the scenes. It’s still unclear whether Pence himself will testify, but unnamed sources reportedly told CNN that the former Vice President hopes to avoid having to make a formal appearance, preferring Short and other aides to serve as his proxies. From CNN: The prospect of Pence appearing before the January 6 committee underscores the dilemma facing the former vice president, whose political ambitions are intertwined with his strained relationship with Trump. The former President still blames Pence for not trying to overturn the election results in Congress -- and Pence has faced a backlash from Trump’s base for his role on January 6. Former President Trump has criticized Pence for not overturning the election, issuing a statement this weekend where he admonished the former Vice President for certifying the results. You can read more about that here: The Kentucky Republican Thomas Massie – of the gun-heavy Christmas card and other provocations – is under fire for criticizing Anthony Fauci with a quote attributed to Voltaire but actually coined by a white supremacist convicted on child pornography charges. “To learn who rules over you,” the quote says, “simply find out who you are not allowed to criticize.” Massie posted it to Twitter on Sunday, saying: “You mustn’t question Fauci, for he is science.” Fauci, Joe Biden’s chief medical adviser, is the target of rightwing criticism, hate and death threats, for his role in the US government’s response to Covid-19. Massie is an energetic rightwing gadfly – and not the first person to apparently be fooled by the supposed Voltaire quote. The neo-Nazi who coined the quote, Kevin Strom, was convicted in 2008. He has said attributions of his quote to Voltaire are “kind of flattering”. Massie has not commented or taken his post down. On Monday morning, he did tweet to praise the “intellectual honesty” of Joe Rogan, a podcast host under fire over Covid misinformation. Here’s more from David Smith, on Massie: Hello! Gabrielle Canon here, taking over from the west coast. Classes had to be canceled at six historically black colleges and universities today after the schools received bomb threats, CNN reports. The list includes: Southern University and A&amp;M, Howard University, Bethune-Cookman University, Albany State University, Bowie State University and Delaware State University. All have since been found to be safe from the threats by investigators and shelter-in-place orders have been lifted. White House press secretary Jen Psaki told reporters that the president has been made aware of the threats, which she called “disturbing”. The FBI and other federal agencies have been called in to work with local law enforcement to investigate the incident. From CNN: Classes were canceled and students are to remain in their dorm rooms until an all-clear is issued. University operations were also suspended until further notice. A Washington Metropolitan Police Department spokesperson confirmed to CNN that at Howard University the “scene has been cleared with no hazardous materials found.” It’s the second time this month that a number of HBCUs received bomb threats that in some cases led schools to relocate students, faculty and staff while searches were performed. That’s it from me today. My west coast colleague, Gabrielle Canon, will take over the blog for the next few hours. Here’s where the day stands so far: The UN security council held a meeting to discuss the crisis in Ukraine, as Russia continues to build up its troop presence along the country’s border. The US ambassador to the UN, Linda Thomas-Greenfield, said at the meeting, “We seek the path of peace. We seek the path of dialogue. We do not want confrontation. But we will be decisive, swift and united should Russia further invade Ukraine.” Joe Biden reiterated his warning that Russia would suffer “swift and severe consequences” if Vladimir Putin approves an invasion of Ukraine. “If Russia is sincere about addressing our respective security concerns through dialogue, the United States and our Allies and partners will continue to engage in good faith,” Biden said in a statement. “If instead Russia chooses to walk away from diplomacy and attack Ukraine, Russia will bear the responsibility, and it will face swift and severe consequences.” Speaking to reporters this afternoon, Biden emphasized that the US was prepared for all possibilities in Ukraine. “We continue to urge diplomacy as the best way forward,” Biden said. “But with Russia continuing its buildup of its forces around Ukraine, we are ready no matter what happens.” Secretary of State Antony Blinken will speak by phone tomorrow with Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov. The conversation marks the first time the two men have talked since the US delivered a written response to Russian demands on Ukraine last week. Gabrielle will have more coming up, so stay tuned. A reporter pressed the US state department spokesperson, Ned Price, on what exactly the UN security council meeting this morning had accomplished in connection to the Ukraine crisis. “This was the first time that the security council took up this question in an open session, and we thought that was important. We thought it was important that they do so in that venue,” Price said. The spokesperson argued the meeting had allowed for an open “exposition of the facts” regarding the build-up of Russian troops near Ukraine’s border, as the US and its allies continue to push for a diplomatic solution to the crisis. “If the criticism is that we are engaging too robustly in diplomacy, that we’re being too transparent, that we’re being too consistent in what we’re saying, that is criticism that we will accept,” Price said. The US State Department spokesperson, Ned Price, said the UN security council meeting today allowed America and its allies to “continue to shine a spotlight on what we are seeing” in Ukraine. “The world is united in the viewpoint that aggression — violations of core tenets of the rules-based international order — that these elements must not be allowed to to be conducted with impunity,” Price said. Price added that there was “a good deal of consensus from the security council” regarding the preference for Russia to pursue diplomatic avenues to eliminate the threat of a potential invasion of Ukraine. “That is the point that we have been emphasizing all along: diplomacy and dialogue remains our preferred course,” Price said. “But there was a resounding call from the Security Council this morning, that Russia should avail itself of that course.” The anti-corruption campaigner Bill Browder has called on Britain to target Russian oligarchs close to president Vladimir Putin with economic sanctions to halt any invasion of Ukraine when new legislation is unveiled on Monday. The US-born financier believes the most effective means of getting the Russian president’s attention is to target his finances and the finances of those closest to him, and that there should be no need for the UK to wait and see if a war ensues. “They should sanction five oligarchs tomorrow. That would show there is political will to do this. Then should sanction another five if they don’t pull back in the 10 days and the top 50 if they invade,” Browder told the Guardian. Liz Truss, the British foreign secretary, has said Russian oligarchs and key supporters of Vladimir Putin will be targeted by UK sanctions if Russia invades Ukraine, but left Britain’s existing much-criticised anti-corruption laws largely untouched. Insisting that the Russian president’s allies would have nowhere to hide their assets if an invasion went ahead, the Foreign Office, clearly working in lockstep with the US, threatened to seize the wealth of Putin’s inner political circle and business backers. Truss, giving a statement to MPs on Monday, refused to name any individual Russians at risk of being sanctioned, saying the aim was to create the maximum anxiety among Putin’s allies. Truss said the new legislation, which will be in place by 10 February, would be the “toughest sanction regime against Russia we have ever had”, and would give the UK “the power to sanction a broader range of individuals and businesses”. Over at the White House, Joe Biden is now meeting with the emir of Qatar, Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad al-Thani, in the Oval Office. Reporters were allowed in to the Oval Office for the start of the meeting, and the president addressed the latest developments in connection to the crisis in Ukraine. Biden noted that he spoke to the president of Ukraine, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, last Thursday, and the two nations are engaged in “nonstop diplomacy” as they monitor the threat of a potential Russian invasion. The president applauded officials from the US and allied countries for outlining the threat of escalating Russian aggression at the UN Security Council meeting earlier today. “We continue to urge diplomacy as the best way forward,” Biden said. “But with Russia continuing its buildup of its forces around Ukraine, we are ready no matter what happens.” The US State Department has just confirmed that Secretary of State Tony Blinken will talk by phone tomorrow with Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov. It will be the first time they have talked since the US delivered a written response to Russian demands. Meanwhile, at the UN Security Council meeting this morning, Ukraine’s representative, Sergiy Kyslytsya, said there are now 130,000 Russian military personnel on Ukraine borders. “The question is, ‘why are all these Russian forces there?” he asked. The State Department will soon hold another press briefing to provide an update on the Ukraine crisis, so stay tuned. White House press secretary Jen Psaki was asked about Donald Trump’s comments on the Capitol attack over the weekend, when the former president defended the insurrectionists who carried out the violence. At a rally in Texas on Saturday, Trump promised potential pardons for the insurrectionists if he becomes president again, and he continued to endorse the “Big Lie” of widespread fraud in the 2020 election. In a statement on Sunday, Trump also criticized his vice-president, Mike Pence, for refusing to attempt to overturn the results of the 2020 election as he presided over the congressional certification of Joe Biden’s victory. Psaki described Trump’s actions on January 6 as a “a unique and existential threat to our democracy,” and she said his latest remarks underscore the danger of his lies about the election. “It’s just a reminder of how unfit he is for office, and it’s telling that even some of his closest allies have rejected those remarks as inappropriate in the days since,” Psaki said. Joe Biden will meet tomorrow with the Senate judiciary committee’s Democratic chairman, Dick Durbin, and Republican ranking member, Chuck Grassley, to discuss the supreme court nomination process. “As you have heard the president say, he will do his duty to select a justice not only with the Senate’s consent but with its advice,” Psaki said. She noted that Biden “looks forward to advice from members of both parties on the Hill, as well as top legal experts and scholars across the country” as he searches for his nominee. “And I think you will see those consultations start this week. So tomorrow, the president is going to host Chairman Durbin and Ranking Member Grassley at the White House to consult with them and hear their advice about this vacancy,” Psaki said. “I expect we’ll have more details to confirm as the week proceeds.” The meeting comes a week after reports first emerged that Stephen Breyer, one of the three liberal justices on the supreme court, would retire after more than 27 years of service. The White House press secretary, Jen Psaki, is now holding her daily briefing with reporters, and she was asked about the Biden administration’s response to the crisis in Ukraine. A reporter asked Psaki whether the White House is concerned that talking up the threat of a potential Russian invasion is weakening the Ukrainian government. “I can only speak for our intention and our responsibility, and we feel it’s important to be open and candid about threat from Russia,” the press secretary said. Psaki noted that Russia has continued to build up its troop presence near Ukraine and has laid the groundwork for a potential false flag operation in the neighboring country. “It’s dangerous. We’ve been saying for more than a week that Russia could invade at any time,” Psaki said. “I would note though that our effort is to ensure we’re informing the American public and the global community of the seriousness of this threat, even as we work with the Ukrainians, with the Europeans to ensure we are not only preparing them and providing them supplies that they need, but standing up and making clear to the Russians what the consequences will be.” Fani Willis, the Georgia prosecutor investigating whether Donald Trump and others broke the law by trying to pressure officials to overturn Joe Biden’s election victory has asked the FBI for security help, after the former president railed against prosecutors investigating him during a rally in Texas on Saturday, and called on his supporters to protest “radical, vicious, racist prosecutors”. The Associated Press reports that Willis, the Fulton county district attorney, “on Sunday wrote to the FBI office in Atlanta asking for a risk assessment of the county courthouse and government center. She also asked the FBI to provide protective resources ‘to include intelligence and federal agents’.” A special grand jury is set to be seated on 2 May in Willis’s investigation. She asked the FBI to take the steps requested before then. “My staff and I will not be influenced or intimidated by anyone as this investigation moves forward,” Willis wrote, adding that her office has already taken steps to address security concerns “considering the communications we have received from persons unhappy with our commitment to fulfill our duties”. Willis said security concerns were “escalated” when Trump focused on prosecutors in Georgia, New York and Washington, calling them “vicious, horrible people”. Willis wrote: “We must work together to keep the public safe and ensure that we do not have a tragedy in Atlanta similar to what happened at the United States Capitol on 6 January 2021.” Willis has confirmed to the AP that her investigation includes but is not limited to: a 2 January 2021 phone call between Trump and Georgia secretary of state Brad Raffensperger a November 2020 phone call between Senator Lindsey Graham and Raffensperger; the abrupt resignation of the US attorney in Atlanta on 4 January 2021; comments made during December 2020 Georgia legislative committee hearings on the election. Trump denies wrongdoing. So does Graham, who said on Sunday he would co-operate with Willis. More: New York Democrats have unveiled their proposal for new congressional maps that would give the party a hold on three additional seats in Congress. The proposal amounts to one of the most aggressive efforts by Democrats this cycle to gerrymander district lines in their favor. While Democrats have complete control of the redistricting process in a handful of other states, including Illinois and Maryland, New York’s 26 congressional seats offers them the biggest opportunity to pick up seats as they seek to maintain control of the US House of Representatives. Democrats will have complete control over drawing 75 congressional districts, compared with 187 for Republicans. Democrats currently control 19 of New York’s 27 congressional districts. The new proposal would favor them in 22 of the state’s 26 new districts. (New York is set to lose a seat in congress following the 2020 census.) Democrats took aim at New York’s 11th congressional district, currently represented by a Republican, by redrawing it to include liberal parts of Brooklyn - making it favorable to a Democrat in future elections. They also redrew a Long Island district to include more Democrat favorable areas. And in upstate New York, Democrats redrew a Syracuse-area seat to be much more Democratic. The move shows the extent to which Democrats are willing to use gerrymandering to their advantage where they have the power to do so. A vote is expected on the maps this week. J Michelle Childs, a South Carolina judge among contenders to be nominated to the supreme court by Joe Biden, has received strong support from an unlikely source: Lindsey Graham, a Republican senator and leading ally of Donald Trump. “I can’t think of a better person for President Biden to consider for the supreme court than Michelle Childs,” Graham, a member of the Senate judiciary committee that will consider Biden’s pick, told CBS’s Face the Nation on Sunday. “She has wide support in our state. She’s considered to be a fair-minded, highly gifted jurist. She’s one of the most decent people I’ve ever met.” Graham is also from South Carolina and so is James Clyburn, the congressman whose endorsement both secured Biden’s promise to install a Black woman and boosted him to the Democratic nomination. Clyburn told CBS he spoke to Biden about Childs “several months ago”. The nomination of any Black woman, Clyburn said, would send a message “to every little child growing up under moderate circumstances, needing the entire community to help raise [her], getting scholarships to go up to school because she couldn’t afford to go otherwise, going to public schools because you didn’t get an offer from one of the big private schools”. A full story on Graham’s comments, including his rejection of Republican complaints that Biden’s promise to nominate a Black woman is an example of affirmative action, is here. Meanwhile, here is our contributor Sidney Blumenthal, from last year, about the long, strange political career of Lindsey Olin Graham: Donald Trump is being widely accused of “saying the quiet part loud”, when protesting that Mike Pence could have “overturned” his boss’s election defeat by Joe Biden. Though he has appeared to admit Biden won before, Trump usually insists he won and his opponent stole the election through voter fraud – the “big lie” which animates rallies like one in Conroe, Texas, on Saturday. At that rally, Trump promised pardons for 6 January rioters if re-elected and exhorted followers to protest against investigations of his business and political affairs in New York and Georgia. The next day, he attempted to seize on moves by a bipartisan group of senators to reform the Electoral Count Act of 1887, which Trump tried to use to have Pence refuse to certify Biden’s victory. In a statement, Trump claimed “fraud and many other irregularities” in the 2020 election, which is untrue, and asked: “How come the Democrats and … Republicans, like Wacky Susan Collins, are desperately trying to pass legislation that will not allow the vice-president to change the results of the election? “Actually, what they are saying, is that Mike Pence did have the right to change the outcome, and they now want to take that right away. Unfortunately, he didn’t exercise that power. He could have overturned the election!” Pundits seized on Trump’s latest apparent blunder into the truth. Bill Kristol, a conservative writer, said: “Talk about saying the quiet part loud. Trump here admits or rather boasts [about] what he wanted Mike Pence to do.” In Congress, Liz Cheney, one of only two Republicans on the House committee investigating Trump’s attempt to overturn the election, said: “Trump uses language he knows caused the January 6 violence; suggests he’d pardon the January 6 defendants, some of whom have been charged with seditious conspiracy; threatens prosecutors; and admits he was attempting to overturn the election. “He’d do it all again if given the chance.” Addressing the National Governors Association, Joe Biden applauded the state leaders for their efforts to address the coronavirus pandemic. Biden also touted the American Rescue Plan, which he signed into law last year, for helping provide states and cities with the funds to respond to the pandemic and address other needs. “I made it clear we should use these funds to combat violent crime as well, including hiring additional police officers and investing in community violence interventions,” Biden said. The president will travel to New York on Thursday to meet with the city’s new mayor, Eric Adams, and discuss his administration’s efforts to combat gun violence. As Biden shifted to the question-and-answer portion of the meeting, reporters were escorted out of the room. Biden did not respond to any of reporters’ shouted questions as they left. Joe Biden and Kamala Harris are now hosting the National Governors Association at the White House for a meeting. Harris spoke first at the meeting, and the vice-president, who serves as the Biden administration’s point person on voting rights, delivered a pitch for ensuring equal access to the ballot box. “I believe that, regardless of who we voted for in the last election, we all as leaders of our nation understand the importance of ensuring that all people who are eligible to vote have an ability, and a meaningful ability, to vote and access to the ballot,” Harris said. “So I would ask that, in this coming year, we work together to ensure that all Americans who are eligible to vote actually have meaningful access to the ballot.” Harris’ comments come as 19 states have enacted voting restrictions over the past year, and congressional Democrats have failed to pass national voting rights legislation because of Republican filibustering. The US ambassador to the UN, Linda Thomas-Greenfield, similarly threatened severe repercussions for Russia if Vladimir Putin authorizes an invasion of Ukraine. Speaking at the UN Security Council meeting this morning, Thomas-Greenfield said, “We seek the path of peace. We seek the path of dialogue. We do not want confrontation. But we will be decisive, swift and united should Russia further invade Ukraine.” The Guardian’s Julian Borger reports: Thomas-Greenfield had some new figures. She said that there were 10,000 Russian troops already in Belarus with heavy armaments, and there are expected to be 30,000 there by early February, ie in the coming days. The Ukrainian UN representative will be speaking towards the end of the session. It will be interesting to see if their permanent representative echoes the Kyiv line, playing down the threat. Joe Biden reiterated his threat that Russia would suffer “swift and severe consequences” if Vladimir Putin approves an invasion of Ukraine. The president released a statement as the UN Security Council holds a meeting to discuss the crisis at Ukraine’s border, where Putin has built up Russia’s troop presence. “If Russia is sincere about addressing our respective security concerns through dialogue, the United States and our Allies and partners will continue to engage in good faith,” Biden said in his statement. “If instead Russia chooses to walk away from diplomacy and attack Ukraine, Russia will bear the responsibility, and it will face swift and severe consequences.” Biden argued the world must be “clear-eyed about the actions Russia is threatening” and prepared to respond if Putin follows through with an invasion. “Today’s Security Council meeting is a critical step in rallying the world to speak out in one voice: rejecting the use of force, calling for military de-escalation, supporting diplomacy as the best path forward, and demanding accountability from every member state to refrain from military aggression against its neighbors,” Biden said. Kamala Harris, then vice-president elect, drove within yards of a pipe bomb left outside the Democratic National Committee on 6 January 2021 and remained inside for nearly two hours before the bomb was found, it was reported on Monday. Harris’s proximity to the bomb was known previously, but not how close or for how long. CNN reported the new details in the case, part of alarming events in Washington on the day Congress met to certify Joe Biden’s election victory over Donald Trump. A pipe bomb was also left near the Republican National Committee. More than a year later, no suspect has been named or apprehended. Citing “multiple sources”, CNN said Harris “pulled into DNC headquarters in Washington at around 11.30am ET with her motorcade through the garage leading to the parking deck near where law enforcement discovered the pipe bomb”. It also cited a US Capitol police document that showed “an unnamed ‘protectee’ was removed from the DNC building at approximately 1.14pm ET – seven minutes after Capitol Police began investigating the bomb”. That protectee was known to be Harris when Politico first reported the story, but it was not known how long she was in the building. Rob Portman, a Republican member of the Senate foreign relations committee, argued that the Ukraine crisis had helped to fortify the relationship between the US and its allies. “One thing Vladimir Putin has done successfully is he has strengthened the transatlantic alliance,” Portman told NBC News yesterday. “For the first time in nearly 80 years since World War II, we could have a major conflict and a very bloody conflict in Europe unless we stand up together and push back, and so far so good.” Echoing the message from Senate foreign relations committee chairman Bob Menendez, Portman expressed confidence that the panel would be able to advance a bill with sanctions against Russia. “We’re looking at putting together a strong package, which I hope we can pass next week, which would include sanctions, which would include more military assistance,” Portman said. The Ohio senator added that Ukraine is “where the cause of freedom is being waged in our generation”. “And we need to stand up and be unified with our allies and as Democrats and Republicans,” Portman said. The Guardian’s Dan Sabbagh and Andrew Roth report: Washington and its allies have prepared a list of Russian elites in or near Vladimir Putin’s inner circle who would be hit with economic sanctions if the Kremlin were to order an invasion of Ukraine, according to a US briefing. The language in the briefing by a US official to Reuters is notably similar to that used on Sunday by the UK foreign secretary, Liz Truss, who said Britain would introduce legislation to allow banks, energy companies and “oligarchs close to the Kremlin” to be targeted by London, and makes clear the targeting is coordinated internationally. Names were not made available but the official said the sanctions list would consist of elite figures – or oligarchs – plus their family members. “There is a broad list of individuals we can pull from,” the official told Reuters, noting that some would be from a classified list of senior Russian political figures and oligarchs outlined in section 241 of the Countering America’s Adversaries Through Sanctions Act in a report sent to the US Congress in 2018. The United Nations security council is scheduled to meet later today for what is expected to be a testy confrontation between US and Russian diplomats over Moscow’s troop build-up on the Ukraine border. It will be the first time the global body will discuss recent threats of a Russian invasion, which has left world governments on edge. Washington called for the meeting last week. US ambassador to the UN, Linda Thomas-Greenfield, has described it in stark terms as a talk on “Russian aggression”. “We’re going to go into the council prepared to listen to Russia’s security concerns, but we’re not going to be distracted by their propaganda,” she tweeted. Russia’s deputy UN ambassador Dmitry Polyansky has been no less assertive, calling the meeting a “clear PR stunt shameful for the reputation of UN security council”. Under council rules – and adding to tensions – Ukraine will also speak. Follow the Guardian’s live blog for more updates on the UN meeting: Greetings from Washington, live blog readers. The Biden administration appears to be moving closer toward issuing sanctions against Russia, as Vladimir Putin eyes a potential invasion of Ukraine. Bob Menendez, the chairman of the Senate foreign relations committee, said his panel is working on bipartisan legislation that would be the “mother of all sanctions” against Russia. “It’s to include a variety of elements, massive sanctions against the most significant Russian banks, crippling to their economy, meaningful in terms of consequences to the average Russian in their accounts and pensions, more lethal assistance to Ukraine,” Menendez told CNN yesterday. “These are sanctions beyond any that we have ever levied before.” John Kirby, the Pentagon press secretary, echoed that message, saying yesterday that the White House is considering “sanctions and economic consequences the likes of which we have not looked at before or even considered even as far back as 2014”. In an interview with Fox News, Kirby still expressed hope that conflict could be avoided. “We still believe there’s room and space for diplomacy, and we’d like to see that be the solution here,” Kirby said. The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned.The Liberals’ preferred candidate to contest the federal seat of Warringah, barrister Jane Buncle, has withdrawn her nomination, leaving a right-aligned candidate described by one senior Liberal as “Tony Abbott 2.0” to attempt to wrest back the Sydney seat from independent Zali Steggall. Buncle, who had been considered a frontrunner and had the support of the moderate faction, wrote to the New South Wales Liberal director Chris Stone to withdraw on Monday after the division again failed to resolve its impasse on preselections. A rising star of the NSW bar, Buncle is said to have expressed concerns that without time to campaign she faced an uphill battle to win the northern beaches seat, which Steggall holds with margin of 7.2% after defeating Abbott in 2019. Only one other nominated candidate remains. He is Lincoln Parker, a defence analyst, who is backed by the right faction. Parker, a member of the Manly branch, has appeared on Sky News and written for the rightwing Falun Gong-backed newspaper the Epoch Times. He is also chair of the Liberal party’s defence and national security policy branch. “He’s Tony Abbott 2.0. It’s completely the wrong look for the seat,” said one senior Liberal. The NSW Liberal party is facing an ongoing crisis with eight key seats without candidates, just three months out from the federal election in May. Despite nominations closing in May 2021, the NSW division has not held preselections or vetted candidates because of factional manoeuvring. Two other candidates are also reported to have withdrawn their candidacies in the NSW central coast seat of Dobell: Pentecostal preacher Jemima Gleeson – the prime minister Scott Morrison’s pick – and cricketer Nathan Bracken. Labor holds the seat by just 1.5%, making it one of the Liberals’ most prospective. Several other candidates had withdrawn from seeking preselection in Warringah in recent months as Morrison sought to entice a high-profile person, including former premiers Mike Baird and Gladys Berejiklian, to run. But none could be found and this left Buncle the obvious frontrunner with the numbers. However, a failure to hold a plebiscite has left Buncle with only a limited time to campaign, and she is understood to have indicated that this made the task impossible. Other members of the Warringah branch disputed this version of events, saying Parker would have won a competitive rank and file preselection and this had been a factor in Buncle’s decision to withdraw. Regardless, Buncle’s withdrawal means Steggall now looks likely to hold the seat with the same or increased margin, local Liberals said. Although it may be possible to reopen preselections, the move would be difficult and would require a rock star candidate to be put forward to gain the 90% support on the deeply divided state executive. Steggall said the Liberal Party in-fighting was a prime example of why voters were turning to independents in the first place. “This Liberals preselection mess shows everything that is wrong with party politics plain for all to see: a focus on power and ambition taking precedence over an actual desire to serve the community,” Stegall said. “Communities need politicians that have the ability to focus on their interests, on delivering solutions to the challenges we face, and on maximising the opportunities we have as a nation.” In Dobell, the remaining candidate is cardiologist Dr Michael Feneley, who has previously run as the Liberal candidate in Kingsford Smith. He is supported by the right and the moderates. Attempts to endorse two ministers, Sussan Ley and Alex Hawke, and one sitting member, Trent Zimmerman, without a competitive preselection failed on Monday. It was a direct rejection of attempts by the prime minister’s office to at least solve part of the problem. However, it would have weakened the right’s bargaining power and was rejected by both the moderates and the right. A complicated, more comprehensive deal on the remaining eight seats remains on the table. It could be put to a vote later this week, but requires 90% support by the 27-member executive. One insider said the chances of federal intervention were now 50/50. This would involve the branch effectively being dissolved and the federal office taking over the affairs of the NSW division. This would almost certainly prompt a legal challenge from some members who are angered about the delays and the plan to parachute candidates into some branches and ignore the party’s new rules which give all branch members the right to participate in a plebiscite.Anthony Pratt’s Pratt Holdings was the biggest political donor in the last year, tipping $1.3m into Liberal party coffers ahead of the 2022 election. The Australian Electoral Commission released disclosures for the 2020-21 financial year on Tuesday, revealing significant donations to upstart political movements including $1m to conservative lobby group Advance Australia and $300,000 to Rodney Culleton’s Great Australia party. In total, the Liberal party and its branches declared $74m in receipts, including $4.8m in donations, with the rest made up of “other receipts” such as fees for business forums, intra-party transfers and public funding. Labor declared $67m in total including $8.2m in donations. The Greens declared $16m and the Nationals $9m, with donations to both totalling about $655,000. Pratt Holdings gave $1,288,000 to the Liberal party’s various divisions, dwarfing its donation of just $10,000 to NSW Labor. Pratt, the billionaire box maker, hosted a rally fronted by Donald Trump at one of his US companies in Ohio, attended by Scott Morrison during his 2019 US visit. Meriton Property Services gave $285,000 to the Liberal party, with some $200,000 going to the NSW Liberal party. Nine Entertainment donated $27,500 to the Liberal party which was disclosed after a controversial political fundraiser the media company hosted for the Liberals prompted it to stop donating to parties. A Nine spokesperson said the payment, dated 15 December 2020, was “made under previous management” – former chief executive Hugh Marks – before the policy change when the company “was also a member of the Federal Labor Business Forum”. Donations tend to ramp up in the months before a federal election, meaning returns for 2020-21 were lower than the bumper year of 2018-19 which included Mineralogy’s $83m donation to the United Australia party. The AEC returns revealed Advance Australia received $650,000 from Silver River Investment Holdings and $350,000 from Cartwright Investment Corp, controlled by Simon and Elizabeth Fenwick. Simon Fenwick, a former fund manager, had previously announced his intention to give the group $1m due to his concerns “Australia’s freedom, prosperity and security is being undermined by left-wing agendas and that a strong counter-voice is needed”. In an interview with the Australian Financial Review, he reportedly cited “dictatorial politicians like Victoria’s Daniel Andrews” as the impetus for the gift. William Nitschke gave $300,000 to the Great Australia party, former One Nation senator Culleton’s new political party which campaigns on an anti-vaccine mandate platform. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Bob Katter’s Australia party received two $100,000 donations, from the Firearms Dealers Association Qld Inc and the Shooters Union Qld Pty Ltd. Many of the largest donors had an each ways bet, giving roughly equal donations to the major parties. The National Automotive Leasing and Salary Packaging Association gave Labor and Liberal $150,000 each; the Pharmacy Guild of Australia gave $295,000 roughly evenly split between Labor and Liberal branches, and the Australian Hotels Association of NSW gave $260,000 in total to the Liberals, Nationals and Labor. The climate action group, 350.org, said the disclosures show $959,155 was donated to the three major parties from fossil fuel companies, $80,000 more than the previous year. Donors in that industry or connected to it included Low Emissions Technology Australia, an investor in carbon capture and storage, which gave $111,500 to major parties; the Minerals Council ($193,943); Northern Star Resources ($105,500) and Chevron ($74,650). Empire Energy, a firm exploring for gas in the Beetaloo Basin, made $65,000 worth of donations including $40,000 to the Liberal party’s Northern Territory branch and $25,000 to Labor. Empire has been the main beneficiary of a federal program designed to incentivise fracking and gas exploration in the Beetaloo Basin, receiving $21m in three grants announced in July last year. The Greens senator Larissa Waters noted that Santos, another company seeking to frack the Beetaloo, had donated to both sides of politics. 350 senior campaigner, Shani Tager, said: “Gas companies are some of Australia’s biggest political donors and are the recipients of massive public subsidies from the government. It’s clear that money is talking.” Australian Conservation Foundation democracy campaigner, Jolene Elberth, said “hefty donations and membership fees to exclusive party forums give fossil fuel companies easy access to our elected representatives”. “Over time, access translates to influence.” Other mining and energy companies prominent in the list of donors included: Woodside Energy, which gave $232,000 to the Liberals, Nationals and Labor. Mineral Resources, which gave $222,400 to the Liberals, Nationals and Labor in Western Australia. The Trustee for St Baker Family Trust, which gave $165,000 to the two major parties, including the LNP in Queensland. Sally Zhou’s Aus Gold Mining Group, which gave the Liberals $77,777. Duncan Turpie, a professional gambler and maths genius, gave $110,000 to the Greens, including their Queensland and Tasmanian branches. Other big donations by individuals included: Scott Edwardes, a lawyer and WA Liberal candidate at the state election, who gave $224,000 to the party; and miner and tech investor Charles Bass, who gave $216,000 to the major parties in WA. According to the Centre for Public Integrity, donations from the 10 biggest donors made up about one-quarter ($4.2m) of the $17.9m received in 2020-21. The centre’s chair, Anthony Whealy, said: “The commonwealth has the weakest donation laws in the country. “Today we can see some of the donations that were made last financial year, but nothing under $14,500 and nothing from the last six months.” Whealy said the disclosure scheme is “mis-named – it is a non-disclosure scheme with more than a third of political funding shrouded in secrecy”. “With an election around the corner, the public deserves to know who is funding our political parties.” Guardian Australia analysis of AEC data shows at least $67.2m received by the major parties is so-called “dark money” – funds for which the source is not made public. Political parties are required to declare the total amount of money they receive in a financial year, and then must make more detailed declarations for donations and sums of money that fit certain criteria. Amounts received under the donation threshold of $14,300 in 2020-21 were not required to be listed by parties, though some do so voluntarily. This means the source of millions of dollars in funding is never declared.Israel’s military has said it is dismissing two officers and would reprimand a battalion commander over the death of a Palestinian-American at a West Bank checkpoint after he was stopped by Israeli troops. The death of Omar Abdalmajeed As’ad, who had lived in Milwaukee before retiring to his native village of Jiljilya, resulted from “a moral failure and poor decision-making”, it added. The 78-year-old had been handcuffed, gagged and blindfolded for between 20 minutes and an hour, before his body was discovered by local residents and others detained in the 12 January raid after the soldiers left. “The soldiers did not identify signs of distress or other suspicious signs concerning As’ad’s health. The soldiers assessed that As’ad was asleep and did not try to wake him,” according the military statement. “The investigation concluded that the incident was a grave and unfortunate event, resulting from a moral failure and poor decision-making on the part of the soldiers.” After an autopsy found he died from “stress-induced sudden cardiac arrest stemming from external violence”, a US embassy spokesperson in Jerusalem said it was “deeply saddened” by As’ad’s death and it supported “a thorough investigation into the circumstances of the incident”. Palestinian leaders have called for the soldiers involved to be prosecuted in an international court. Two members of Wisconsin’s congressional delegation asked US secretary of state Antony Blinken on Monday to investigate whether the soldiers involved used equipment procured with American aid. “We strongly support human rights and the rule of law as the foundation of United States foreign policy,” US senator Tammy Baldwin and representative Gwen Moore wrote. “As a Palestinian American, Mr As’ad deserves the full protections afforded US citizens living abroad and his family deserves answers.” The 78-year-old’s US citizenship means that his case has received more international attention than most civilian deaths related to Israel’s military occupation of the Palestinian territories. In 2021, security forces killed 41 Palestinians in the West Bank who were not involved in attacking or allegedly attacking Israelis, according to the human rights group B’Tselem. As’ad was born in Jiljilya but spent about 40 years in the US. He became a US citizen before he returned to his home village in 2009 to retire with his wife, Nazmia, his nephew told the Associated Press. US state department officials have said they’re seeking clarification about the events leading up to As’ad’s death. State department spokesperson Ned Price said on Monday that he hadn’t seen the request from Baldwin and Moore and the agency hasn’t seen a final report from Israeli officials. “We continue to support an investigation that is thorough and comprehensive into the circumstances of the incident and we welcome receiving additional information as soon as possible,” Price said. Omar As’ad’s nephew and his son, Hane Assad, both described Omar as a philanthropist who was the life of the party. Hane Assad told the AP his father would often hand out money to the poor. “He just loved everybody, no matter what race you were, what culture you came from,” he said. “He just saw you as a human being.” He was coming home from playing cards with a cousin when the soldiers stopped him, Assad Assad said. “He was very weak,” Hane Assad said. “He walked with a cane. It takes him five minutes to get to the car, the way he walks. He doesn’t have the power of 30 soldiers … The military said ‘we left and he was fine.’ It doesn’t make sense.” “Every time we got stopped Dad would say ‘whatever they ask for give it to them. Just be calm.’ Plenty of times we got pulled over and I never saw him fight,” Hane Assad said. “I can’t believe they did that to my Dad. Almost an 80-year-old man. All the soldiers there couldn’t handle him? This is uncalled for. You don’t treat no elderly person like that.” With Associated Press and ReutersSue Gray’s highly anticipated report into alleged lockdown-busting parties at Downing Street dominates the headlines in today’s newspapers. The 12-page Gray report identified “failures of leadership and judgment”, while the Met was revealed to be investigating 300 photos connected to a dozen of gatherings at No 10. The Guardian has “‘Failures of leadership’: Tories turn on PM over Gray report” as the splash, saying Boris Johnson faced a wall of anger from Conservative MPs in the Commons after the Gray report. The Independent also leads with “Failures of leadership” alongside a picture of a downcast Johnson. The Metro too goes with “A failure of leadership”, writing the Gray “update” gives a damning verdict on boozy parties at No 10. The Mirror’s take on the fallout from the Gray report is “Zero shame”. The paper writes “Boris Johnson again refused to quit over Partygate despite Sue Gray revealing police are probing 12 lockdown bashes at No 10”. The Times picks up on the Met investigation with its headline “Police investigate PM’s four lockdown parties.” It reports that Johnson faces a police investigation over at least four lockdown gatherings. The Sun also highlights the Met investigation, saying Johnson faces a police grilling over claims of an Abba-themed party at Downing Street – giving rise to its headline “Mamma Mia!”. The Express attempts to move the issue forward with its headline, “Yes PM, you got it wrong … Now get it right!” The paper says an embattled Johnson pledged to right the wrongs of his premiership, also claiming the PM won vital support from his doubters as he said “Covid nearly killed me.” The Telegraph goes with “PM to ask Gray for new report”. As Tories demand full publication of the party investigation, the paper writes, the PM requests a further update on inquiries to appease backbenchers. The Daily Mail calls for the Gray report to be released in full, with its headline: “Now publish the whole damn thing” The paper writes a national clamour for the full report erupted, with the flimsy 12-page update leaving the country “still stuck in limbo”. The i newspaper has “PM pleads for his job” above the Gray-report quote “Failure of leadership” over Downing Street parties. The FT’s focus is on the defiance of the PM, with its splash: “Johnson rejects calls to quit after Gray’s scathing report on parties”.It happened at 4pm on the first Wednesday in our new house: an unexpected gift on my doorstep. Tucked in a brown paper bag was a pumpkin salad, a serve of tiramisu and a can of soft drink. It wasn’t something I’d normally order, or had ordered, but I accepted it on the grounds that it was for “Sam”, my partner’s name. Sam wasn’t home, but there was a chance he’d surprised me between mealtimes with this very specific order for one. As a hungry, sleep-tortured new parent I was willing to suspend my disbelief – and the fact I don’t eat pumpkin. I don’t dislike pumpkin. I simply don’t cook it, order it in restaurants or think about it at all. Nevertheless, I carried my serendipitous meal inside. It says it’s for “Sam”, drawled the devil on my burp cloth. I was reaching for a fork when there was a hard knock at the door. It was Sam. Not my partner Sam. “Did you just take my food?” they asked, unpleasantly. “Oh, hi! Sorry!” I was already bustling down the hallway to retrieve my ostensibly honest mistake, returning with the unopened bag. “It’s just that … my partner’s name is Sam!” “Sure,” Sam said. “It really is.” “OK.” It was worse than I thought. Not only did this person believe I’d stolen their food, they thought I’d go so far as to give my partner a fake name to cover my tracks. According to them I was a stone-cold psychopath. This from a grown human who drank Sunkist. “Thanks,” Sam said, snatching the bag and storming the 12.5 metres between my door and theirs. Mine and my new neighbour’s houses were separated by a nose-height fence that revealed a forehead-up view of one another’s lives. We were particularly exposed in our kitchens, where we quickly took to avoiding each other’s eyes at our facing sinks, a silent agreement to lend the other this one small dignity. Unfortunately, we had less avoidable senses at our disposal. My neighbour heard every babble and demonic scream from my place, and I heard every exasperated conversation from theirs. Once they imitated my two-year-old’s tantrum after a particularly harrowing afternoon during lockdown. I retaliated by feeding the kid spoonfuls of Nutella before bedtime and leaving the windows open wide. Late one night, my neighbour was entertaining guests in their living room, directly opposite my baby’s room. They were playing my favourite Hole album, appropriately titled Live Through This, and screaming to Courtney Love’s pearly vitriol. My baby was screaming, too. I tried texting and knocking in my pyjamas. When both tactics failed to get a response, I resorted to throwing six drink coasters at their window, first one, then two at once, then three. The window flung open. “Are you right?!” Sam said, in a tone one might adopt when addressing a stone-cold psychopath. No. You’re playing an album that I’d forgotten about because I’ve disappeared into a life that doesn’t feel like mine and I’m profoundly lonely. Can we at least be friendly? “I’ve got a crying baby,” I said, in the tone of someone supremely confident in their choices. “Can you please turn it down?” The drink coasters appeared in my letterbox the following day, bound together with a disturbing amount of sticky tape. Months later, when our frisbee went sailing over the fence, my neighbour claimed not to have it. I imagined they had big plans to cut it up and mail it back to us, piece by piece. We had a lot in common, my neighbour and I, like the fact neither of us valued our privacy enough to attach a basic extension to the fence. Instead, we chose to peripherally hate-watch each other like an early-aughts, surveillance-style reality show like Britney and Kevin: Chaotic or Big Brother Australia, the season it got axed. There was a cosiness there, too. As the pandemic settled in and the world outside got less familiar, I knew my neighbour Sam’s life would be playing in the background. I knew they quit smoking whenever they were dating someone. They knew I almost got divorced over a fight about the laundry basket. Not the laundry. Just the basket. One New Year’s Eve, I sat in my backyard with a glass of wine. Cigarette smoke curled into the air from the other side of the fence. “Hey, Sam,” I said. “Hey, Ashe.” “Happy New Year.” “You, too.” “Can I bum a ciggie?” Sam laughed, pleasantly. “You’re a scumbag.” I laughed. “Look who’s talking.” The air crackled with the spark of something new. Me: “In another life we’d be friends.” Sam: “Maybe in a parallel universe, we already are.” • Ashe Davenport is a writer and authorAged care workers have described comments by the federal health minister, Greg Hunt, on Covid deaths in the sector as “astonishing” and “disrespectful”, and say the significance of those deaths is being downplayed by politicians. On Monday, Hunt addressed a growing number of deaths in aged care, with 473 Covid-related aged-care deaths recorded in January alone. “The latest advice that I have is that approximately 60% of those that have agonisingly passed have been in palliative care,” Hunt said. He added: “The definition is that they have passed with Covid, and they are absolutely rightly counted as a national loss. But approximately 60% of those that have passed were in palliative care.” The Australian Nursing and Midwifery Federation federal secretary, Annie Butler, said the comments were “astonishing”. “How much more disrespectful to elderly Australians can this government be,” Butler asked. “To turn around and say basically, ‘you were just going to die anyway,’ rather than acknowledging that they died faster and in difficult conditions because the government didn’t look after them well enough. “The comments are just outrageous because elderly people can be in palliative care for a week, for two weeks, or even years, and the aim is to make sure the person has the best life they can have in that time. Letting Covid rip through homes and these people become infected is hardly delivering people the best quality of life that they can have.” Some of the homes with high numbers of deaths contacted by Guardian Australia said most who died had serious underlying health conditions, and that Covid-19 was not considered to be the primary cause of death. But Butler said residents with the virus would be put into isolation, potentially unable to be with their family in their final days. “So the fact that they are palliative or have other conditions is irrelevant, aside from asking, how much did Covid hasten their death.” A spokesperson for Hunt said “from the outset of the pandemic, aged care has been a major focus of support from the Australian government”. They said Hunt had been responding to a question about details of those who died in aged care. “However, like the rest of the community and what occurred in previous waves of the pandemic, when there are increased cases in the population, they will be reflected in the cases in aged care,” the spokesperson said. “Aged care facilities have been required to implement infection control training and it is encouraging that despite the increase in cases, there has not been the same level of increase in illness or loss of life, with most facilities indicating that the cases have been milder at this stage.” The figure the minister used is from ongoing data provided by the states and territories on lives lost in residential aged care residences. It shows that of the deaths from Covid, 61% were in palliative care. Of the 73% of people who died who were fully vaccinated, 63% of those were in palliative care. Of all those who died, 73% were fully vaccinated and 8% were partially vaccinated. Neither the health minister nor the minister for senior Australians, Richard Colbeck, provided data on the percentage of residents in aged care who had received their booster shot. Butler said it is not the first time politicians have mentioned that many of those dying of Covid in aged care are palliative. In August, the prime minister, Scott Morrison, responding to the aged care crisis exacerbated by Covid, said: “For those of us who have had to make decisions about putting our own family, our own parents, into aged care, we have known that when we’ve done that we are putting them into pre-palliative care. We know it won’t be long in many cases …”. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Butler said: “There’s no such thing as pre-palliative care. All I can say is comments like these show the largest level of disrespect you could show to elderly Australians.” The Aged and Community Services Australia CEO, Paul Sadler, said every resident of an aged care facility is entitled to the best possible care including protection against Covid and other infections. “The government must prioritise the health and wellbeing of older people, and this can be done by ensuring that the services and care they depend on is run by a safe, fully staffed, and fully supported workforce,” he said. The public health researcher and director of Aged Care Matters, Dr Sarah Russell, said no matter the cause of death, people dying in aged care homes infected by Covid-19 were being locked down, deprived of visits from loved ones. “It’s traumatising families and it’s such an awful way to die,” she said. “These people, they have died under terrible, preventable circumstances.”As millions of Chinese families gather this week to celebrate the arrival of the year of the tiger, Luo Shengchun is awaiting news of the fate of her husband, Ding Jiaxi, a human rights lawyer. “It’s the third year that our family hasn’t celebrated the Chinese new year. I don’t know what celebrating new year means now,” said Luo, who now lives in self-imposed exile in New York. “It’s beyond devastating for my family. My husband has not done anything illegal. Why did they deprive us of a normal life?” Ding was detained on 26 December 2019 and charged with subversion of state power on 20 January last year. Last February, Amnesty International raised the alarm over reports of torture. Before Christmas, Luo was told that her husband and another activist, Xu Zhiyong, who was arrested in 15 February 2020 after two months on the run, might finally be sentenced sometime between Christmas and the new year, a tactic often deployed by the authorities. It didn’t happen. This week Luo was told that the expected harsh sentence may not be handed down until May, two months after the conclusion of the Winter Olympics which start on Friday. Analysts say both activists are expected to be charged with involvement in a gathering of 20 rights activists in the southern city of Xiamen in December 2019. More than 10 people linked to the meeting have been charged or detained. Before being treated as a dissident, Xu was a high-profile legal scholar who founded the New Citizens’ Movement in 2010, a loose network of activists advocating for better government transparency to combat corruption. And Ding was a core member of the movement. In 2013, both men were detained after signing a high-profile open letter urging China’s leaders to disclose their wealth for public scrutiny. The following year, Xu was given a prison sentence of four years and Ding three and a half years. In recent months, the two activists’ case has been a subject of discussion in Chinese human rights circles. Analysts say a harsh sentence would show China’s increasing intolerance of any sign of dissent. “While we don’t know what Xu and Ding and others exactly discussed during their meetings, it looks like what they discussed touched the nerves of the Chinese government, probably Xi Jinping himself,” said Patrick Poon, an adviser to The 29 Principles, a UK-based NGO supporting oppressed human rights lawyers. “The government’s purpose is to silence prominent dissidents like them so as to scare off other dissidents,” Poon said, adding that the potential sentencing would no doubt send a chilling message to other Chinese activists. “Some dissidents would now need to rethink what they should say online and offline before making any politically sensitive comments.” One of Xu’s lawyers, Liang Xiaojun, had his legal licence revoked on 16 December. In a Twitter post on 21 December, Liang said the authorities had accused him of publishing speeches on social media – including Twitter, which is blocked in China – that endanger national security. William Nee, a research and advocacy coordinator for Chinese Human Rights Defenders, said the trials would be a “farcical sham”. “It is crystal clear that the government’s case against Xu Zhiyong and Ding Jiaxi is based on their political views, namely a conception of a new form of democratic citizenship in China,” he said. “China has claimed to be a ‘whole-process democracy’ in recent months, but the prosecution of Ding and Xu will highlight how absurd that claim to being a democracy actually is.” Luo said while her husband’s fate was hanging in the balance, the uncertainty of the last few years had turned her into an advocate herself. “I will continue to voice my concern and campaign. Over the past decade, the authorities have become more and more bottomless. This is not justice. Not even a smidgen of it.”Mortgage-holders and other borrowers may face higher repayment costs sooner than expected after the Reserve Bank of Australia declared it would stop buying government debt from 10 February and lifted its forecast for underlying inflation next year while cutting its jobless rate projection. The steps, disclosed after the RBA’s first meeting of 2022 on Tuesday, suggest the central bank deems it can pare support for an Australian economy already bolstered by record budget deficits even with disruptions from the Omicron Covid variant. The RBA left its cash rate unchanged at the record low 0.1% annual rate it has been since November 2021. The RBA governor, Philip Lowe, stressed the end of its quantitative easing program of buying up debt to drive long-term interest rates lower did not signal the cash rate would soon be raised. “Ceasing purchases under the bond purchase program does not imply a near-term increase in interest rates,” Lowe said. “As the Board has stated previously, it will not increase the cash rate until actual inflation is sustainably within the 2 to 3% target range,” he said. “While inflation has picked up, it is too early to conclude that it is sustainably within the target band.” Still, economists will note the recent stronger-than-expected economic activity at the end of 2021 as New South Wales and Victoria emerged from Covid lockdowns has prompted the RBA to elevate its inflation projection. Underlying inflation that the bank uses to set rates is set to reach 2.75% “over 2023”, up from 2.5% the RBA predicted after its December board meeting. In the December quarter, that inflation tally was 2.6% – the highest since mid-2014 – and the RBA said today it expects the pace to accelerate to “around 3.25%” in coming quarters. The RBA also cut its jobless rate projection to below 4% in 2022 and “around 3.75%” by the end of 2023. That compared with predictions of 4.25-4.5% in 2022 and 4% next year, as per the banks’ statement on monetary policy released last November. Lowe cautioned that some uncertainties remain, including the persistence of disruptions to supply chains and distribution networks from Omicron and their ongoing effects on prices. Another uncertainty is wage growth, which so far “remains modest and it is likely to be some time yet before aggregate wages growth is at a rate consistent with inflation”, he said. The lowest jobless rate in 13 years during the December quarter may also nudge wages higher. The RBA’s most recent rate rise was in November 2010. Still, “the Board is prepared to be patient as it monitors how the various factors affecting inflation in Australia evolve”, Lowe concluded. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Even without a firm date from the RBA, investors are tipping the first move by May or June, assuming the rise is to 0.25%. Private economists are predicting a bit later, perhaps August. Back at the last RBA meeting in December, the bank said it would continue to buy government securities at the rate of $4bn a week “until at least mid-February 2022”, and today it put a firm date to its cessation. The bond-buying, which also has the effect of driving down yields and making it cheaper to borrow, has seen the RBA acquire about a third of government debt totalling close to $350bn, compared with about $16bn when the program began. “Since the start of the pandemic, the RBA’s balance sheet has more than tripled to around $640bn, with this expansion providing continuing support to the economy,” Lowe said, adding the board will consider “the issue of the reinvestment of the proceeds of future bond maturities” or how it will unwind its positions at its meeting in May. Westpac said the RBA’s comments offered few surprises, and the Australian dollar dropped against the US dollar as a result. It eased to 70.35 US cents from 70.7 US cents just prior to the statement. Warwick McKibbin, a former RBA board member, welcomed the decision by Lowe to avoid setting a rate rise date. “Basically, they’ve gone back to their target being the inflation outcome, and ending the bond purchases is the right thing to do,” said McKibbin, a professor of economics at the Australian National University, adding “to specify the new target in terms of sustainable inflation around the band [of 2-3% inflation] is the right way to pronounce policy.” McKibbin predicts the RBA will “certainly” lift interest rates before the end of the year. The challenge for the bank is to determine how much any rise in prices is caused by supply chain troubles rather than increased demand. “To the extent that is supply driven, you don’t want to raise rates in the face of that because you just make the output losses worse,” McKibbin said. “In America, it’s clearly demand-driven more so than supply-driven, but in Australia’s not quite so clear.” The US Federal Reserve, the country’s central bank, last week said it would start raising interest rates next month, joining the UK and New Zealand among those to have moved. Major banks are predicting a rate rise by the second half of this year, with Westpac and the CBA tipping August and the ANZ September.It’s the time of year they call the “hungry gap”, when the land is exhausted but winter drags on. We looked across the bare ground on which we stood, through a low grey sky, to the deep grey ashwoods opposite, which rippled up the far slope following its contours. The only chromatic variation came from the canopy, which was feathered pale as if dusted with frost. How odd to get down into the dale’s darkest section and suddenly be overwhelmed by the colours of life. The woodland flanking Cressbrook’s stream is so sheathed in mosses that it takes on an almost animate, mammalian quality. It’s not only the green-furred trees but the walls, the ground, any waist-high sapling or even just a dead stick or snag somehow lodged upright. Everything was coated in moss, but unevenly, so that twig ends blossom out as rounded nest-like masses. These cushions have, in turn, given opportunity for lichens and polypody ferns to take hold. Yet the most completely transformed are hawthorns. Instead of their customary February profile of barbed-wired meanness, they are turned into something suggestively soft and enfolded. While everywhere is in subaquatic gloom, the moss limbs of these smothered hawthorns are a singing yellow-green. They evoke something paradoxical or upside down, like a skeleton in a wedding dress. Mosses, like ferns and liverworts, are often called “lower plants” – a reference to their different, simpler ecology and to the fact that they appeared on Earth far earlier than the dominant vegetation of our modern world, which comprises plants called angiosperms. Heather moorland, flower meadows, deciduous woods, even our gardens are populated with angiosperms. Look out of your window now and you’re almost certainly seeing some of the planet’s 308,000 species. Mosses and ferns may be “lower plants”, but we shouldn’t mistake that as meaning lesser or less successful. In Cressbrook, you see how vibrant the presence of these 400m-year-old survivors is. Here, the angiosperm trees look little more than a convenient scaffold or stage on which the Earth’s lower plants fulfil their ongoing destinies and thrive. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryTropical humidity is set to hit south-east Queensland this week, raising concerns of large-scale power outages as Queenslanders try to stay cool. Temperatures are already high, with Brisbane expected to hit 34C on Tuesday followed by 36C on Wednesday. The heatwave has stretched inland to the central highlands, with Lockington recording 41.7C at 11 am on Tuesday morning. The tropical heatwave means the humidity in large parts of the state is sitting at 90%, making it feel much hotter than it is. Meteorologist Brooke Pagel said the heatwave is pushing temperatures between 5-10C above average for this time of year and the uncommonly high dew points, which measure the moisture in the air, will make it feel hotter. “When you have high dew points and high humidity – which is not actually common when you see humidity and high temperatures together – it will actually feel closer to 40C in south-east Queensland,” Pagel, who works for the Bureau of Meteorology, said. “With that combination, the ‘feels like’ temperature is really going to increase even if the temperatures in some cities hover around 34-36C.” The tropical temperatures are being caused by a trough that is heading towards the east coast and mixing with moisture from the north. A reprieve is expected with a strong southerly change and a dramatic drop in temperatures on Thursday. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The dew points for south-east Queensland at this time of year normally sit between 19 and 21C but are currently in the mid-20s, creating levels of humidity more in line with temperatures in Darwin or Cairns. Pagel said the Bureau of Meteorology considered anything above a dew point of 18C as “uncomfortable”. “It is unusual to see this combination of humidity and high temperatures,” she said. The heatwave is causing concerns there will be power outages, with Powerlink chief executive Paul Simshauser asking Queenslanders to reduce their electricity consumption over the next two days. Queensland is forecast to reach record electricity demand of 10,032 MW – close to the 2019 record of 10,044MW –later today. “We’re encouraging electricity customers to reduce their energy consumption where safe to do so over the next two days,” Simshauser said. “Your safety and wellbeing is important so only reduce energy consumption if it is safe to do so. We appreciate your efforts in reducing power use.” Queensland has several large generators undergoing emergency maintenance which is adding to the pressure on the grid, he said. “In the event of supply outages, it is important to note emergency services and other priority groups such as hospitals and nursing homes will be given priority access to electricity supply to ensure that crucial services are available.”The threat to the west from the Chinese government is “more brazen, more damaging” than ever before, FBI director Christopher Wray has said, accusing Beijing of stealing American ideas and innovation and launching massive hacking operations. The speech at the Reagan Presidential Library in California on Monday amounted to a stinging rebuke of the Chinese government just days before Beijing is set to occupy the global stage by hosting the Winter Olympics. In another salvo from the US towards China on Monday, billionaire George Soros said Chinese president Xi Jinping was the “greatest threat” to open society throughout the world. However, he added in his speech that the crisis engulfing China’s “unsustainable” property market could be the downfall of Xi, along with other mounting problems such as containing Omicron, the pursuit of total social control, and a plummeting birthrate. Wray’s remarks made clear that even as American foreign policy remains consumed by Russia-Ukraine tensions, the US continues to regard China as its biggest threat to long-term economic security. “When we tally up what we see in our investigations, over 2,000 of which are focused on the Chinese government trying to steal our information or technology, there’s just no country that presents a broader threat to our ideas, innovation, and economic security than China,” Wray said, according to a copy of the speech provided by the FBI. The bureau is opening new cases to counter Chinese intelligence operations every 12 hours or so, Wray said, with Chinese government hackers pilfering more personal and corporate data than all other countries combined “The harm from the Chinese government’s economic espionage isn’t just that its companies pull ahead based on illegally gotten technology. While they pull ahead, they push our companies and workers behind,” Wray said. “That harm – company failures, job losses – has been building for a decade to the crush we feel today. It’s harm felt across the country, by workers in a whole range of industries.” Chinese government officials have repeatedly rejected accusations from the US government, with the spokesperson for the embassy in Washington saying in July last year that Americans have made “groundless attacks” and malicious smears about Chinese cyber-attacks. The statement described China as a “staunch defender of cybersecurity”. The threat from China is hardly new, but it has also not abated over the past decade. “I’ve spoken a lot about this threat since I became director” in 2017, Wray said. “But I want to focus on it here tonight because it’s reached a new level – more brazen, more damaging, than ever before, and it’s vital, vital that all of us focus on that threat together.” ‘The system is built on credit’ Speaking at a Hoover Institution panel on China, Soros said the victory of open societies “can’t be taken for granted” in a world teetering on the edge of military aggression in Ukraine and Taiwan. However, Xi Jinping’s attempt to impose “total control” on China through a strategy of city-wide lockdowns, could jeopardise his chances of staying in power, Soros claimed, because they are “unlikely to work against a variant as infectious as Omicron”. Despite Xi’s firm control over the military and his tools of repression and surveillance, Soros said that it should not be assumed, given strong internal opposition, that the president will stay in power. He rules by “intimidation” and “nobody dares to tell him what he doesn’t want to hear”, he said. The Soros comments appeared timed to coincide with the run-up to the Winter Olympics, although several countries – including the US and UK – will not be sending any diplomats in protest at human rights abuses in Xinjiang and elsewhere. Soros also argued that the world’s second-biggest economy has become too dependent on using “unsustainable” property development to power growth since Xi took power in 2013. The sector that accounts for about 30% ofChinese economic output was faltering with high-profile failures such as Evergrande spreading throughout the industry, leaving “people’s confidence shaken” and the economy struggling, he said. Add in the disruption caused by trying to stamp out every case of the Covid-19, and a falling population that will lead to labour shortages, and China’s economic growth could not be taken for granted. “The model on which the real estate boom is based is unsustainable. People buying apartments have to start paying for them even before they are built. So, the system is built on credit. Local governments derive most of their revenues from selling land at ever-rising prices. The fall in prices already under way in many parts of China “will turn many of those who invested the bulk of their savings in real estate against Xi”, Soros claimed.New Zealand’s Catholic church has admitted that 14% of its diocesan clergy have been accused of abusing children and adults since 1950. The church released the figures at the request of the royal commission on abuse in care, set up in 2018 by prime minister Jacinda Ardern, who said the country needed to confront “a dark chapter” in its history, and later expanded it to include churches and other faith-based institutions. An interim report by the commission in December found up to a quarter of a million children, young people and vulnerable adults were physically and sexually abused in New Zealand’s faith-based and state care institutions from the 1960s to early 2000s. Te Rōpū Tautoko, the group that coordinates church engagement with the royal commission, sought and examined records from the country’s six Catholic dioceses and from 43 Catholic religious congregations (also known as religious institutes, orders or associations). The research included records of 428 Catholic parishes, 370 Catholic schools and 67 other care institutions. The allegations of abuse captured physical, sexual, and emotional or psychological abuse, and neglect. A failure to act on reports and facilitating abuse were also included. The extent of the allegations of abuse in the church in Aotearoa New Zealand had not been collated before now, said Catherine Fyfe, the chair of Te Rōpū Tautoko. “The Information Gathering Project was a major exercise involving dozens of people over two years, including searching paper files dating back 70 years in hundreds of places.” The findings found that since 1950, 1,350 children and 164 adults reported suffering abuse, with the age of a further 167 not established by the research. Of the 1,680, almost half (835) were reports alleging sexual harm against a child and 80% of all reports were related to children. Of the total, 687 relate to educational facilities, 425 to residential care, 228 to parishes and 122 to other locations, and the rest were at unidentified locations. Allegations were made against: 14% of Catholic diocesan clergy, who worked for a bishop and not a congregation, 8% of male congregational members (brothers or priests) and 3% of female congregation members (sisters or nuns). Most of the abuse reported happened in the 1960s and 1970s, with 75% occurring before 1990. Te Rōpū Tautoko said that the records will not represent all abuse that has happened in the care of the Catholic church, as the research covers only recorded reports alleging abuse. The Survivors Network of those Abused by Priests (Snap) said the actual scale of abuse was likely to be much higher based on the information it has from its members – “as high as twelvefold, given data indicating about only one in 12 have reported [abuse] in regions across New Zealand”. “The church has simply released what information it has recorded and this should not be seen as a comprehensive listing of all abuse that has occurred. The actual scale of sexual abuse is very difficult to measure.” Snap said while the church acknowledges that harm was done, there has been no substantial change in the church’s own internal training methods and culture. “In the handling of abuse complaints, its investigative processes are based on the balance of probabilities and are not complainant centred.” The statistics were “horrifying” and something the church was “deeply ashamed of”, said Cardinal John Dew, the president of the NZ Catholic Bishops Conference. “I am grateful that so much work has been done in researching the details and making them public. “As we continue to respond to the royal commission into abuse and we build a safer church for everyone, I firmly hope that facts like these will help us to face the sad reality. The church will learn from this and affirm its commitment to the work of safeguarding.”Labor says it would spend up to an extra $700m on a contentious new Snowy Hydro power plant in the Hunter Valley to equip it to run on green hydrogen made with renewable energy instead of a fossil fuel. Speaking in the NSW town of Kurri Kurri on Tuesday, Anthony Albanese said if Labor won the upcoming federal election it would ensure the publicly funded gas-fired plant announced by the Morrison government last May could run with 30% green hydrogen blended in once it started operation next year. The opposition leader said the Kurri Kurri plant would run entirely on hydrogen “as soon as possible”, with a goal of 2030, under a plan that would take the Coalition’s “flawed approach and make it work”. Labor’s climate change and energy spokesperson, Chris Bowen, said the party would allocate up to $700m in extra equity investment to Snowy Hydro, lifting the potential total cost from $600m to $1.3bn. He said Snowy Hydro documents indicated the 660MW plant could run 30% on hydrogen immediately, but this was not in the government’s plans. “We’ll ensure, working positively with Snowy Hydro, that will be the case,” Bowen said. Angus Taylor, the energy and emissions reduction minister, said the opposition’s plan was “economically incoherent”, and accused it of a “humiliating backflip” on the project aimed at shoring up support in the Hunter Valley, particularly in the Labor-held seats of Paterson and Hunter. Taylor said it would not yet be technically feasible to run the plant on hydrogen by 2030, and that the government’s goal was to first help bring down the cost of the fuel. He would not comment on when the plant would run on hydrogen under the Coalition. “There’s technical feasibility – and getting some hydrogen into the generator is technically feasible – (and) there’s economic feasibility, which is: who’s going to pay for it?” Albanese said Labor’s pledge would ensure a secure electricity supply while making the plant consistent with a shift to net zero emissions by 2050. “I see the Hunter as potentially a green hydrogen powerhouse for Australia and the world. Not just producing it here, but exporting it internationally,” he said. The Kurri Kurri plant was announced as part of what the Morrison government has called a “gas-fired recovery” from the pandemic. It would be a “peaking” plant, turned on only occasionally when needed at times of high demand and to fill gaps in the market. Snowy Hydro expects it will run at 2% of its full capacity annually, and to employ about 10 people once operational. Taylor has argued the Kurri Kurri plant is needed to avoid a significant increase in wholesale electricity prices when the Liddell coal-fired plant shuts in 2023, but analysts have said it is not needed to maintain electricity supply. Kerry Schott, the former head of the Energy Security Board, last year said a gas plant in the Hunter Valley did not “stack up” commercially given there were cheaper and cleaner alternatives in development. Labor argues running the plant on hydrogen will make it economically viable as it will be in use longer than gas, which releases significant emissions. It points to the billionaire Andrew Forrest’s proposal to build a 660MW gas-hydrogen generator at Port Kembla at an estimated cost of $1.3bn, including $30m in federal funding to help make it hydrogen compatible. Forrest’s company, Squadron Energy, has said the plant will be capable of running on 50% green hydrogen when first turned on, with a goal of increasing that to 100% by 2030. Debate over hydrogen in power generation But analysts have questioned whether hydrogen will ever be economically competitive as a fuel to generate electricity. Michael Liebreich, the founder of Bloomberg New Energy Finance, ranked it as among the least viable likely uses of hydrogen. Tony Wood, energy program director with the Grattan Institute, said the Kurri Kurri plant was never necessary to ensure the electricity supply once the Liddell coal plant closed as claimed, and was likely to deter private investment, but Labor’s pledge was pragmatic given contracts were likely to be signed before the federal election, expected in May. He said moving the plant from gas to hydrogen would not reduce emissions by much given the plant would only run when needed and, depending on how hydrogen costs evolved, it could be difficult for a government to get a return on additional investment of up to $700m. “I think whether this is a good use of public funding is something they would need to think about in government,” Wood said. The Greens leader Adam Bandt said even with a non-binding pledge to use hydrogen the project remained a “terrible idea”. “Gas is as dirty as coal. This power plant is Scott Morrison’s Trojan horse for more methane gas, and now Labor is backing it too,” he said. ‘Cynical political decision’ Bruce Robertson, a gas market analyst at the Institute for Energy Economics and Financial Analysis, said Labor had made a “cynical political decision that is not based on economics or the delivery of electricity to the Australian people at the cheapest possible cost”. “This project is poorly located on a gas line that cannot even supply it with sufficient gas and is now proposed to be powered by hydrogen, a technology that’s unproven and whose costs are unknown,” he said. “Make no mistake this is a decision based purely on politics and is not in the best interests of the Australian people.” Fiona Lee, from the Gas Free Hunter Alliance, said “not a single cent of public money” should be spent on a project using fossil fuels. “Any power station that burns more fossil fuels like gas is just worsening climate change,” she said. The backdrop to Labor’s announcement is the National party targeting Labor-held seats in the Hunter Valley, hoping to recruit voters disaffected by Labor’s more ambitious climate change commitments. Retiring Labor veteran Joel Fitzgibbon, who suffered a significant voter backlash in his Hunter electorate in the 2019 election, has spent much of this term warning Labor will lose another election if it pursues ambitious climate commitments at the expense of regional jobs in traditional industries.When the Danish film-maker Jonas Poher Rasmussen was 15, an Afghan refugee moved to his small village. Rumours circulated about how the boy, Amin, had got there. Some said he had walked all the way from Kabul, others that he had seen his whole family slaughtered. Rasmussen became the newcomer’s friend and confidant – Amin even came out to him as gay when they were teenagers – and their closeness endured into adulthood. When they both suffered bad break-ups in their 20s, for instance, Rasmussen went to stay with Amin; they refer to that period now as “the heartbreak summer”. He still didn’t know the truth about how his friend came to Denmark, though, so he did what any documentarist might do: he proposed making a film about him. Amin refused to reveal his identity on screen – but what if the film were animated? The result is Flee, which alternates between scenes of Rasmussen interviewing his friend, dramatisations of Amin’s perilous journey to Copenhagen via Moscow, and present-day interludes showing him househunting with his boyfriend in which the concept of settling down presents unique challenges for someone who has spent his life running. Aside from the occasional excerpt of archive footage – the war-scarred streets of Kabul, the unruly waves seen from a boat smuggling people across the Baltic – every frame of the movie is animated, most of it in a simple, straightforwardly realistic fashion that matches Amin’s narration. “Fundamentally, everything came from his testimony,” says the 40-year-old director. We are speaking via video call just before Christmas, at the end of a year that began with Flee (which is executive-produced by Riz Ahmed and the Game of Thrones star Nikolaj Coster-Waldau) winning the Grand Jury prize in the documentary section at Sundance. “It had to be a style of animation that supported what Amin said. It also had to represent authentically the streets of Kabul and Moscow in the 1980s rather than being stylised or otherworldly.” When Amin frolics as a child in his sister’s dresses or bops happily to the sound of A-ha, the mood is bright and buoyant. In moments of trauma, the animation grows nightmarish: faces appear without features, surroundings become scratchy and abstract. “Again, that came from the voice. When Amin started to talk about trauma, he spoke more slowly and incoherently. I knew we needed to see that reflected in the animation. It’s not about the reality any more, it’s about the emotion inside, the anger and fear.” Flee provides harrowing glimpses into the refugee experience but in places the movie is playful and funny. The young Amin, a devout fan of Jean-Claude Van Damme, imagines his idol winking at him in the middle of a fight scene from Bloodsport. Later, when Amin is squashed next to a dishy older man while being driven in a van by people smugglers, the soundtrack (Joyride by Roxette) seems to be expressing his taboo desires. The partial disguise of animation gives Amin, who is hiding behind an assumed name as well as a cartoon face, a way to tell his story in full for the first time. “He didn’t want people to pity him, or to see him only as a refugee,” Rasmussen explains. It’s impossible not to notice, though, that Amin isn’t the only person whose appearance has been altered on screen. The film-maker talking to me today looks nothing like the one who is shown interviewing his friend in Flee. “Ah, my non-blondness,” he says sheepishly, gesturing to his dark hair and beard. “I wanted to create a contrast between Amin and me so that people weren’t confused.” It also reflects the story’s unreliable nature, where rumour and subterfuge are gradually peeled away to reveal the truth. “What we’re seeing on screen doesn’t always match up with the real world.” He confesses to a more personal reason, too. “I didn’t want the audience to question where I’m from. In my own family, there is a refugee background. My maternal grandmother was born in Copenhagen but her parents, who were Jewish, had fled Russia in the pogroms. They applied for asylum here but were rejected, then moved on to Berlin. Being Jewish, my grandmother had to stand up every day in class with a yellow star on her chest. After that, they had to flee again – to England and then the US.” Rasmussen insists that he didn’t feel like an outsider himself during his childhood in Denmark, though there was one detail that set him apart. “All my friends were blond,” he says. “At 11 or 12, I wanted to be blond, too. And now I had the chance.” He looks bashful and boyish: a kid who made his wish come true. Flee was an emotional film to piece together. “I’d heard the rumours about Amin’s past so I expected it to be harrowing,” he says. “I was more surprised by how much it all still affected him. He wasn’t able to connect his past and his present so he didn’t feel like a whole person.” The most traumatic part for Rasmussen was sifting through footage from 1980s Afghanistan to find just the right snapshots of horror. “That was a tough few weeks,” he says. “I needed a lot of breaks. But we had to show that staying in Kabul was not an option. The kid you see lying in a pool of blood represents Amin if he had stayed.” In Rasmussen’s previous film, the live-action documentary What He Did, he used a different sort of framework to address horrifying events. That film told the story of Jens Michael Schau, who brutally murdered his partner, the novelist Christian Kampmann. In that instance, the rehearsal and performance of a new play about the killing provided a lens through which to explore the story on two levels of reality, just as animation does in Flee. Both films concern gay male outsiders – Schau admits he felt “inferior” in his partner’s literary circles, while Amin describes himself as being “ashamed and embarrassed” of being a refugee. The films also feature scenes set in gay bars. “I’m definitely drawn to outsider stories, to seeing how marginalised people cope in society,” says Rasmussen. Then a grin: “I’m not drawn to gay bar scenes. It’s just a coincidence I have two of those in a row.” Are the animation and the play-within-the-film ways of holding these subjects at an analytical distance? Quite the opposite, he argues. “When you deal with stories in the past, it’s always a struggle to make them feel current again. The setting up of the play in What He Did provides a natural structure. The same with the animation in Flee. It makes it all feel like it is happening now in front of our eyes.” And it is. There will be millions more people who are displaced like Amin in the coming years and decades, not only through war but also the climate emergency. “I hope it gives a human face to these stories,” he says. “When Amin arrived in Denmark, the rhetoric around refugees wasn’t so bad. In the last 20 years, it has become increasingly toxic. I want the film to show that being a refugee is not an identity – it’s a circumstance that can happen to anyone. Yes, Amin is a refugee but he’s so much more. He is an academic, a house owner, a husband.” How is he now? “He’s very well. He’s been travelling all his life and suddenly he had to stay at home like everybody else for the past few years. But he’s enjoyed it. He sends me photos of cats, and the flowers in the garden.” Does Rasmussen feel as if he has finally understood Amin after making Flee? “I don’t think you can get to the bottom of a living person,” he says. “We’re all works in progress. I do understand him a lot better, and I understand what it does to someone to lose your home and not be fully who you are. In Afghanistan, he couldn’t be openly gay. In Denmark, he couldn’t be honest about his past. All his life, parts of himself had to be hidden away. Flee is really the story of a man trying to find a place where he can be who he is.” Flee is released on 11 February.One of the world’s smallest countries, with a total area of just 54 sq km, the British overseas territory of Bermuda lies in the western Atlantic Ocean, 1,000 km east of North Carolina in the US. At a latitude of 32 degrees north of the equator, Bermuda has a subtropical climate, which combined with its oceanic position means there is not much variation in temperature between summer and winter. Summer maximums usually peak at about 30C, though occasionally range into the high 30s; in winter, they are around the low 20s, falling to the mid-teens at night. Humidity is generally high, especially at the height of summer, again thanks to Bermuda being surrounded by ocean; and rainfall is fairly high, with an annual total of just over 1,400 mm (55 inches) – comparable with parts of western Britain. However, the rain tends to be concentrated in downpours, so sunshine levels are also high, with five or six hours a day in winter and up to 10 hours a day in summer. With mostly guaranteed sunshine and warmth, it is little wonder that Bermuda is such a popular holiday destination for elderly Americans, often sporting the country’s signature long and baggy shorts. But they might wish to avoid visiting in the late summer and early autumn, when the remnants of hurricanes or tropical storms from further south can bring unsettled and windy weather.The Decade the Rich Won 9pm, BBC Two The second half of this undersold documentary continues to unpick what has happened to the UK economy since the 2008 financial crisis – picking up with a little thing called Brexit. Recalling a not-so-merry-go-round of resignations, risky decisions, shock statistics, tax scandals and billionaires blasted into space while cleaners have their wages capped, talking heads include Philip Hammond, George Osborne, Miatta Fahnbulleh, Margaret Hodge and Jeremy Corbyn. Hollie Richardson The Gilded Age 9pm, Sky Atlantic Catty dinner party swipes, meddling matchmaking and a constant parade of beautiful frocks – Julian Fellowes’ period drama continues to be an indulgence (with Christine Baranski’s sharp-tongued performance being the icing on the cake). The second episode sees an admirer of Marian (Louisa Jacobson) follow her to New York, while Bertha (Carrie Coon) goes to new lengths to forge her way into the circle. HR The Equalizer 9pm, Sky Witness Queen Latifah returns as Robyn McCall, formidable former CIA operative turned freelance NYC vigilante. Season two begins with Robyn contemplating quitting her covert double life, but a lethal bank heist keeps her in the game. Chris Noth co-stars as her old colleague Bishop (but is hastily written out later this run following the news of recent allegations). Graeme Virtue Kings of the Wood 9pm, Quest If you go down to the woods today, you’re in for a dose of heartwarming reality TV. In this new series, expert woodworkers craft bespoke furniture for deserving nominees. This week, Alex takes on a toolbox project for a school volunteer while Saf designs a drinks cabinet for a charitable chip shop owner. Henry Wong Toast of Tinseltown 10pm, BBC Two Toast signs up to appear in a western, only to end up in a mid-desert crash en route and basically appear in his very own western. A wild-eyed Aidan Turner and a flinty Benedict Wong are among the oddballs he meets on a desert journey that takes in sheriffs, saloons, rattlesnakes and, erm, goldfish. Alexi Duggins Lazy Susan 10.15pm, BBC Three The much-missed channel is back on TV from tonight, and what better way to celebrate than with this new female-led sketch series? Commissioned off the back of Freya Parker and Celeste Dring’s Edinburgh fringe show, it’s a short, full-throttle mix of the weird, the observational and the silly. HR Film choice O Brother, Where Art Thou? (Joel Coen and Ethan Coen, 2000), IMDb TV Enjoy spotting the references to Homer’s Odyssey or just revel in the silliest performance of George Clooney’s career – either way, the Coen brothers’ Great Depression-era comedy boasts a breadth of entertainment value. Clooney, John Turturro and Tim Blake Nelson play escaped convicts who hit the road to find supposed buried treasure. Chaplinesque comedy scenes vie with dramatic encounters with the likes of bank robber Baby Face Nelson, bluesman Tommy Johnson and the Ku Klux Klan – all backed by a cracking folk soundtrack – as the inept trio attempt to reach their goal. Simon WardellWhen Boris Johnson addressed MPs an hour after the release of Sue Gray’s redacted report, he will have hoped his apology would travel far beyond the Commons chamber and reached places like Tonge Fold, on the outskirts of Bolton. But the immediate reaction suggests the prime minister might be in trouble. “It’s just extremely disappointing and very frustrating. There’s no other words for it,” said Adele Warren, a Conservative councillor, after watching Johnson’s Commons statement with some of her party colleagues. “I’m a Conservative because I have Conservative values,” she said. “However, that doesn’t mean that I will blindly endorse acts that I think aren’t honourable, and I don’t think these actions have been honourable.” Warren, a cabinet member responsible for regeneration on Bolton council, said she now believed Johnson should resign. His premiership risked damaging the Conservatives in the upcoming local elections, she added. “I do think it has the potential to be extremely damaging for the local elections. “It’s really sad because Brexit is finally sorted, no matter how you felt about it; the vaccination rollout was brilliant; the way the economy didn’t tank … [but] unfortunately I don’t think you can have a mandate built on trust and respect when there’s a report like that.” Tonge Fold is a white working-class community in the constituency of Bolton North East, a former Labour stronghold won by the Conservatives in the 2019 election. It has the thinnest majority of all the red wall seats won by the Conservatives – just 378 votes – and its MP, Mark Logan, has been publicly critical of the prime minister over the “partygate” saga. So febrile was the atmosphere in Westminster last week that Logan used a live interview with Sky News to dispel rumours that he was preparing to defect to Labour. Days earlier he had told the television cameras: “The PM has a lot of convincing to do because I and my constituents are not convinced at the moment.” Around the corner from Logan’s constituency office, Angelika Searle was digesting the Gray report before the teatime rush at her Bavarian bakery, Pretzel &amp; Spelt. “You just can’t have different rules in Downing Street. It’s appalling,” she said. “You see Queen Elizabeth doing the right thing, following the rules, sitting alone, and it seems that none of these rules were applicable to the government itself.” Tommy Maloney, 30, said he was “fuming” to learn that government figures were attending lockdown-busting parties at a time when he could not visit his vulnerable mother or grandmother or properly celebrate birthdays and Christmas. “My gran is 84 and I wasn’t allowed to see her for her birthday and then we see the people in charge were on the piss? It’s a joke.” His friend Chris James, 31, said he had not been able to see his seven-year-old daughter for months due to the restrictions on households mixing. Boltonians have lived with some form of restrictions for most of the last 22 months, due to the enduringly high transmission rates in the town. “We’ve been locked down for nearly two years, we’ve gone through our savings, and the puppeteers can just do what they want,” James said. The mood was not unanimously bleak for Johnson, however. One shopkeeper, who refused to give her name in case her customers read the Guardian, said it was “a disgrace” that the prime minister’s critics were “sticking the knife in” and insisted he had done a good job handling the pandemic. “Leave him a-bloody-lone, for Christ’s sake,” she said. At AllBreeds pet shop, owner Denise Williams said she was not angry about partygate because “deep down I don’t think we should’ve had those rules for everybody anyway”. As the controversy rumbles on, with an ongoing police investigation and the full details of the Gray report yet to be revealed, it will be the views of party members in seats like Bolton North East that will worry Johnson the most. Warren, the Conservative councillor, said Gray’s initial findings called for a “drastic change” to the culture – and the occupants – of No 10: “The police investigation is right, but the way it’s been handled isn’t fair. There needs to be repercussions from it. People want answers.”Rob Piper’s world is grey, blue and black. The early morning sky is an inky blue-black as Piper drives his 44-tonne, 12-wheeled DAF XF lorry out of the Nursling industrial estate in Southampton. At this time of day – 6am – the endless grey roads consist mainly of lorries. Their metal bullbars flash a friendly smile in the halogen glare of each other’s headlights. After mind-numbing loops of concrete motorway, Piper finishes driving mid-afternoon. Lorry drivers used to do 16- or 18-hour shifts, but now they are monitored by a digital tachograph card; Piper inserts his into a slot above the dashboard. It records all the lorry’s data: speed, distance travelled, breaks taken, total driving hours. Piper may drive for a maximum of nine hours a day and he must take a 45-minute break after four and a half hours. He can work a maximum of 60 hours a week. (In normal circumstances, drivers can work for only 56 hours a week, but the government has extended this temporarily due to a shortage of drivers.) The data goes to his employer, the haulage firm Youngs, which has to produce it on request to the Driver and Vehicle Standards Agency, the government body that checks compliance. The law is strict, with good reason. “You’re driving a killing machine,” says Piper. Long-distance lorry driving has a narcoleptic effect, especially after lunch. Lorry drivers swap photos of bad accidents like trading cards. Piper was sent a particularly graphic one recently. In it, a lorry half-hangs from a motorway bridge. He shuddered when he saw it. *** The run-up to Christmas is always a wearying time for the UK’s lorry drivers, but 2021 was exceptionally busy. All year, the haulage industry struggled with vacancies, mostly down to an exodus of European drivers after Brexit, but also because of Covid. It is estimated that there is a shortage of more than 85,000 drivers in the UK. Those who remain have been left to pick up the slack. “We’re seeing chronic staff shortages,” says Rod McKenzie, the managing director for policy at the Road Haulage Association. “And we have an ageing driver population. When you have an ageing population of workers and they’re not being refreshed by younger people, you’re in a bad place.” Youngs has lost many drivers; all the haulage companies have. About 20 of its 40 drivers across four depots returned to EU countries, including Romania, Poland, the Czech Republic, Hungary and Bulgaria, post-Brexit. To retain staff, pay has risen by about 30% across the sector. “To be perfectly candid, drivers’ wages needed to go up,” says Rob Hollyman, a director at Youngs. “They were kept low by the consumer demanding cheap prices and so costs were cut everywhere.” Even with these pay increases, drivers have left to work for the supermarkets, which typically offer higher wages; some supermarket drivers are paid more than £53,000 a year. But Piper isn’t tempted. It is difficult work, with multiple drop-offs throughout the day, and you have to work weekends. Piper prefers to have some time at home with his wife and their three dogs, Tilly, Lulu and Bella. From Monday to Friday, Piper is alone, with only the ashes of his chihuahua, Toby, for company. Toby swings from the roof of the cab in a small felt bag, with a heart embroidered on it. “He’s with me all the time, that little man,” he says. The best bit of Piper’s week is Friday afternoon, when he gets back and the dogs jump all over him, jealous for his attention. On the road again … Piper sets off from Southampton for an 11am delivery in Swindon. Piper is old enough to remember how things were before the tachograph cards (the 59-year-old has been a driver for 33 years). There was no heating in winter, nor air-conditioning in summer; no kettles or fridge-freezers or curtains to block out the sun. The engine was so loud that the seat shook. (Piper is partially deaf; his doctor says it is because of the job.) The lorries were manual and the rubber housing around the gear stick always had holes in it, which drivers would bind with jumpers to stop the cold coming in. (All newer models, including Piper’s, are automatic.) There were no beds in the cab, so drivers slept across the seats at night. They never wore seatbelts. Many still don’t. When asked, Piper says that things are better now, safer, and he means it. But in his heart he prefers how things were before – before the tachograph cards, the medical he must pass every three years, the 35 hours of training every five years to renew his Driver Certificate of Professional Competence, all of which he has to pay for from his £700-a-week wages. “Before, you got in a truck and drove,” Piper says. “Now, you’re dictated on the hours you can do, and where you can go, and what you can do. There’s just no fun in it any more.” But these restrictions demonstrably work: lorry driving is safer than it was a decade ago. There were 54 deaths of goods-vehicle occupants, a category that includes large- and heavy-goods vehicles, in 2020, down 13% from 2010. Monday to Friday, when he is out on the road, Piper sleeps in his lorry. If he is unlucky, he has to park wherever he can. Industrial estates are usually OK: there are toilets and security gates, meaning Piper doesn’t have to worry about thieves siphoning off his diesel or jacking open the back of the vehicle and making off with his cargo. If he is very unlucky, he has to pull over in a layby. He sleeps badly on those nights, waking at the slightest noise. But today, an unexceptional Monday in early October, Piper is lucky. He ends up at Eling Wharf in Southampton, where Youngs rents space for its drivers. There are toilets and showers, as well as a small office in a repurposed shipping container, painted blue, with a kettle, a fridge and a microwave. Piper drinks tea and looks out across the industrial estate. He sees a dishwater sky reflected in brackish puddles around the site. He sees workmen preparing tomorrow’s loads and carrying out maintenance on a vehicle. Without its trailer, the lorry seems exposed, like a great metal crab missing its carapace. By now, 4pm, what little light remains is mud-coloured. The waiting game … with delays in Swindon holding up the unloading of his delivery, Piper takes the opportunity to check his calendar and rest his eyes. After Piper has finished his dinner, he returns to his lorry. He climbs six feet into the cab, which is immaculately clean. He takes off his boots and leaves them on the step, careful to shut them in when he closes the door, so they don’t fall out. He closes the curtains across the windscreen and undresses. He puts the heating on. He calls his wife, to let her know that he is OK. He always speaks to her twice a day, at 12.30pm and 7.30pm. She worries otherwise. Afterwards, he lies across the single bed behind the seats and turns on the flatscreen TV at the end of his bed. He likes having the TV on – it feels like company. He watches Emmerdale first, then Coronation Street and EastEnders. By Corrie, Piper is usually half-asleep. By EastEnders, he is definitely asleep. As he sleeps, the tachograph uploads his data for the day. The computer floods the cab with a bright light that other drivers complain about, but Piper is used to it; he doesn’t stir. Staff shortages aren’t confined to the drivers. More often than not, when Piper arrives at his destination, there are no workers available to unload his cargo. On another Monday later in October, Piper drives from Southampton to Birmingham with a full cargo of baby car seats. He gets to the warehouse at 11am, as requested; Piper takes pride in his job and is rarely late. There are no staff available to empty the lorry. Piper waits until 2pm, but there are still no staff free, so he returns to Southampton. Man’s best friend … the ashes of Piper’s chihuahua, Toby, hang in his cab. He drives back the next day and waits all afternoon. Still no staff. He spends the night in Birmingham, meaning that the firm has to pay demurrage, the fee set after the three-hour window for unloading has expired. There is a kebab van on the industrial estate where he is sleeping, which he considers, but, on account of his diabetes, Piper makes do with a microwaveable hot pot. Finally, on Wednesday, the car seats are unloaded and Piper goes back to Southampton. This is the life of a lorry driver: endless waiting. Piper waits at Southampton docks to be assigned to a loading bay. He waits for his trailer – or box, as he calls it – to be lifted on to his lorry by a straddle carrier, a freight-carrying vehicle that looks like a giant stamp. He waits at his destination for his cargo to be unloaded. When he started, the waiting irritated him. “You get used to it,” he says. While he waits, Piper flicks through his favourite truck magazines: Commercial Motor; Truck &amp; Driver. Sometimes he naps, although he always wakes up when he feels the lorry is almost empty; he can tell from how it shifts on the wheels. He speaks on his phone to his friends at work – Piper calls them the container boys. (Lorry driving is an overwhelmingly male profession: of the 315,000 registered HGV drivers in the UK, just 2,200 are female.) There is Alan, on whom Piper likes to play practical jokes, and Lloyd, who is obsessed with unusual food innovations: jam-flavoured teabags, lemon drizzle digestive biscuits, roast potato crisps. Lorry drivers tend to speak about one of five things: routes, traffic, schedules, other drivers and food. If Piper discovers a useful titbit – perhaps a bakery he likes to stop at has closed down, or a client told him something interesting as they were unloading his lorry – he passes it on to Alan and Lloyd carefully for inspection, like a piece of ancient pottery at a dig. “There is a lorry-driver grapevine,” Piper says. This camaraderie – the inane, meandering chats – makes the job tolerable. Lorry driving is lonely work and the job has an emotional price. “I know I missed my kids growing up,” says Piper, who has three children and five grandchildren. “I only saw them weekends.” *** October passes in a bleary circuit of motorway service stations and harried clients who complain about shipping costs and staff shortages. And then, at 6.07am on 11 November, a rent in the fabric of Piper’s everyday life. A 54-year-old cyclist dies after colliding with a lorry at the entrance to Southampton docks, causing tailbacks all day. Through conversations with the other boys in the yard, Piper gleans the particulars of the crash: the spot where the cyclist became affixed to the lorry; the stretch of road along which he was dragged; and the place where the driver made his grisly discovery. Southampton docks are the beating heart of the south coast’s haulage operation. Here, gleaming cars, children’s toys and electrical appliances arrive from all over the world via inconceivably huge container ships. They are then carried by lorry on the M3, north-east to London, or the A31, westwards to Totnes, or the A34, north to Stoke-on-Trent. The container boys … Piper has a cup of tea with his friend Alan (top) and catches up with another colleague. But, in the past 18 months, Southampton docks have often been congested. When Piper drives into the docks, they are backed up. He might wait there for two, even three, hours. The delays are worst in the afternoon. As he waits for his box to be loaded on to his lorry, Piper speaks to Alan and Lloyd on the phone. They gripe about the delays and wonder if it is down to Covid-induced staff shortages, as people are off sick and self-isolating. To make matters worse, fuel prices have increased by nearly 20%. In June 2021, Youngs paid 99p a litre for fuel; by December, it was £1.17. “We have to pass it on to the consumer,” says Hollyman. “We have no other option.” (No one has managed to manufacture an electric HGV lorry, because of the fuel power needed to pull heavy loads, while the UK is not, in general, well set up for rail freight.) *** Late in November, the lorry-driver grapevine yields more fruit. Three curtain-side lorries have their loads stolen during the night at Fleet services, on the M3 near Basingstoke, Hampshire. The trailers on curtain-side lorries are covered only by sheets of tarpaulin, affixed with ropes, which are easy to cut through. Piper hates driving curtain-side vehicles for this reason, especially around Christmas, when thieves surmise, correctly, that the lorries are full of valuable goods. Piper was robbed six years ago, in the middle of the night. They took £180,000 worth of clothes. He felt the vehicle moving, but thought it was because of the soft ground on which he was parked, as well as the vibrations from passing traffic. Something felt off, though, so he pulled back the curtain on the passenger side of the cab. A man was standing there. He put one finger on his lips and slid another across his throat. Ten accomplices unloaded the van. Piper called the police, but they said there was nothing they could do. Afterwards, a doctor signed him off work for a week and prescribed him anti-anxiety medication. “It frightened me to bits,” he says. The stress is constant. “It’s always in the back of your mind,” he says. “Where will I park? Will I be safe? When I wake up, I look out of my mirrors to see if there’s anyone around. I don’t want to go through that again. We’re targets all the time.” Many industrial estates are painted with double yellow lines, so lorry drivers are forced to park in laybys, where they sleep fitfully, fearful of being attacked and robbed. “People want their goods, but they don’t want you to park anywhere,” says Piper. “It’s horrible.” Home from home … unlike in the old days, Piper’s cab is fitted with a bed, a TV and heating. It is for this reason that the sector struggles to recruit staff, says McKenzie. “Conditions are poor,” he says. “There’s very little safe and secure lorry parking. There are few gold-standard lorry parks. And drivers are fed up with it.” In October, the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, announced £32.5m in funding for roadside facilities. “It costs around £40m to build a brand new lorry park, so he’s talking about upgrades to existing parks,” says McKenzie. “But when you see some of the parks we’ve got, they need a lot more than a brush-up.” This is the stuff that really grinds down Piper, that makes him wish there was something else he could do. This and the lack of respect. Most clients are polite, but some can be awful. They refuse to let Piper use the toilets, or berate him for being late, even if he has explained that it is not his fault the docks were backed up. During the first lockdown, things were different. Families waved at him from motorway bridges. “We were loved by the public because we delivered everything,” he says. “Now that it’s over, we get treated dreadfully. But if it wasn’t for us, you wouldn’t have the clothes on your back. The food in your house. Your car.” A man once came to Piper’s house, in a village near Andover in Hampshire. He was campaigning against a distribution depot that a supermarket was planning to build nearby. He told Piper: “We don’t want lorries coming through here.” Piper was appalled. “I said: ‘Hold on, I’m a lorry driver. I’m fed up with people saying they don’t need lorries. How do you think you get your stuff?’” *** By December, Piper is working punishingly long hours. At this time of year, he normally does a 13- or 14-hour shift, made up of his nine-hour drive time, but also mandatory breaks and waiting time. One Thursday morning, he has to wake up at 3.30am, in the Eling yard. Everything is dark and depressing. “It’s cold out,” he says. “You’re in there nice and warm. You pull the curtain back and look outside and think: ‘I don’t want to get up this morning.’” It is a wrench to leave his plastic-moulded bedroom, where he sleeps more soundly than he does at home. Piper brews a cup of tea, makes his bed, then walks to the shower block through the gloom. Some drivers don’t bother, but Piper is fastidious about his personal hygiene. On his return, he checks the lorry, inspecting the wipers, tyres and brakes with a torch. He does the 10-minute drive to Nursling, listening to BBC Radio 2, before finding his load, strapping it down and collecting his paperwork from the office. Then it is on to Birmingham, where he has three drops. Collections in Newbury and Basingstoke will follow. ‘You’re snacking all the time’ … Piper tucks into a sandwich and a packet of crisps. Often, his only options for lunch are fast food or ready meals. Lunch is a bacon, egg and sausage sandwich from a van in a layby outside Birmingham. He had planned to buy only a cup of tea, until he smelled the bacon. A pot belly is the lorry driver’s inheritance, like the salaryman’s gold watch or the Olympian’s medal cabinet. Lorry drivers are more likely than average to be obese, have diabetes, hypertension, heart disease, cancer, problems sleeping and musculoskeletal disorders. The average life expectancy of a male lorry driver is 76.6; for male doctors and lawyers, it is 82.5. It is the sedentary nature of the job, but also the fact that it is almost impossible to eat healthily on the road. Before, there would be truck stops, which served home-cooked meals, but most have closed down; Piper’s only options come lunchtime are usually McDonald’s, Burger King and KFC, or a salt-filled ready meal. His doctor tells him to go for a walk in the evening to get some exercise, but that is unrealistic: he can’t leave his lorry unattended. Besides, he is always knackered. Piper’s friends have had heart attacks while driving; he had a stroke in 2000 and didn’t work for 18 months. “It’s the style of life,” he says. “You sit here and you get bored. You think: I’m hungry, I’ll have a sandwich. I’ll have a bag of crisps. You’re snacking all the time. You drink tea until it comes out of your ears.” *** Late in December, things go mad. “Everyone wants their containers and their deliveries urgently,” says Piper. He does a job in London on a Friday. The traffic is unbelievable. It takes nearly an hour to travel 15 miles (24km) around the North Circular. By the time he gets home, it is nearly 8pm. He is working right up until Christmas. On 20 December, he drives from Southampton to Wellington in Somerset. He leaves Nursling at 6am with a cargo of wicker baskets, crammed into the back with not an inch to spare. Passing other lorry drivers, he has the feeling of being part of a pod of friendly whales. In Wellington, the client wants to talk about the supply chain crisis. His shipping container costs have gone up from $2,000 (£1,490) to $15,000 (£11,160) in just 18 months, partly due to increased labour costs since Brexit, but also due to the supply chain crisis. The client runs a garden furniture business that is foundering: just this year, he had to return a million pounds’ worth of orders, because it was impossible to import the stock. He had two containers on the Ever Given, the container ship that got stuck in the Suez canal in March 2021, disrupting global trade for months. “This is the picture across the world,” says Prof Edward Anderson, a supply chain expert at Imperial College London. Because globalised supply chains are run so efficiently, when something goes wrong – like the Ever Given – the impact can be catastrophic. The pandemic, too, has disrupted global trade. “Covid sits behind many of these disruptions,” says Anderson. “The pingdemic. People not being able to go to work.” Covid has also created an international shortage of computer chips, which has had knock-on effects for the haulage sector, as these chips are used in automobiles. Youngs should have had 12 lorries delivered in November 2021, but it received only eight. All of the major lorry manufacturers have closed their books for 2022: you can’t get a new lorry now unless you have already ordered it. As Piper waits for the client to unload the lorry, he calls Alan and then Lloyd. They chat about the traffic and their routes. Piper relays some gossip he heard from the owner of the garden centre about how he came to buy the business. Later, in the twilight of the Eling yard, Piper wrings out the story a third time for his colleague Steve. “Is that right?” Steve says. Today has been a good day. Friendly clients, no traffic. Back in Eling, Piper gets to sleep. But, as he approaches the culmination of his more than 30-year career as a lorry driver, in all honesty, Piper has regrets. He wishes he had paid attention at school, instead of bunking off every Friday to work on a milk float, and got the grades to do something else, like become a truck mechanic. “I’m a fool,” he says. “But it’s the only thing I know how to do.” ‘All I wanted to do was to drive a truck’ … Piper in his cab. Yet, when his stroke took him off the road, he was miserable. “I thought that was it,” says Piper. “My lorry-driving days were over. And my life was over, in a way.” Lorry driving is his life’s work – and his passion. “It’s sad, really,” he says. “Ever since I was at school, all I wanted to do was to drive a truck.” When Piper says that sometimes he hates being a lorry driver, what he means is that he hates how the job has changed. Piper is nostalgic for the days when lorry drivers had the freedom to drive wherever they liked, for however long they wanted, rules and regulations be damned. He has always been like this: even when he was at school. “I don’t like change,” he says. “I like things to be the way they were.” The best days, the days that really stick out, are the ones where people are kind. Ordinary human kindness takes on an outsized importance in Piper’s memory: he collects these encounters and turns them over in his mind. Take the time he was doing a house removal in Devon. It was a bucolic summer’s day. He drove through a tiny village, past cottages entwined with roses and an old man smoking a pipe. When he got to the house, it turned out he had arrived a day early, by mistake. The client was a woman in her 30s. They sat out together on the patio, chatting and drinking tea. He could hear the church bells ringing. It was lovely. But these days are rare. For the most part, lorry drivers are treated with disdain. Motorists cut them up. Nimbys campaign against proposed lorry parks, as if drivers should not be able to eat and sleep in comfort and safety. Environmentalists shudder at the emissions, while wearing clothes and eating food conveyed to them by lorry. “Lorry drivers are essential workers,” says McKenzie. “We told them that during Covid. But we have not done a lot as a nation to back that up.” There are so many people like Piper, all over the country. They bring everything from our fuel to our medical supplies and, for the most part, they do it quietly, without recognition. “Lorry drivers are the forgotten side of the supply chain jigsaw,” says Anderson. “Consumers see the last mile and the people who deliver parcels to our front doors. But they don’t necessarily see the lorry drivers.” After an exhausting week, Piper drives home on Christmas Eve, past houses where all the presents – and the turkey – arrived via lorry. He lets himself in. The dogs jump all over him, mad with excitement. A few days’ respite before Piper starts up the engine again. Who else would bring us the freight of Britain? • This article was amended on 10 February 2022. A reference to the Vehicle and Operator Services Agency should have been to the Driver and Vehicle Standards Agency.Thousands of children face an increased risk of catching deadly measles in England, senior health officials have warned, as “very worrying” figures reveal MMR vaccine rates have fallen to their lowest level in a decade. The UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) and the NHS will launch a joint appeal on Tuesday urging parents and guardians to ensure their children have had their measles, mumps and rubella (MMR) vaccines – as well as other routine jabs – before starting school. Since the start of the Covid-19 pandemic in March 2020, there has been “a significant drop” in the number of children getting MMR jabs and other childhood vaccines, UKHSA said. Between July and September last year, the most recent figures available, just 88.6% of children had had their first MMR dose by the age of two while only 85.5% had had both doses at the age of five. It means that more than one in 10 children aged five are not up to date with their two doses of MMR vaccine. The World Health Organization (WHO) says 95% of children need to be vaccinated to keep measles away. Measles is highly contagious so even a small decline in MMR uptake could lead to a rise in cases, UKHSA said. With international travel resuming, it is also more likely that measles will be brought in from countries that have higher levels of the disease. “Even a small drop in vaccine coverage can have a big impact on population immunity levels and lead to outbreaks,” said Dr Vanessa Saliba, a consultant epidemiologist at UKHSA. Measles can lead to complications such as ear infections, pneumonia, and inflammation of the brain, which require hospitalisation and on rare occasions can lead to long-term disability or even death. “It is very worrying that more than one in 10 children are not fully protected against measles by the time they start school,” said Prof Helen Bedford, professor of children’s health at the UCL Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health. “There has been so much focus on Covid over the past two years, but we mustn’t forget about measles, which has not gone away.” All children are invited for their first MMR vaccine on the NHS aged one, with the second dose given when they are three years and four months. The NHS says it has continued to prioritise routine vaccinations throughout the pandemic. However, some parents whose children haven’t been vaccinated against MMR have said they didn’t realise the NHS was still offering appointments, or they didn’t want to burden the NHS, according to UKHSA. Separate research commissioned by the Department of Health and Social Care and UKHSA, conducted by Censuswide, shows many parents are unaware of the risks measles poses to their unvaccinated children. Of 2,000 parents and guardians of children aged five or under surveyed, almost half (48%) were unaware measles can lead to serious complications such as pneumonia and brain inflammation. Just four in 10 (38%) were aware that measles can be fatal. Dr Nikki Kanani, medical director for primary care at NHS England, said: “It is incredibly important that all parents and guardians ensure their child is up to date with their routine vaccinations, including MMR, as these vaccines give children crucial protection against serious and potentially deadly illnesses and stop outbreaks in the community. “If your child has missed a vaccination, please contact your GP practice to book an appointment as soon as you can to make sure they have maximum protection against disease.”Treasury officials have quietly introduced a new “super tax” to deter energy company owners from cashing out lucrative contracts for gas bought in advance before leaving their supply business to go under. The government quickly pushed through the new laws late last week to counter industry concerns that Stephen Fitzpatrick, the founder of Ovo Energy, could use his almost two-thirds stake in the company to liquidate its long-term gas contracts and exit the supply market with a hefty profit. Energy industry sources believe this loophole may have already been used by BP, which owned almost a quarter of Pure Planet before pulling the plug on the challenger brand last October. It is understood to have sold the energy it bought in advance, using the profit to pay back loans to BP. Under the government’s new super-levy, called the public interest business protection tax, a 75% tax will be imposed on any future windfall that an energy company shareholder could hope to make by cashing out gas contracts while leaving millions without a supplier. Many of the suppliers that have gone bust did not have long-term energy contracts, known as hedges, in place. However, those that did buy gas in advance, before markets reached record highs last year, have found the value of the contracts has rocketed. Ovo Energy said the new levy had its support, and that it had “been clear for some time that action was needed” to help protect households and taxpayers. The Guardian understands that the tax was ushered in to block any financial incentive for energy company owners to make a fortune off the loophole, and to provide a “safety net” for household bill payers and the public purse that would otherwise have to bail out customers left behind. Consumers in England, Scotland and Wales could already be on the hook for a total of £3.2bn to cover the cost of finding a new supplier for the 2 million households affected by the collapse of energy suppliers since the start of September, and for the further 1.7 million customers of Bulb Energy, who have been handed to a special administrator appointed to handle the large-scale collapse. Treasury documents said there was “a potential risk” that some energy suppliers and their shareholders might monetise large profits on assets such as hedges “for their own benefit, leaving the government and ultimately the wider public to be landed with the costs of ensuring the continuity of supplies of energy to customers”. “The government considers it unacceptable that, whilst consumers across the UK face rising energy bills, it would be possible for some companies and their shareholders to exploit this situation to the detriment of taxpayers and end consumers,” the documents added. A spokesperson for Ovo Energy said: “We support this, and other recent announcements intended to strengthen the resilience of the UK energy retail market.” However, the company added that it was “still not clear on what – if anything – the government will do to help support vulnerable customers” ahead of the looming hike to the UK’s energy cap which is expected next week. Energy bills are expected to soar to almost £2,000 a year from April under the regulator’s energy price cap – up from an average of £1,277 this winter – in the steepest bill increase since the cap was introduced in 2019. The government has been in talks to soften the blow to households but no measures have been agreed. “We hope this announcement is a sign of further initiatives to come to resolve the current energy crisis,” the Ovo spokesperson said.Authorities in Cyprus are being urged to launch a fresh inquiry into a gang rape complaint by a British woman after the country’s supreme court acquitted her of fabricating the claim that she had been sexually assaulted at a holiday resort. The 21-year-old’s legal team said it was incumbent on the island’s police force to reopen the investigation in the wake of the landmark ruling. “It’s our next big battle,” said the human rights lawyer Nicoletta Charalambidou. The three-member tribunal threw out the case on Monday, acknowledging that the Briton had not been given a fair trial. The verdict was announced two years after the then teenager was found guilty of making up the gang rape allegation and handed a suspended four-month sentence for fomenting public mischief. Michael Polak, who had coordinated the appeal against the conviction as head of the legal aid group Justice Abroad, told the Guardian it was critical a new investigation be initiated if justice was to be properly rendered as the initial inquiry had breached standards. “Cypriot authorities now have a duty to properly investigate the rape complaint because it is clear that was never done,” he said. “We want the investigation to be transferred to a different police force so that all the evidence in this case can be considered fairly and dispassionately.” The verdict, he said, had been achieved “against the odds.” Persefoni Panayi, the British-born president of the supreme court, had upheld the appeal in favour of the conviction being dropped, although jurists were divided, with one voting against. The Derbyshire student, who is attending university in the UK, had described in detail how she was gang-raped by up to 12 Israelis in a hotel room in Ayia Napa in July 2019. She had threatened to go to the European court of human rights if the bid to clear her name failed. The guilty verdict, handed down by the district court judge Michalis Papathanasiou, had hinged on the Briton allegedly admitting that she had falsified her original complaint. Her defence team had argued that the handwritten confession, which formed the basis of the prosecution case, was extracted under duress, in the absence of a lawyer, or translator, after more than seven hours of police questioning. Papathanasiou had repeatedly refused to allow the defendant, as she stood in the dock, to speak about the assault, saying: “This is not a rape trial.” The retraction allowed the alleged assailants, who were aged between 15 and 22 and included the sons of senior Israeli officials, to return home immediately. The woman’s status changed overnight, from victim to suspect, and she spent four weeks in Nicosia general prison before being ordered to remain on the Mediterranean island for court proceedings that would drag on for six months. The student, who has never been publicly named, was not in Nicosia to hear the news on Monday. Her lawyers described her as still being too traumatised to travel. But in a statement, her mother responded to the outcome, saying: “It is a great relief we hear that the authorities in Cyprus have recognised the flaws in their legal process. Whilst this decision doesn’t excuse the way she was treated by the police, the judge or those in authority, it does bring with it the hope that my daughter’s suffering will at least bring positive changes in the way victims of crime are treated.”Oti Mabuse has spoken out about the “racially abusive” and “fat-shaming” comments she received after performing on BBC’s Strictly Come Dancing. Mabuse, who has appeared as a professional on the show since 2015, said she used the abuse as fuel to carry on and show young girls that “anything is possible”. “I’ve never really spoken about it because I’ve tried for so long to think about it this way: I work on a show that 10 million people love; if 10 or 100 people aren’t nice to me, that is not representative of everyone else’s views,” she said in the Radio Times. “To get tweeted or receive a message in my inbox being racially abusive, or fat-shaming me, is horrible. But it’s written by a person who can’t even face themselves in the mirror. “The hard stuff that I’ve been through, with the racism and discrimination, is proof that people still have a lot to learn. The more hate I receive the more of a reason it is to carry on doing my job. I have to show young girls that anything is possible. I have to fight, and be strong.” Born in South Africa, Mabuse, 31, studied civil engineering before moving to Germany to dance. The Latin American and ballroom dancer, who won the South African Latin American championship eight times, was crowned Strictly winner both in 2019 with actor Kelvin Fletcher and in 2020 with comedian Bill Bailey. Over the last year, Mabuse has taken a seat on the judging panels of BBC One’s The Greatest Dancer, ITV’s The Masked Singer and most recently, ITV’s Dancing on Ice – leading to speculation that she may not return to the Strictly ballroom. She said that growing up and moving from South Africa has remained difficult, however. “When you do something good, it’s not good enough because you’re black. Some people say you’re on a show because the channel needs to tick a box. Which means you’re not worthy of being there. But I think that just shows where people who make those comments are in their own lives. Being black makes me special.” Her new BBC radio show, Oti Mabuse’s Dancing Legends, explores the extraordinary people who have changed the course of dance, including Fred Astaire and Raven Wilkinson. Mabuse said her sister Motsi, also a dancer and Strictly judge, was her own “dancing legend”. The show, she added, was partly inspired by Bill Bailey, who taught her to “go back in time and find the root of the purpose of what you’re doing”. She also emphasised the power of dance to push boundaries, pointing to last year’s Strictly competitors, Rose Ayling-Ellis and Giovanni Pernice, and John Whaite and Johannes Radebe as proof of that point (Ayling-Ellis was the first deaf contestant on the show, and Whaite and Radebe the first all-male couple).Top story: Police investigating 12 events Morning everyone. I’m Martin Farrer and these are the top stories today. Boris Johnson has promised to clean up his act and reform the workings of Downing Street as he attempts to shore up his premiership after Sue Gray said lockdown-era parties at No 10 were “hard to justify” amid “failures of leadership and judgment”. The prime minister ran the gauntlet of his own angry backbenchers in the Commons yesterday following the publication of a redacted version of the civil servant’s investigation into the scandal, in which she also criticised the culture of “excessive alcohol” at the heart of government. Several MPs made damaging interventions, including his predecessor, Theresa May. Despite an apology to his MPs in a private meeting at the Commons later and pledges to reform his style of government – “I get it and I will fix it,” he told them – questions about partygate could continue to dog him for months. A party in Boris and Carrie Johnson’s flat is one of 12 events now being investigated by police, and officers have been handed 300 pictures of alleged parties. The ongoing investigation means that Gray could not release her whole report. In an effort to calm backbenchers, Johnson said he would publish it in full once the police inquiry is complete. Many Conservative MPs have reached the limit of their tolerance of Johnson’s leadership – like frogs in boiling water, according to one – although the prime minister has so far avoided the string of ministerial resignations that did for May. Much will still depend on whether voters in marginal seats such as Bolton North East keep faith. One said it was a “joke” that Johnson was still in office, while a Tory councillor said the matter was still not closed. “People want answers,” she said. Some of our writers, including Nesrine Malik, Frances Ryan and Katy Balls, say what they think should happen next. Here’s how the other papers covered the dramatic day. * * * ‘Nowhere to hide’ – Boris Johnson will try to shift the focus from parties to foreign policy when he flies to Ukraine today to meet Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelensky amid ongoing tension with Russia. Liz Truss was meant to go with him but will be staying at home after contracting Covid. Earlier the foreign secretary warned that key supporters of Vladimir Putin will be targeted by UK sanctions if he invades Ukraine. The Russian president’s allies would have nowhere to hide their assets if an invasion went ahead, she said. In New York, a Russian diplomat told a meeting of the UN security council that Ukraine could “destroy itself” if it disregarded peace agreements in the region. The US secretary of state, Tony Blinken, is due for talks with his counterpart, Sergei Lavrov, today. * * * Vaccine U-turn – Sajid Javid has announced a U-turn on an order forcing all NHS staff in England to get vaccinated against Covid. The health secretary hopes the decision will prevent an exodus of much-needed staff and was made three days before Thursday’s deadline for unvaccinated NHS workers who had face-to-face contact with patients to have their first dose or be dismissed. It followed figures showing 92,000 Covid cases were reported for England on Monday, a steep rise on the day before, after reinfections were included in the statistics for the first time. * * * MMR stalls – Amid the ongoing debate about the Covid vaccine, senior health officials in England have reported a “very worrying” fall in the number of children having the MMR vaccine, leaving thousands at increased risk of potentially deadly measles. They will launch a campaign today to rally uptake of the vaccine, which guards against measles, mumps and rubella. Between July and September last year, just 88.6% of children had had their first MMR dose by the age of two while only 85.5% had had both doses at the age of five, well short of the 95% needed to keep measles at bay. * * * Reporting toll – Journalists in Mexico have responded with despair after the murder of a fourth reporter this year. Roberto Toledo was shot dead by three gunmen yesterday afternoon in a carpark in the city of Zitácuaro, where he reported for a local news outlet, Monitor Michoacán. “Exposing corruption led to the death of one of our colleagues,” said Armando Linares, the director of Monitor Michoacán. “We don’t carry weapons. We only have a pen and a notebook to defend ourselves.” * * * Wordle play – The viral word game Wordle has been bought by the New York Times for an undisclosed seven-figure sum. Its creator, Reddit engineer Josh Wardle, said he was “thrilled” with the deal for the game which gives players six guesses to determine a five-letter word that changes every day. The soothing daily puzzle has become a hit since its launch, quickly attracting hundreds of thousands, then millions, of players. Today in Focus podcast: can Johnson survive? Sue Gray’s report into Covid lockdown rule-breaking in Downing Street has finally been published. Jessica Elgot analyses what it means for Boris Johnson’s future Lunchtime read: ‘I drive a killing machine’ With so much focus on supply chains and the problems of recruiting lorry drivers, our reporter joins trucker Rob Piper to find out about his life on the road – from long hours, fear of being robbed, and living for the weekend. Sport Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang has passed a medical and is due to be confirmed as a Barcelona player on a free transfer from Arsenal on Tuesday morning after several hours of negotiations on deadline day. Frank Lampard marked his first day as Everton manager by signing Donny van de Beek from Manchester United and securing the audacious permanent transfer of Dele Alli from Tottenham. The latest move in golf’s global power struggle will take place on Tuesday, when the Saudi Arabian business fronted by Greg Norman reveals detailed plans for 10 events – including one in the UK – on the 2022-23 Asian Tour schedule. Formula One staff must be fully vaccinated against Covid-19 under new FIA rules that aim to avoid a Novak Djokovic-style fiasco. Scotland have been told to keep a close eye on Marcus Smith if they want to make a winning start in the Six Nations. And police have been given extra time to question the Manchester United footballer Mason Greenwood on suspicion of rape and sexual assault. Business The Treasury has introduced a new “super tax” to deter energy company owners from cashing out lucrative contracts for gas bought in advance before leaving their supply business to go under. The public interest business protection tax is a levy of 75% on any future windfall on contracts while leaving millions without a supplier. George Soros says falling property prices in China could turn people against Xi Jinping and even cause his downfall. On the markets the FTSE100 is set to rise around 0.5% this morning while the pound is on $1.344 and €1.197. The papers The Telegraph splash is “PM to ask Gray for new report” in an attempt to “appease backbenchers”, while the Mail takes a similar line saying that Britain is “in limbo” and exhorting Johnson to “Now publish the whole damn thing”. The Express says “Yes PM, you got it wrong … now get it right!”, the Times’ main headline is “Police investigate PM’s four lockdown parties”, and FT says “Johnson rejects calls to quit after Gray’s scathing report on parties”. The Guardian picks a line out of the Gray report that is a theme of much of the coverage today. “‘Failures of leadership’: Tories turn on PM over Gray report”, its headline says, while the Independent just goes with ‘“Failures of leadership”’. The Metro has “A failure of leadership”, the Yorkshire Post has “‘Failures of leadership’ in parts of No10” and the Northern Echo says “Failure of leadership”. The Sun goes with “Mamma mia!”, a reference to a police investigation into an alleged Abba-themed party in the Downing Street flat on the night Dominic Cummings quit in November 2020. The Mirror’s front highlights “12 parties probed, 3 attended by PM, 1 in his own flat, 300 pictures handed over” and the main headline “Zero shame”. The Star puns with “50 Shades of Gray”. Sign up The Guardian morning briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekendUS authorities have banned disposable gloves from a manufacturer in Malaysia over allegations it uses forced labour, sending the share price of global protective equipment group Ansell into a tailspin. The customs and border protection unit of the US Department of Homeland Security said it had “information that reasonably indicates the use of forced labor in YTY Group’s manufacturing operations” and banned the importation of gloves made by the company. CBP alleged workers at YTY, which is one of Ansell’s top five suppliers, experienced “abuse of vulnerability, deception, retention of identity documents, intimidation and threats, debt bondage, abusive working and living conditions, and excessive overtime”. Ansell’s share price plunged almost 15% when it revealed the US import ban, together with Covid outbreaks in its Malaysian factories, would cut its earnings for the first half of the year by as much as 35%. The ban, known as a “withhold release order”, followed a complaint from Nepal-based activist Andy Hall. He said it was the fourth made against an Ansell supplier out of the six orders CBP has made against Malaysian glove companies since 2019 and accused the Australian-listed company of failing to properly deal with a longstanding problem with allegations of forced labour in its supply chain. “They have a history of not remediating any of these issues, you know, they just go and they buy from another company,” he said. He said that in relation to a US ban on gloves from another supplier, Top Glove, “they didn’t even stop buying”. “They just started rerouting products to their European and Australian markets. “They have a huge issue and to be honest, they’re one of the companies that I detest the most actually, because of their behaviour, and the way in which they fail to remediate things.” He said exploitation of overseas workers, who mainly come from Bangladesh and Nepal, was rife across the glove-making industry in Malaysia. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Some workers in the industry are charged large sums to come to Malaysia, have their passports kept by bosses so that they can’t leave, work excessive overtime that can result in seven-day work weeks and are exposed to violent reprisal if they complain, he said. “There’s been a lot of changes in the industry since I started campaigning in 2018, mostly because of the US sanctions and because of the media pressure,” he said. “So there’s slowly been improvements but the pandemic has really increased the workload and they haven’t been able to get new workers from overseas, so the workers are really working very long hours.” YTY’s chief executive, Vikram Hora, said the company had been working to improve the conditions of migrant workers since 2019, “given that they are at greater systemic risk for abuse or exploitation”. “Given the substantial and continuous progress YTY has made over the past three years, we are both surprised and disappointed with the enforcement action taken by the Department of Homeland Security, especially as this action was undertaken without any form of prior engagement with us,” he said. However, Hall said he told YTY about the CBP investigation. “I definitely think they’e been improving a lot, but whether or not they’ve solved these issues, I don’t know,” he said. An Ansell spokesperson said most of the companies hit by US bans “are minor suppliers to Ansell and two of the four (Top Glove and WRP) are now again exporting into the US with their respective WROs revoked by US Customs and Border Protection”. “Ansell clearly and publicly acknowledges the risks that modern slavery practices may be evident in our supply chain,” the spokesperson said. “Risks of human trafficking are driven in large part by our use of migrant labour and recruitment agents, particularly in our manufacturing plants in Malaysia and Thailand. Similarly, risks of forced labour in our operations are most likely to be present as debt bondage, driven by deceptive recruitment practices in the third-party hiring of migrant labour”. The spokesperson said that Ansell followed the advice of human rights groups and rather than walking away from suppliers with problems preferred to work with them “to drive positive change through ongoing dialogue and the audit process, where possible given the current pandemic conditions”. “However, when we identify suppliers who do not align with our labour standards commitment and who are not working in good faith to progress positive change in their labour standards compliance, we review our potential options, including finding alternate sources for our product and terminating the supplier relationship”. The CBP began investigating potential violations of labour standards at YTY in March last year after a complaint from Hall, documents he provided to Guardian Australia show. Announcing the ban, the secretary of homeland security, Alejandro N Mayorkas, said the US would “continue to leverage all of our authorities and resources to bar goods produced with forced labor from entering the United States, and with my designation earlier this week of a senior accountable official to prevent human trafficking in DHS contracts, we are leading efforts to ensure that no taxpayer dollars are ever used to purchase goods or services that rely on forced labour”.A pregnant New Zealand journalist who was stranded in Afghanistan after failing to secure a spot in her own country’s strict quarantine system is “so excited” she has now been offered a place. The deputy prime minister Grant Robertson said on Tuesday the ministry for business, innovation and employment, which manages the quarantine system known as MIQ, has offered Charlotte Bellis an MIQ voucher. “There is a place in MIQ for Miss Bellis, and I urge her to take it,” Robertson said. In a statement, Bellis confirmed her application had been approved and said she would be returning to New Zealand in early March. The approval was granted based on the risks associated with her location and not because of her pregnancy, she said. “We are so excited to return home and to be surrounded by family and friends at such a special time,” Bellis said. She thanked New Zealanders for their support and expressed disappointment that the situation “had to come to to this”. “I will continue to challenge the New Zealand government to find a solution to border controls to keep New Zealanders at home and abroad safe and their rights protected,” she said. Bellis discovered she was pregnant a short time after gaining international attention in 2021 for questioning Taliban leaders about their treatment of women and girls. She is due to give birth in May. She resigned from Al Jazeera in November and had no choice but to leave Qatar, where she was usually based, because sex outside marriage is illegal. She and her partner, Jim Huylebroek, then moved to his native Belgium. In a column published in the New Zealand Herald on Saturday, Bellis wrote that she was unable to stay in Belgium because she was not a resident. She said the only other place the couple had visas to live was Afghanistan, where they are now located. In her column, she said she had been forced to turn to the Taliban for help before re-entering Afghanistan after her application for a place in New Zealand’s MIQ was rejected. She said she had since been attempting unsuccessfully to secure an emergency MIQ to give birth in New Zealand. New Zealand has managed to keep the spread of the coronavirus to a minimum during the pandemic and has reported 52 Covid deaths among its population of 5 million. But the requirement that even returning citizens spend 10 days isolating in quarantine hotels run by the military has led to a backlog of thousands of people vying for spots. Robertson said Covid-19 has meant many New Zealanders have been unable to return home for funerals, weddings and childbirth. “That’s incredibly tough. We’ve had our MIQ process in place for a very good reason - it has supported our public health response; it has avoided a number of deaths. But it doesn’t make it easy for people who are at the other end, wanting to come back to New Zealand.”Perched on the Yarra River, in full view of the iconic Bolte Bridge, Yarra’s Edge by Mirvac is a well-established, thriving community occupying 3.7 hectares of tranquil, open space. It’s hard to believe that it is just 2.4km from the Melbourne CBD. That’s because every part of Yarra’s Edge has been designed to exist in harmony with the landscape from which it takes its name. The show-stopping new residential tower at Yarra’s Edge, Voyager, boasts 43 floors of luxuriously appointed one-, two- and three-bedroom apartments, unrivalled rooftop amenities and relaxing common areas. Two people who hold Voyager close to their hearts are Mirvac design director Michael Wiener and resident Erika Meyer. They’re all too happy to talk about its design, and what that means for the current and future Melburnians who will call it home. World-class design, inspired by Melbourne As you drive over the Bolte Bridge, Voyager is a defining feature on the bank of the Yarra River, Wiener says, “so it was very important that this was a landmark building; that it had a really beautiful sculptural form, and it was a building in the round”. Compared with the angular precinct it occupies, Voyager is softer and more aerodynamic. Its edges are smooth and curved, giving the impression that it just melts into the skyline. “I chose a really beautiful warm glass for the building, because I wanted to contrast it with the other buildings in the precinct,” Wiener says. “I wanted something really reflective and alive, something that reflected the sky and reflected the light.” Voyager really is one with the city’s urban fabric. Every part of its construction has been carefully considered and expertly finished, including the intricate steelwork that adorns the top floors. Wiener says the quality of that steelwork was non-negotiable from a design and architectural perspective, which shows in the sleek trusses and connections. The indoors and outdoors unite on Voyager’s Level 43 Skydeck. “It’s been designed to be the gateway into Melbourne,” he says. “So we have this amazing site that’s north facing, riverfront city view, and we designed the building to optimise its exceptional location and amenity for residents.” Speaking of amenities, Voyager has them in spades. Up top, on the 43rd floor, is a spectacular roof terrace with a grass lawn, gardens and fire pit. “People need living green nature wherever they can find it,” Wiener says, adding that these kinds of spaces help foster a sense of community and connectedness inside an apartment building like Voyager. “Those little touches are very important.” Curated by Studio Gallery, residents and guests are greeted by the striking lobby art gallery featuring a collection of exquisite artwork. On the ground level is a foyer – which Wiener calls the “living room” of the building – and a private gallery where residents and their guests can enjoy a permanent exhibition featuring works by local and Australian artists. The original plan had been to have the artworks change, but Wiener says there’s something special about knowing people will grow to understand and ponder them over a longer period of time. “There’s an immense sense of pride [that comes with] living in that building; that sense of being part of something special creates community on its own.” Coming home to Voyager Erika Meyer and her husband, Michael, along with their two teenagers, Dylan and Cielo, moved into a three-bedroom apartment in Voyager in September. They were some of the tower’s first residents and Erika says it already feels like home. “It’s been wonderful,” she says. “It’s just lovely.” Erika hails from Colombia, where it’s common to live in a high-rise building, and lived in New York and the UK for years before settling in Melbourne. Voyager’s sensational view and prime location drew her in. She and Michael both work in the city but feel far removed from the rat race when they step through the door of their new home. “I wanted to be close to the CBD, but not in it,” Erika says. “This area gives you the feeling that you’re part of the city, but without the craziness. It feels a bit suburban, but very international at the same time. And I think we have the best view in Melbourne.” If apartment living doesn’t gel with your idea of what a family of four needs, allow Erika to convince you otherwise. She says the thoughtful design of Voyager’s apartments means everyone can enjoy the space and privacy they need without being on top of each other, and the expansive windows and luxurious finishes create a feeling of openness and warmth. The Meyers have enjoyed putting their own personal spin on the space since moving in, with beachy, pastel hues featured throughout, and are excited to see the Yarra’s Edge community grow in the new year. “For me, it’s about where you are in your life: if you want to enjoy everything this city has to offer and, of course, if you want a wonderful view, this is the place,” she says. Find out more about one of the best new designs in Melbourne’s Yarra’s Edge, Voyager by Mirvac.My first encounter with the military came on 4 February 2021, three days after the coup. From the back of my friend’s motorcycle, I hid my camera under my clothes and attempted to photograph soliders as they drove in trucks through my native city of Mandalay carrying their guns. I couldn’t get a good picture, however, because one of the vehicles started following us and we had to retreat. Within days, almost the whole country had erupted in protest. I couldn’t stay still any more, and I joined the crowds on 7 February. ‘The whole country had erupted in protest. I couldn’t stay still any more, and I joined the crowds’ The first crackdown came a week later. Water cannon, smoke bombs and sound grenades sent us running in every direction. It was a totally new experience for me, and although I had tried to prepare myself, when it actually happened I felt shocked and scared. Still, I returned to the streets the next day, as protesters gathered in front of a state-owned bank to urge its workers to join a growing civil disobedience movement and go on strike. First, soldiers and police fired rubber bullets and air guns to disperse the crowd. Then, they went after us journalists. More than 20 people chased us with sticks and guns and tried to surround us. I somehow managed to escape and, luckily, people from the neighbourhood pointed where to run and one man opened his door for me. I climbed up to the rooftop of his building. Looking down on the street below, I saw soldiers and police fire catapults and air guns at fleeing crowds. I recognised four journalists among them, and watched with horror as one of them, my friend, was caught. I saw them beat him with their batons and rifle butts, and kick him; before he managed to get away, they also destroyed the video camera he had borrowed from me . I tried to film this with my phone, but couldn’t get a clear view, and almost got hit myself by a stray projectile that pierced the steel rail of the balcony in front of me. The protests and suppression only intensified from there. On 20 February, crowds gathered at a dockyard to support striking ship workers as soldiers and police attempted to force them back to work. I saw regime forces aim their guns at protesters’ heads and open fire with sniper rifles. I also saw the determination of the protesters, who ran for cover and fired back with catapults whenever they had the chance. Many protesters were shot, and there was blood everywhere. Two of them were killed that day, including a 16-year-old boy. After that, bloody crackdowns happened daily. Initially after the coup, we journalists wore helmets and vests that said Press, thinking the gear would protect us, but by early March, we didn’t dare to identify ourselves and instead focused on not standing out. ‘I saw the determination of the protesters’ On 3 March, I saw a young woman demonstrating on the frontline of the protests, wearing a black T-shirt that said: “Everything will be OK.” I tried to photograph her, but soldiers were everywhere and I had to run. From a nearby rooftop, I saw soldiers and police hunt down protesters as they attempted to hide. I tried to keep photographing, but rubber and steel bullets hit the wall behind me and smoke grenades exploded too. But as soon as I had the chance, I ran back on to the street. A woman makes a three-fingered salute at soldiers. The gesture, which originated in The Hunger Games films, has been adopted by protesters as a symbol of resistance and support for democracy I saw bloody wounds and scattered brains; I also saw the body of the young woman wearing the black T-shirt. Her name was Kyal Sin, and she had been shot in the head. The 19-year-old – one of three people killed during that protest and at least 28 unarmed protesters killed across the country that day – has since become an icon of the protest movement. I photographed her funeral the next day. Throughout these traumatic experiences, I set my mind on my responsibility to document everything. With that motivation, I was able to continue. Clockwise from top left: young protestors try to protect themselves with handmade shields; a protester among the crowd flies the flag of the All Burma Federation of Student Unions, which has been active in the anti-coup movement; the shirt and sandals of Ye Swe Oo, shot in the chest on 13 March; the body of Saw Pyae Naing, a 21-year-old student By early April, the brutal suppression of protests had convinced many people that street demonstrations were not enough to defeat the junta. Some left the city to join the rapidly growing armed revolution, while others held early-morning guerrilla protests on narrow streets. Although they had changed tactics to avoid being shot or run over by military vehicles, soldiers and police still found ways to violently put down opposition. I tried to go out with my camera a few times by hiding it, and then tried to document the protests on my phone, but it was too dangerous – and I couldn’t get a good shot. Finally, I stopped going out altogether. ‘Journalists often encourage me to flee the country. But I have never thought about leaving’ It has now been nearly 10 months that I have not been able to go out and photograph. But even staying inside, I don’t feel safe at all. I haven’t been home since the coup, and I am constantly moving from place to place. Journalists often encourage me to flee the country and report from abroad. They might wonder why I stay here in this situation. But I have never thought about leaving. My purpose is to document what is happening here for the public and the world, and I believe that the time will come for me to go out again. I am waiting for that time. When it comes, I will resume my work no matter the risks. Moe is a photojournalist based in Mandalay. He is using a pseudonym to protect his identity Translated by Nu Nu LusanScott Morrison has been blindsided by a claim that leaked texts between a party colleague and the former New South Wales premier Gladys Berejiklian included her calling the prime minister a “horrible person” who was untrustworthy. Morrison on Tuesday was confronted at the National Press Club by the Network Ten political editor, Peter van Onselen, who claimed he had been leaked text messages between “a current Liberal cabinet minister” and Berejiklian. “In one, she described you as a horrible, horrible person, going on to say she did not trust you, and you are more concerned with politics than people,” Van Onselen said. “The minister is even more scathing, describing you as a fraud and ‘a complete psycho’. Does this exchange surprise you? And what does it tell us?” Van Onselen did not specify whether it was a state or federal minister. In response, Morrison said: “Well, I don’t know who you’re referring to, or the basis of what you’ve put to me. But I obviously don’t agree with it. And I don’t think that that is my record.” In a later news report on Tuesday night, Van Onselen claimed that in another text, sent during the 2019-20 bushfires, Berejiklian said: “Lives are at stake today and he [Morrison] is just obsessed with petty political point-scoring.” In a statement, Berejiklian said she had “no recollection of such messages”. “I understand there has been some commentary today concerning myself and the PM,” she said. “I have no recollection of such messages. Let me reiterate my very strong support for prime minister Morrison and all he is doing for our nation during these very challenging times. I also strongly believe he is the best person to lead our nation for years to come.” Late last year, Morrison urged Berejiklian to contest the federal seat of Warringah for the Liberal party, describing her as “a dear friend over a long period of time”. Berejiklian, who ultimately ruled out running, said she had considered the tilt because of her “respect” for Morrison and the Liberal party. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning In Tuesday’s pre-election scene-setting address to the press club, Morrison sought to draw a line under a turbulent summer for the Coalition by conceding the government’s response to the pandemic was “not perfect” while seeking to switch the focus to the economic recovery ahead. But Morrison’s announcements of $800 in bonus payments to aged care workers and a new $2.2bn manufacturing strategy were overshadowed by a series of questions to the prime minister about his poor personal standing and the failure of the government to properly prepare for the Omicron outbreak. The prime minister was also asked whether he knew the cost of a “loaf of bread, a litre of petrol and a rapid antigen test” in a question suggesting he may have lost touch with ordinary Australians. “I am not going to pretend to you that I go out each day and I buy a loaf of bread and I buy a litre of milk,” Morrison replied. “I’m not going to pretend to you that I do that.” The prime minister, who is lagging in the polls and faces an uphill battle to secure the government’s re-election after three consecutive terms in office, said he did not believe the election would be about the Coalition’s performance. “It’s not a referendum on the government, this is a choice about who is going to lead the government after the election and there are two choices, and they will be able to see the differences between those two choices and to weigh up the consequences of those two choices – and they will carefully consider it,” he said. “Australians, you know, in between elections, they tend not to focus that much on politics because they are focused on what matters most to them, not the political goings-on in this place. “But the time for the election will come, and when it does they will weigh these things up, and quietly get about their business.” After using his opening address to “acknowledge” the frustrations felt by Australians during the pandemic, Morrison said he had reflected on what more the government could have done. “That leads you to ask: ‘Couldn’t you have done more? Couldn’t this have been avoided? After all, aren’t you responsible?’ I get that. For me, as prime minister, accepting this responsibility means asking yourself and challenging yourself every single day with those same questions. “But what I say to Australians on every occasion where something hasn’t gone exactly as we’d hoped or we’ve got it exactly right or the way we would have liked it to have turned out, we’ve crushed together, worked the program, solved it, and moved forward. “And that’s what Australians expect of us. I don’t think they expect perfection. But they do expect you to keep working it every single day. And that’s something I’m very proud my government has done.” Asked by the ABC’s Laura Tingle if he would like to apologise for perceived mistakes made as prime minister, including going to Hawaii during the 2019-20 bushfires, not securing enough rapid antigen tests, and shortcomings in the national disability insurance scheme, Morrison demurred. “We’re all terribly sorry for what this pandemic has done to the world and to this country,” he said. “These are the times in which we live. And I’ve set out today, I think, very clearly, the challenges that we’ve faced. But I’m also very proud of Australians and what they’ve achieved in enabling us all to come through this despite the setbacks and the challenges that we have faced.” Morrison said if he had his time over he would have better managed expectations about the risks of opening up over summer – saying the government had been “too optimistic”. “In raising those expectations about the summer, we heightened the great sense of disappointment that people felt.” The prime minister also said that he would have handed responsibility for the vaccine rollout to the military earlier last year. “I wish we had done that earlier – and that is a lesson.”In 2013, the subreddit r/antiwork was born. “Unemployment for all, not just the rich!” read its tagline. America was experiencing a mood change at that time. Occupy: The Movie had just hit theaters, lodging the eponymous movement in the national consciousness; the Socialist Alternative party had just won its first ever seat on Seattle’s city council; and Senator Bernie Sanders, the longtime independent from Vermont and self-described “democratic socialist” was considering a presidential run. Born of the moment, r/antiwork offered a space where people could envision a life free from work – or at least, too much of it. Anchored by Marxist philosophy, people used it to commiserate, share memes and trade war stories about the horrors of modern-day working in America. Then the pandemic hit, laying bare inequities long faced by lower-wage workers, particularly in the United States. The subreddit exploded. Screenshots of resignation texts to bosses went viral – “Eat. My. Ass.” read one memorable text, in response to a boss who had warned against such an “impulsive decision”. In December, users bombarded a Kellogg’s application site that had been launched to replace 1,400 striking users with fake applications. As media reported on the “Great Resignation” in the wake of the Bureau of Labor Statistics’ report that 4.5 million Americans left their jobs in November 2021, an all-time high, r/antiwork inched closer to the mainstream. By the time Doreen Ford, the subreddit’s longest-tenured moderator, flicked on her webcam last Tuesday for what would be the group’s most public exposure yet – an interview with Fox News’ Jesse Watters, whose primetime show debuted with 3.8 million viewers the previous evening – the subreddit had reached 1.7 million members, good enough for one of the most popular on Reddit but less than half of Watters’ audience. The stage was set for some classic schoolyard bullying. On one side was r/antiwork, a community that functioned as a living, breathing – and growing – counterpoint to capitalism. On the other was Fox News, a rightwing media juggernaut with the mission of selling the working class on the sanctity of the American dream, and an institution directly threatened by movements like r/antiwork. It took Watters three minutes, 23 seconds to paint Ford as a clumsy caricature – and send r/anti-work into an existential crisis. “All right, so Doreen,” Watters said, kicking off the interview, “why do you like the idea of being home, not working, but still getting paid by corporate America?” The 43-year-old Watters, a rising star on Fox who has praised QAnon and urged supporters to ambush Dr Anthony Fauci remained in split screen opposite Ford, who spoke into her fuzzy webcam from a dimly lit, messy room with an unmade bed. Ford, whose unkempt hair was matted to her forehead, later said in a Reddit comment she had trouble focusing on the camera because she’s autistic. Watters’ face became an instrument of mockery as Ford answered his questions, his eyes bulging in bemusement. When Ford, who said she worked 20-25 hours a week as a dog-walker, said she’d like to one day be a philosophy professor, Watters let the subtle smile on his lips turn into a chuckle. “You know what, a professor’s a very similar schedule than something you are … imagining,” responded Watters. There is much debate over how many hours professors work, with schedules varying from college to college, although studies and individual professors put it somewhere between 40 to 70 hours a week. Watters quickly noted he didn’t think the antiwork movement was the best idea, but “it’s a free country. Not everything is free, but it’s a free country.” He snuck in one final shot as he ended the segment, speaking over Ford: “Thank you so much, we’ve got to run. We’ve got to pay the bills.” The interview sent r/antiwork into a tailspin. Not only was the subreddit overrun by bad actors from less sympathetic corners of the internet after the interview; longtime users expressed frustration and rage at the interview. Ford, who at one point during the segment referred to laziness as a “virtue”, had set the movement back, they believed, by being made to look like the worst stereotype of r/antiwork. (“I think laziness is a virtue in a society where people constantly want you to be productive, 24/7. And it’s good to have rest. That doesn’t mean you should be resting all the time, or not putting effort into things that you care about,” Ford had said, in a response to Watters asking her whether the group was encouraging people to be lazy.) “That interview was so embarrassing,” one user wrote, “it made me go back to work.” Others called for Ford’s demotion as a moderator, or to have her banned from the group. The subreddit went private the following night, and when it reopened the next morning Ford had been removed as a moderator. Users demanded a short-term freeze on media interviews, and not long after I requested to chat with the moderators, I received a notification that my Reddit account had been permanently suspended. Another subreddit, r/workreform, was created and by Saturday afternoon had 458,000 users. Watters did a victory lap later in the week, updating his viewers on Ford’s removal as moderator on Thursday. “I’m sorry to see that Doreen is no longer doing that and I guess, maybe, she now has more time on her hands,” he said, shrugging. “That’s what she wanted.” Before r/antiwork had become a target of conservative news – the New York Post published a 17 January piece on the movement, accusing the subreddit of fueling the Great Resignation – it was a place for people fed up with a system that they believe perpetuates financial inequality. They used it to trade tips and tricks for navigating unruly bosses; or to share lighthearted stories. In early January, a thread from an IT specialist who claimed to have written a script that automated most of his job read: “I’m only at my desk maybe 10 minutes a day,” it went viral, inspiring people to unbind themselves from work and earning 83,800 upvotes. The subreddit’s library offered recommended reading (The Abolition of Work, by Bob Black; In Praise of Idleness, by Bertrand Russell), music (Every Day is Exactly the Same, by Nine Inch Nails). But while the subredditor’s trading of inspirational quotes and canvassing support for unionization efforts was threatening enough to warrant an investigation it to its motives by a huge conglomerate like Fox, anti-work members seemed mostly to be having fun: lambasting the worst parts of work, while mostly working full-time jobs (an internal survey run through the subreddit last month found 64% of its users work full time). On a thread asking anti-workers for their favorite quotes, one posted a line from Charles Bukowski: “It was true that I didn’t have much ambition, but there ought to be a place for people without ambition … How in the hell could a man enjoy being awakened at 6.30am by an alarm clock … fight[ing] traffic to get to a place where essentially you made lots of money for somebody else and were asked to be grateful for the opportunity to do so?” it read. Meanwhile, where other subreddits refer to their members as “users”, on antiwork, members are proudly labelled “idlers”. If r/antiwork were to fold, as many users suggested to avoid further embarrassment, it would not take with it the ideas it had helped to elevate over the past near-decade. But it would mark the end of a community that, for nearly 2 million people, had provided a place to vent and map out more fulfilling lives. By the weekend, the infighting on r/antiwork had mostly abated, with new posts taking on a familiar tone: “An Amazon warehouse in Staten Island is having a Union election! Show some support if you can!” read one post. “My boss just said ‘only mediocre people care for work life balance,’” read another. But the pinned post, Restructuring &amp; Recent Events [Megathread], in which a new moderator attempted to lower the temperature, pointed to the uncertain future facing the subreddit “Hello chaos,” the moderator wrote. “This thread is to address the many concerns raised in [the] wake of the Fox interview … We’re all reaching for a world free of the horror of ‘work as we know it’ – let’s continue that and not tear ourselves apart because of a few misinformed actors,” it read. The post had more than 7,600 comments, including one from a user named “Smokiiz” that earned 995 upvotes. Now, they realized, many outsiders associated r/antiwork with Watters’ smirking face, Smokiiz wrote: “My mom literally asked me if I’m on the ‘lazy movement’ that was on the news the other day,” they wrote. “I feel so ashamed.”It was a low point even for GB News, a rolling-opinions TV channel with no documented highs: to celebrate the anniversary of Churchill’s funeral, it interviewed a Churchill impersonator as if he were Churchill. “Why do you think there is still so much admiration for you?”, the man – his name lost to the viewers, unfortunately, since the strapline underneath read simply “Winston Churchill, former prime minister” – was asked. “I think probably because I was the right man at the right moment,” he replied, having made the baffling decision to stick with the first person while consigning himself to the past. “I don’t think I could survive in the current climate,” he continued, presumably because the woke warriors would come for him. Too right we would. “You’re dead,” we would say, “and yet still talking. For this gross unnatural act, you are hereby no-platformed, nay, cancelled.” Some time in the early 2000s, a survey found Churchill to be the Briton most admired by his compatriots, and that was interpreted – some would say overinterpreted – as a lesson on what kind of prime minister we all secretly wanted. Did we like him best for his lofty rhetoric or his white supremacism? For his salty remarks at parties, or his “I, too, am human” physique? It was none of those things, of course. People liked him because he won things. Not all of them – he lost the odd election. But the important things, he won. Well, one important thing, but to give him credit, it was pretty damn important. The salient thing now is not so much Churchill himself, who is – one more time for the GB viewers at the back – very much still dead, but what British politicians are trying to invoke when they wang on about him. The prime minister has written a book about his hero, but, even if you were prepared to read it, you would struggle to find the Churchillian value that Johnson most seeks to emulate. This is because it isn’t anything intrinsic to the man himself but rather the nature of his legacy: to Winston-stans, nothing matters, nothing he said or did, no mistake or omission, besides that one thing that he won. Imagine how relaxing it would be for a chaos monkey or a seat-of-pants merchant to live that creed: don’t sweat the small stuff, just choose one huge thing, and say you won it. Zoe Williams is a Guardian columnistIn May 2017 we spent £1,374 on what was supposed to be an extremely well-made inflatable tent – a Hornet 6SA by Outwell – with a view to keeping it until our children were grown up. But, when we arrived at our Dorset campsite last summer, the tent would not go up because the inflatable poles were perished and leaking. After spending several hours on hold to Outwell in Denmark we were forced to buy a £380 replacement in nearby Poole. Since then, I have been trying to resolve this with Outwell. It has told me that it no longer stocks replacement poles, and because of Brexit it can’t collect the tent. Its only solution is to offer to sell us a new one at a discount. I am upset about the money wasted – and hardly need a third tent – but I’m much more upset about the lack of concern about what we should do with the non-functioning one. It is huge, weighing more than 40kg, and the idea of sending it to landfill is awful. We only used it four times – our previous one lasted 25 years. SA, Lancaster Most people would expect a £1,374 tent to last more than four trips. Outwell, while it was very sorry, hasn’t really come up with a solution. It tells me it had tried to source replacement tubes but had failed. It has offered a 65% discount on a new tent – the same, it claims, as it would have cost to replace the tubes. It again blamed post-Brexit customs problems for being unable to collect your tent. I spoke to the inflatable tents expert at Attwoolls Outdoors, near Gloucester, who, amazingly, knew your (early) model. He said that Outwell had since changed the design of the tubes and thought it unlikely you would find replacements, or that the universal pipes that now exist would fit. The retailer you bought the tent from is responsible under the Consumer Rights Act but I suspect you won’t get a better offer than the 65% discount if you go to court. I’d be trying to find an ingenious local person who may be able to fix it. Can anyone suggest somebody who can? We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email consumer.champions@theguardian.com or write to Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Include a phone number. Letters are subject to our terms: gu.com/letters-termsSometimes Ambridge reminds me of The Village, that splendidly implausible M Night Shyamalan film about a 19th-century community in Pennsylvania. The village’s secret is that beyond a supposedly monster-infested forest, there is an actual 21st-century world with cars and telly. But hardly anyone knows about it and no one dares go there. In fact the entire village has been set up as a mad kind of social experiment. So it is in Borsetshire. The “powerful hold Ambridge can have” over its inhabitants was the subject of rumination by young Phoebe this month. (Will the penny drop? Will she realise that Nottingham, Birmingham, and even, dammit, London are places rather than idle dreams? Will she remember that she too once tasted freedom, at Oxford?) Later she and Alice, chatting on the phone, found that they were both “shovelling muck” (Radio 4 being too genteel, unlike the Guardian, to shovel shit). Alice was clearing out Shula’s no-doubt Augean stables; Phoebe was doing something unmentionable with the rewilding project’s composting loos. Along with Lily, who is bored to death with her job selling kitchens, the trio – Phoebe the Oxford alum, Lily the Manchester University dropout, and Alice the aeronautical engineering graduate – got round, and not before time, to lamenting the fact that The Village conspires to keep them in a state of perpetual underachievement. Still, Lily is proposing to do a degree in estate management at Felpersham Uni – which suggests interesting times ahead vis-a-vis her twin brother, the feckless but charming son and heir to the family stately home, Lower Loxley. Hazel Woolley, one of the few characters not bound by Ambridge’s invisible force field, declared the village, with some justice, to be “a parochial, self-satisfied, two-bit place”, before flouncing out of Borsetshire, having evicted Tom and Natasha from the flat above the shop, which she owns (I always imagine her with a massive fur coat and cigarette holder, like Cruella de Vil). Housing in Ambridge is a bit like one of the Valentine’s Day nights that Kenton and Jolene are trying to devise for the Bull – a sort of large-scale musical chairs, with never quite enough accommodation to go around when the music stops. Tom and pregnant Natasha have moved in with Tony and Pat, who are being quietly sent demented; Chris and baby Martha are moving into the flat above the shop, which might leave Alice and Chris’s old cottage, the Nest, free; Pip and Josh are squabbling over the bungalow, currently inhabited by Rex Fairbrother; and Emma and Ed are still languishing in a static caravan. I feel it is all soluble, but you’d need a chart and some diagrams. Stella’s sexuality is still not established, but I live in hope.Holiday bookings are experiencing a surge ahead of Covid travel tests being scrapped, making it a real possibility to go abroad without having to take a single test this February half-term. Last month the UK government scrapped pre-departure tests, along with the need for travellers to self-isolate on arrival until they receive a negative PCR test result. With the requirement for the day two test also being dropped from 11 February, test-free holidays for fully vaccinated Britons will soon, finally, be possible again. On the Beach has predicted the biggest wave of holiday bookings the travel industry has seen in the past two years, with holiday sales already 150% up week on week since the start of the year. Zoe Harris, chief customer officer at On the Beach, said: “The scrapping of test requirements will give people the peace of mind they need to book with confidence, and that extra nudge to escape the cold and grey at home in favour of a sun lounger with their name on it.” There are 37 countries that are welcoming visitors without the requirement to take a test, but travel-testing regulations change often, so check the rules for your designated country before departure. Below we list a selection of options that still have availability for February half-term. Andalucían warmth, Spain February is often warm in southern Spain, and Responsible Travel has a number of family activity holidays that run all year round. The bestseller is a seven-night multi-activity trip based at an off-grid eco-hotel in Altiplano de Granada, Andalucía. The price includes a choice of three activities – horse riding, rock climbing and flamenco dancing (from £1,320 for five people half-board, responsibletravel.com). Those with older children could opt for a week’s self-guided cycling holiday in Murcia. Kids (and parents!) need to be able to cycle an average of 35km a day on cycle paths and quiet country roads (from £695 B&amp;B including bike hire and luggage transfer, explore.co.uk). In the hilltop town of Vejer de la Frontera, Andalucía, the Califa group has 10 stylish houses for rent, including Casa Badillo, which sleeps 11, for a relaxed extended family break. Vejer is a few kilometres from the Atlantic coast surfing beaches and near to two natural parks (from €1,300 for five nights, califacasas.com). Forest hikes, cycling and winetasting, Croatia The stone villa at the Kameni Dvori family farm near Dubrovnik is available only for exclusive rental in the summer (sleeps 11), but in February smaller families can choose to book just one or two rooms. A recent restoration has retained the exposed stone walls, wooden beams and original fireplaces, but modernised the facilities, decor and technology. Outside, the former barn is now an outdoor swimming pool, there is a games area with table football, badminton and darts, and a terrace with a dining table and barbecue. Guests can rent bikes, take a cooking class, try the owners’ homemade wines and explore the neighbouring forest to find a lookout point with views of the Adriatic. The agriturismo is 15 minutes’ drive to the airport and 30 to the city centre (doubles from €68 a night, holiday-village-konavle.com). Cross-country by train and ski, Switzerland Exodus has a new self-guided cross-country skiing trip in Kandersteg, a village in the Bernese Oberland, suitable for ages eight and above. There are lots of easy trails in the pine and beech forests surrounding the village, and guests have unlimited travel on local buses if they want to venture further afield (cable car tickets are extra). Families stay in a traditional, family-run hotel, which provides breakfast, packed lunches and four-course dinners, plus one five-course meal of regional specialities. It has a small indoor pool, gym and sauna, a bar with a pool table and a lounge with an open fire and board games. The local ski school offers cross-country skiing lessons if needed. From £879 for six nights, exodus.co.uk. Alternatively, Inntravel has a winter trip combining stays in Lucerne and Chur with the Glacier Express, one of the world’s most spectacular train journeys. From £1,195 per person for seven nights, inntravel.co.uk. Bright bucolic days, Malta Malta is peaceful during the winter months but often has some bright, sunny days – perfect for an adventurous hike or a bucolic stroll. Inntravel is offering a self-guided walking tour of Gozo, the second largest island, which takes walkers through fertile farmland towards dramatic cliffs and idyllic bays. There are also opportunities to visit neolithic temples and the island’s medieval citadel. No car is required – travelling on local buses is easy, especially with Inntravel’s (included) travel pass. From £665 for seven nights, excluding transport, inntravel.co.uk. For those who want to kick back and relax with views of the sea, Responsible Travel still has availability at a self-catering holiday home in the village of Ghajnsielem in Gozo (from £958 per week, sleeps six, responsibletravel.com). Alpine fix, Germany Go off the beaten track and head to the Bavarian Alps for your snow fix this half-term, a region with glistening alpine peaks, abundant wildlife, glacial lakes and thick fir forests. Snow Trex still has availability on a number of different accommodation options, including a stay at the four-star, family-friendly Hotel Bayern Vital in Bad Reichenhall, a spa town in Upper Bavaria. From £1,954 for a family of four including lift pass, snowtrex.co.uk. Arctic wonder, Sweden Sweden offers a winter wonderland playground in February – great for active families who love the outdoors. Brändön Lodge in the Luleå archipelago in Swedish Lapland is a real treat, offering everything from snowmobile safaris to northern light tours and dog sledding. From £2,646 for four nights for a family of four sharing a cabin, with full board and several activities, excluding travel, with Discover the World, discover-the-world.com.One bright afternoon not long ago, Wendy Mitchell saw her father in her garden. She was inside with a mug of tea and he was standing on the lawn in his baggy green cardigan, smiling at her. She saw the yellow of his nicotine-stained fingers and the shine of his black, Brylcreemed hair. They stared at each other, happy to be together again. Then, in the blink of an eye, he was gone and the sunlit lawn was empty. Her father had been dead for more than 20 years and the sighting of him through the glass door was simply one of the many visual hallucinations that ambush Mitchell: the escalator turns into a waterfall; a marble floor is a swimming pool; a patterned carpet writhes with creatures; a person dressed in black becomes a disembodied head floating on air. Seeing her dead father could have been scary, confusing or painfully distressing, but instead Mitchell accepted the trick that dementia was playing on her as a gift, a moment of grace. What I Wish People Knew About Dementia is chock-full of such optimistic reversals, in which something that most of us would experience as upsetting or frustrating is turned towards the light: a problem has a solution, a loss can bring unexpected gains, the diagnosis of dementia does not need to be a death sentence, but can instead herald the start of a whole new adventure in being human. Like her bestselling account of living with dementia, Somebody I Used to Know, this is a book whose purpose is to convert despair into hope. People with dementia (and people who live with and care for them) know that much of the suffering and havoc that the illness can bring comes not from the condition itself, but from the way the world treats people who live with it. Mitchell learned this the hard way: her life, and her sense of who she was in that life, was demolished when she first got the diagnosis of early onset dementia and it took her many years to work out strategies that enabled her to “live well with dementia” (though she dislikes that phrase for its implication that some people fail to live well). Her book, which she wrote with the help of Anna Wharton and which includes the comments of friends who also live with dementia, is a compilation of these strategies: a kind of how-to manual for people with the condition and those who support them. It proceeds by a practical and calming formula: take a difficulty and find a way to overcome it. The book is divided into six sections – Senses, Relationships, Communication, Environment, Emotion and Attitude – with each section subdivided into easily assimilable packages of guidance. Writing things down, not worrying about getting lost (a “walker” becomes a “wanderer”), buying shoes without laces or a cordless vacuum cleaner, turning a space into a memory room, finding other people with dementia to talk to, refusing to let her two adored daughters become her carers, understanding that “behavioural problems” are actually expressions of the desire to be understood and “challenging behaviour” a symptom of unmet needs, taking joy in the moment, meditating, finding the right apps, acknowledging confusion, recognising that dementia is a neurological condition… Running under all the commonsense pieces of advice is a deeper and more existential message, one for all of us, young and old, in health or frailty: be kind, be attentive, be resilient, bend with change rather than be broken by it, connect, forgive, accept, embrace. Live. Like Somebody I Used to Know, this is a book of hope. But there is a sense of intense labour, struggle and pain behind Mitchell’s pieces of advice and consolation. I can’t begin to imagine the how hard she has to work to be the Wendy Mitchell she has forged out of her illness – the one who has become a beacon of hope for thousands of people who live with dementia, who seeks joy in small things, takes adventures where she finds them, is open to her own vulnerability and humorous in the face of implacable decline (laughter is her best medicine). Yet she says that, in spite of the “haze” in her brain, in spite of the effort and weariness, in spite of times of confusion and distress, in spite of knowing she is edging towards the darkness, in spite of all she has lost and continues to lose, she is in many ways happier now than she has ever been, liberated from the shyer, more self-conscious and timid self of that somebody she used to know. I interviewed Mitchell when her first book came out and have met her several times since (she can never remember me, as she delightedly tells me each time): a small woman, grey-haired and smiling, who wears bright clothes and walks with a lopsided gait. She reminds me of a frail boat in a storm, battered and tossed about but still afloat and forging into the unknown, ripped sails unfurled. In the final pages of What I Wish People Knew About Dementia, when she recounts her experience of skydiving for charity, she draws on this sense of openness and joy. Strapped to a giant of a man dressed in pink, she plummets towards the ground smiling wider than she had ever smiled before: “Up here, there is no dementia… I am flying, free from all that binds me to the earth.” And why, she wonders when she is once more on solid ground, should the adventures ever end? She is a gallant soul. • What I Wish People Knew About Dementia, From Someone Who Knows by Wendy Mitchell (with Anna Wharton) is published by Bloomsbury (£14.99). To support the Guardian and the Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyDeep down, everyone wishes they were Marvel. Armed with nothing but B-grade IP and heroic levels of pluck, a lowly comic book company slowly went about wrestling the film industry into an inescapable stranglehold. But a decade and a half on, Marvel has become the established order. It is time for a new plucky upstart to stage another revolution. That upstart? Mattel. You know, Mattel. The toy people. No, really. This weekend, Mattel Films’ Robbie Brenner gave an interview to Variety, during which she laid out her ambitious plans for cinematic domination. Brenner, who in 2013 produced Dallas Buyers Club, unveiled a slate of films that is staggering in its ambition and amassed talent. Margot Robbie and Ryan Gosling have signed on to star in a Barbie movie directed by Greta Gerwig, working from a script she co-wrote with Noah Baumbach. Lena Dunham is writing and directing a Polly Pocket movie starring Lily Collins. Akiva Goldsman is writing a Major Matt Mason film that will star Tom Hanks. Now, unless I am mistaken, the people named in this paragraph have between them won three Oscars (and been nominated for another 14) and seven Emmys (and been nominated for a further 15). And they’re making films about toys. There’s also going to be a He-Man film, a Hot Wheels film, a Rock ‘Em Sock ‘Em Robots film, a Big Jim film, a horror franchise based on Magic 8 Ball and films based on Chatty Cathy and Betsy Wetsy. Three years from now we will all find ourselves drowning in Mattel films. Isn’t this incredible? Thanks in part to Marvel packing out the multiplexes with endless superhero blockbusters, there is no longer a commercial market for theatrically released mid-budget fare. And the people who made those films – the Oscar fare, the romcoms, the beloved indie classics – have found themselves without a home. Until now, these people ultimately had two options: either lash themselves to the deep pockets of the streamers, or bite the bullet and enter the world of television. Both choices, in one way or another, represent a compromising of ideals. But now Mattel, glorious Mattel, has ridden to the rescue with a beautiful third way. “Hey Gerwig! Hey Dunham! Hey Baumbach and Hanks!” it has said. “Here’s a budget you never thought imaginable, and free rein to make exactly the sort of film you have always dreamed of making!” True, they’re working under a contract stipulating that whatever they produce has to be a transparently cynical attempt to synergise the world’s greatest art form into toy sales, but beggars can’t exactly be choosers. It’s easy to sneer, of course. But then again, people sneered at Marvel 15 years ago. Who would watch a film about a no-mark superhero like Iron Man, they thought. Who would possibly watch something as grotesquely jingoistic as a post-Iraq Captain America movie? Or Ant-Man, or a film about a talking tree monster? The same could be said for Mattel. Watching a Polly Pocket film genuinely sounds like the worst afternoon of anyone’s life. But it could end up being Star Wars for all we know. It could end up being Citizen Kane. Mattel might just be ushering in a whole new epoch of cinema. This is just the start. Once these Mattel films become enormous blockbusters, who knows what will be next. Mattel has an impressively deep well of properties to draw from, so the sky’s the limit. We might soon see a Street Sharks movie. A Princess Mommy movie. A Merry Cherry Muffin movie. Perhaps, if we all close our eyes and wish, we’re only a few years from hearing the words “the Oscar for best picture goes to Pooparoos” spoken out loud in an auditorium of glamorous A-listers. Of course, any idiot can simply license their intellectual property to Hollywood. If Mattel is really serious about becoming the next Marvel, it needs to step up a notch. It needs to create a whole extended universe. Imagine how incredible it would be if Mattel could persuade an auteur like, say, Paul Thomas Anderson to make He-Man: When Barbie Comes to Town. Or Alejandro G Iñárritu to make Rock ‘Em Sock ‘Em Robots v Thomas the Tank Engine. At this rate it can only be a matter of time before the ghost of Stanley Kubrick is hired to make Chatty Cathy in Flushin’ Frenzy: Diarrhoea Smackdown. This is the future of cinema, and the quicker we all accept this the better.A Gold Coast doctor has been subjected to death threats and abuse and is living in “utter fear” of anti-vaxxers thanks to false reports that two children died in his clinic after being administered the Pfizer vaccine. The Pacific Pines GP, Dr Wilson Chin, said “widespread panic” swept through his community when false reports spread online that the two children had died in his clinic. The girls suffered what Chin described as a “normal” fainting episode while under observation at the clinic a fortnight ago and have since recovered. But a post to a Facebook page purporting to be a “personal eyewitness account” wrongly claimed the girls had suffered “violent convulsions” and later died in the waiting room. Another Facebook user posted false information describing the girls as “unresponsive when ambos got there” and encouraging others to share the post. The backlash ultimately forced the clinic to pull out of the vaccine rollout of five to 11-year-olds after Chin and his colleagues received death threats, which have been reported to police. Five to 11-year-olds joined the rollout on 10 January after vigorous TGA approval. As of 28 January, 35.98% of the national age bracket had received at least one dose of a vaccine. In Queensland, though, the figure was 31.39%, trailing behind every state and territory except Western Australia. The Queensland government has cited misinformation as a key reason for lagging vaccination rates and vaccine hesitancy in some areas. In a lengthy Facebook post written after the misinformation spread, Chin said the “abuse and utter fear” he had faced via the practice’s phone and social media pages was “unbelievable”. In one instance, a social media user urged for dogs to be set on staff, while another person encouraged residents to “get” Chin after work, labelling him a “murderer”. “I have never seen anything like this before and it seemed never ending,” he wrote. “They did this without attempting to confirm the facts and whether these deaths were real.” Chin told Guardian Australia it was the “first time in his life” he’d questioned whether he was safe as a practising health worker. “I am concerned … we’re just trying to keep people safe and follow the guidelines and when things like this happen, there hasn’t been any government support, nothing’s been done,” he said. “There are a lot of people against the vaccine willing to do anything to jeopardise it, and we have no backup.” Chin said he was still receiving multiple threatening messages daily, including a death threat sent to his personal Instagram account advising him to hire security and watch his back. “Our address has been given to the public, and we have no security here. Every time I finish work I look around the car park to make sure nobody is following me.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Chin has cut down on his working hours and entered counselling since the abuse began. “We are just doing our jobs – we just want to care for our patients … I’m on the last thread here,” he said. Dr Karen Price, president of the RACGP, said Meta and other social media companies needed to do more to counter the spread of Covid-19 misinformation. “A GP receiving death threats simply for doing his job trying to keep his community safe is completely unacceptable and I won’t stand for it,” she said. “Dr Chin had to stay at a friend’s place because he was so concerned for his safety and there have been sleepless nights for fellow GPs, the practice manager and the other members of the practice team.” The RACGP has previously urged social media companies – including Twitter and Facebook – to take better accountability for anti-vaxxer content on their platforms. Price said a nearby practice which hadn’t offered Covid-19 vaccines to children had also received death threats. “Meta has a real opportunity here to walk the walk and back up their rhetoric by removing anti-vaxxers from the platform and making a concerted effort to counter anti-vaxxer misinformation and threats, including in private Facebook groups,” she said. “We cannot allow people like Dr Chin to experience threats, abuse and intimidation simply for doing his job.” Police were investigating the allegations and had tracked down one person who had made a direct threat against Chin, but no charges had been laid. GP and chair of RACGP Queensland Bruce Willett said Chin’s experience was an “extreme example of a widespread problem”. “Social media is fuelling this and social media companies need to step up and take some responsibility … particularly the extreme degree of misinformation that is essentially inciting hatred and potentially violence,” he said. “GPs have been under an enormous amount of pressure … the responsibility for Covid care has fallen back on general practice for mild and moderate cases, at the same time GPs have provided vaccinations and tried to do business as usual.” Willett said adding a “small, but very loud” group of people opposed to vaccinations attempting to “start a fight” to the mix was only increasing the burden on healthcare workers. A Meta spokesperson said it was “investigating” Chin’s profile and any content that breached its rules would be removed. “In addition to our policies on Covid-19, we do not allow death threats, hate speech or bullying and harassment on our apps and we’ll remove this content and work with law enforcement where there’s a credible risk of offline harm,” a spokesperson said.Along Tombo’s crumbling waterfront, dozens of hand-painted wooden boats are arriving in the blistering midday sun with the day’s catch for the scrum of the market in one of Sierra Leone’s largest fishing ports. In a scrap of shade at the bustling dock, Joseph Fofana, a 36-year-old fisherman, is repairing a torn net. Fofana says he earns about 50,000 leone (£3.30) for a brutal, 14-hour day at sea, crammed in with 20 men, all paying the owner for use of his vessel. “This is the only job we can do,” he says. “It’s not my choice. God carried me here. But we are suffering.” Every day, about 13,000 small boats like Fofana’s cast off from Sierra Leone’s 314-mile (506km) coastline. Fisheries employ 500,000 of the west African nation’s nearly 8 million people, represent 12% of the economy and are the source of 80% of the population’s protein consumption. But a dozen fishermen interviewed by the Guardian say their catch is dwindling rapidly due to sustained overfishing on a large scale. “Many years ago, you could see fish in the water from here, even big ones,” says Fofana. “Not any more. There’s less fish than ever before.” Tombo’s fishing community put the blame squarely on foreign fleets. About 40% of industrial licences are owned by Chinese vessels; though legal, locals say they pay meagre fees for their permits, under-declare their catch and add little to the local economy. At the same time, illegal, unregulated and unreported (IUU) fishing is a huge problem, costing Sierra Leone $50m a year, President Julius Maada Bio said in 2018. Last year, a joint operation by the Sierra Leonean navy and the conservation organisation Sea Shepherd Global led to the arrest of five foreign-owned fishing vessels in two days, including two Chinese-flagged trawlers found to be fishing without a licence. Those in Tombo who have protested at the illegal fishing say they face violence from the crews. Alusine Kargbo, a 34-year-old mackerel fisherman, says trawlers’ crews threw boiling water at him when he confronted them over fishing in areas where trawling is prohibited. “Before, the trawlers weren’t in our zones, now they are,” Kargbo says. “The difference is so great [in terms of his catches] compared with before, I’m struggling to feed my children.” Others are being forced farther afield in search of fish. Ibrahim Bangura, 47, often goes on three-day fishing trips into the Atlantic, a deadly venture in the rainy season. But while the potential reward is greater, he says conflicts with Chinese trawlers are more likely. “There’s so, so many of them,” says Bangura. “They disturb my property, trash my nets. And if you try to stop them, they will fight you.” In addition to dominating licensed markets, China is consistently ranked as the worst offender for IUU fishing in a global index of 152 countries. Across west Africa, illegal trawling is devastating marine ecosystems and undermining local fisheries, which are a critical source of jobs and food security. A study in 2017 found that Sierra Leone, Senegal, Mauritania, the Gambia, Guinea-Bissau and Guinea lose $2.3bn (£1.7bn) a year due to IUU fishing, which amounts to 65% of the legal reported catch. Some experts warn that Sierra Leone’s coastal communities face devastating consequences of legal and illegal overfishing. “The Chinese fleet has been taking the profits of the fisheries for 30 years and the impact on fish stocks has been terrible,” says Stephen Akester, an adviser to Sierra Leone’s Ministry of Fisheries and Marine Resources between 2009 and 2021. “The resources are disappearing, fishermen are suffering, families are starving. Many have just one meal a day.” “Imagine working for weeks and not being able to catch food,” says Woody Backie Koroma of the Sierra Leone Artisanal Fishermen Union. “They are getting debts. They go to bed without food.” Such is the strain, says Koroma, that one debt-ridden fisherman in Tombo killed himself last year after his boat was confiscated by the local authorities. Efforts to manage the sector, including the creation of an inshore exclusion zone that prohibits all but subsistence fishing in the six nautical miles closest to shore, installing movement trackers on industrial trawlers and creating community fishing associations to promote sustainability, have so far had limited impact due to policing and funding challenges, according to officials. A month-long ban on industrial fishing in 2019 was criticised as being too short to allow stocks to replenish. “We receive a lot of reports and intelligence of illegal fishing,” says Abbas Kamara, an officer at Tombo’s fisheries ministry. “But it’s difficult to corroborate. The trawlers work day and night. “Fish is very important to Tombo – it’s how people survive – but the fish go to the Chinese,” says Kamara. The Chinese embassy in Freetown did not respond to the Guardian’s request for comment. Amara Kalone, at the Environmental Justice Foundation, a charity that monitored foreign vessels in Sierra Leone until last year when funding for the project ran out, says fleets are adapting their tactics to evade restrictions brought against industrial fishing. “Semi-industrial ships are coming closer to the estuaries, and they are in a legal grey area,” he says. “Other crews are using very fine, monofilament nets, which are illegal but hard to track.” Another major concern is the rise of marauding fishing crews from neighbouring countries such as Guinea and Liberia, which catch juvenile fish in protected breeding grounds, fatally undermining fish populations, according to Salieu Sankoh, coordinator of the West Africa Regional Fisheries Programme in Sierra Leone. “It’s a serious threat to the nutrition of the population,” he says. “Some local boats go to the sea and come back with nothing.” In Tombo, as the sky turns orange over Sierra Leone’s Western Peninsula and the ocean becomes unusually still, a sense of despair sets in for the many artisanal fishers struggling to stay afloat. Low hauls mean that Ali Mamy Koroma, a 40-year-old fisherman with two wives and six children, has had to borrow 1m leone (£65) to pay his bills. “I feel like I’m drowning,” says Koroma, slumped against the wall at the back of Tombo’s indoor market. “But I can’t swim. There is no way out.” • In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is at 800-273-8255 or chat for support. You can also text HOME to 741741 to connect with a crisis text line counselor. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.orgMombasa Lenapir briefly strokes the waters of Kenya’s Lake Turkana with his hand as he boards the rickety canoe. A piece of hippo tooth or kalate, dangles from his right earlobe, evidence that he once killed a hippo in his younger years, a rite of passage. Lenapir is 70 and looks older, one of the El Molo community that has lived on the shores of Lake Turkana for millennia. Two years ago, he had to leave his home when rising waters engulfed his village, Komote, turning it into an island. Fearing being marooned by the expanding lake, Lenapir and other families built new homes on the mainland, while some opted to remain on the new island and use canoes to travel between the two settlements. “Can you believe we are riding on what was once dry land?” says Lenapir. “I have never seen the water rise to this level. Children used to walk to school and play in a field, now under water, a few years ago. In the past, you could have driven up to these homes. Now parents have to pay boat owners for their children to get to school. It is difficult for the sick to get medical assistance, especially at night,” says Lenapir. Another big loss for the community was a water pumping station that used to supply freshwater but now lies beneath the surface of the lake, forcing the El Molo people to rely on one of the most saline lakes in Africa for their water instead. The high levels of fluoride discolour teeth and weaken bones. Children, in particular, are prone to water-borne diseases such as diarrhoea, cholera and typhoid. Surrounded by a barren landscape and dotted with black volcanic rocks, Lake Turkana, a Unesco world heritage site, has increased in area by more than 10% over the last decade, submerging close to 800 sq km of land. It has obliterated El Molo’s fishing sites, destroyed freshwater infrastructure, engulfed burial grounds and brought the community in proximity with ferocious Nile crocodiles, hippos and snakes. A government-sanctioned report, published in 2021, says the rise in water levels in Lake Turkana and other Rift valley lakes is due to increased rainfall in the lakes’ catchment areas over the last few years, unsustainable land-use practices leading to soil in runoff water and geological activities within the Rift valley system. A 2021 UN Environment Programme report stated how the climate crisis will lead to heavier rains over the lake’s key river inflows creating a further rise in the water levels over the next 20 years, with more social, cultural and economic impacts for nearby communities such as the El Molo. “Such a possible increase in inflow will result in an increasing water level in Lake Turkana. Thus, the flooding which occurred in 2020, which was considered a rare event, is likely to become more regular in the future without any adaptation measures. The new evidence of continuing rising lake water levels is partially based on climate change scenarios and a predicted change in rainfall patterns,” says the report. With an estimated population of 1,000, the El Molo were already living on the edge. Their language is listed as extinct by Unesco’s Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger, as there is no known native El Molo who can fluently speak the dialect. El Molos belong to the Cushite ethnic group, but intermarriages between the tribe and nearby Nilotic communities, such as the Turkana and Samburu, have contributed to the language’s disappearance. Its future now lies with schoolchildren who are learning to speak a rudimentary form through a grammar book and folklore. The El Molo are said to have originated from Ethiopia before settling in about 1,000BC on the shores of Lake Turkana in Kenya. Their diet consists largely of fish caught using traditional spears, harpoons and nets. The expanding lake has affected their key source of livelihood. “Rising waters mean more fish are now found deeper into the lake. It is too windy to venture further offshore since our boats can capsize easily. We have lost a few of our members through such incidents. Without a good daily supply of fish, our lives are in danger since we cannot farm as the whole place is rocky,” says Julius Loyok, a local tour guide. After 20 minutes, Loyok helps anchor the canoe on the shoreline of Komote island, before helping Lenapir to disembark. Bypassing homesteads, they head to some traditional shrines known as gantes, where older men like Lenapir offer sacrifices when a tragedy hits the community, to curse enemy tribes, pray for the rain and protection from snake bites. There are fears that if the lake continues to expand, the revered shrines, lying close to the water’s edge, will become inaccessible. “Our language is dead, our culture is going and our homes are being swallowed by the water,” says Lenapir. In neighbouring Layeni village, the water almost laps some homes, and half of the graves in the community burial site lie submerged. It is only a matter of time before the other half, a few metres from the lake, are submerged too. In a community where the dead are revered, the sight of the graves under water is particularly distressing. “This is painful. Sometimes you need moments of solitude here. But now I have to ride a canoe with other people to reach the submerged graves. We buried the dead and now the graves are buried too,” says Lenapir. A few miles from the El Molo villages, the Desert museum houses several artefacts belonging to the community, such as food and tobacco containers and tortoise shells used as plates. Ntalan Ogom, the museum’s caretaker and a member of the El Molo community, says this is perhaps the only place where future generations will learn of a lost tribe, an extinct language and a dying culture. “We relied on the lake to live. Now it’s killing our people.”With that, we will wrap up the blog for the evening. Here is everything that went down today: The Prime Minister, Scott Morrison, gave an address to the National Press Club, beginning by acknowledging some of his mistakes, but refusing to outright apologise. Morrison made a series of announcements, including pledging an additional $209m for the aged care workforce, $666m for NDIS providers, two more years of mental health funding, a $1.6bn “economic accelerator” and a $2.2bn “university research commercialisation package”. The address came with a large crowd of anti-vaccine protesters that massed outside the Press Club, with police blocking streets and hundreds of protesters standing on the road. The RBA decided to hold the cash rate at 0.1% again. NSW reported 12,818 new cases and 30 deaths. Victoria recorded 11,311 new cases and 34 deaths. Queensland recorded 7,588 new cases and 10 deaths. Tasmania reported 699 new cases. The ACT reported 522 new cases. South Australia reported 1,266 new cases and three deaths. The Northern Territory reported 1,122 new cases. Western Australia recorded 13 new cases. NSW will resume a limited number of non-urgent elective surgeries in private and regional public hospitals from next week. The opposition leader, Anthony Albanese, confirmed Labor would support a pay rise for aged care workers if elected. Labor’s acting foreign affairs spokesperson, Kristina Keneally, said Australia has been a “bystander” to Myanmar bloodshed, a year on from the coup. Foreign affairs minister, Marise Payne, called on Myanmar’s military to “halt violence against civilians and return the country to the path of democracy”. The Queensland education minister confirmed that the Citipointe Christian College has been referred to the Non-State Schools Accreditation Board after they asked students to sign a contract denouncing homosexuality. Thanks for reading. The defence minister, Peter Dutton, has played down the idea the government could dump its $45bn future frigates program, as a new report spelled out the problems with the huge defence acquisition. The Australian newspaper reported today that the Hunter-class frigates would be “substantially” slower, have a shorter range than originally intended and could be vulnerable to detection by enemy vessels. The newspaper cited a defence “Engineering Team Assessment” of the frigates program, undertaken last November, as raising problems with the “immature” British design. The government’s contract is with shipbuilder BAE Systems. Dutton said the Australian government would not be scrapping the deal. He told Sky News: “I mean unfortunately the most important part has been left out, and that is that, yes, concerns are raised, but they are being addressed.” Dutton said he and the cabinet’s national security committee decided last year “that we would push back the start of this ship [build] by about 18 months and the reason that we did that was because of the lack of maturity around the design”. He suggested that an early build “would have caused us dramas down the end”. He said his department had assured him that they could mitigate the weight-related risks. Asked by Sky News whether there was a plan B, Dutton said: No, we’ve looked at the plan B and we went through this project in great detail late last year. Obviously I’ve been very conscious of looking at all these programs. We cancelled the subs contract as you know. We’ve gone to a different helicopter platform because the MRH90 was not performing to the standard that was assured to us, and we looked very carefully at this project and we’ve decided that we will proceed with it. The relationship with the UK is incredibly important. BAE is a very important partner with us. Meanwhile there continue to be revelations about how the Australian government handled the scrapping of the French submarine contract. Here’s our piece from yesterday, based on new documents obtained under freedom of information laws: Liberal MP Angie Bell has commented on the controversial move by one of Queensland’s largest independent schools to ask families to sign an enrolment contract that includes asking them to agree “homosexual acts” are immoral, listing them along with bestiality, incest and paedophilia as “offensive to God”. The “statement of faith” required for enrolment at Citipointe Christian College also includes statements that imply transgender students will be recognised only by their “biological sex” at the school – that students should identify “with the gender that God bestowed”. Bell led a group of four Liberal moderate MPs who traded their support for the religious discrimination bill in return for a commitment from the attorney general, Michaelia Cash, that LGBTQ+ students would be protected at the same time by amendments removing the ability for schools to discriminate on sexuality and gender. Cash has since reneged on the deal. Bell said: The contract created by Citipointe Christian College contains no new developments. For many years, religious schools have preserved the ability to terminate a child’s enrolment based on their sexual orientation, gender identity, marital or relationship status or pregnancy. It still does not make it okay for a child who may be struggling with mental health challenges. Prior to the conclusion of the 2021 sitting calendar, I worked with the prime minister’s office to discuss how greater protections for students who identify as part of minority groups could be implemented by repealing the exemption currently afforded to religious schools that enables a contract such as this to be enforced. Upon my return to Canberra next week, I will continue to advocate, negotiate and discuss any possible options to ensure children are held accountable to their merit and not their sexual identity, gender identity, relationship status or pregnancy. A child should be able to attend any Australian education institution without hinderance or judgement. The only instance in which a child should be issued a consequence in a learning environment, is when held accountable for poor choices of an academic nature such as not completing homework, breaking uniform policy or disrupting the learning of their peers. In this matter of Citipointe Christian College, I strongly urge its leadership and board to focus on the education of children and fostering a positive environment, where every child feels safe, supported and does not fear retribution based on any of these grounds. Bell also gave her first public account of why the deal doesn’t appear to have panned out as intended: The undertaking to repeal section 38(3) of the Sex Discrimination Act did not eventuate in consequential amendments after the legislation did not come to a vote in the House of Representatives in the final sitting of 2021. The aged care services minister, Richard Colbeck, has agreed to attend the Covid committee, after he declined to attend on 14 January citing urgent Covid work only to then attend the Ashes Cricket on that day. Colbeck will appear at the committee tomorrow (Wednesday 2 February) from 2 to 4pm alongside officials from the health department, Therapeutic Goods Administration and the Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation. The committee’s chair, Katy Gallagher, has also taken issue with Scott Morrison taking credit for setting up the Covid committee at the Press Club today: Aly has continued zeroing in on the government today, saying the cash bonus for aged care workers is “not a long term solution.” The Morrison government intends to provide two payments of $400 to aged care workers by the end of May, but Aly wasn’t buying it: Aged care workers don’t need a sugar hit of $400 to keep them doing what they’re doing. They love what they’re doing and they do it because they have a passion for it. They need better work conditions and better pay conditions. The government can respond today to the Royal Commission into Aged Care and lift the working conditions for aged care workers now, instead of giving them a $400 sugar hit, which of course is welcome – they do deserve that money [and] I won’t argue against that – but it’s not a long-term solution. If you want aged care workers to stay in aged care, if you want our most valuable asset in Australia which is our elderly to be looked after, you need to improve their work and conditions. Nationals senator Matt Canavan is on the ABC’s Afternoon Briefing, defending the PM’s speech earlier this afternoon (although admitting he didn’t watch it): I have seen some of the reports, though, and I think the prime minister is just simply acknowledging common sense. None of us are perfect. No government in the world has had a perfect record through what has been an amazing pandemic. Even absent a pandemic. We all make mistakes from time to time. The key thing for any organisation, for any government, for any individual really in life is to learn from your mistakes and fix the consequences of them when you can. Labor MP Anne Aly was much less forgiving of the PM’s lack of acknowledgement of his mistakes: After a very slow vaccine rollout, the slowness in getting the antigen tests out is testimony to the fact they haven’t learned from their mistakes. They haven’t learned from the mistakes exposed by the royal commission. They haven’t learned from the mistakes of robodebt and quite frankly, if Scott Morrison is asking people to judge him and his leadership on whether or not he has learned from his mistakes, then it’s a huge failure in that regard. Gladys Berejiklian has issued a statement in response to the leaked text exchange in which she and a Liberal colleague discussed Scott Morrison. The texts allegedly described the prime minister as a “horrible person”, a “fraud” and a “complete psycho”. ”I understand there has been some commentary today concerning myself and the PM,” Berejiklian said. “I have no recollection of such messages. Let me reiterate my very strong support for prime minister Morrison and all he is doing for our nation during these very challenging times. I also strongly believe he is the best person to lead our nation for years to come.” The former NSW premier, Gladys Berejiklian, has responded to reports this afternoon she called the PM a “horrible person” in private text messages with a Liberal cabinet minister: The Australian Bureau of Statistics has released retail figures for December, showing sales have slowed, but turnover was still strong. Retail turnover dropped 4.4% in December, the biggest fall since April 2020, but it followed a 7.3% national jump in November and a 4.9% jump in October. The ABS director of quarterly economy-wide statistics, Ben James, said figures remained above pre-pandemic levels and December’s turnover was the second highest level on record, behind November. Despite this month’s fall, retail turnover remains strong, up 4.8% on December 2020, with strong consumer spending continuing post the Delta outbreak. Victoria recorded the largest fall of any state or territory, down 8.4%, however this only partly unwinds the state’s strong rise in November when it rose to a record level. NSW spending also fell by 4.2% while WA spending dropped by 3.5%, with the NT the only state or territory reporting a rise in turnover, seeing a 3.6% increase. If you’d like to watch the prime minister be asked about private messages where the former NSW premier, Gladys Berejiklian, called him a “horrible” person, you can check it out at the link below: Paul Sadler, CEO at Aged &amp; Community Services Australia (ACSA), has stepped up to respond to the Prime Minister’s announcements saying he welcomes the acknowledgement of what the industry is going through but more is needed: This one-off payment which will be happening over two payment periods in February and May is important for our workforce. But it only amounts to around $1 per hour extra for the workers in aged care. The headline number is $800 but most aged care workers will not receive that because it’s prorated according to whether you work full-time or part-time. The $800 only goes to the full-time workers and they are the minority of our aged care workforce. So from our point of view, we welcome government to the whole question of what’s happening in Covid but we need to do so much more to support aged care. Some of those things that we need to do: firstly, we need to make sure we are actually getting rapid antigen tests and personal protective equipment to all the aged care homes who need them. The government is prioritising aged care homes that have outbreaks for the provision of rapid antigen tests. Why aren’t we giving rapid antigen tests to the aged care homes that don’t yet have an outbreak and are trying to stop this disease getting in? Secondly, it’s going to be really important to finish the booster program. We’re nearly there. We’re nearly at 100% of aged care homes ... but we now need to make sure that all of the aged care residents and all our staff have access to boosters over the coming weeks. Western Australia has reported 13 new local cases and zero deaths. The WA premier, Mark McGowan, had earlier said eight of the new cases were linked to known clusters, with five under investigation. The Voices of North Sydney pro-democracy group have been complaining on social media about a poll into the Liberal-held electorate over the weekend. Journalist and activist Margo Kingston has published a transcript, confirmed by Guardian Australia through other recipients of the call, that shows why the group is outraged. After some fairly neutral questions about which party or candidate is best to handle this or that issue, the poll then asks whether respondents agree with a series of propositions: Trent Zimmerman does a good job representing me? Independents lack experience and influence? Independents have a strong voice? A hung parliament will create instability and uncertainty at a critical time for Australia? You don’t know what an Independent stands for ? Scott Morrison is doing a good job steering Australia through a crisis? Keeping your Liberal member will ensure stability ? As you can see - the vast majority of these are pro-incumbent and anti-independent in an electorate where Liberal Trent Zimmerman has a large margin but faces a strong challenge from independent Kylea Tink. Academic Murray Goot noted that only one of the statements is supportive of an independent, which is consistent with “message testing – the questions being an attempt to see what aspects of being an independent might make an Independent vulnerable to an attack launched on behalf of the sitting member [or] ... a conscious attempt not to gather information but to spread doubt about the wisdom of voting for an independent, only partly disguised by the inclusion of one positive statement out of eight”. Psephologist Kevin Bonham told Guardian Australia the poll is “not push polling” – which refers to the practice of seeding disinformation (false claims) through something purporting to be a poll. Bonham said: This is a typical internal party poll where parties test messages ... [In which they] try to hone their strategies for campaigning. They sometimes get very controversial because they test claims that are dubious. It looks like the Liberal Party are honing attack lines against independents. We’ve asked them if they’re behind the poll, which recipients said was conducted by EMRS, a company owned by the Liberal-aligned Crosby-Textor lobbying group. The Reserve Bank will stop its purchases of government debt to support the Australian economy from 10 February but says the move does not imply a near-term rise in the official cash rate. At the central’s bank’s first meeting of 2022, Governor Philip Lowe said “faster-than-expected progress has been made towards the RBA’s goals and further progress is likely”, hence it was “the right time to end the bond purchase program”. However, “the Board is committed to maintaining highly supportive monetary conditions to achieve its objectives of a return to full employment in Australia and inflation consistent with the target. Ceasing purchases under the bond purchase program does not imply a near-term increase in interest rates. “As the Board has stated previously, it will not increase the cash rate until actual inflation is sustainably within the 2 to 3% target range. While inflation has picked up, it is too early to conclude that it is sustainably within the target band.” What’s notable is that the RBA has dropped its previous reference to lifting rates in 2024 or at a pinch in 2023. Financial markets have already been pencilling in a move by May, and today’s comments may encourage others to bring forward their predictions on when rates will rise. More than a few federal Coalition MPs will be hoping the central bank can wait at least until June. So, in between that flurry of announcements, we had South Australia and the Northern Territory give their Covid update. South Australia recorded three deaths and 1,266 new cases, with 273 people in hospital, which the premier said was the lowest it had been in some time. The Northern Territory reported 1,122 new cases, with 132 people in hospital. The Reserve Bank of Australia has announced it will hold the cash rate at its record low, in line with many expectations. The RBA also announced it would end its bond buying program. New Zealand has secured the delivery of another 36m rapid antigen tests, upping the stocks to more than 55m tests for use over the next two months as the country prepares for a widespread Omicron outbreak. A total of 123m rapid antigen tests have been ordered through to June. The deputy prime minister, Grant Robertson, said on Tuesday: The government is preparing for a move to phase two of our Omicron plan, where we start integrating rapid antigen tests into testing, to ensure a return-to-work programme for critical businesses. Robertson said modelling shows that during the peak of an Omicron outbreak, the country may need to use 9m RATs a week which is equivalent to testing a quarter of New Zealand every day, or all of New Zealand twice a week. That scale of testing will go a long way to reducing the risk of an infected person going to work and then infecting others. The tests will be used for asymptomatic critical workers so that hospitals, supermarkets and other services can continue operating, added the associate health minister, Dr Ayesha Verrall: The use and supply of RATs will continue to be prioritised to ensure we are protecting the vulnerable and to enable asymptomatic critical workers to return to work. These additional supplies will go a long way to ensuring those who most need a test can access one. Outside the Press Club following his speech, Scott Morrison refused to answer further questions about the text message allegations raised by Network 10’s Peter van Onselen. As he left the building and got into a waiting car, the PM refused to stop for journalists outside, waving off reporters’ questions. Protesters had assembled at the exit gate to the carpark after leaving the front of the building. Security cleared a path through the crowd, but protesters ran alongside the PM’s car as it sped away. The deputy prime minister, Barnaby Joyce, walked through the crowd himself before turning around and returning to the carpark. He told reporters he was looking for his waiting car, which had dropped him off on the road outside the Press Club. Protesters yelled abuse and insults at Morrison and Joyce as they left. The immigration minister, Alex Hawke, also shrugged off questions about the text allegations aired by Van Onselen. Stopped by journalists on his way out of the Press club, Hawke said he wouldn’t comment on the texts but called Berejiklian “fantastic”. Home Affairs officials have insisted the government is not “anti-encryption” while arguing tech platforms rolling out end-to-end encryption are prioritising privacy and security over public safety. Speaking before the parliamentary inquiry on social media and online safety, Brendan Dowling, the first assistant secretary for digital and technology policy at the Department of Home Affairs, said the department is “deeply concerned that innovation in digital tools, including anonymising technology like end-to-end encryption, is not striking the right balance between the benefits and the risks of harm.” Dowling accused the tech companies of considering safety of users as an afterthought when rolling out end-to-end encryption for privacy and security reasons: I’ll start by saying that we recognise there are substantial benefits particularly to cyber security and privacy from the use of encryption. So we’re not ... anti-encryption or looking for vulnerabilities in encryption. But we do see that the adoption of ubiquitous encryption across more and more platforms will have serious and real implications for safety, and particularly around the proliferation of child abuse material, around the use of anonymity tools in the conduct of cybercrime. Here are the case numbers from around the country today, as states confirm at least 74 coronavirus deaths: ACT Cases: 522 Deaths: 0 In hospital: 64 (one person in ICU) NSW Cases: 12,818 Deaths: 30 In hospital: 2,749 (186 people in ICU) NT Cases: 1,122 Deaths: 0 In hospital: 132 Queensland Cases: 7,588 Deaths: 10 In hospital: 868 (54 people in ICU) South Australia Cases: 1,266 Deaths: 3 In hospital: 273 Tasmania Cases: 699 Deaths: 0 In hospital: 16 (one person in ICU) Victoria Cases: 11,311 Deaths: 34 In hospital: 851 (106 people in ICU) Western Australia Cases: 13 Deaths: 0 In hospital: 1 And that brings an end to a dramatic National Press Club! Take a breather, have some tea, there was a lot to unpack there. Laura Tingle ends proceedings by asking the PM if he would debate opposition leader Anthony Albanese on the NPC stage, to which Morrison says he is pushing for an independent debating commission. Tingle presses on: LT: Will you do a debate, though? SM: Of course I will. Of course I will. We’ll be debating lots! Final question, this time from Greg Brown of the Australian, who says the last election was won by Morrison because he was more popular than Bill Shorten and could “tear apart” Labor’s “big” policies. What can we expect from Morrison this year? If you want taxes to remain low, then vote Liberal and National – don’t vote Labor. Because their taxes are the opposite. They’ve already opened the batting on the higher taxes and they’ve already started that. And once they get started, you know that they can’t stop when it comes to taxing you. The PM is asked why his government wasn’t prepared for a variant like Omicron, why they had not anticipated that RATs would be necessary in their response. Once again, we return to comparisons: No country did pick that. Which country did? Sam Maiden from news.com.au has asked the PM what he thinks of changing the rules that pay MPs $291 a night to live at home, comparing the payment with the $800 made to aged care workers. The PM says he expects all his MPs and senators to follow the rules, only adding that “if those rules need to change”, they would be changed independently. OK, so we have veered a little off topic, but Peter van Onselen from Channel 10 says he has text messages between former NSW premier Gladys Berejiklian and a “current Liberal Cabinet minister”: I’ve got them right here. In one she describes you as “a horrible, horrible person,” going on to say she did not trust you and you’re more concerned with politics than people. The minister is even more scathing, describing you as a “fraud” and “a complete psycho”. Here is what the PM had to say: Well, I don’t know who you’re referring to, or the basis of what you’ve put to me. But I obviously don’t agree with it. And I don’t think that that is my record. Another spicy question, this time from Andrew Probyn of the ABC, who points out the PM’s plummeting approval ratings, asking why Morrison was “the best person to lead the Coalition to the next election”. Here was Morrison’s answer: I have a great trust in the Australian people. I think they’re very wise and I think that they’re very discerning. I think that they take elections very, very seriously. Because they know the consequences. And there’s a difference between answering a phone and walking into a ballot box and making a decision that has consequences. And I know from my own experience that they will weigh these things up in the months ahead. And they’ll be saying, “Who has the economic plan and economic management experience to ensure that I can stay in my job and my business can succeed? ... And who has that experience and who has that understanding of the complexity of these challenges to make all of that work?” And they’ll weigh that up. And they’ll wonder, with what we’re seeing in the regions and the threats to our security – well, who has shown that they’re able to stand up for [our] interests? Whether it’s standing up to other countries in our region, standing up to the big tech companies, standing up to the banks and the energy companies. Andrew Clennell from Sky News has lobbed the PM a spicy question, asking if he has “lost touch” with ordinary Australians. Clennell asks him to list the price of a loaf of bread, a litre of petrol and a rapid antigen test. Here is what the PM has to say: First of all, during the pandemic, you can’t pay for everything. Because it all has to be paid for. Over the course of the pandemic, we’ve provided over $100 billion in economic support, JobKeeper being the most significant, and that has saved businesses across this country. And, of course ... one of the things that we have to be very mindful of, Andrew, is that this thing isn’t over yet. It’s not over. The next variant could have any number of permutations to it. And so, when we decided to do JobKeeper, we said it’s going to start and it’s going to finish and people asked the treasurer and I the same question that you’re asking me now. “Why are you pulling JobKeeper away?” Because, that’s what you do when you’re responsible and running a government. You can’t say yes to everybody all the time. And you have to do things which ensure that you’ve got your government and your bank balance as a government able to deal with the next challenge. I mean, our opponents wanted to keep it going. Now, I’m not going to pretend to you that I go out each day and I buy a loaf of bread and I buy a litre of milk. I’m not going to pretend to you that I do that. I’ll leave those sort of things to you, mate. And you can run it. But the point is that I do my job every day to ensure that those things are affordable as they possibly can be for Australians every single day. Claire Armstrong from the Daily Telegraph has asked Morrison what makes parliament and political offices more safe for women than they were 12 months ago, a year on from the reckoning parliament faced. Morrison begins by saying he “listened” and “reflected” on the “brave stands people have taken”: I’d say the most important thing that has happened is we now have an independent complaints mechanism. This was one of the key recommendations, and the one we have acted on. And we’ve done that together as a parliament. And that, I think, assists everybody who works in that building. Not just the politicians and their staff. That process that we examined closely, that let down so many a year ago, and before, has been significantly changed. And for the better. And we have learnt from those times. And I believe it’s safer today than it was a year ago because of those changes and the brave stands that people have taken on these issues. And I’ve listened carefully to them and reflected on them. And will continue to work to ensure that those processes work for people. Because if you find yourself in that situation, it’s incredibly important that there are those there to help you and support you, to be able to make good decisions for you, and to address the things that you need addressed to make the place safer. And so the independent complaints mechanism that we have put in place – and the counselling support and the other things that sit around that – I think provides an environment should, God forbid that ever happen to anyone again, that they will find a situation very different to the one Ms Higgins found herself in. Spare a thought for policymakers and reserve bankers (see earlier post) ... Is the economy running too hot (so we must curb excessive spending and lift interest rates) or at a delicate stage because of disruptions from Omicron or the next Covid variant (so we must throw more money at struggling firms and families)? The latest data from the ABS and other sources suggest the risks lie more with the former than the latter. Take retail sales figures for December. They fell 4.4% from November, the biggest monthly retreat since April 2020. That sounds bad, but turnover was up 4.8% on December 2020, and in dollar terms only November 2021 was bigger. And lending data also out from the ABS also indicates confidence was high at the end of 2021. Perhaps too high. New loans for housing rose 4.4% in December to a record $32.8bn, which is a bit scary if you figure out how many days were “holidays”. Anyway, the sum was 26.5% higher than a year earlier with loans to owner-occupiers (up 5.3%) and investors up 2.4%. Personal finance was up a more modest 0.7% but lending for “personal investment” was up 17.4%. Anyway, Omicron dates some of that data, hence the extra interest in more recent readings. Among those is ANZ-Roy Morgan’s consumer confidence view. Sentiment improved last week by 1.7% as (reported) Covid cases fell across most of the country. NSW snapped three weeks of falls to perk up 6.2% and WA (despite those closed borders) rose 4.3%. Victoria, though, sank 2.5% and Queensland 0.6%. The weekly numbers can jump around a bit but a surprise was a 0.3 % fall in inflation expectations to 4.7%. “Retail petrol prices are up 7% in January, which would usually elevate inflation expectations,” ANZ’s head of Australian economics, David Plank, said. The CBA, too, has picked up a rise in activity according to credit card spending behaviour. “With this week’s increase, NSW has accounted for just over 40% of the increase in spending nationally since the start of this year, much higher than its contribution during normal times,” the CBA said. That’s slightly jarring given this week’s appeal by NSW Premier Dominic Perrottet and Treasurer Matt Kean for more federal aid. I’d just like to add the final interaction between Tingle and Morrison there: LT: So you don’t have to say sorry about any of those things? SM: I think I’ve explained my answer fairly fully. OK, we’re into questions, and Tingle begins with a doozy: Will the PM apologise for the many mistakes he’s made as prime minister? Here is his response: We’re all terribly sorry for what this pandemic has done to the world and to this country. These are the times in which we live. And I’ve set out today, I think, very clearly, the challenges that we’ve faced. But I’m also very proud of Australians and what they’ve achieved in enabling us all to come through this despite the setbacks and the challenges that we have faced. In terms of the things – when I say we haven’t got everything right – let me reflect on a couple of them for you. First of all, as we went into this summer, we were optimistic – I was optimistic ... As we went into the summer – I think we were too optimistic, perhaps. And we could have communicated more clearly about the risks and challenges that we still faced. And I think in raising those expectations about the summer, that we heightened the great sense of disappointment that people felt. And as we had to make massive changes because of Omicron, as I said, the rapid antigen tests had only actually been approved for use by the TGA earlier in November. We’d agreed at the meeting of national cabinet about how they’d be funded and who had to go and get them. And so we moved quickly because we hadn’t anticipated that we would have a variant that resulted in the vaccine not being able to stop the transmission. We had invested so much – and Australians invested so much – in getting those vaccinations. Secondly, on the vaccination program, if I had my time over, I would have put it under a military operation from the outset and not later in the year. ... We’d had the goal of ensuring that everyone who wanted a vaccine could be offered one by October - for the record, that was achieved on the 25th of October. In the aged care sector, we knew – well, I should say we learnt – that the interface between the aged care sector and the public hospital system was blurred. And so, when the storms of Covid hit, that created some real challenges. So the PM wraps up with one final announcement, a $2.2 billion investment into research and universities: Our $2.2 billion university research commercialisation package will focus the considerable research power, our smartest minds of our universities, on Australia’s national economic priorities. And as we drive down unemployment, we’re also driving up the creation of new products and new companies here in Australia. Backing our best researchers and their ideas to ensure Australia’s economy roars back even stronger in the future, with leading-edge manufacturing at its core. We make stuff here. We make it really well. And we’re gonna keep making it under our government. The PM has continued on this topic, talking about his “Trailblazer Universities Program”, and announcing a $1.6 billion program to encourage research to get to “later stages of development”: This will see eligible universities undertake reforms, including to intellectual property arrangements, and provide clear promotional pathways for academic researchers, engaging in commercialisation activities. Now, the first step is underway. There are eight university proposals short-listed to share in $243 million of investment, working closely with industry partners. And regions are going to do great in this program. They really are. Funding of $30 million will see participating universities partnering with the CSIRO to access specialist equipment, enabling researchers to prototype and test technologies at scale. Today, I’m announcing the cornerstone of the government’s new approach to turning great Australian ideas into commercial success, a $1.6 billion program called Australia’s economic accelerator. In driving commercialisation, the key policy challenge surrounds the so-called valley of death, where early-stage research is frequently not progressed to later stages of development because of the risk and uncertainty about commercial returns. It will allow Australian innovators to access funding opportunities for each stage of their project, provided they can continue to prove project viability and, importantly, commercial potential. Next, the PM is talking about his “modern manufacturing strategy” that he wants to “take to the next level”: We’re doing that by fusing it with greater investment in our world-class university research capabilities. Our modern manufacturing strategy has set out clear principles to build new sources of growth and scale in six key areas where Australia has significant comparative advantage, strategic interests, and the capacity to harness new opportunities. Medical products. Food and beverage. Recycling and clean energy. Resources technology and critical minerals processing. Defence industry. And space. To date, we have committed over $312 million in funding to boost manufacturing capability and supply-chain resilience, leveraging $677 million more in private-sector investment. We now need to better link and leverage our world-class research sector to boost these efforts. 85% of Australian research is rated, officially, at or above world standard. Yet we continue to under-perform frustratingly in achieving commercialisation outcomes. We need to shift the focus from citations to commercial success. We need to accelerate the forging of linkages between Australian industry and Australian university researchers. We need to develop a new breed of research entrepreneurs here in Australia, so they can create the new products, the new companies and, most importantly, the new jobs. Ok, now Morrison is listing out the five point economic plan he will be taking into the election (I have a feeling we’ll be hearing these again): Firstly, keeping taxes low and cutting red tape to drive investment and enabling Australians to keep more of what they earn, as we promised. Secondly, investing in the infrastructure and skills development, and growing our workforce, to meet the demands of a growing economy. Thirdly, delivering the affordable, reliable energy that Australian businesses, and especially regional economies, need to power their futures ahead, while reducing our emissions to achieve net zero by 2050, and reducing household electricity bills. Fourthly, making Australia a top-10 data and digital economy by 2030. And fifthly, securing our sovereign manufacturing capability, unlocking a new generation of high-wage, high-skill, high-tech jobs. More financial stats now, including 300,000 people assisted into home ownership in the past three years, an estimated $245 billion in additional household savings, and an 8% drop in energy bills, reportedly saving households $128 a year. We are passionate about getting Australians into jobs. And we have the experience, we have the track record, and we have the economic plans that back this up. Jobs change lives. They change families. They change communities. They give Australians purpose and independence. They free them from the clutches of welfare and dependence. And they do the heavy lifting on transforming the budget also. I believe we can now achieve an unemployment rate with a “3” in front of it this year. Our goal is to achieve this in the second half of 2022. Next, Morrison has just gone through a whole heap of unemployment figures, including youth unemployment dropping to its lowest levels since 2008, with unemployment at 4.2%, and with more than 1 million women in work. And as my colleagues know, nothing puts a bigger smile on my face than hearing that young people are getting into jobs. The PM continues, listing off two new announcements, including a boost for NDIS services providers, and adding two more years to the government’s commitments to mental health funding: To ensure the viability of the NDIS providers, we provided more than $666 million in advance payments and made changes to allow eligible NDIS providers to claim a payment to support their disability workers to be vaccinated against Covid-19. Strong health resilience built through a once-in-a-century pandemic. Police have requested vehicles move on from the front of the Press Club, and several quickly did. Around a dozen cars and trucks remain, including one van from which protesters are making speeches. The PA is now playing a stream of Morrison’s speech from inside the building, with one protester giving comments after each sentence, as the crowd boos and jeers. Other protesters are now intensifying their verbal abuse of journalists standing behind the police line. Hundreds of protesters camped in parks and public areas around Parliament House on Monday night. On Tuesday morning, Guardian Australia counted more than 300 cars parked in public areas, with the majority setting up tents, camper vans or swags. ACT police told Guardian Australia they have “moved on” protesters who “set up unauthorised campsites in the area”. “The community is reminded camping or parking vehicles is prohibited in the Parliamentary Triangle and on NCA managed land without a permit,” a police spokesperson said. And we have the first actual announcement from the PM, who announces an additional $209m to support aged care workers: And that’s why I’m announcing today the government is providing, again, a further $209 million to support the aged care workforce to continue to care for older Australians through this pandemic. This is a responsible commitment that build on the $393 million already provided over three payments to 234,000 aged care workers earlier in the pandemic. It worked. We’re doing it again. In coming months, two bonus payments of up to $400 each will be paid to aged care workers, including those providing direct care, food or cleaning services. We’re back to comparing to other countries (I am now unsure if we should or shouldn’t be doing this), this time in discussion of Australia’s health response to Covid: Our health response has ensured that our health and aged care system has stood up to the global pandemic where, in so many other countries we know around the world, it collapsed. More than 40,000 lives have been saved in this country when compared to the death rate from Covid in other countries just like Australia. We have one of the lowest death rates from Covid in the world, including from Omicron. We have one of the highest vaccination rates in the world – more than 93% of Australians aged 16 and over are fully vaccinated. And since the pandemic began, our government has committed an additional $40 billion to support Australia’s health response to the pandemic – more than Medicare and the PBS in any given year. The PM has continued, saying he didn’t engage in “petty fights” with state premiers, and stood by his largely consistent position that the states have had most of the responsibility during the pandemic: You must also focus on what you can control and what you’re responsible for. A good example is respecting the constitutional responsibilities of the states and the commonwealth under our federation. The pandemic did not suspend the constitution or the federation. It did not change what the states and commonwealth have always been responsible for. They didn’t get any more powers. They didn’t get any less. And I have always sought to put the national interest first by seeking to work together with the premiers and the chief ministers through the national cabinet, and not engage in petty fights. That wouldn’t have helped anyone. My job was to keep everybody in the room working together. So, moments after saying we should compare pandemic responses to reflect on how good we supposedly have it, Morrison now says we should not compare to other responses because Australia is “different”: Everywhere is not the same. We are constantly engaged with experts and governments around the world to share experience, data, and information. And they’ve learnt from us, I can tell you. But that doesn’t mean that what is done elsewhere is always the right solution for our conditions or circumstances here in Australia. Australia has many differences with the rest of the world. Our regulatory authorities. Our seasons. Our health and social security systems. Cut-and-paste doesn’t cut it in a pandemic. The PM has now shifted to discussing the Omicron response, first reiterating that testing “was always free”: The unprecedented surge in cases caused by Omicron changed everything. It was like dealing with a completely new virus. The medical advice to government on the use of rapid antigen tests changed. And so did our response. And so, since then, the government contracted 78 million rapid antigen tests to help meet significant new demands in the states and the territories and the private sector. Over 652,000 concession card holders have already accessed over 2.7 million free rapid antigen tests through the community pharmacy concession card holder program, which commenced just over a week ago. The government is also delivering 10 million rapid antigen tests to support state and territory clinics. And our own area of responsibility, around 8 million tests have already been provided to aged care facilities with the purchasing of those tests beginning back in August of last year. Morrison has said he wants to share some of the “lessons” he’s learnt over the past three years, and launches into a defence of the “balance” needed to be struck in pandemic responses: Firstly, you’ve always got to focus on getting the balance right. From the outset of the pandemic, I have said our twin goals have been to save lives and to save livelihoods. This is how we protect our Australian way of life. And I have always sought to balance our health objectives with our broader societal and economic wellbeing. We must respect the virus, but we must not live in fear of it. You must be prepared to listen to that advice, but also to take the decisions that strike the right balance. Because it is we who have been trusted with those decisions. He adds a second, where he says it is important to be “practical”: The virus does not care what your political views are. It writes the rules about how it behaves. And we must then write our rules about how we respond. And these rules must be flexible. They will change. There is no set-and-forget in a pandemic like this. There are times when you have to pull back. And there are times when you have to push forward. Morrison immediately adds that situations overseas have been worse, but says it was “fair enough” that some have asked of him to improve the government’s response to the series of crises he listed: The fact that far worse outcomes have been experienced overseas – which we know – well, that gives some important perspective. But it doesn’t soften the blow. And it’s fair enough that this disappointment leads you to ask, “Couldn’t YOU have done more? Couldn’t this have been avoided? After all, aren’t you responsible?” I get that. For me as prime minister, accepting this responsibility means asking yourself and challenging yourself every single day with those same questions. And I can assure you I do. I haven’t got everything right. And I’ll take my fair share of the criticism and the blame. The PM says it has been “crushing” to have visited towns “devastated” by storms, floods or fires: It’s been crushing to visit towns and homes devastated – often with Jen – by storms, ravaged by flood or fires, to walk across barren pastures, to see the queues outside Centrelink or testing centres, to see the empty shops and restaurants, as we saw in Cairns earlier over the weekend. To see the lives and livelihoods of Australians disrupted through no fault of their own and through circumstances well beyond theirs and our control, often. So I understand and I acknowledge the frustration, especially with how this global pandemic has played out over this past very difficult summer. The PM begins by reflecting on the past three years, listing fires, pandemics and recessions, saying young people have “never know anything like it”. The past three years have been some of the most extraordinary that our nation has ever experienced. Younger generations have never known anything like it. The succession of natural disasters from drought to flood, fires, pestilence, a once-in-a-century global pandemic, the recession – it has pushed our country to the very limits. Our way of life has been completely turned upside-down. For so many Australians, I know it’s been exhausting financially, physically, emotionally. And when we thought we might just be breaking free, the rains have come, the cyclone has hit, or a new and completely different strain of the virus – like Omicron – has come and changed all the rules. The president of the NPC, Laura Tingle, introduced the PM by saying she anticipated he had a “veritable smorgasbord of announcements” to make today. Back at the Press Club protest, trucks are blasting their air horns and demonstrators are waving upside-down Australian flags. A small number of protesters are drinking beer from cans and smoking what appears to be marijuana, while others have shouted abuse at journalists standing outside the building. As has become common at anti-vaccine protests in Australia, demonstrators are singing “The Voice” by John Farnham. They’re also singing along to their own version of Pink Floyd’s “Another Brick In The Wall”, with lyrics related to vaccination which I won’t subject you to. Chants of “remove ScoMo” have rung out just minutes before the prime minister is due to address the Press Club. Other speakers on a PA system are loudly sharing debunked conspiracy theories about vaccines. The crowd appears to be growing. Earlier, only a smattering of protesters had been on the lawns outside Parliament House, in a far cry from the dramatic scenes on Monday. More than a dozen federal police officers were standing guard at parliament’s front doors, and main roads around the building were closed off, in anticipation of further protests. They have not yet eventuated, with most demonstrators now at the Press Club. Good afternoon, Mostafa Rachwani with you this afternoon, and a quick thanks to Matilda Boseley for expertly navigating us through the morning’s news. The PM is due shortly, and we will bring you all the updates from that and everything else happening around the country. With that, I shall hand you over to the amazing Mostafa Rachwani to bring you all the update’s from the prime minister’s National Press Club address and all the rest of the afternoon’s news. Popular science podcast, Science Vs, is the latest to take a stand against Spotify’s reluctance to take strong action against Joe Rogan for airing unchallenged Covid-19 misinformation, with staff at the Spotify-owned podcast announcing they would not release new episodes except ones counteracting misinformation on Spotify. Science Vs host and executive producer, Wendy Zukerman, tweeted out the letter she and editor Blythe Terrell sent to Spotify chief executive, Daniel Ek, on Tuesday, explaining their reasoning. They said: Rogan’s show leaves the audience with a skewed and inaccurate view of the Covid-19 vaccines. And Spotify has done little to address this. On Sunday, Spotify published its Platform Rules, but we do not think they go far enough. Until Spotify implements stronger methods to prevent the spread of misinformation on the platform, we will no longer be making new Science Vs episodes, except those intended to counteract misinformation being spread on Spotify. The pair said content moderation can be hard, but Spotify has a responsibility to do more, especially now that Spotify acknowledges its position in the tech world has moved from being simply a music platform to a publisher of exclusive content. Science Vs started out in 2015 as a podcast by Australia’s ABC, before it was purchased by US-based podcasting network Gimlet Media, which was bought out by Spotify in early 2019 for US$230m. The Queensland education minister has confirmed that the Citipointe Christian College has been referred to the Non-State Schools Accreditation Board after they asked students to sign a contract denouncing homosexuality and bisexuality and promising to conform to the roles of their biological gender. You can read more about the situation below: A large crowd of anti-vaccine protesters has massed outside the National Press Club in Canberra, where the prime minister, Scott Morrison, is shortly to give a speech. Police have blocked off streets all around the area, but a dozen cars and trucks had already parked outside the building, blocking the main road. Hundreds of people – nearly all maskless, many brandishing signs critical of vaccines and vaccination mandates – are now standing on the road or perched on the back of the vehicles. A large line of police is standing between the protesters and the front door to the building. Many demonstrators are displaying flags or signs supportive of Donald Trump or the United Australia party. Morrison’s office says “at this stage” the speech will be going ahead. The deputy PM, Barnaby Joyce, has just arrived, walking through a side entrance. Our fantastic science reporter Donna Lu is looking to speak to Australians living with long Covid. You can email her at Donna.Lu@theguardian.com Some very normal scenes coming out of Canberra this morning: D’Ath has labelled the federal government’s response to the aged care situation as “a bit cheeky,” saying Morrison’s government is claiming to have the Covid situation in aged care under control when “behind closed doors, they’re turning to the states and territories and saying: ‘Hey, can you sort this out for us?’” She also stated: “Too many aged care residents are passing away who have not been offered a booster.” The Queensland health minister, Yvette D’Ath, has labelled Morrison’s proposed $800 aged care worker bonus payments a “slap in the face to staff to these facilities and to all the families and loved ones out there”. She says the federal government should instead be taking action on the recommendations made by the royal commission. Foley has been asked whether Victoria is considering resuming non-urgent elective surgery, after NSW announced some elective surgeries will resume in a staged capacity from Monday 7 February. Yes, every day, including today, we consult with both private hospitals and the public hospital sector around just where the situation is when it comes to when it will be appropriate to turn back on elective surgery. He apologised for the disruptions and delays, but said the pause was necessary. Like many other jurisdictions, like in fact all other jurisdictions, measures of reductions and deferrals of elective surgery have been put in place. Our friends in New South Wales, where the initial outbreak of Omicron peak is coming off, have always been about two weeks or so ahead of ourselves. Foley said changes in NSW applied only to private hospitals and some regional hospitals. It’s not a return to normal operations. We are in the process of having similar discussions. Just jumping back to Victoria for a moment. Foley has been asked why the government hasn’t consulted the state’s chief health officer on whether a third Covid-19 vaccine dose should be mandated. Mandates are one of the tools of driving vaccination rates and are a key feature right across the country in 2021 in making us one of the most vaccinated communities on the planet. And in that regard, the process, as we all know, is pretty straightforward. The Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisations considers what constitutes being fully vaccinated. They’re going through that process. All the states and territories are contributing to that and in the very near future, from my discussions with officials, we would expect the Australian Technical Advisory Group to advise the national cabinet on that outcome. And once that advice has been given then the states and territories will go about the process of consultation as we have in previous times to drive those vaccination rates up. Foley says “in the context of 2022 and the Omicron variant” he expects “fully vaccinated” will come to mean three doses of a vaccine. For people who are immunosuppressed and other at-risk groups, it will be four doses, he says. Queensland chief health officer, Dr John Gerrard, is providing additional details about those Covid deaths now. Sadly, we have 10 deaths to report today. That is 10 people who died having had a Covid test around the time of their death. That includes two people in their 70s, four in their 80s, and four in their 90s. Of these, two were unvaccinated, eight had received two doses of vaccine and none had received boosters. Of these 10, eight had come from aged care facilities. We have recorded 107 deaths among aged care residents since the wave began after 13 December. That is 107 deaths out of the 200 that we have had recorded since the beginning of the Omicron wave in mid-December. The Queensland premier is speaking now and has confirmed the state has recorded another 10 Covid deaths, eight of whom were in aged care. They also had an additional 7,588 new cases. If you’re in south-eastern Queensland, you don’t need to check our blog to know you’re in the midst of a heatwave that has at least a day to run. One consequence of the heat and humidity (and perhaps more people working from home) is that demand for electricity is high, given so many air conditioners will have been running days and nights lately. Planners have seen these weather-related strains on the grid coming for some days, and now the market operator AEMO has deemed fit to warn of a possible “lack of reserve” later today. To be clear, there are no actual shortfalls yet that would prompt suppliers to switch off some unhappy customers. AEMO has a couple of tricks up its sleeve, such as triggering its reserve system that includes some users agreeing to reduce their demand and receive compensation. It’s only about a week since AEMO noted summer had been going swimmingly as far as the national electricity market was concerned, with the La Niña-influenced season keeping conditions relatively damp and mild. No reserve backup had been needed by the end of December. (Melbourne, mind you, just matched its record of the most days in a month of 30C, so things did start to heat up in some key population centres.) Today or even tomorrow might test Queensland’s supplies, especially if one of those ageing coal-fired power stations drops out. Sweaty fingers will be crossed all over Queensland that doesn’t happen. The ACT has recorded another 522 new Covid infections overnight. There are now 64 Covid-positive people in hospital and one person in the ICU. They currently require ventilation. The Victorian health minister, Martin Foley, is holding a press conference in Melbourne. The state has recorded 34 Covid deaths and 11,311 new infections but hospitalisations are trending down. Foley: We are seeing currently 851 people in Victorian hospitals with Covid-19, that is down from yesterday’s figure of 873 and is also below the rolling seven day average of 925. Yesterday we had 102 people in ICU and today we have 106 people in intensive care as of 6am this morning, so an increase of four. But in regards to people on ventilators, we have 30 people on ventilators ... down from 33 yesterday. Of the 34 deaths, Foley says 13 were within the last two days, with the remainder previous fatalities that have just been reported to the Victorian authorities. We send our deepest condolences and best wishes to those families and communities in this time of grieving. Okay, it’s time to hear from the Victorian health minister, Martin Foley, with his Covid-19 update for the day. He has kicked things off by chatting about a new initiative to get vulnerable children across the state vaccinated. We know we don’t want any members of our community left behind when it comes to the vaccination program. The [new] program targeting disadvantaged communities, kids with disabilities, kids in out-of-home care programs, kids in the justice program and their families need the support to go that little step extra so as to make sure that we get the highest possible vaccination rates for the communities and those that find it the hardest to access services. The Tasmanian numbers are in and the state has recorded 699 new Covid-19 infections. There are still 16 people in hospital in the state and one in the ICU. I’ve got a bit more detail out of the latest dump of donations data, just released by the Australian Electoral Commission. Empire Energy, a firm exploring for gas in the Beetaloo Basin, made $65,000 worth of donations. The majority went to the Liberal party’s Northern Territory branch, which received $40,000, while Labor got $25,000. Empire has been the main beneficiary of a federal program designed to incentivise fracking and gas exploration in the Beetaloo Basin, receiving $21m in three grants announced in July last year. Empire gave the Liberal party $27,000 later that month. The rest of the money was donated in three instalments in November, January and April. A Senate inquiry has previously probed the company’s connections with the Liberal party, revealing that it paid for a party fundraiser to inspect its operations in the NT. The company has previously denied that its connections to the Liberal party played any role in it receiving the grants, saying it “followed due and proper process at all times”. Reporter: We can circle back to the hydrogen argument, do you have a horizon or some sort of expectation when you think green hydrogen could be economically viable? Angus Taylor: We have been very clear on the pathway for hydrogen. Since we launched the technology investment roadmap 18 months ago or so, we said we are targeting getting below $2 per kilogram. The reason why getting below $2 per kilogram is so important is because as you get down to that level, you are getting the parity with alternatives and you are not raising the cost of electricity for Australians. That is so important. We do know that we are expecting to see blue hydrogen getting towards that level sooner than green. Over the course of this decade, we expect that to be the case for blue hydrogen. Green will take longer. We have laid that out very clearly in our plan. We will start to see a shift towards $2 by the end of the decade, it will take potentially longer to get down to that parity level and we have laid [that] out in a very clear chart in the long-term strategy which I encourage all to look at. The Reserve Bank of Australia, the country’s central bank, emerges from its summer slumber with its first board meeting for 2022 today. It’s something of a luxury among central bankers to take January off, but this is ‘Straya, after all. Anyway, the RBA is not expected to lift the official case rate from its record low 0.1% annual rate but today’s meeting is likely to provide more of a hint of when that first-in-a-decade hike might occur. Markets, with all their self-interested wisdom, are tipping the first move by May or June, assuming the rise is to 0.25%. Private economists are predicting August, but these are guesses, which is why what RBA Governor Philip Lowe actually says today will be examined closely. (And tomorrow’s National Press Club address.) Until late last year, Lowe had been touting 2024 as the time to start “normalising” interest rates. But with more and more signs of a strong economic recovery, 2023 was started geing mentioned in RBA dispatches. Last week, too, we’ve had inflation figures that the RBA looks at rising at their fastest pace since 2014, and a week before that, the lowest jobless rate in more than 13 years. Not to mention central banks globally moving to lift lending rates. In anticipation of today’s RBA meeting, a few headline writers have also got a bit twitchy, declaring the central bank had “put an end to economy stimulus”. They mean the bank has stopped buying government bonds, another aspect of its support for activity during the Covid pandemic. Back at the last RBA meeting in December, the bank said it would continue to buy government securities (a move that keeps interest rates lower, longer) at the rate of $4bn a week “until at least mid-February 2022”. So technically, the bank buying has a couple of weeks to run – unless the RBA formally ends it today. If it does run another fortnight, the $8bn it will buy would bring the total to about $350bn – not a small addition when you figure the RBA started the bond binge with $16bn in holdings. While borrowers on variable rates will be keenly following today’s hints and punditry, those with a longer-term view might wonder how the RBA is going to unwind its accumulation of about one-third of government debt in just two years. Now, I know what you are thinking: “Gosh, I really wish I could hear politicians talking about green hydrogen a little more this morning.” Well, you are in luck! Here is the energy minister, Angus Taylor, having a chat about the old H2: We heard a moment ago they couldn’t answer the question as to what the cost of hydrogen would be ... We want to see hydrogen going into this generator but in a way that is economic, commercial and technically feasible. That is what we will continue to work with, to achieve this in the coming years. But forcing it in any way is going to cost other taxpayers for electricity consumers, it doesn’t make economic sense. We have seen time and time again that Anthony Albanese and his team are not economically coherent. He has never held an economic portfolio. It shows up because affordable, reliable energy is crucial to all Australians. A project that delivers a return, as we said in the business case, 4% is crucial for taxpayers. The federal government has quietly agreed to allow the importation of unapproved rapid antigen tests for personal use amid shortages of approved kits. Even the kits approved by the Therapeutic Goods Administration have varying degrees of accuracy, and the TGA is currently reviewing the effectiveness of the 23 tests approved for detecting Omicron. Low sensitivity on tests could mean people receive negative results even though they are infectious, and go on to spread the virus. The agriculture, water and environment department’s website was updated on 12 January with new rules for imported tests. Up to three months’ supply of the unapproved tests can be brought into the country as long as they meet various conditions including “does not contain bee pollen”, and are commercially prepared and packaged for testing humans. You can read the full report below: We will be hearing from the Queensland leaders for a Covid update in just over an hour. Anthony Albanese has confirmed Labor would support a pay rise for aged care workers if elected. Reporter: Does Labor support an increase in the hourly rate? Albanese: If I was prime minister, we would make a submission to the Fair Work Commission supporting an increase in pay for aged care workers. Yes, we would. Reporter: Craig Kelly has been targeting this area quite intensely. How do you plan to counter that? Albanese: Well, Craig Kelly, of course, was hand-picked by Scott Morrison to be the member for Hughes when he didn’t have the support of his own party locally. What we will do is we’ll continue to point out that a vote for Craig Kelly or a vote for One Nation is a vote for Scott Morrison. If you actually want to change the country, if you want a country that stands up for workers’ security. If you want a country that supports same job, same pay for coalminers. If you want a country with better living standards, cheaper childcare, that defends Medicare – and can I say happy birthday, Medicare on today – of course, done by federal Labor. And what we’ve seen from this Government is a continuing undermining of Medicare. Craig Kelly has voted for all of that. He’s voted for all of that. You might be asking yourself, “Why is Anthony Albanese in Kurri Kurri this morning?” Well, it’s because yesterday, Labor confirmed they would support Snowy Hydro building a new power plant in the Hunter Valley if it wins the upcoming election, but only on the condition that the plant should be powered entirely by green hydrogen, instead of gas, by 2030. He was asked about the role hydrogen will play, but ended up mostly talking about the NBN: One of the things about this site is that some of the hydrogen can be sourced from solar that could be constructed on site. There are a range of proposals to do just that, and the site is an appropriate one to be able to feed into and ensure that it is green hydrogen. There is a difference between green and blue hydrogen. We’re about the best case, and Labor always does this. I was the communications minister at the end of our time in government and I well recall a debate that occurred then over something called the National Broadband Network ... and we were rolling out fibre to every home and business. And the [new] government said – don’t worry about that, we’ll just go with old technology, we’ll go back to copper. And they bought enough copper with your money, taxpayer money, to wrap around the world, not once, but twice! And as a result, you have a flawed multimodal system whereby you have some people getting first grade and some people getting third and fourth grade that just doesn’t work. What they’ve had to do is go back and retrofit, and we’ve said we’ll add more than a million homes to that if we’re elected, because, frankly, you need to use the best technology. If you want to read more about all of these political donations, the amazing Nick Evershed has created this interactive chart for you to trawl through at your leisure. We’re still trawling through the political donations. You’ll be pleased to know minor parties also got a cut of the action: Katter’s Australia party received two $100,000 donations from the Firearms Dealers Association Qld Inc and the Shooters Union Qld Pty Ltd. Duncan Turpie, a professional gambler and maths genius, gave $110,000 to the Greens, including their Queensland and Tasmanian branches. The Trustee for St Baker Family Trust gave $165,000 to the two major parties, including the LNP in Queensland. Trevor St Baker is an Australian businessman with interests in power plants. Other big donations by individuals included: Scott Edwardes, a lawyer and WA Liberal candidate at the state election, gave $224,000 to the party. Charles Bass, miner and tech investor, gave $216,000 to the major parties in WA. Oooh, new political metaphor alert! Albanese is bringing out the big guns, suggesting Morrison care less about driving the car (I think the car is Australia) and more about the “bumper sticker” on the back. What’s more, [the Morrison government] have failed to back Australian manufacturers who want to produce more rapid antigen tests right here. [We need] a future made in Australia, making things here for Australia’s resilience. We cannot remain a country that’s at the end of the supply chain. We need to make more things here, and that’s why part of my big commitment, which is consistent with today’s announcement here, is I want a future made in Australia and I want us to buy Australian, to support Australian jobs and Australian industry and Australian resilience. This government talks about overseas interference. Well, it leaves us totally vulnerable and older Australians today are very vulnerable. Older Australians and those people who are healthcare workers in the aged care sector. Aged care workers want, are desperate, to have the products to look after their residents. Scott Morrison’s just desperate to get their votes. And a cash payment that does nothing to lift the wages of aged care workers beyond the next federal election campaign is an appalling response from a government that never has its hands on the steering wheel, just as always, the bumper sticker and the ad at the back of the car. What we need is a government that actually leads. Okay, let’s jump over to Kurri Kurri, NSW where the opposition leader, Anthony Albanese, is speaking. And by “speaking”, I do very much mean “slamming Scott Morrison’s aged care worker bonus payment announcement”. Let’s listen in: I think people will wake up this morning and say that Scott Morrison has presided over an aged care system where the federal government is the funder, the regulator of aged care in this country. And where we have 20,000 active cases for residents or workers in the aged care sector, at a time when Scott Morrison says the solution to that is one-off payments, cash payments in the lead-up to an election. Scott Morrison is trying to buy the support of aged care workers. What aged care workers want him to do is to buy rapid antigen tests and PPE for them. Scott Morrison knows that the aged care sector is in a crisis. He doesn’t have to listen to us. Mike Baird, the former Liberal premier of New South Wales, has called for the defence force to be brought in to make beds. We know that aged care residents are sitting in bed without being able to be showered. In some cases without being fed, and with open sores that aren’t being tended to as a result of a crisis that could have been foreseen, and indeed, was, by the prime minister and the health minister, who were talking about rapid antigen tests being available as far back as August last year. But other countries were placing orders for rapid antigen tests in December of 2020 and early 2021. This Government made its first order in January. More than a quarter of aged care staff say their workplace is not giving them free rapid antigen tests, with nearly 20% reporting they’ve had to find and buy their own kits before working. Trade unions have lashed the prime minister, Scott Morrison, and the Coalition over the findings of the new survey from the Australian Nursing and Midwifery Foundation, saying it was “an indictment on this government” that aged care workers were forced to dip into their own pocket for RATs. “The Morrison government is simply refusing to learn the most basic lessons of this crisis and continues to make the same mistakes. The tools to defeat and control the virus – vaccines, PPE and RATs – must be free and accessible to all people,” said the Australian Council of Trade Unions president, Michele O’Neil. You can read the full report below: In case you were curious, here is the full statement on these newly announced aged care worker bonus payments. The Australian Electoral Commission has just released financial disclosures for 2020-21, revealing that Anthony Pratt’s Pratt Holdings Pty Ltd was the biggest donor that year. Pratt Holdings gave $1.3m in 2020-21, almost all of it to various branches of the Liberal Party, but there was one $10,000 donation to NSW Labor. The next biggest donors were: Silver River Investment Holdings Pty Ltd – which gave $650,000 to right-wing lobby group Advance Australia. Cartwright Investment Corp Pty Ltd – which gave $350,000 to Advance Australia. The National Automotive Leasing and Salary Packaging Association, which gave $150,000 each to the Labor and Liberal parties. William Nitschke, who gave $300,000 to the Great Australia Party, which is former One Nation senator Rodney Culleton’s new political party. The Pharmacy Guild of Australia, which gave $295,000 roughly evenly split between Labor and Liberal branches. Meriton Property Services, which gave $285,000 to the Liberal Party, the bulk of it ($200K) to the NSW Liberals. The Australian Hotels Association of NSW, which gave $260,000 in total to the Liberals, Nationals and Labor. Miners and energy companies were also prominent in the list of donors: Woodside Energy Ltd gave $232,000 to the Liberals, Nationals and Labor. Mineral Resources gave $222,400 to the Liberals, Nationals and Labor in Western Australia. Craig Kelly has signalled the United Australia party could throw a political lifeline to incumbent MPs prepared to break ranks and support two new private members’ bills he will bring forward during the final sitting weeks of parliament. The UAP plans to put all sitting members of parliament last on its how-to-vote cards in the coming federal election – a strategy prompting significant anxiety among Morrison government MPs, given the Coalition was the primary beneficiary of preference flows in the 2019 election. But Kelly, the former maverick Liberal and now UAP leader, says his party’s “pox on all your houses” strategy could well change depending on where MPs line up in the final sitting weeks. You can read the full report below: Tragically it’s been a particularly deadly day for Victoria as well, the state recording 34 Covid-19 deaths along with 11,311 new cases. There are now 851 Covid-positive people in hospital, 106 of those now in the ICU. As temperatures soared last week, Cass Willcocks’s rental apartment in inner Melbourne quickly became “unlivable”. “It’s gotten to the point where the tiles in my kitchen are hot, I try to put moisturiser on and it’s hot. Everything in my apartment is literally baking and I feel like I’m suffocating,” she said. “I pay $395 a week for an apartment that’s basically unlivable. I’ve had to go work from my friend’s kitchen table in the air conditioning because I can’t concentrate. I’m barely sleeping.” Willcocks’s blackout curtains and a borrowed portable air conditioner were barely making a dent – a thermometer on her fridge showed the temperature inside her Thornbury apartment reached 36C on the evening of 25 January. There were three more days of above-average temperatures and warm nights ahead. You can read the full report below: Greens deputy leader Larissa Waters appeared on ABC radio earlier this morning calling for political donations to be capped at $1,000 per year. There’s a real perception – and I think it’s a reality – that you get what you pay for. That’s why these big fossil fuel companies should not be allowed to buy the policy outcomes that suit their profits, particularly in a climate crisis ... We’ve seen more than $100m of corporate donations to both of the bigger parties since 2012 ... We are seeing an Americanisation of our political system, with massive money getting outcomes. It’s legalised corruption. We think all [political] donations should be capped to $1,000 a year because we don’t think big money should be running the show. We think an outright ban is appropriate on coal and gas companies because they’ve got a track record of trying to influence policies. She also stated she was hopeful about the minor party’s prospects in the upcoming election, (although, like, what else is she going to say?) I think we’ve got a great chance of winning a whole swathe of additional seats. We’ll likely be the biggest third party the country’s ever seen again, with the voters’ permission. We already know the NSW numbers for today but here is the official graphic. The Australian Nursing and Midwifery Federation (ANMF) is extremely concerned that many nurses and carers are still being forced to pay for their own rapid antigen tests (RATs) to go to work in aged care homes. According to the preliminary findings of a new national survey being conducted by the ANMF, almost one in five aged care nurses and carers paid for their own RATs, despite the government promising back in August 2021 to commence rolling out RATs to residential aged care facilities to protect workers, residents and their families. Over 770 health and aged care workers have so far participated in the survey, with preliminary findings showing: 1 in 5 participants report needed to buy their own RATs; 27% report “poor” to “very poor” testing experience. ANMF federal assistant secretary, Lori-Anne, Sharp said: Aged care is in crisis. Chronic understaffing across the system has been exacerbated by the pandemic, with care staff unable to provide elderly residents with the quality care they need. One aged care nurse commented in the survey that: I worked directly caring for Covid-19 positive residents (six positive of 15 residents on my floor) and was not tested over five shifts as my employer had run out of RATs as they were waiting for a supply from the commonwealth government. The high court should overturn a landmark decision finding Aboriginal Australians cannot be aliens because it threatens to confer “political sovereignty on Aboriginal societies”, the Morrison government has argued. Government lawyers made the claim in an appeal, warning that the Love and Thoms decision barring the deportation of Aboriginal non-citizens threatened the principle that Aboriginal sovereignty did not survive the colonisation of Australia. In submissions lodged on Friday, the commonwealth also argued that Aboriginal people’s spiritual connection to the land does not create a “special relationship” to the commonwealth. You can read the full report below: The foreign affairs minister, Marise Payne, has called on Myanmar’s military to “halt violence against civilians and return the country to the path of democracy”. In a statement issued on the first anniversary of the military coup, Payne said its actions on 1 February 2021 had denied the will of the people. Since that time, the military has inflicted horrific violence, trampled basic freedoms and triggered humanitarian, security, health and economic crises across the country. Australia condemns the use of violence against civilians and other serious human rights violations. We urge the military to exercise restraint and to release all those arbitrarily detained, including Australian Professor Sean Turnell. Payne called on the military “to allow immediate and unimpeded access for the delivery of humanitarian assistance to all people in need” and to “engage meaningfully in inclusive dialogue for a peaceful return of Myanmar to the path of democracy”. As we reported earlier, human rights group and the Labor opposition have strongly criticised the Australian government for failing to implement any additional sanctions against Myanmar military figures or their business interests in the year since the coup. Payne’s statement is silent on the prospect of new sanctions. But the minister called on the international community “to prevent the flow of arms into Myanmar, to suspend all operational support to the military and its representatives, and to cease the provision of arms, enabling materiel and technical assistance”. She said Australia would “provide humanitarian assistance to those most in need and remains committed to working with regional and international partners in response to these crises”. The NSW premier Dominic Perrottet has already been out and about this morning discussing the return of students to state school’s this morning. It is an incredibly important day for our state and an exciting day ... And I want to particularly thank our teachers who have done an amazing job over the course of the last few weeks in getting our schools ready to open day one, term one. I know that many parents are anxious. I know that many parents are also excited to have their kids back in the classroom. But this is incredibly important as we move through 2022, as we move back to normal, that we have our students back at school. We know that many children have lost a quarter of their time in face-to-face learning over the last two years as a result of the pandemic. There could be nothing more important, not just for our student’s educational outcomes, for social outcomes, for mental health outcomes, is for kids to get back in school. NSW chief health officer Dr Kerry Chant has confirmed the state has recorded another 30 Covid deaths and 12,818 new infections. There were 2,749 people with the virus with 183 in ICU and 70 requiring ventilation. ABC News Breakfast host Lisa Millar: Greg Hunt yesterday suggested that of the deaths that we have seen and there has been several hundred in January just since the start of this year, that 60% of those are receiving palliative care. Do you accept that? Shadow aged care minister Clare O’Neil: I find that disgracefully offensive. I mean, what is Greg Hunt saying that these people were going to die anyway? That is a disgusting comment. What is the reality here is that this sector was already in crisis, through Omicron, this is the worst crisis this sector has experienced in 40 years. Wound management is not being taken care of. Vulnerable people are sitting in soiled pads because there is literally no one to come and help them. People are not getting enough to eat. Staff cry to me on the phone and tell me that it’s like a war zone where they are working at the moment. The government is in the middle of this crisis – this tells you everything about their priorities – instead of dealing with this crisis, instead of going to the parliament and asking questions about this, the aged care minister Richard Colbeck went to the cricket ... he spent not one day at the cricket, but three days at the cricket. O’Neil: A pay rise that lasts up until the next election is a cynical political ploy, because we know this plan ... will not do anything more than hold this thing together by a thread. The truth is that the aged-care sector – the average experience of a person in aged care today is one of neglect. The royal commission told us that. Two-thirds of residents today are malnourished, literally starving under the care of their own government. Scott Morrison has this shoddy political fix that he has put forward, yet the real answer to this problem lies in part in supporting the workers who have gone to the Fair Work Commission to ask for a pay increase. While speaking to ABC News Breakfast shadow aged care minister Clare O’Neil has labelled the government’s newly announced aged care bonus payments are “an act of cynical politicking that I thought would have even been beyond Scott Morrison”. The truth is that we have a crisis in aged care that has been eight years in the making. Scott Morrison has cut aged-care funding personally as treasurer twice. One of the first actions of the incoming government was to cut the wages of aged-care staff and now we are expected to believe that this is going to make a difference? If Scott Morrison gave a stuff about aged-care workers he would be doing something more than giving them a pay rise that only lasts up until the next election. I mean, come on. An Australian naval ship which had been supplying critical aid to tsunami-ravaged Tonga has suffered a major power outage, reports AAP. The defence department confirmed that HMAS Adelaide, which docked in the Pacific island nation last week, had lost power during the operation. A defence spokesperson said back-up power had been activated aboard the vessel to restore essential systems. The situation is being closely monitored and the safety of the ship and the embarked forces remains our highest priority ... The power outage has not affected Australia’s ability to support requests from the government of Tonga to assist their recovery efforts. The ship departed from Brisbane and arrived in Tonga last week, carrying critical relief including medical and humanitarian supplies as well as helicopters, following the January 15 underwater volcanic eruption and tsunami. Defence said civilian specialists are on route to conduct an assessment of the affected systems of the HMAS Adelaide. The minister for superannuation and the digital economy, Jane Hume, has denied that these newly announced aged care worker bonus payments are an election bribe. She was just speaking now with ABC radio. We provided the aged care workforce with a bonus payment back in 2020 in recognition of the increased demands on their time they faced. She indicated that the prospect of a $5 per hour pay rise across the industry (a proposal currently before the Fair Work Commission) may be unsustainable. A $5 per hour increase would dramatically increase the cost of an aged care workforce. We want to make sure this is a sustainable system going into the future... The decision for a pay rise is not for government but one for the Fair Work Commission and it’s making that decision now. The Sydney Morning Herald is reporting that the presumed Liberal candidate for Warringah has pulled out as the party’s NSW branch descends into preselection turmoil. According to them, barrister Jane Buncle, withdrew her nomination on Monday night, adding yet another stress to the party after the state executive rejected a motion that would have granted special powers to endorse three prominent sitting Morrison government MPs without the need for plebiscites Guardian Australia’s Anne Davies has been reporting heavily on this over the last few weeks, but basically, the prime minister’s office sponsored a motion that asked the state executive to bypass the preselection process in North Sydney, Farrer and Mitchell – effectively saving the careers of the moderate faction leader, Trent Zimmerman, the environment minister, Sussan Ley, and the immigration minister, Alex Hawke. You can read the full report below: The Morrison government’s failure to impose sanctions against Myanmar junta figures sends a message that Australia is a “mere bystander to authoritarian backsliding in our region”, according to the Labor party. With today marking one year since Myanmar’s military seized power in a coup, the opposition today joined with human rights activists in urging the Australian government to act to stop the flow of money to the junta. Labor’s acting foreign affairs spokesperson, Kristina Keneally, said at every stage of the crisis in Myanmar, the government had “acted too late and done too little to demonstrate Australia’s opposition” to the coup and to the “the killing of over a thousand innocent civilians”. She said: The Morrison-Joyce government’s refusal to act over the past year sends precisely the wrong message – that Australia does not care and that we are mere bystanders to authoritarian backsliding in our region … We join calls from the Australian Council of Trade Unions, Human Rights Watch and the Australian Council for International Development, as well as many other NGOs, for targeted sanctions against the Tatmadaw and linked entities. Mr [Scott] Morrison and the foreign minister must use this anniversary to finally act – and stand up for democracy in our region. Elaine Pearson, the Australia director of Human Rights Watch, said Australia needed to take coordinated actions together with like-minded governments “to help deprive the military of its revenue sources and to maximise pressure on the junta to end its campaign of terror”: This is the one-year anniversary of the coup and I think it sends a terrible message that Australia has failed to implement any new targeted sanctions against the coup leaders or any of the business interests. Pearson said the Australian government had repeatedly expressed its grave concerns, but “actions speak louder than words”. She said the government should target the oil and gas revenue flowing to the junta. Citing Woodside Petroleum’s announcement last week that it would leave Myanmar, Pearson added: When Woodside is taking stronger action on human rights than the Australian government, I think that’s a cause for concern. Earlier this month the foreign affairs minister, Marise Payne, and the defence minister, Peter Dutton, joined with their British counterparts in calling on the Myanmar military “to immediately cease violence against civilians; engage in constructive, inclusive dialogue; end the targeting of legitimately elected leaders; and release all those arbitrarily detained, including Australian Professor Sean Turnell”. New South Wales will resume a limited number of non-urgent elective surgeries in private and regional public hospitals from next week, the government will announce on Tuesday. The government announced on 7 January that non-urgent elective surgery would be suspended as hospitalisations rose following the Omicron wave of infections. At the time the premier, Dominic Perrottet, said surgeries would resume from the middle of February. But while the government is confident that hospitalisation numbers have plateaued, on Tuesday the premier will announce some elective surgeries will resume in a staged capacity from Monday 7 February. The plan will see non-urgent elective surgery requiring an overnight stay returning to 75% capacity in private hospitals, and up to 75% of pre-pandemic levels at some public hospitals in regional and rural NSW. Perrottet said in a statement: The reintroduction of non-urgent elective surgery will be done in a phased manner to balance the ongoing potential need for extra capacity in our hospitals and the need for people in NSW to access their elective surgeries as quickly as possible... We recognise the effect these necessary restrictions have had on the lives of people requiring non-urgent elective surgery and I want to assure them we will be doing everything possible to return to full capacity in all of our hospitals as soon as possible. The NSW government has been using private hospitals to deal with the surge in Covid-19 hospitalisations during the Omicron wave, and the health minister, Brad Hazzard, said that would continue for non-urgent elective surgery to ensure equity of access. Our hospitals remain under pressure due to Covid-19 so only our public hospitals that are in a position to resume non-urgent elective surgeries without compromising their ability to care for Covid-19 patients and patients with other medical conditions will do so. The latest Bureau of Health Information report released in December revealed that waves of Covid-19 outbreaks had seen the elective surgery waitlist in NSW rise to more than 92,000 people before the most recent suspension. Last week the government flagged a resumption of some elective surgeries as hospitalisations and ICU presentations remained within the best-case scenarios projected by the state’s health department. “Hospitalisation numbers have certainly plateaued, as we said last week ... we do think that in the coming week we will start to see them drop,” deputy health secretary Susan Pearce said last week. Good morning everyone, It’s Matilda Boseley here and, like always, there is plenty to chat about today so let’s jump in. Prime minister Scott Morrison is under fire today after union leaders labelled his newly announced aged care bonus payments as “too little, too late”. Ahead of a major speech at the National Press Club this afternoon, Morison promised two pre-election bonus payments worth up to $800 for aged care workers, but Health Services Union Gerard Hayes says the industry wants accountability for the slow residential care vaccine roll-out, not “trinkets”. Trinkets are not required when diamonds are needed ... From day one, they have not understood aged care, they have never understood the rollout of the vaccine, they haven’t understood the booster shots, and they have never understood the workforce crisis we are facing – and they never complied with the outcomes of the royal commission. Heading over to NSW, and elective surgery is set to return to all private hospitals and regional public health facilities on 7 Febuary. Any elective procedures that required a stay overnight in the hospital were paused during the Omicron surge, but as case numbers slowly retreat these will be allowed to resume at 75% capacity. However, public metropolitan hospitals will keep focusing on treating Covid patients and emergency surgery recipients for now. Speaking of NSW, thousands of students across the state are heading back to classrooms today as state schools restart across the state, putting the government’s Covid-safe education plan to the test. Strict anti-virus protocols have been implemented including improved ventilation, vaccinations, mask-wearing, twice-weekly RATS, and the segregation of year groups, but with daily cases still in the tens of thousands, many are fearful the start of the education year could spark numerous outbreaks. OK! With all of that out of the way, why don’t we get cracking on the day’s news?Two years after Brexit formally took effect on 31 January 2020, and a year since the UK’s exit from the single market and customs union, we can attempt a provisional economic stocktake for both sides. Nearly 52% of UK voters supported Brexit in the 2016 referendum. Nearly 100% of citizens elsewhere in the bloc were shocked by the result, and the first concern was that Brexit could mark the unravelling of the whole European project. That did not happen: indeed, quite the opposite. Even in the most Eurosceptic countries there was an increase in support for the European Union, a sort of closing of the ranks. There was a clear risk that the EU would become disunited in the buildup to Brexit. But again, it did not happen. All countries gave a strong mandate to the European Commission, and stood united. Today, British politics appears increasingly folded in on itself, and the British economy is arguably less outward-looking than before the referendum. Countless questions remain unresolved with the commission, and mutual trust between London and Brussels has long since collapsed. From the EU, the drama of the Brexit negotiations was watched with mixed feelings. Initial regret shifted to a desire to limit the damage. Some economic opportunities to fill the gaps left by the UK opened up. Brexit was clearly going to be a loss for everyone, but far greater for the UK than for any continental European economy. The negative impact on trade, so far, is substantial for the UK. The Centre for European Reform recently estimated that there has been an 11.2% negative impact on trade as a result of Brexit. The UK share of world trade has fallen by a further 15% compared to pre-referendum projections. Assessing the impact of Brexit on the EU presents a challenge, as macro-economic data is contaminated by the pandemic shock. However, digging into the details of trade flows, there has been a noticeable negative effect on some countries, sectors and firms. This has been especially sizeable for small producers who used to have unbounded single market access to the UK. Now, the extra paperwork puts off firms that lack the critical mass to absorb the extra fixed costs of handling non-EU trade procedures. Over time, the situation may well improve, but some companies have already given up. British consumers have paid the price, EU consumers far less. A more precise picture of the geographical and sectoral composition will emerge once EU funds to compensate countries for the impact of Brexit are distributed. Since 2016, the flow of EU workers to the UK has been in decline. That process accelerated last year, causing major imbalances in hospitality, agriculture, transport and healthcare, but also in some highly qualified jobs. The corresponding impact in the EU is a greater pool of labour in some countries and less of a brain drain, which increases unemployment but over time becomes a positive supply-side phenomenon. Again, while the impact is sizeable for the UK, it is very much diluted in continental Europe. Although the impact of Brexit on the City of London is not yet significant, the possibility of maintaining an undisputed dominant position in increasingly integrated European financial markets has been jeopardised. On the margins, London financial job openings have moved to continental Europe, and some firms have relocated. The historically Eurosceptic wing of the Conservative party wanted Brexit to deliver more freedom from what was perceived as the unnecessary constraints and bureaucratic burdens imposed by Brussels. A minority ultra-liberal wing naively dreamt of an even more open, deregulated, low-tax environment to increase economic dynamism and transform the UK into a Singapore-like haven. That raised fears in the EU of unfair competition through access to the single market, especially given the uncooperative approach to negotiations chosen by the UK government. Again though, these risks have by and large not materialised and concerns are dissipating. The illusion of giving a boost to the UK economy with a reduction in taxation has clashed with the new needs for public spending for healthcare, the fight against the climate crisis, infrastructure investments, and the various electoral promises to the point of forcing the government to raise taxes. Instead of diverging, policies in the UK and the EU look increasingly alike. Finally, there are non-tangible effects. In the past, the UK government has been obstructive on various initiatives aimed at strengthening the EU’s architecture and achieving stronger economic and political integration. It opted out of schemes developed to alleviate the impact of the financial and economic crisis on Greece and other economies. Would the ambitious €800bn (£665bn) pandemic recovery plan have even been possible with the UK government still around the table? Some in Brussels would say it would have been inconceivable. The economic effects of the pandemic inevitably blur into those of Brexit, and therefore only once the dust settles can the damage be properly assessed. Of the many problems the EU is currently facing, Brexit has happily receded from the foreground. Lorenzo Codogno is visiting professor in practice at the London School of Economics and the former chief economist of the Italian treasuryA stone’s throw from London’s West End, the Groucho Club is exactly the sort of spot you’d expect to find a theatre producer holding court, surrounded by rumpled media types and within earshot of a Netflix exec or three. But there is a more practical reason why Libby Zietsman-Brodie has suggested this location for our chat today: in a few hours, she has a wine tasting there. When I locate her in the upstairs bar, she is proffering a carafe of pale rosé. “A little something?” she asks, waggling a glass. Zietsman-Brodie is on the point of becoming a full-time wine consultant and writer. After 15 years in professional theatre – initially at the Old Vic, then founding her own production company – she has decided to depart showbiz for good, at the age of 38. No regrets, she insists: “You have to keep moving. If this business taught me anything, it’s that.” She is, of course, far from alone in deciding that it’s time to get out. While no sector has been immune from the effects of Covid, the arts have been experiencing an earthquake that has been rumbling on for the best part of two years. Everyone has felt the shockwaves, from laid-off front-of-house staff (some of whom were then rehired for less pay) to musicians thrown out of work and artistic directors scrambling to keep major institutions from imploding. Early fears that more than 400,000 creatives might see their livelihoods disappear in the UK turned out, mercifully, to be pessimistic (thanks largely to government interventions such as the furlough and self-employed support schemes, and the recently expanded culture recovery fund). And not every part of the creative economy has been the same: once Covid protocols were in place, TV and film swiftly rebounded, in fact boomed – so much so that there is currently a skills shortage. Still, the overall picture is grim, particularly in visitor-reliant sectors such as theatre, live music, festivals, cultural heritage and museums. The most recent estimate by industry body Creative UK last summer calculated that over 110,000 jobs were likely to go in the UK by the end of 2021. Perhaps 95,000 of those are freelance roles, and the people doing them may never return. Music-specific figures are on a similar scale. If these estimates are right then, as 2022 begins, fewer people are working in Britain’s creative sector than at any time since 2016. And Omicron has added to the havoc: a nightmarish deja-vu of theatre and gallery closures, festival cancellations and delays. The impact on live events will be felt for months to come. It’s little wonder that so many culture professionals have considered retraining. But, assuming they’ve found work, where have they actually gone? When the pandemic began, much was written about artists jumping into temporary jobs to make ends meet: have those changes become permanent, with other sectors screaming to hire people? And, to ask what feels like a tough question amid so much gloom and uncertainty, are there success stories here too – people for whom leaving the arts has actually been a good thing? In October 2020, the UK government was ridiculed for an advert suggesting that a ballet dancer should retrain “in cyber” (even the photographer who took the picture disowned it). But can positive changes come out of being forced to reset and try something else? And what does it feel like to abandon a vocation you’ve invested so much in, and move in a different direction? Over lunch, Zietsman-Brodie reflects on her own journey. Spring 2020 was meant to mark her star-spangled return to theatre after maternity leave: three separate shows, one in the West End, another on a UK regional tour, one opening in New Zealand before heading across to Asia. “It was meant to be this big thing, saying, ‘here I am!’” she says brightly. “Five years in the planning.” The workload was so intense, she adds, that she was doing emails while about to give birth. Everyone knows what happened next: British theatres went dark, presaging the first national lockdown. When some of her colleagues banked on a return in Christmas 2020, they ran straight into another lockdown, losing even more money. “I was just so exhausted by the prospect of having to start again, build it all up, you know?” Zietsman-Brodie’s company was fortunate to receive two Arts Council grants – which helped her keep some creatives in work – but she felt that she herself was yearning to make a bigger change – and that her interest in wine could actually be it. When she was doing her tasting qualifications, a friend asked if she’d help choose wines for a wedding. “The wine company I work with said, ‘You realise this makes you a consultant?’” In December 2020 she launched her own specialist company, named after Bacchus (“God of both theatre and wine”). Zietsman-Brodie knows she is supremely lucky to have options: despite being her household’s main breadwinner, she and her partner had savings and could share childcare. But she observes that, in a wider sense, her experience echoes that of so many people during the pandemic. “It stripped everything back, forced you to ask, ‘how happy are you in the present?’ I realised, ‘Not very’.” Her production company has one show still running but, as soon as it recoups, will go dormant. “In comparison to theatre, wine feels rather lockdown-proof,” she says. *** For Vivienne Clavering, the shift has been more challenging. As a production manager at the Royal Opera House, she’d been wavering even before Covid: long hours and gruelling workload; tight budgets; a sense that, in her late 30s, maybe the career she’d spent so long building wasn’t all it was cracked up to be. Over Zoom, she explains that before joining the ROH she’d applied seven times to the National Theatre before finally landing the job, such was her determination. Now, she was doubting whether she was even on the right path. When the pandemic hit, she was offered furlough, before redundancies began. Her moment of clarity came during lockdown, when she moved from London to be with friends in Morecambe, helping look after their kids. “I found myself talking about teaching,” she remembers. A quick check revealed that the starting salary of a teacher – up to £32,000 in London – was only just below what she’d been earning in a senior post at one of the world’s leading opera houses. She applied for her PGCE, threw herself into the course, graduated, and when we first speak is doing supply work at a primary school near her home in south London. She loves it, she says: “When you’re in a classroom with a bunch of kids who are learning to count from one to 10, it’s amazing.” Like Zietsman-Brodie, Clavering admits it was a wrench to leave behind a career that had always been her dream. But it was easier than she imagined it would be. “I worked my butt off for 15 years, and the appreciation wasn’t always there, you know? You see people breaking around you.” When I suggest that teaching is hardly known for its work-life balance, she laughs. “Sure, it’s intense. You’re there 7am until 5pm, and of course there’s lesson planning and the rest. But, honestly, it doesn’t compare to what I was doing in opera. If you’re doing tech [technical rehearsals], you’re there until 11pm. One video designer I worked with used to call me constantly from 7am to midnight, for a full year. However hard teaching gets, no parent is going to have my phone number.” She pauses. “And if you’ve handled an opera director, you can handle a five-year-old.” *** How unusual are case studies such as these? While some creatives have been fortunate enough to have found a new path, hasn’t the reality for many been far more tortured? In search of answers, I call Caroline Norbury, chief executive of Creative UK. She and her colleagues have been keeping an eye on how the pandemic has reshaped the cultural sector. She says finding precise data and analysing the trends is hard, because the arts are the very definition of a gig economy. So many roles are freelance; contracts are agreed on a handshake; people do multiple jobs. And the effect has been uneven. “As with so much of the pandemic, it’s not been the same everywhere,” she says. “Some people have seen their livelihoods evaporate. Other people have never been so busy.” But, she says, even though many institutions have worked hard to help protect freelancers in particular, others were left high and dry. “If you look at the music sector, for instance, freelance musicians often supplement their income through teaching or other pieces of work, and of course a lot of that fell away and never recovered. People had no other choice but to look elsewhere.” In Norbury’s view, those worst affected have been early-career creatives, who didn’t get a chance to develop networks that could carry them through. “I think what the pandemic has uncovered is an ecosystem that is terribly fragile. It often relies on passion and goodwill – and if the chain breaks down, the system isn’t always there to support you.” What does she think about people who have experienced the transition as positive? “For many people, the pandemic has been extremely interesting in focusing their minds on what’s important. That’s great. But the people making those decisions often have a safety net. Not everyone is so lucky.” Covid should teach us a lesson, she says. Too often, the cultural sector treats its workforce as if their jobs are somehow hobbies, as if the creative reward is enough in and of itself. “These are rigorous, highly skilled, highly qualified professions. Sure, people are here because they’re passionate. But that’s not enough.” What’s needed is structural change, she adds. “We need to bring in more stability and security so that people can feel like they’re progressing. Otherwise we’ll waste all that talent.” *** Hard though the pandemic has been for those in British culture, at least there has been targeted help (albeit not on the scale of many mainland European countries). Artists in the US have had things far, far tougher: orchestral players and opera singers lost contracts or were thrown on unpaid furlough; unemployment rates among dancers and choreographers jumped fivefold; actors ended up on food stamps. One established performer I talk to has seen their Broadway career essentially evaporate; another has abandoned a career in cabaret to retrain in carpentry and construction. When I get hold of the American actor–puppeteer Jonathan MacMillan, a veteran of shows such as War Horse and King Kong, he turns out to be on the other side of the world, having relocated for the Australian premiere of the Disney musical Frozen. Opening night in Sydney was delayed and delayed, then the production closed; a transfer to Melbourne finally went ahead, but, like so much Australian theatre, is currently battling rising Covid rates and cancellations. When the Covid hurricane first hit, many of his US colleagues were in similarly fragile boats. “Everyone had a side gig – we call them ‘survival jobs’,” he says. “But all the survival jobs, the catering or waitering gigs, the events stuff, went away too.” As the son of a Hollywood actor who battled long periods of unemployment, the idea of transitioning had been on MacMillan’s mind for a while (he’s now 36). Suddenly, the need was urgent. Then he heard about a volunteer-run group called Artists Who Code, which supports creatives keen to learn software engineering. “I needed something future-proof, with a high salary, where I could work from home,” he explains. He enrolled on a coding bootcamp, and has been working with an Australian company for the last year. When I ask how he’s finding it, he practically radiates contentment. “I get my evenings and weekends back, and I can go on vacation and still get my wage,” he says with wonder. “Paid vacations! They’re still amazing to me.” How do people react to his change in profession? “Sure, no one gets excited when you say you’re a software engineer. The highs aren’t quite as high as in theatre. But the lows are nowhere near as low.” Has he left puppeteering behind for good? He’s still mulling the future, he replies; the fact that Frozen has finally opened means he’s suddenly busy performing again, and is considering auditioning for other shows. But he’s also interviewing at software firms too. “Doing both jobs has worked out pretty well so far,” he says. We talk about failure, the shadow of which has stalked so many of my conversations on this topic. To many people, the idea of a ballerina abandoning her artform for a job in tech sounds like an appalling waste. If MacMillan did eventually leave theatre, would it feel like failing? Absolutely not, he says: “Staying in a job that isn’t working for you, working for free, working for credits on your résumé, not standing up for your rights, not having the guts to turn a job down, for fear you’ll never work again? That’s failure, right there.”Can a thing feel entirely impossible and entirely inevitable all at once? This, perhaps, was the paradox of the most recent Greatest Comeback In The History Of Tennis: once it began you could already glimpse how it ended. We’ve all been doing this for 15 years. The muscle memory is too strong, the emotional liturgy too deeply ingrained. This is why, from the moment Rafael Nadal started to claw back his Australian Open final against Daniil Medvedev from two sets down, it never really crossed my mind that he would lose. At the moment of victory the crowd roared and the commentator hailed the “miracle of Melbourne” and Medvedev paid tribute to an “amazing champion” and this, too, felt comforting, hypnotic, agreeably familiar. It had been another great match, probably the greatest, definitely the greatest. Nadal, with his 21st grand slam title, was now definitely the greatest, along with the other two who were also the greatest. Up in the press box, the world’s greatest sportswriters flexed their typing fingers and once again applied themselves to the pointless but highly lucrative question of legacy. None of which is intended as a slight on the players themselves, or the level of skill required. Nadal said his career should be remembered for moments and not mathematics, but out there in the great beyond, the world was quickly proving him wrong. This was, after all, a seismic development in the “Goat debate”. A decisive move in the “Goat race”. Nadal’s victory, we were told, had pushed him to the forefront of the “Goat conversation”. With just a modicum of distance, it’s possible to observe what a strange and diminishing state of affairs this is: the men’s half of an entire sport reduced to the level of a pub debate, a swirling and interminable noise that seems to have sucked all the oxygen and a good deal of the fun out of the room. Smart, well-informed people now go on television and argue about head-to-head records and win percentages. Increasingly hostile online fandoms fire off memes and insults at each other as if they were Top Trumps. At what point does this stop feeling relevant or constructive or remotely interesting and become an industrial waste of everyone’s time? This isn’t Nadal’s fault, any more than it is the fault of Roger Federer or Novak Djokovic. Rather, the problem is with men’s tennis itself, the people who cover it, the people who follow it and the people who market it: a panoply of well-meaning characters who in the past few years have begun to indulge the sport’s myth-making to a vaguely unhinged degree. In a way, it’s a form of real-time nostalgia, this fetishisation of statistics and superlatives and numbers and records (some of which, we are breathlessly informed, will never be broken!). After all, if this were simply a fun debate then we could probably leave it there. But tennis’s consecration of its self-appointed golden era has real-world consequences, not least for the players following in its wake: the spiky Medvedev, the exciting Jannik Sinner, the brilliant Carlos Alcaraz. Attention, time, energy, media coverage, sponsorships, primetime television slots: none of this is an infinite resource. Give it to somebody and by extension you take it away from somebody else. What if a fraction of the marketing budget and column inches expended on the Big Three had instead been devoted to women’s tennis, which is quietly serving up a new era of gripping rivalries, compelling stories and new characters? The same is true of power. For all their excellence on the court, there has been a self-perpetuating element to the Big Three, a dynasty that has been enabled and encouraged, often by the same organisations responsible for broadening opportunity. Last week, Denis Shapovalov, the world No 12, claimed that the Big Three get favourable treatment from umpires. “Already they’re so tough to beat, but if you give them more advantages, then it just becomes that much harder,” he said, which raised a few eyebrows but is really just an extension of what has been a largely unspoken convention in the sport for years. Schedules and court assignments are routinely built around them. Rules are relaxed, soundings taken, medical exemptions furnished. Nadal has admitted to asking that certain umpires do not take charge of his matches. At last year’s Australian Open, Nadal and Djokovic (Federer was injured) were allowed to train at a luxury Adelaide resort while most of their rivals were forced into hotel quarantine. Yes, they have also been better than everyone else at tennis. But there is something vaguely disquieting about the way the authorities have essentially smoothed the path for them. The real question is what comes next, once the Goat conversation has finally fallen silent, once men’s tennis has finally wrung its last drops of value out of the Big Three era, once its great champions have gone and taken their banality of miracles with them. “They’ve really only marketed three players for the last decade and now it’s kind of caught up with them,” Nick Kyrgios said last week. While Nadal’s triumph will fuel the promise of an eternal empire, that day will come, and probably sooner than we think. After all, if the Big Three have taught us anything, it is that something can feel entirely impossible and entirely inevitable all at once.The UK’s cost of living crisis escalated in December, as inflation jumped to its highest level in almost 30 years at 5.4%. The Bank of England expects the consumer prices index will climb to about 6% by April, and the International Monetary Fund warned inflation and Omicron will dent global growth in 2022. As inflation climbs the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, is under pressure to rethink April’s hike in National Insurance as business large and small face spiralling costs. Five businesses speak about how inflation and rising energy costs are affecting them. ‘Anxiety is at its maximum level’ Davide Angeletti, coffee shop owner When the gas bill arrived Davide Angeletti assumed it must be a mistake. His supplier told him it was correct. “It’s terrible, in the space of three months the energy price doubled,” said Angeletti, the 51-year-old owner of Ovenbird Coffee roastery in Glasgow. He sells mostly to other businesses and, during the early pandemic, was supplying free coffee to hospitals. Angeletti was hit by surging energy costs when his supplier People’s Energy went bust in September. He was switched over to Scottish Gas. “I used to pay in a peak time £500 a month, which was manageable, and now I have £1,100 or £1,200 – we don’t know what to do.” The company’s energy rate jumped from 16.52p to 30.972p per kilowatt hour, plus a 139.330p pKWh standing charge during the handover. It wasn’t just energy; raw materials from Europe have soared, such as a pallet of raw coffee climbing from £90 (“before Brexit”) to £300-350 now. It means Angeletti must weigh up layoffs from his eight staff. “I want to keep them, we are a big family,” he said. Staff have rent to pay and are applying for mortgages. “To tell them, ‘Sorry guys I can’t afford you’ is one of the worst things I could say’.” Angeletti feels the government should do more to support small companies, perhaps an energy cap for SMEs. But, he said, “we know exactly what this prime minister thinks about business”. Angeletti frets over bringing the stress home to his family. “Anxiety is at its maximum level,” he said. ‘I’ll probably have to increase prices again before April’ Dawn Gill, jeweller “In just two years I’ve had to put my price up by £7 for some items,” said Dawn Gill who makes and sells silver jewellery and crochet gadgets in Exeter. “The cost of raw materials like sterling silver has meant I’ve had to refine my costs.” Gill, who is a sole trader and started her business in 2014, said it costs bullion dealers more to ship and import gold and silver into the UK since Brexit, with prices also fluctuating because of the pandemic. At the beginning of 2019 it was about £378 per kilogram for silver and now it’s about £550. “It’s been a bit of a nightmare,” said the 50-year-old. “At least the rise in energy prices won’t directly affect me as we generate most of our own electricity using solar panels and I tend to use just a hydrogen powered torch.” As a result she has had to adjust the prices of her items and passes the increase in cost on to her customers. “A hooker ring that requires no soldering or hallmark, because it falls under the exemption weight, was £21 in November 2019 but now sells for £24. I’ll probably have to increase the price again before April. “Then there’s the cost of packaging and consumables like burrs and blades, but one of the major concerns is the cost of sales due to Brexit – directly in the form of sales tax and allied Etsy fees, and indirectly because of paperwork and customs official registrations. “About 80% of my export pre-Brexit was to the US and Europe, with the latter making up around 40% of that.’’ said Gill. “Now I only export around a third outside the UK and even then my European exports are only around 5% of that figure.” Most of her UK customers are understanding about price increases but she has concerns about the future. “It’s been difficult during the pandemic as I normally sell at fairs and we haven’t had many,” she said. “The cost of bullion is such a volatile market that I’ve learned now to just suck it up. I’m not trying to stress about it as there’s nothing I can really do.” ‘We went in really bullish after lockdown, but now the spectre of inflation is kicking in we’re really nervous’ Andrew Hilliard, recruitment firm owner This year was supposed to signal a bold new future for AJ Chambers, Andrew Hilliard’s specialist recruitment firm in Southend. After 12 years operating, the 40-strong company planned to move out of leased offices into its own renovated digs. Due to inflation pressures however, “we had to scale down”, Hilliard said, and lengthen the building process “to rebuild our war chest”. A wellbeing and collaboration area, with a gym, was erased from the blueprints. “Inflation has been creeping up for sometime now,” he said. “It’s completely transformed the budgets.” There’s no way to cancel the move, which involves the revamping of an old supermarket, its new home. “We’re in too deep, we have to go ahead,” Hilliard added. His supplier for the renovation said glass prices have risen by 30%, twice, plywood prices have climbed from £7 to £36 a sheet since 2019 and Hilliard’s staff salaries have risen about 10% in the past year, forcing it to scale back hiring. Hilliard’s expansion plans were drawn up amid the post-lockdown bounce-back of last year – a time of growth optimism. “We went in really bullish, but the spectre of inflation is kicking in,” he said. “We’re really nervous about that now.” ‘I’m a pretty laid back guy, but I’ve been shocked’ Tim Haddock, construction company owner Just weeks ago, Tim Haddock, owner of a construction company in Derby, said he could buy a bag of backing-plaster for just over £8. This week he said it’s up to about £11. “I just keep looking at prices and thinking, that’s ridiculous, it’s insane,” he said. Haddock, 56, is director of a small building company, Kay and Haddock, employing three people and working on extensions, conversions and domestic refurbishing. He said the garage revamping business boomed during the pandemic; people wanted to elevate their homes during lockdowns. But the start of 2022 feels uncertain. “I am seriously worried about price increases,” he said. “I seriously believe we’re rapidly heading to a point where customers will just balk at the cost and stop having work done,” which would raise the grim prospect of layoffs. Softwood tongue-and-groove timber cladding cost about £30 for a few square metres before Covid, he said, but now it’s almost £90. Plaster was roughly £4-£5 a bag in 2019, now about £10. And Brexit [and global supply chain] effects have compounded the problem – sometimes “you just can’t get hold of stuff” or must spend hours searching. The national insurance hike in April adds further pressure. “Prices are rising every week,” Haddock said. “I’m a pretty laid back guy – you have to be in the construction business as everything changes all the time – but I’ve just been shocked.” ‘It took the shine off what otherwise should have been a great year last year’ Steve Keeton, managing director of Nippon Electric Glass Steve Keeton, the managing director of Nippon Electric Glass, had expected a stellar year for the fibreglass manufacturer in 2021. “Then we saw energy prices rising. At first our advisers were telling us not to worry, that there would be a small peak in energy prices and they’ll soon come down. But they didn’t,” he said. The UK’s only maker of reinforced fibreglass directly employs 350 staff at its Wigan site, and supplies its materials to the wind power and automotive industries across Europe. Thanks to the green energy boom its biggest challenge used to be keeping pace with demand. But energy prices are beginning to take a toll. “We lost money, on an operating level, every single month over the second half of last year. It took the shine off what otherwise should have been a great year last year,” Keeton said. The glass industry, like many manufacturing sectors, is a high intensity user of both gas and electricity which faces an uncertain future due to rocketing energy market prices. “I personally don’t want a government bail out,” Keeton said. “As a leader in my business I understand that my job is to create the right environment for my team to be successful. So what I expect from the government is for them to create the environment for business to be successful. That means a stable and predictable energy supply situation, and the infrastructure to support this,” he said.A video of a woman apparently locked against her will in a filthy shack has gone viral in China, prompting an investigation as well as a conversation about the country’s treatment of people with mental illness. The footage, taken on 26 January, was posted to the video-sharing site Douyin the following day by a man who was shocked to find the woman locked in the rubbish-filled building in a village in Jiangsu province in the east of the country. Standing in freezing conditions, the woman appeared to be chained by her neck to a concrete wall and she seemed dazed as she struggled to speak coherently. A video of the man who had apparently locked up the woman was posted later. As a small boy stood next to him, the man said the woman had multiple children with him, some of whom introduced themselves in the video. “Other people looked down on her,” he said, explaining why his family had taken her in. Local authorities investigating the case in Feng County said the woman had been a beggar and had married the man in 1998. They said after the birth of the couple’s second child, family planning officials had implemented birth control measures that proved ineffective. Psychiatric experts who examined the woman diagnosed her with schizophrenia, the authorities said. China’s censors have not attempted to suppress the story or discussion of it. On Weibo, a national microblogging site, a thread discussing the government investigation of the case has been viewed more than 76m times, racking up more than 25,000 comments since Monday. Mental health and sexual consent are less-discussed topics in China’s vast rural regions, where female infanticide has skewed the gender balance, causing men to outnumber women nationwide. Officials are also investigating the man, who is not facing criminal charges. Many outraged commenters have accused him of human trafficking but the Feng County government said there was no evidence to support those claims.Ukraine will be responsible for its own destruction if it undermines existing peace agreements, a senior Russian diplomat has warned at a combative UN security council debate on the crisis. The warning from Vasily Nebenzya, Russia’s permanent representative to the UN, came on a day of continued high-level diplomacy aimed at defusing the Ukraine crisis. The state department said it had received a response from Moscow to a document the US delivered in Moscow last week, formally outlining areas where the Biden administration believes the two countries could find common ground. US officials would not disclose the contents of the Russian letter, saying they would not “negotiate in public”. Russia’s state news agency RIA reported on Tuesday that Russia had sent follow-up questions rather than a response, and that Moscow was still working on an actual response. The US secretary of state Tony Blinken and his Russian counterpart, Sergei Lavrov, are due to talk on Tuesday, in the wake of the Russian letter and the security council session. Meanwhile on Monday, Vladimir Putin talked to Emmanuel Macron in the second phone conversation between the Russian and French leaders since Friday. “The two leaders agreed to continue contacts by telephone and to promptly consider the possibility of meeting in person,” the Kremlin said in a statement. Monday’s security council session did nothing to narrow the wide divide between Russia and the west, but did provide a test of diplomatic strength on the world stage. Nebenzya began the meeting by deriding western claims of a planned Russian attack as “hysterics” and blamed Ukraine for not abiding by the Minsk agreements of 2014 and 2015, which were supposed to end the conflict between the Kyiv government and the Russian-backed separatists in the Luhansk and Donetsk regions. Nebenzya, Russia’s permanent representative at the UN, also blamed western nations for “actively pumping Ukraine full of weapons” which he said would be used against civilians in the east of the country and were “in violation of the Minsk agreements”. He ended his address to the security council with a warning. “If our western partners push Kyiv to sabotage the Minsk agreements, something that Ukraine is ... willingly doing, then that might end in the absolute worst way for Ukraine,” Nebenzya said. “And not because somebody has destroyed it, but because it would have destroyed itself and Russia has absolutely nothing to do with this.” The US had called for an emergency debate on Ukraine as part of a diplomatic campaign to fend off what Washington and its allies say is a planned Russian invasion of Ukraine. As part of that campaign, the US and the UK both announced that pro-Putin Russian oligarchs would be targeted if an attack goes ahead. Russia had sought to stop a security council debate on Ukraine until after it took over the council presidency on Tuesday. But only China supported its opposition, with Gabon, India and Kenya abstaining, leaving the US with more than the nine votes required to proceed with an open session on the crisis. In her remarks, the US envoy, Linda Thomas-Greenfield, said that even as the issue was being debated in New York, Russia continued to add to the more than 100,000 troops already massed around Ukraine’s borders, and within days would have 30,000 inside Belarus alone. “Russia has already used more than 2,000 rail cars to move troops and weaponry from across Russia to the Ukrainian border,” Thomas-Greenfield said. “Russia has also moved nearly 5,000 troops into Belarus, with short-range ballistic missiles, special forces and anti-aircraft batteries. We’ve seen evidence that Russia intends to expand that presence to more than 30,000 troops near the Belarus-Ukraine border, less than two hours north of Kyiv, by early February.” Speaking towards the end of the session, the Ukrainian envoy, Sergiy Kyslytsya, described the Russian build-up of troops and military hardware around his country’s borders and did not echo President Volodymyr Zelenskiy’s complaints that the West was exaggerating the threat. Kyslytsya said there were now 112,000 Russian troops massed around Ukraine’s borders and in Crimea, with another 18,000 deployed at sea off the country’s coast. He pointed to the sophistication of the weapons being gathered in Belarus, including Iskander missiles, Pantsir anti-aircraft systems and advanced Sukhoi-35 jet fighters. Kyslytsya also said Russia was bolstering paramilitary separatist forces in eastern Ukraine, which he estimated as 35,000-strong, including 3,000 Russian troops “in command posts and in other critical combat positions”. In naval exercises in the Black Sea which started last week, the Ukrainian envoy said the Russians had deployed frigates, missile ships, assault landing ships and minesweepers. Another six warships from Russia’s northern fleet were reported to have entered the Mediterranean on Monday. According to the Italian newspaper la Repubblica, the vessels are carrying 60 tanks and more than 1,500 soldiers. The warships are currently navigating in the Sicilian Channel under aerial surveillance from Nato planes. Ukraine’s former defense minister, Andriy Zagorodnyuk, said that if the ships entered the Black Sea, the odds would tip on the likelihood of a Russian attack. In his comments to the security council, Nebenzya insisted that the military exercises were nothing out of the ordinary. Military analysts studying satellite imagery of the buildup in Belarus say the military units are coming from Russia’s far east and their deployment in such large numbers so far from base is unprecedented since the cold war. The Belarus envoy to the UN, Valentyn Rybakov, said the Russian troops were in his country for joint exercises from 10 to 20 February “to develop joint measures to eradicate the threat on the borders of our allied state, including caused by the migration crisis and the need to stabilize the humanitarian situation”. The two nations’ combined forces, Rybakov said, would organize the defense of “strategically important facilities” and would “curb and ward off external active aggression”. • This article was amended on 2 February 2022. An earlier version referred to “battleships” when warships was intended.Bullying, sexual harassment and racism are common throughout Rio Tinto, according to a review of the global miner’s workplace culture conducted by Australia’s former sex discrimination commissioner Elizabeth Broderick. Rio Tinto’s chief executive, Jakob Stausholm, said the findings were “deeply disturbing” and he promised the company would implement all 26 recommendations Broderick made to improve its culture. “I offer my heartfelt apology to every team member, past or present, who has suffered as a result of these behaviours,” he said on Tuesday. “This is not the kind of company we want to be.” Broderick and her team received survey responses from 10,000 of Rio’s 45,000 employees and conducted 109 “group listening sessions” around the world. There were also 85 confidential one-on-one meetings. Broderick said the majority of women who responded experienced “everyday sexism” such as being left out of meetings, not being provided with a women’s toilet or “even being asked to take notes, get coffee, or even do a colleague’s washing” while 21 women reported an actual or attempted rape or sexual assault in the past five years. “Bullying is systemic, experienced by almost half of the survey respondents,” she said in the report released by Rio on Tuesday. “Sexual harassment and everyday sexism occur at unacceptable rates. Racism is common across a number of areas.” Broderick said everyday sexism was damaging in its own right but also “creates fertile ground for more serious misconduct, such as sexual harassment and sexual assault”. Sexual harassment “was a significant organisational challenge”, she said, experienced by 43% of women working at fly-in fly-out (Fifo) and drive-in drive-out mine sites and 28% of women across the entire company. “Women at Fifo worksites spoke of eating alone in their room to avoid harassment in the dining hall and the gym; of avoiding being out after dark; of bad lighting and poor security; and of harassing and even threatening behaviour from male colleagues when they were walking to their accommodation after work,” Broderick said. “Women also spoke of the lack of consequences when they reported these incidents; and of having to carry the burden of managing the situation themselves, rather than receiving support from management or human resources.” Racism was also rife, with 39.8% of men who identify as Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander experiencing it in the past five years. Only 12.4% of men who do not identify as Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander experienced racism in the past five years. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning More than a third of both men and women working for the company in South Africa experienced racism. “As one employee commented ‘Rio is a Caucasian oriented company,’” Broderick said. The survey found that 48.4% of employees experienced bullying – 53% of women and 47% of men. “Employees described expectations that they should ‘toughen up’ for ‘life in a global miner,’” Broderick said. She said LGBTIQ+ employees also experienced “significantly elevated rates of bullying, sexual harassment and racism”. “Overall, their comments suggest that the same hyper-masculine norms and culture that can fuel everyday sexism and sexual harassment can also fuel heterosexism, making the inclusion and safety of employees who identify as LGBTIQ+ a priority in any cultural reform,” she said. She said Rio needed to adopt the same approach to psychological safety as it does towards physical safety, where the company “recognises that workplaces cannot be free from injury or critical incidents if employees do not feel confident to report unsafe practices or risks”. “The project revealed that this confidence is not common amongst Rio Tinto employees for complex and sensitive interpersonal issues such as sexual harassment, racism and bullying,” she said. “Similarly, employees participating in the listening sessions described a ‘culture of silence’ and negative impacts from reporting; of a lack of confidentiality; and of the subject of complaints being protected and even rewarded.” One participant said they still feared the person who bullied them, even though they had left Rio. “The culture of the team was really rotten to the core while he was leader,” they said. “Once that person starts firing your colleagues for speaking out, they have a level of power over you.” Broderick commended Rio for making cultural changes over the past 12 months, but warned that the company was “only at an early stage along this path”. She said staff were confident Rio could do better. “In my interactions with the Rio Tinto leadership team, I have observed a strong desire for transformational change, as well as to make positive contributions to the societal shifts that we need to see. “There is clear recognition, however, that new approaches are needed to solve these issues.” A separate parliamentary inquiry in WA is examining sexual harassment at fly-in-fly-out mining sites. Tuesday’s report follows turmoil among the top ranks of Rio after it blew up culturally significant 46,000-year-old rock shelters at Juukan Gorge, in the Pilbara, in order to mine more iron ore. • In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In the UK, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123. Other international suicide helplines can be found at befrienders.orgPeter van Onselen, the political editor of Network Ten, undermined and humiliated the network’s federal political reporter, Tegan George, including by backgrounding other journalists against her, according to a statement of claim filed against the network in the federal court. George says she has been unable to work since June last year and claims she suffered “hurt, humiliation and distress” and the loss of opportunity to advance her career at the network, in part due to her treatment by Van Onselen. She claims the network did nothing about her treatment, and that she was threatened with disciplinary action when she resisted making a formal statement about an alleged sexist remark that she had overheard. After George complained to news bosses about the lack of a “clear chain of command” and “conflicting instructions” under Van Onselen’s management of the Canberra bureau, she was allegedly told by the network’s executive editor, Anthony Murdoch, “Peter is batshit crazy but we just have to get used to it” and that Van Onselen expected George to apologise for “hurting his feelings” by raising the issue. George also complained about the behaviour of other managers at the network, claiming one was “rude and hostile” to her. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning George’s statement of claim, seen by Guardian Australia, says Ten managers told her the Canberra bureau had always been “toxic” and she needed to learn to “deal with it”. The claim says Van Onselen rejected George’s complaint of being “unsupported, disrespected and unwelcome” and news management said the political editor “did not give a shit” about how she was feeling. When Canberra staff complained about having to write Van Onselen’s TV news packages as well as their own, news boss Ross Dagan said “words to the effect that Mr van Onselen was the Network’s number one and said that they were all expected to build Mr van Onselen’s brand”, according to the statement of claim. George claims that when she and a female colleague raised concerns about their workload with management they were asked by a manager (not Van Onselen): “What did you even do today? Painting your nails and drinking herbal tea?” The federal political reporter claims the Ten Network, where she has worked for 11 years, breached her general protections under fair work laws by reducing her standing and reputation among her colleagues, subjecting her to speculation and gossip, causing her public embarrassment which made her feel isolated and unsupported – in effect failing to provide a safe workplace. George also claims she was pressured into making a formal statement after she “overheard a conversation in Network Ten’s Parliament House bureau between a Network Ten employee and a freelance camera operator in which a sexist remark was made about another employee”. After initially resisting making a statement about the alleged remark in May 2021, she was threatened with disciplinary action and eventually relented, the statement says. George claims Van Onselen backgrounded journalists against her and tweeted about “employees who witness” sexual harassment but did not report it, a tweet she believed was directed at her. George claims that from early 2020 Van Onselen avoided talking to her and only communicated via text message, and further humiliated her by sending a script she had written to a minister behind her back. “On 3 September 2020, Mr van Onselen sent parts of a script of an exclusive story about the federal government, written by Ms George to the Minister for Health, Greg Hunt, prompting the Minister to demand corrections,” the claim says. The claim says in February 2021 Van Onselen failed to acknowledge that a video of George questioning the prime minister about Brittany Higgins received almost 500,000 views on Twitter and he “publicly reprimanded Ms George for forgetting to send him her script on the previous Saturday”. George claims Van Onselen variously used Twitter, Ten group emails and WhatsApp messages to undermine her. On 21 June 2021, Van Onselen sent an email to the network’s Canberra bureau email group which read in part: “…Tegan has extended her leave by another week…” “… as mentioned I’m covering this weekend anyway. It will be my 15th straight day working so Alex has very kindly offered to double check my work!!!” In June last year George told management Van Onselen’s conduct was “belittling and passive aggressive” and that his “bullying and offensive conduct had a corrosive and devastating impact on her mental health”. After a September meeting with Ten management and the media union at which George was visibly distressed, according to the statement of claim, Van Onselen published a tweet which she felt was directed at her. George claims Van Onselen undermined her by publishing thinly veiled tweets which some people would understand to be about her. He also directly replied to one of her tweets in a “rude, intemperate, condescending and patronising” tone which implied that she was “inexperienced, ignorant and wrong”, the statement of claim says. George, who has deleted her Twitter account, is represented by employment lawyers Maurice Blackburn. “As this is an employee matter, we will not be commenting,” a Ten spokesperson said. Van Onselen has been approached for comment. Network Ten is expected to file its defence to the claim in due course. Van Onselen, an associate editor of the Australian, is a fill-in host on Ten’s The Project, co-hosting with Carrie Bickmore while Hamish Macdonald was on leave last week. He is also a professor of politics at the University of Western Australia.Britain’s housing market has made its strongest start to a year since 2005, with annual house price growth rising to 11.2%, according to the UK’s biggest building society. Nationwide said the average price of a home hit £255,556 in January, the sixth consecutive monthly increase. The annual growth rate accelerated 0.8 percentage points from 10.4% the previous month, reaching its highest level since June. Robert Gardner, Nationwide’s chief economist, said: “Housing demand has remained robust. Mortgage approvals for house purchase have continued to run slightly above pre-pandemic levels despite the surge in activity in 2021 as a result of the stamp duty holiday, which encouraged buyers to bring forward their transactions to avoid additional tax. “Indeed, the total number of property transactions in 2021 was the highest since 2007 and around 25% higher than in 2019, before the pandemic struck. At the same time, the stock of homes on estate agents’ books has remained extremely low, which is contributing to the continued robust pace of house price growth.” Many forecasters, including Nationwide, predict the housing market will cool later this year. Gardner noted that house price growth had outpaced wage growth by a wide margin since the coronavirus pandemic struck. For example, a 10% deposit on a typical first-time buyer home is now equivalent to 56% of total gross annual earnings, a record high. Similarly, a typical mortgage payment as a share of take-home pay is now above the long-run average despite mortgage rates remaining close to all-time lows. While affordability has worsened, household finances have been hit by sharp increases in the cost of living. Consumer price inflation reached 5.4% in December, its fastest annual rate since 1992, and is set to rise further as the energy price cap is lifted in April. This is likely to force the Bank of England to raise borrowing costs again. Jeremy Leaf, a north London estate agent and a former Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors residential chairman, said the Nationwide survey “confirms what we have seen on the ground – a resilient market with prices still rising in response to improving but continuing low stock levels. Looking forward, higher interest rates and inflation will inevitably have some impact on the pace of price increases and number of transactions.” Guy Gittins, the chief executive of the London-based estate agent Chestertons, expects the London market to remain at high activity levels in the first half of this year. “For many, 2022 feels like a new chapter and house hunters have been eager to begin the new year in a new home. Following on from a busier than usual December, London’s property market has continued to see record numbers of buyers registering throughout January. “While spacious properties or homes with an outside space remain sought-after, apartments in some of London’s more central boroughs are experiencing a steady comeback. This is particularly driven by professionals who are returning to the office and are seeking a nearby home as well as international investors and students.”The New York Times has acquired the viral word game Wordle for an undisclosed seven-figure sum, the publisher announced on Monday. Created by a Reddit engineer and launched in October, Wordle gives players just six guesses to determine a five-letter word that changes every day. The soothing daily puzzle has become a hit since its launch, quickly attracting hundreds of thousands, then millions, of players. Social media posts about its game of the day have become ubiquitous, along with screenshots of the game’s distinctive grid. Josh Wardle, who created the game for his partner, who loves puzzles, told the Guardian this month that he felt overwhelmed by the game’s viral success. “It going viral doesn’t feel great, to be honest. I feel a sense of responsibility for the players. I feel I really owe it to them to keep things running and make sure everything’s working correctly,” Wardle said. At the same time, he said, “it’s not my full-time job and I don’t want it to become a source of stress and anxiety in my life.” The New York Times’ crossword editor, Will Shortz, praised Wordle as a “a great puzzle”, and noted: “It doesn’t take long to play, which makes it perfect for our age when people have short attention spans.” Jonathan Knight, general manager for the New York Times Games, told a Times reporter: “The game has done what so few games have done – it has captured our collective imagination and brought us all a little closer together.” The ascent of a “pleasant little daily brainteaser” during the third year of a global pandemic has prompted many reflections on the joys of an earlier, more innocent age of the internet. It has also fueled a tiny cottage industry of game optimization strategies, with mathematicians and linguistic experts weighing in on the best possible first guess. “I think that at this point in life – after ten or so years of a proliferative mode in the online idiom – there is a craving to return to an earlier, slower internet,” the American author Brandon Taylor wrote in a recent newsletter reflecting on the game. Wordle, he said, “re-creates a sense of scarcity within the digital space”. Wardle said in a statement that he was “thrilled” that the New York Times “will be the stewards of the game moving forward” and that he admired the newspaper’s “approach to games and the respect with which they treat their players”. “This step feels very natural to me,” he wrote. Some Wordle aficionados responded to the acquisition news with concern that the newspaper would move the puzzle behind its content paywall. “When the game moves to the New York Times, Wordle will be free to play for new and existing players, and no changes will be made to its gameplay,” the newspaper promised, a pledge Wardle echoed in his statement. Some reactions on social media remained skeptical: “I’d better not lose my streak when the game moves, or there will be HELL to pay,” one player wrote on Twitter. Wardle wrote in his statement that he was working with the Times “to make sure your wins and streaks will be preserved”.The company behind Irn-Bru has revealed it is increasing its prices after its packaging, ingredients and energy-linked commodity costs jumped, as it raised its sales and profit estimates. AG Barr said owing to rising costs, which includes fruit and wages, it had put up prices “where appropriate” and signalled further price increases as it pointed to the UK’s inflation rate rising above 5%, the highest in decades. Sales of the Scottish fizzy drink, made to a secret recipe, are likely to have been boosted in part by it becoming the talk of the recent climate summit Cop26 in Glasgow. The drink made global headlines when the US congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez posted an Instagram video of herself praising Irn-Bru, after being handed a can by the Scottish first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, on her arrival in Glasgow. Irn-Bru is often referred to as Scotland’s other national drink – after whisky – and AG Barr was the exclusive soft drink and water supplier at two convention centres in Glasgow used during Cop26. The company, which also makes Rubicon drinks and Funkin cocktail mixers, said it made revenues of £267m in the year to 30 January, up 17.5% on the previous year and ahead of its own expectations – despite the spread of the Omicron Covid variant and restrictions on socialising. Sales are also higher than its pre-pandemic performance of £255.7m. As a result, AG Barr expects its full-year profit before tax and one-off items to be slightly higher than its November estimate of £41m. The company said: “While government restrictions have impacted consumer behaviour across the year, both our Barr Soft Drinks and Funkin business units have traded well, particularly during the periods when restrictions were eased.” Its chief executive, Roger White, said: “We have remained fully operational throughout the year, producing high-quality products and providing strong business support to all of our customers. “We have delivered an excellent financial performance against a volatile backdrop, while at the same time delivering on our strategic priorities.”When BBC Three is reborn as an on-air channel at 7pm today, its schedule includes Eating With My Ex, a post-dating format in which former lovers meet up over a meal. It’s an appropriate choice given that the network itself is returning to a former partner after a split that caused serious disagreement and left messy unfinished business. The first three series of Eating With My Ex were branded as BBC Three content but could only be streamed via iPlayer, as the youth-oriented service, which launched in 2003, was dropped from the airwaves in 2016 when the BBC was looking for budget cuts. However, the chances of a long, harmonious partnership second time around have been vastly reduced by this comeback coinciding with a funding crisis even more severe than the one that axed BBC Three six years ago. When the culture secretary, Nadine Dorries, recently announced that the £159 TV licence would be frozen for two years, fall behind inflation for six and might cease completely from 2028, BBC director-general Tim Davie warned that the necessary economies might “absolutely” include axing channels. As a result, Three might feel this week like an ex who arrives at the reunion restaurant to be told the other person already feels this is a bad idea. In adding another channel while simultaneously threatening to cut some, the BBC might seem to many viewers chaotic and contradictory. But to be fair, the timing was not its choice. Still, there is reason to wonder if the restoration of Three ever made sense. In 2016, the corporation gave these reasons for the decision to move the channel aimed at 16- to 34-year-olds to iPlayer alone: although Three had an impressive hit record (Gavin &amp; Stacey, Little Britain, Murdered By My Boyfriend etc), data showed that the target demographic was much more likely to watch by streaming or catchup than on linear TV. In 2022, these are the reasons given for the reversal: younger viewers still watch a surprising amount of linear television, and terrestrial restoration ensures that there will be a dedicated BBC channel for them, viewing of which will “complement” iPlayer viewing and may even drive additional youth viewing to it. These contrasting rationales are explained by recent research revealing that younger audiences are failing to make a progression that was once standard – from watching Doctor Who courtesy of a licence fee bought by your parents or place of education, to enjoying 9pm crime dramas covered by a permit you paid for yourself. The regulator Ofcom and BBC bosses hope the return of a linear BBC Three will help to restore the BBC habit to the absconding demographic. But even before the additional difficulty of whether the corporation can afford another linear network, the strategy looked a huge and probably futile gamble. Are younger viewers really consuming fewer BBC shows because there isn’t a button on the remote for them, or because they prefer material from rival streamers such as Netflix, Sky and Disney or the vast quantities of other content available online? Will the return of “their” channel energise them to buy TV licences, or has the impulse to fund public service broadcasting gone, killed by the multiplicity of content and the widespread (though false) belief that no licence is needed to watch BBC content online? The relaunch schedules also raise the question of what BBC Three is for. During its streaming interlude, the franchise proved a very impressive feeder to the main BBC channels. Normal People, Clique, Fleabag and People Just Do Nothing were among the many shows to flourish on BBC One or Two after iPlayer debuts. Shows on the new Three include Conversations With Friends (another Sally Rooney adaptation) and Mood, a comedy drama with a genesis very similar to Phoebe Waller-Bridge’s Fleabag, having also started as a solo theatre piece: Nicôle Lecky’s Superhoe. Aside from the issue of how the BBC hopes to appeal to younger viewers if Superhoe is apparently considered too rude a title to use on air, have Normal People and Fleabag not opened up a space on One and Two into which Conversations With Friends and Mood could move at once? Similarly, Stacey Dooley, one of the best reporters on television, has made another impressive documentary called Stalkers, about those who inflict and suffer obsessive attention. But surely such a combination of star and subject matter could, even should, be on BBC One? At a relaunch event, Dooley joked that she was surprised to be involved – she also fronts a new Three cookery show, Hungry for It – as, 35 next birthday, she is about to move beyond the channel’s demographic. But the gag raises a serious point: as Dooley is at such a different age and stage now, why is the channel still being branded with her? And, although BBC management would hate this conclusion to be drawn at this point of the debate with government on the corporation’s funding, BBC Three may show the way towards a subscription model. Younger viewers might be persuaded to pay, among a portfolio of subscriptions, a low-ish fee for Three-like material. Traditionalists would object that this arrangement would deny them exposure to BBC News, wildlife shows and arts documentaries, but viewing, especially among the young, no longer works like that, and the reappearance of an old channel seems unlikely to change that. Diners on Eating With My Ex often find that there were very good reasons for having gone their separate ways. That feels dangerously likely to be the case with BBC TV and BBC Three.Marcus Rashford is writing a follow-up to his bestselling debut You Are a Champion, in which the England footballer will explore “how to celebrate and champion difference”. Rashford’s first book, published last May and co-written by Carl Anka, was the bestselling children’s non-fiction title of last year, selling over 220,000 copies in the UK, according to its publisher. His and Anka’s follow-up, which will be called You Can Do It: How to Find Your Team and Make a Difference, will be published in July, Macmillan Children’s Books said today. Rashford said that before he and Anka put together the idea for You Can Do It, they spent time with children who had read You Are a Champion, “understanding what they took away from the book and what tools we could still equip them with, so they are best prepared for adult life”. “The insight sessions were brilliant and I’m proud of the outcome, focusing on how we can best champion one another, and view difference as a positive rather than a means to discriminate,” Rashford said. “This is about how you can use your voice to support others.” Described as an “inspirational guide” for children aged between 10 and 14, You Can Do It will see the footballer “encourage readers to use their voice to champion causes they care about”, and give advice about the importance of teamwork, how “even the smallest changes can have the biggest impact”, and how to “use your voice to make a meaningful change for the better”. Anka said he “leapt” at the chance to collaborate with Rashford again. “We want to build on some of the ideas and principles developed in the first book and hopefully create something to help young people foster their communities and go out and shape the world,” said Anka. Rashford’s first novel, the middle grade fiction book The Breakfast Club Adventures, is out in May, co-written with Alex Falase-Koya and illustrated by Marta Kissi.In this frenetic, rumbustious new graphic biography of Diego Rivera by Francisco de la Mora and José Luis Pescador, the Mexican artist’s third wife (and fourth: they married twice) appears only fleetingly. We don’t find out where or how they met; the powerful connection between them, never fully explained, must simply be taken for granted by the reader. But perhaps the authors feel that Frida Kahlo has had a bit too much attention just lately: who could forget the snaking queues at the V&amp;A’s show of her work in 2018? In their book, then, it’s Rivera who is centre stage. Like a raging bull, rushing into the ring for a fight, he dominates every page, all bristling melodrama and animal energy. “There have been two great accidents in my life,” Kahlo said. “Diego was by far the worst.” There is surely hyperbole in this statement, however unhappy Rivera made her at times (both of them were repeatedly unfaithful). But you grasp her meaning: the sense of collision that accompanied her husband wherever he went. Though his talent was prodigious – he went to art school at 11 – it often struggled to find its place in a life that was by any standards overpopulated with incident. Born in 1886, Rivera was the son of a journalist who was involved in revolutionary politics, instincts he would famously go on to share. Travelling in Europe, he met Lenin in Paris and Stalin in Moscow; later, he offered refuge to Trotsky during his Mexican exile. But revolutionaries come in many guises. If he talked the talk – even after fame arrived, he remained proudly un-clubbable – he was also easily distracted, usually (though not exclusively) by women. De la Mora and Pescador pick and choose when it comes to the biographical details. They make little, for instance, of Rivera’s Jewishness on his mother’s side – her family was supposed to have converso history (ancestors who were forced to convert to Catholicism) – something that he felt informed both his art and his politics. But they’re predictably enthralled – and who can blame them? – by his years in Paris, where he knew Braque, Picasso and Modigliani and embraced cubism (a passion that did not last). There is, perhaps, a bit too much wild sex in their book – bed springs are always groaning; women are ecstatic at his merest touch – but they make the most both of his return to Mexico and, later, the time he spent in the US, where he accepted commissions from such giants of capitalism as John D Rockefeller. Pescador, who illustrates, has a feeling for the epic scene; he knows just how to do it, stepping back from the frame, opening things out. Depicting the artist at work at his mural The History of Mexico in the stairwell of the National Palace in Mexico City – Rivera’s Sistine Chapel, it took six years to complete – he uses fold-out pages, the better to give us a 360-degree fix on the spectacle and the result is quite wonderful, a moment of quiet in a narrative that is at times very noisy. Rivera and Kahlo, now in a wheelchair, are tiny on a landing. Like two small children, their chins are raised, they eyes look ever upwards. Here is his vision, vast and teeming and fervent, and it seems that even they must struggle to take it all in. • Diego Rivera by Francisco de la Mora and José Luis Pescador is published by SelfMadeHero (£16.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyWhen social media influencers turned up at the Azimuth music festival in the middle of the Saudi Arabian desert they were promised a festival of musical and gastronomic excess, all subsidised by an arm of the Saudi government. What attendees did not know was that the pricey music festival was secretly organised by youth media company Vice, as part of the media company’s ongoing push to make money in the Middle Eastern state despite the country’s poor human rights record. Just three years after Vice publicly announced that it was pausing all work in Saudi Arabia due to the fallout from the state-ordered murder of dissident Jamal Khashoggi, insiders at Vice told the Guardian the company was once again aggressively pursuing business opportunities in Saudi Arabia. “Vice employees have for years raised concerns over the company’s involvement with Saudi Arabia – and we’ve been fobbed off with empty statements and pathetic excuses,” said one Vice employee. Although the Azimuth music festival received little publicity in the western media when it took place at the start of the Covid pandemic, it is believed to be have been highly lucrative for Vice. Staff at the company estimate the total budget was $20m (£15m). The event promised to bring together the best of eastern culture (it took place among ancient carvings at the world heritage site of Al-’Ula on a historic trade route) with the best of western culture (it featured a performance from the dance duo Chainsmokers). The lineup was topped by French electronic musician Jean-Michel Jarre who appeared alongside rapper Tinie Tempah. High-end chefs from restaurants such as New York’s Michelin-starred Contra and London’s Annabel’s were flown in to cook for guests. British contemporary artists Lauren Baker joined the conceptual studio Shuster + Moseley to provide special art displays. Despite this, efforts were taken to keep Vice’s name off the event. Contractors who worked on the music festival – organised through Vice’s creative marketing agency Virtue – were asked to sign non-disclosure agreements, while Vice’s name did not appear on public marketing material. Saudi Arabia is desperate to spend big money to rebrand itself in the eyes of western youth – and Vice, despite its counter-cultural roots, is now an ageing business that needs to improve its financial position fast. The company rode the new-media start-up wave of the early part of this century but has already burned through billions of dollars of investment – all while also dealing with allegations of sexual harassment and trying to deliver a financial return to investors. As a result, the money on offer in the Middle East has been tempting and Vice last year opened a dedicated office in the Saudi capital Riyadh. It has also had a deal to make promotional films for the country in conjunction with the Saudi Research and Marketing Group, a business with close ties to the Saudi state which also has a partnership with the Independent and Evening Standard. One employee claimed Vice executives were acutely aware of the potential reputational damage that could be caused if Vice’s western audience became aware of the extent to which it was working with the Saudi state, saying: “It is astounding that – despite ongoing opposition from staff – Vice is still happy to take money from a country that was literally responsible for the state-sanctioned murder of a journalist.” Asked about concerns from staff about its return to doing business in Saudi Arabia, a spokesperson for Vice said: “Vice Arabia was set up over four years ago as part of our global expansion – alongside many other media and content businesses who have expanded into the region. Vice has always been about creativity and culture for youth in every corner of the world – and in the Saudi Region, two-thirds of the population are under the age of 35. “We opened a commercial and creative office in Riyadh earlier this year, which was reported and shared publicly. Our editorial voice has and always will report with complete autonomy and independence.”Internal documents and Slack messages obtained by the Guardian reveal senior executives at the New York Times are heavily leaning on workers to vote no in a union election for more than 600 tech employees. Meredith Kopit Levien, the chief executive of the New York Times Company, wrote a memo on 19 January circulated to staff titled “Why a Tech Union Isn’t Right for Us” on the tech workers’ union election at XFun, the group within the New York Times responsible for product development operations. “In short, we don’t believe unionizing in XFun is the right move. But that’s not because I’m anti-union,” said Kopit Levien. In the memo, Kopit Levien cited the origin of the XFun group and its growth, and attributed any disconnect workers might be feeling to working apart during the pandemic. She also cited Wirecutter’s union as a warning sign for unionization. Workers at Wirecutter walked out on Black Friday weekend in late November and called on the public to boycott the publication, in protest of unfair labor practices and alleging that the New York Times was bargaining in bad faith. Shortly after the walkout, an agreement was reached between the union and Times management. Kopit Levien said in the memo: “It took Wirecutter two years to reach an agreement with the NewsGuild. And the result of those prolonged Wirecutter negotiations was a set of terms that are, in most ways, what the rest of the company already enjoys. This was two years of uncertainty and discord to negotiate terms that were largely in line with what they and their non-union colleagues already had in place. She emphasized the relationship between management and workers, alleging the relationship would be disrupted by a union, and that the New York Times’ diversity, equity and inclusion goals would also be disrupted by a union. Kopit Levien wrote: “This is an unproven experiment with permanent consequences.” In Slack messages, Times chief product officer Alexandra Hardiman and chief growth officer Hannah Yang posted messages urging workers to vote no in the union election. Yang reshared Kopit Leviten’s letter to workers, prompting workers to see it on the company’s internal election resources hub. “A union is not a silver bullet,” wrote Hardiman, urging workers to vote no. “It will introduce another layer into our process that we believe will make it harder to work – and achieve – together.” Yang argued that a union would “dilute” the voice of smaller teams within the group of workers. “If you have any concerns about how your voice will be represented in negotiations, we urge you to vote no for the union,” she said. “We encourage you to vote no,” a leaflet distributed by the Times to workers said. It cited three reasons: “weakening relationships between employees and managers”, “lengthy negotiating processes and inflexible multi-year agreements” and “reducing your flexibility to learn new skills”. The Slack messages from the executive were quickly flooded by negative emojis. Only a select few workers can post in the staff-wide Slack channels, so emojis are often the only way most workers can respond to the posts. Ballots for the mail-in election were sent out on 24 January and are due on 28 February. Vote tallies are to be counted on 7 March. The National Labor Relations Board rejected the New York Times’ attempt to stop the election, alleging the bargaining unit was improper. The company had previously declined to voluntarily recognize the union and immediately began holding anti-union captive audience meetings with workers. The NewsGuild of New York filed a complaint earlier this month with the NLRB, accusing the Times of violating federal labor law by adding new paid days off to the company holiday calendar for non-union employees only – which was viewed as a tactic to dissuade workers from voting for the union. After the complaint was filed, the New York Times made similar changes to its bereavement policy, making it applicable only to non-union workers. The union is collecting signatures as part of a public petition demanding the New York Times stop what it calls union-busting. On 5 January, the NLRB filed a complaint against the Times, ruling the company violated federal labor law by telling some employees they could not show support for tech workers seeking to unionize. If successful, the tech workers at the New York Times would form the largest bargaining unit of tech workers in the US, according to the union. In an email to the Guardian, a spokesperson for the New York Times wrote: “The Times Company has a long history of productive relationships with our unions. However, we do not believe a union would be best for the individuals or teams in the proposed tech and digital product unit, and could stifle innovation and collaboration. “Also, a union among tech and digital workers would be an unproven experiment with lasting implications.”The AFLW star Tayla Harris has told a parliamentary inquiry that continued cyber abuse she has suffered since the infamous photo of her kicking a goal went viral has had a negative impact on her mental health. The 24-year-old gave evidence at the parliamentary inquiry into social media and online safety on Tuesday where she spoke about being attacked when she moved from Carlton to Melbourne last year. Harris said when she switched teams from Carlton to Melbourne in 2021, she began to receive “some pretty nasty and hurtful comments” from people in private messages or post tags after, she claimed, a narrative was created that she wanted much more money. “Which wasn’t true, which was the most frustrating part,” she said. “So my responsibility after speaking with my team was I just needed to just go about my business and get on with it, I guess, on the footy field. “So that was the concerning thing, that people, obviously particularly men, are just so obsessed with the idea that women do not deserve anything near what the men deserve.” She said it was an attack on her character and left her in a worse mental state than when the photo incident happened. Harris said she would love to delete all social media and had retreated from posting. “I’ve very consciously not been using it and not been active recently, which is disappointing because I love to share positive messaging, I love to inspire people, but at what cost?” she said. “Anything I put [up] is a platform for someone to come back with more hurtful things, and I don’t have the energy to continue to delete [them]. “And the reason I would delete is because I don’t want a 15-year-old girl who’s aspiring to be a footy player to see what she might be exposed to … I am so conflicted, because I want to inspire people, I don’t want them to be exposed to the kind of people that think it’s acceptable to pile on.” The inquiry is part of the federal government’s push to introduce laws that would force social media platforms to take down offending posts and, in some circumstances, reveal the identity of anonymous posters. A Hawthorn Indigenous player, Chad Wingard, said the online bullying of players around the time they are traded from one club to another is damaging. “I know a lot of people will say that it comes with being an AFL player but … being bullied or being discriminated against isn’t a job description,” he said. He said the AFL gives players training on the pros and cons of social media, but does not prepare players for the toll it can take. Wingard called for people to need to be identifiable on social media, pointing to an incident on Instagram where a “burner account” with one follower commented a monkey emoji on a photo of 10 AFL players. “It’s taken him five minutes to really ruin 10 people’s days, weeks, months, it could be years to get over that kind of stuff, and that’s how easy it is for someone to really make an impact,” he said. “And it’s not the one comment. It’s the thousands, it’s the daily, it’s the weekly struggles – people don’t understand that.” Wingard said while he initially let it slide, he has decided to call abuse out every single time now. Tanya Hosch, executive general manager of inclusion and diversity at the AFL, told the committee she knows some players keep a minimum presence on social media as a result of the abuse. “We wouldn’t have any data on that, but I certainly anecdotally know that there are some players who just have a minimum presence as a result of direct abuse themselves or through watching other teammates, friends, family members going through a terrible amount of abuse,” she said.Last Friday, Jake Paul – the controversial YouTuber turned professional boxer – released a rap video targeting Dana White, the president of the Ultimate Fighting Championship. Aptly named the Dana White Diss Track, the song opens with a cameo from former UFC champion Cris Cyborg, who is pressured by an actor playing White into signing an exploitative contract that doesn’t even guarantee health care. Paul – who modestly portrays himself as a crusading hero – then launches into the track, which takes aim at White and his business partners Frank and Lorenzo Fertitta, as well as notable fighters such as Conor McGregor, Jorge Masvidal, Nate Diaz, and even retired champion Khabib Nurmagomedov. The definitely not safe-for-work track, which has garnered more than 2m views on YouTube, is Paul’s latest attempt to call for improved pay in the UFC while escalating his personal conflict with White. “Dana, pay your fighters more. Give them healthcare, you scumbag. I haven’t met a single person who says anything good about you. I passed my drug test and you went silent. I’m keeping my foot on your neck until you tap, bitch,” proclaims Paul in the closing section of the video. “Stop raising your pay-per-view prices on the fans and not paying fighters more. Greedy, old, lonely, bald, bitch.” Paul and White have clashed repeatedly over the past few months. It began when Paul offered to retire from boxing and join the UFC roster if White agreed to raise fighter pay and provide long-term health care to his athletes. White responded by suggesting that Paul was using steroids. Unfazed by White’s attack, Paul announced last week that he had invested in Endeavor, the parent company of the UFC, with the intent of driving change from within. He then told ESPN’s Stephen A Smith that he planned to start a fighters’ union and that his conflict with White is “really about the fighters.” Paul’s verbal showdown with White has undoubtedly drawn attention to the mistreatment of fighters in the UFC. However, it also raises questions about Paul’s motivation given his (and his older brother Logan’s) history of monetizing controversy. The 25-year-old Paul launched his YouTube channel in 2014, which quickly became a platform for eye-popping antics that earned him more than 20 million subscribers. He grew to become one of YouTube’s most popular names until Logan Paul posted a December 2017 video of a dead body filmed in Japan’s infamous “suicide forest.” As a result of the backlash from the video, both brothers lost their sponsors and had their videos demonetized on YouTube. Though Jake Paul continues to be embroiled in various controversies – include throwing a party during the initial Covid -19 lockdown and allegations of sexual assault—he has since turned his attention to his flourishing boxing career, which accounts for the vast majority of his earnings. Earlier this month, Forbes estimated that Paul made a combined $40m for his three boxing wins in 2021, all of which took place against former UFC fighters. With his eyes set on several other potential UFC opponents, including Jorge Masvidal, it makes financial sense for Paul to bring attention to the organization’s oppressive contracts and its mistreatment of fighters, especially since White vehemently opposed the idea of Paul challenging those under contract with the UFC. Paul’s conflict with White also expands his popularity in the mixed martial arts community and presents him as a supposed defender of downtrodden athletes while bringing in more viewers to his fights. Given this, it comes as no surprise that Paul is creating videos attacking White while claiming that it is all for the benefit of underpaid fighters. Nevertheless, while Paul’s conflict with White is most likely self-serving, it would be foolish to ignore the fact that his fanbase and social media presence could provide an invaluable platform to spotlight the issue of fighter pay in the UFC. Unlike the vast majority of sports leagues and organizations, where athletes receive anywhere between 47-50% of the sport’s revenue, the UFC has historically paid out between 16-19%. In 2019, the promotion reported $900m in revenue, but only 16% was paid out to the UFC’s approximately 600 fighters. The UFC’s stranglehold led to a half-dozen former UFC fighters filing a $5bn antitrust lawsuit against UFC’s parent company, Zuffa LLC, in December 2014. The lawsuit charges the company with illegally acquiring and maintaining a monopoly over the MMA industry. It claims that the UFC used predatory practices and ran an illegal scheme to eliminate competition, which resulted in fighters being paid “a fraction of what they would earn in a competitive marketplace.” According to Lucas Middlebrook, a union-side labor attorney representing airline and professional sports labor groups, Paul has both the wealth and influence to play a crucial role in creating collective bargaining opportunities for fighters. “Jake Paul has the money to throw behind [unionizing fighters],” said Middlebrook. “He’s also got the ability to create media, which he can use as a tool to educate the fighters on the benefits that unionization could bring.” Middlebrook, who previously advised former UFC fighter Leslie Smith’s Project Spearhead labor association, added that if Paul wants to create real change, he should begin by funding grassroots organizing activities such as hiring former UFC athletes to educate current fighters and coordinate unionization efforts. These activities could be especially effective right now, as the National Labor Relations Board takes steps to investigate workplaces and employers that misclassify workers as independent contractors. UFC fighters are currently classified as independent contractors. “Once you’ve made the UFC bargain instead of implement, you take away their power and … see the empowerment of the labor. And once you see the empowerment of the labor, things start to change very quickly.” Paul has a unique opportunity to help countless fighters improve their livelihoods. Whether the YouTube star will follow through on his claims of support or simply stick to his brand of profiting from real-world controversy remains to be seen.Crows are being recruited to pick up discarded cigarette butts from the streets and squares of a Swedish city as part of a cost-cutting drive. The wild birds carry out the task as they receive a little food for every butt that they deposit in a bespoke machine designed by a startup in Södertälje, near Stockholm. “They are wild birds taking part on a voluntary basis,” said Christian Günther-Hanssen, the founder of Corvid Cleaning, the company behind the method. The Keep Sweden Tidy Foundation says that more than 1bn cigarette butts are left on Sweden’s streets each year, representing 62% of all litter. Södertälje spends 20m Swedish kronor (£1.6m) on street cleaning. Günther-Hanssen estimates his method could save at least 75% of costs involved with picking up cigarette butts in the city. Södertälje is carrying out a pilot project before potentially rolling out the operation across the city, with the health of the birds being the key consideration given the type of waste involved. New Caledonian crows, a member of the corvid family of birds, are as good at reasoning as a human seven-year-old, research has suggested, making them the smartest birds for the job. Günther-Hanssen said: “They are easier to teach and there is also a higher chance of them learning from each other. At the same time, there’s a lower risk of them mistakenly eating any rubbish. “The estimation for the cost of picking up cigarette butts today is around 80 öre [Swedish change] or more per cigarette butt, some say two kronor. If the crows pick up cigarette butts, this would maybe be 20 öre per cigarette butt. The saving for the municipality depends on how many cigarette butts the crows pick up.” Tomas Thernström, a waste strategist at Södertälje municipality, said the potential of the pilot depended on financing. “It would be interesting to see if this could work in other environments as well. Also from the perspective that we can teach crows to pick up cigarette butts but we can’t teach people not to throw them on the ground. That’s an interesting thought,” he said.Scott Morrison has kicked the political year off with an address to the National Press Club after which he faced a barrage of questions about the government’s handling of the pandemic and poor standing in the opinion polls. Politicians often answer the question they wish they’d been asked – not the one that was actually asked – and Morrison’s Q&amp;A was a classic of the genre. So where did Morrison’s answers fall short? 1. Is it too late now to say sorry? The ABC’s Laura Tingle asked if the prime minister would like to “take this opportunity to actually say sorry for the mistakes you’ve made as prime minister”. Morrison replied: “We’re all terribly sorry for what this pandemic has done to the world and to this country.” See what he did there? He shifted the apology from its intended subject – his mistakes – and on to something arguably outside his control. Earlier, Morrison had said accepting responsibility means to challenge yourself with questions like “couldn’t this have been avoided”. In answer to Tingle, Morrison admitted being too optimistic about the summer and said he wished he’d sent in the military to fix the vaccination rollout sooner. But asked again if he would apologise, sorry seemed the hardest word. “I think I’ve explained my answer fairly fully,” he said. 2. Aged care Guardian Australia’s Katharine Murphy asked why errors keep being made in the handling of outbreaks in aged care, resulting in more than 400 deaths since January. Morrison replied that by now 99% of aged care centres had been visited and residents offered booster shots, then filibustered by giving statistics about personal protective equipment. Nothing about the settings in place before those deaths, when many residents were still not boosted. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The Seven Network’s Mark Riley asked why the Morrison government wouldn’t join a Fair Work Commission case in which unions are seeking a pay rise in the sector. Morrison responded by attacking Labor for promising to do so without saying how it would fund any increase ordered. Morrison said: “There’s a process under way, and we will let that process follow its course. And we’ll, of course, have to absorb any decision that is taken there.” So, aged care workers will get bonus payments of up to $800, but no answer as to why the government won’t be involved in the case seeking a permanent pay rise, as the royal commission, industry and unions have asked it to do. 3. The hip pocket Sky’s Andrew Clennell asked about economic supports and added a gotcha question by asking for the price of bread, petrol and rapid antigen tests. Morrison replied: “I’m not going to pretend to you that I go out each day and I buy a loaf of bread and I buy a litre of milk.” Of course, Morrison was asked the price – not whether he bought it himself. On economic support, the answer wasn’t much better: “First of all, during the pandemic, you can’t pay for everything. Because it all has to be paid for.” 4. Rapid tests Nine newspapers’ David Crowe asked why the federal government didn’t order more rapid antigen tests, given the risk of future variants and more cases. Morrison responded that the Therapeutic Goods Administration had approved many tests and was working with local producers, but was on less sure footing when trying to explain why more weren’t ordered. Morrison said “the medical advice to the government was not to use rapid antigen tests” because Australia had so few cases that we could use the more accurate PCR tests. Morrison said: The reason for that is that we were in Delta. And we were focused on getting the vaccinations in place because that is what would prevent the transmission … What happened with Omicron is that it flipped it completely. And it did it within a matter of weeks. And so, there had been no suggestion that rapid antigen tests from any official health advisers to the government was something as a priority over children’s vaccinations, over the booster shots. There was no answer beyond that on why there was no planning for more infectious variants. Of course, it’s an absurd idea that rapid tests and vaccinations were mutually exclusive. 5. Poll questions lead to standard stump Two questions noted the government’s poor standing in the polls and queried why Morrison was best to lead the Coalition (Andrew Probyn from the ABC) and how he could catch up to the Labor leader, Anthony Albanese (Greg Brown from the Australian). On the first, Morrison replied that he trusted the Australian people, who would make “careful judgments” before they made “a decision that has consequences” by changing the government. But in a long answer making comparisons between himself and Labor on national security and other issues, Morrison didn’t touch the sides of the question about why he should be leading the Coalition – as opposed to, for the sake of an argument, Peter Dutton.In the final days of Theresa May’s premiership, the UK’s net-zero target, like the landmark 2008 Climate Change Act before it, entered the statute book with hardly any resistance. Well-founded complaints were made that it did not match the pace and scale required to address climate breakdown, but, as in 2008, across parliament there appeared to be an underlying consensus that “something had to be done”. Outright climate-change denial was kept to a faint background hum. Now, however, this consensus seems to be falling apart. Behind the scenes, a faction of Tory MPs is manoeuvring, Brexit-style, to systematically undermine the government’s stated climate efforts. With the Conservative party in meltdown, it looks like Britain’s net-zero policy is becoming just another political football to be kicked around the government backbenches. Make no mistake, the UK government’s current stance on the climate falls gravely short of what’s needed. The “something” that must be done has always been a matter of contentious debate, with activists and experts despairing at Tory inadequacy. The Johnson government is hailed as world-leading in setting targets, but accused of only paying lip service to – rather than ensuring real policy dividends for – decarbonisation efforts. But the newly formed Net Zero Scrutiny Group (NZSG) is launching an attack from the other end of the political spectrum. It reportedly has around 18 members in the Commons and is being run by dissident MPs Steve Baker and Craig Mackinlay, a Tory MP who was once the deputy leader of Ukip. This is hardly the first time that small Tory factions have organised to upend a whole political agenda. The NZSG appears to be modelled on the European Research Group – also chaired by Baker – whose membership in the years leading up to the EU referendum never exceeded 26 MPs, but who successfully changed the shape of European politics. Just as with Brexit, Baker is gunning for an “enormous political explosion” around net zero. The group rejects the characterisation that they are climate sceptics. Their focus is on blaming climate policy for the cost-of-living crisis, particularly soaring energy bills. They take climate “delayism” to extremes, not only arguing that we can act later, but that government should support the further exploitation of fossil fuels. Via the hashtag #CostofNetZero, members associated with the group have been making interventions across the media, calling to shelve the green levy on energy bills (which pays for insulation for those in fuel poverty and subsidises renewable energy). This totally mischaracterises the energy crisis – which is ultimately a cost-of-gas crisis, meaning major corporations have reaped billions in profits. When we should be doubling down on climate measures, such as insulation and renewable energy, as well as a windfall tax on fossil fuel companies, the NZSG is pulling lines straight out of the climate denial playbook: spreading easily refutable claims about the cost of renewables and future of fossil fuels. Their alternative solutions to the gas crisis? Antiquated proposals such as drilling for more North Sea oil and gas while bemoaning the phasing out of coal. Ultimately, anyone advocating for the continued use of oil and gas does not understand the threat that climate breakdown poses. This climate cost conspiracy is being manufactured by both internal Tory agitators and the usual suspects on the populist right. Although Nigel Farage has “retired” from politics, he is throwing his weight behind the latest incarnation of the Brexit party, Reform UK. In a piece for the Telegraph earlier this month, he wrote about Reform’s lines of attack. Two of the three are familiar: Brexit and the arrival of asylum seekers. But the third is new – the net-zero strategy, he says, is supposedly placing the UK at “a significant disadvantage”. We underestimate the Net Zero Scrutiny Group at our peril. These seemingly small configurations can hugely influence policy. Tiny cracks of “climate scepticism” have the ability to activate huge rifts in attempts to limit temperature rises to 2C. Things are so bad that “greener” MPs in the Tory party have been forced to speak out. In a direct challenge to his colleagues, Chris Skidmore has set up a “Net Zero Support Group” to keep climate hopes alive; Alok Sharma has cautioned against delayed action on climate change; while Nick Fletcher and Richard Graham have written in favour of net zero. But there is yet to be a proper crackdown on climate delayism inside the governing party. This is all compounded by the current fragility of Boris Johnson’s position. The prime minister’s perceived proximity to the net-zero strategy could mean MPs (such as those in the 100-strong Conservative Environment Network) are nervous to come out and make a strong case for net zero, lest it appear to be a vote of confidence in Johnson at this febrile time. And the two frontrunners to replace him – Rishi Sunak and Liz Truss – have questionable green credentials at best. Johnson’s fall from power could represent an opportunity to make sure the UK’s decarbonisation strategy falls off the priority list altogether. Only recently, the Treasury floated that it is reviewing the green levy on energy bills, a move that could be read as Sunak throwing a bone to the NZSG. The electorate care about climate breakdown, with concern at an all-time high last November during Cop26. But without rigorous myth-busting around the cause of high gas prices, and interventions that tackle the cost of living and emissions at the same time, the supposed “cost of net zero” could breed popular resentment that sets tackling the climate crisis even further back. Activists and opposition parties should beware – we could be entering an era in which we are not just pushing to transform promises into action, but battling to get climate on to the agenda at all. Eleanor Salter writes about climate, culture and politicsWith a crucial vote pending over filibuster rules that would have made strong voting rights legislation feasible, Democratic senator Kyrsten Sinema flew into Houston, Texas, for a fundraiser that drew dozens of fossil fuel chieftains, including Continental Resources chairman Harold Hamm and ConocoPhillips chief executive Ryan Lance. The event was held on 18 January at the upmarket River Oaks Country Club. One executive told the Guardian that Sinema spoke for about half an hour and informed a mostly Republican crowd that they could “rest assured” she would not back any changes with filibuster rules, reiterating a stance she took several days before during a Senate speech. The Arizona senator also addressed some energy industry issues according to the executive, who added that overall he was “tremendously impressed”. The day after the Houston bash, Sinema voted against changing filibuster rules, thereby helping to thwart the voting rights bill. The Houston gusher of fossil fuel donations for Sinema from many stalwart Republican donors underscores how pivotal she has become, along with West Virginia Democratic senator Joe Manchin, in an evenly divided Senate involving high-stakes battles for Republican and fossil fuel interests. Campaign finance watchdogs say that the Houston fundraiser reveals much about Sinema’s aggressive efforts to capitalize on her Senate power on matters ranging from climate change to taxes to the filibuster rule. “Sinema isn’t up for re-election this year, but she’s fundraising full-tilt,” Sheila Krumholz, the executive director of OpenSecrets, told the Guardian. “By her comment to oil-industry attendees last week, she clearly knew her vote to protect the filibuster would please them.” The Houston fundraiser, which was expected to raise tens of thousands of dollars for the senator’s campaign coffers, offers a stark example of how Sinema has been courting major Republican donors and special interests who, in turn, seem to be increasingly eager to help her. Sinema’s drive to rope in more big Republican donors was also apparent at a September fundraiser in Dallas at the $18m home of G Brint Ryan, a prominent Republican donor and CEO of a global consulting company, who hosted another money bash last year for Manchin. Sinema’s stance against changing filibuster rules has also won her support from other top Republican donors such as Stan Hubbard, a Minnesota billionaire broadcaster who gave her $2,900 last September, which reportedly was the first donation he made to a Democrat since 2019. Hubbard told the Guardian that her opposition to the filibuster was a crucial reason he donated, adding that it would “be terrible to get rid of the filibuster”, and that he thought voting rights were “just fine”, without passing a Democrat-backed bill to protect them. Little wonder that voting rights advocates were dismayed by Sinema’s staunch opposition to any changes with the filibuster. “We are very disappointed that Senator Sinema has put formalistic rules over protecting our democracy,” said Danielle Lang, the senior director of voting rights at the nonpartisan Campaign Legal Center. Sinema’s position on the filibuster rule has sparked anger among liberal backers such as the powerful group Emily’s List, which endorses Democratic women who support abortion rights. One week after Sinema gave a floor speech indicating that she wouldn’t support altering filibuster rules, Emily’s List publicly stated that the group would no longer endorse her. In her floor speech backing the filibuster rule, Sinema touted the need for more bipartisanship, stressing that she would not “support separate actions that worsen the underlying disease of division infecting our country”. But Sinema’s vote and speech only spurred more criticism in Arizona where the state Democratic party issued a rare censure in the wake of her continued support for the filibuster. Arizona’s Democratic party chair Raquel Teran has stated that the vote was a “result of her failure to do whatever it takes to ensure the health of our democracy”. More broadly, Democratic angst about Sinema was highlighted by a January tracking poll before her filibuster vote that showed just 8% of registered Arizona Democrats had a favorable view of the Senator. The recent poll reflects a steep drop from the 70% positive rating the Senator had in 2020. Her declining popularity also has been spurred by the senator’s voting against raising the federal minimum wage, and skipping a Senate vote to create a bipartisan commission to investigate the January 6 mob attack on the Capitol by Trump supporters. Sinema has also drawn brickbats from Democrats for her unwillingness last month to endorse the House passed Build Back Better legislation that she and Manchin were instrumental in whittling down from the measure’s original size, while accelerating their fundraising outreach to rightwing donors and lobbyists. Sinema told Democratic senators according to the New York Times that she was opposed to any tax increases in personal rates or corporate rates to pay for the bill, which included approximately $550bn for clean energy and climate change measures, a crucial part of President Joe Biden’s agenda. Leftwing Vermont senator Bernie Sanders was especially irked when both Sinema and Manchin joined all the Senate Republicans in blocking the filibuster rule change, saying that they “forced us to go through five months of discussions which have gotten absolutely nowhere”, and indicating he might support primary challengers to both senators. Veteran Arizona Republican consultant Chuck Coughlin noted that Sinema “clearly understands the electoral position she is in, and is using this opportunity to raise as much as she can in order to make challenging her a herculean task – whether she runs as a Democrat or an independent.” Coughlin’s analysis seems on target based on the very robust $4.4m that Sinema’s campaign had in the bank at the end of September. Charlie Black, a longtime Republican operative and lobbyist, added that “Sinema’s gotten a lot of support from the business community, including both Republicans and Democrats.” Still, with Democratic attacks on Sinema increasing, the odds are good that if she opts to run again in 2024 she will have a primary opponent, perhaps Congressman Ruben Gallego, who has publicly suggested he might challenge her, and knocked the senator over her filibuster vote. A group called the Primary Sinema Project that began last summer has raised at least $330,000, including $100,000 during the week after her filibuster speech. Sinema’s drive to raise big bucks early seems to be underscored by the jump last year in donations from fossil fuel interests, according to campaign finance data. Last year, Sinema hauled in $24,310 from fossil fuel donors compared with just $7,522 the year before, according to OpenSecrets. Although there’s no data yet on how much Sinema raised in Houston, a veteran fossil fuel lobbyist told the Guardian that donors at such fundraisers are often asked to pony up the maximum of $5,800 to the senator’s campaign committee, and write another check for as much as $5,000 to the senator’s leadership Pac. For Krumholz of OpenSecrets, the Houston fundraiser offers a broader message. “The timing of the fundraiser and Sinema’s filibuster-protecting vote really puts a fine point on the return on investment for her donors.” Krumholz added that the fossil fuel fundraiser “seems well timed as Congress revisits the $550bn BBB measure focused on climate change provisions, where her vote could help industry minimize new regulatory and tax burdens.”England The disruption that has blighted England’s buildup must be seen in the context of the size of the player pool available to Eddie Jones, but the fact that more than half the backs in the training squad – not to mention a handful of forwards – have never played in the Six Nations demonstrates the uncertainty with which their campaign begins. On one hand, it gives Jones the chance to assess inexperienced players in the heat of battle but on the other England finished fifth last year and a repeat in 2022 would leave the Rugby Football Union running short of excuses as to why it should continue to back him. Jones is having to strike the right balance, then, but there is optimism and excitement about his “New England” following uplifting autumn victories, notably over South Africa. Much of that comes from the anticipation that greets Marcus Smith’s every touch and the excellence of Freddie Steward but how those two, and other callow members of the side, perform when the rain is coming in sideways at Murrayfield could define England’s tournament. A trip to Rome follows and England could be sitting pretty with two wins from two and bolstered by the expected return of Manu Tuilagi and, maybe, Joe Launchbury. Defeat, however, puts England under the pump from the onset. Player to watch Alex Dombrandt. With no Sam Underhill in the squad, you’d expect Tom Curry to move to flanker, meaning an opening at No 8. Sam Simmonds is in good form but Dombrandt is the coming man. Key match The trip to France on the final weekend could be a mouth-watering decider but this weekend in Murrayfield feels so important for England’s fortunes. France They start as favourites and there is undoubtedly a sense that now is the time for France to turn all of the progress they have made under Fabien Galthié into tangible success after consecutive second-place finishes. Covid problems in the Top14 have hampered preparations somewhat but, ominously for the rest of the competition, the vast majority of the players affected – including Antoine Dupont – have now returned to the squad. There may be an element of rust but it helps that France start off against Italy and, provided there are not any long-lasting effects, it is easy to see why they are so well fancied. The depth of talent is frankly outrageous and Eddie Jones has made repeated reference to how Galthié is able to select 42 players at the start of every week and keep 28 with him throughout. Jones was no doubt attempting to turn the pressure up a notch but evidently France are now reaping the rewards of the improved alignment between club and country that has them on track for a home World Cup in 2023. The public are engaged again and a long-awaited victory over New Zealand in the autumn showed that Les Bleus can operate at a level above their Six Nations rivals. How they handle the expectation will likely determine their fate. Player to watch Melvyn Jaminet. The full-back has been a revelation since a surprise call-up for last summer’s tour of Australia. A reliable goal-kicker to boot. Key match France triumphed on their last trip to Cardiff but they do not win at the Principality Stadium often. Repeat the feat in round four and they should be in the hunt going into the final round. Ireland Ticking along very nicely under Andy Farrell, whose decision to step aside from the British &amp; Irish Lions last summer was proved a shrewd one in the autumn when the manner of their victory over New Zealand – just as much as the scoreline – demanded attention. Under Joe Schmidt, Ireland were at their best when overwhelming opponents with their power and physicality and they seem to be doing so again with Farrell at the helm. The signs were there when thumping England in the last round of the championship last year and Ireland arrive at the starting line without the injury headaches afflicting some of their rivals. They are, as always, a Johnny Sexton injury away from a national crisis but they have not lost at home to Wales in the Six Nations for a decade and the form of the provinces is another cause for optimism. Trips to Paris and Twickenham suggest Ireland should struggle in even years but they won the grand slam in 2018 and while a clean sweep may not be on the cards this year – given how competitive the championship is – squeeze past France in round two and they will take some stopping. Player to watch Hugo Keenan. He looked a little out of his depth when first coming into the side in 2020 but has blossomed and is in supreme form for Leinster. Key match Eight of the last 10 championship matches between France and Ireland have been decided by a score or less and their round two encounter is likely to be similarly tight. Italy Thirty-two championship defeats and counting – a run that dates back to 2015 and is not expected to change any time soon. Progress will have to be measured in how close they can keep losing margins and while they will probably produce a 40-minute showing that gives one of their opponents a fright, there is no evidence to suggest anything but another wooden spoon. The trouble for Italy is that, whatever incremental improvements they make, it seems their rivals are getting better – as shown in the autumn when the southern hemisphere big three were all beaten by European opponents on the same weekend for the first time since 2002. It is, at least, another five matches in which to develop young players such as Paolo Garbisi, Federico Mori and the captain Michele Lamaro but the relegation question will not go away, whatever the Six Nations chief executive Ben Morel says. He has a point when he refers to more obvious progress at age-grade level but you have to wonder if an extreme option like placing selection restrictions – a limited number over the age of 23 for example – on their opponents might be better for all concerned. Still, at least the sun should be out in Rome. Player to watch Paolo Garbisi. The obvious choice but the fact he is keeping Handré Pollard out of the Montpellier side shows his class. Sergio Parisse also falls into this category if he features. Key match It’s a fool who bets against five defeats but here’s hoping they can start off with a positive performance in their opening match in Paris. Scotland There are many things to like about Scotland at the moment, from the coaching excellence of Gregor Townsend and his assistants to the genius of Finn Russell, while in Stuart Hogg they have a captain who is consistently striking the right tone. His anger at how France’s potential margin of victory was the chief talking point before the postponed finale a year ago might have backfired, instead it galvanised Scotland into a performance and a win that establishes them as genuine contenders this time around. And Hogg is not afraid to embrace that label. We can but hope that this week’s Scotland v England buildup is not dominated by both sides kicking around the favourites’ tag because now is the time for Scotland to welcome the fact they are well fancied for the tournament. Townsend has a relatively injury-free squad to pick from, Cameron Redpath has made a timely return, and a third win over England in five years would set them up well. Rivals will no doubt be studying their disappointing autumn defeat by South Africa but there are a number of unmissable matches on paper this year, and most of them involve Scotland. Player to watch Kyle Rowe. Uncapped winger showed his potential with a hat-trick for London Irish against Saracens this season. Was previously part of the sevens set-up, put on furlough and took a job in an Amazon warehouse to make ends meet. Key match The Calcutta Cup is hugely significant but equally so is how Scotland fare on their travels and it would be incredibly frustrating if they fail in Cardiff, having opened up with a win over England. Wales All the signs suggest a difficult championship for Wales but they have won grand slams when starting off in similar circumstances and though they are badly hit by injuries, Wayne Pivac can still select a first-choice XV to slug it out with the very best. They began their autumn campaign poorly, with a sloppy performance against the All Blacks, but improved thereafter and November form has never been a bellwether for Wales’s fortunes in the Six Nations anyway. Dan Biggar is a shrewd choice as captain, provided he does not get on the wrong side of the officials, and do not underestimate the effect a full house at the Principality Stadium will have. Wales may end up being a gallop or two short in the title race but given they host Scotland and France they are likely to have a big say in who is ultimately crowned champions. They may even have Alun Wyn Jones back before the end of the tournament too – the embodiment of why you write Wales off at your peril. Player to watch Adam Beard. Deemed surplus to requirements by Pivac not long ago but was a late call-up by the Lions, then made the bench in the third Test and is now Wales vice-captain. Key match They rarely triumph in Ireland but this year, perhaps more than most, you sense Wales need a winning start given how stretched resources are already. • This is an extract from the Guardian’s weekly rugby union email, The Breakdown. To subscribe, just visit this page and follow the instructions.Dacia Torchia tries to avoid her basement. Especially when the foul, familiar smell creeps under the door just off the kitchen. She knows what’s waiting for her at the bottom of the dark stairway. “I’m in a state of denial. Like if I don’t go downstairs, I don’t have to deal with it,” said Torchia, 55, a single mother who owns a century-old house at the bottom of a hill in Mount Vernon, New York. After heavy rains, her basement sometimes floods with dark, sludgy wastewater – 8in on bad days. Torchia isn’t alone. Like many residents in Mount Vernon, she is unclear about whether underlying weaknesses in her plumbing are her problem alone, or whether the city bears some responsibility. Over the years, she said, four private plumbers have diagnosed different causes for her sanitation woes. But their suggested fixes were all too expensive. Instead Torchia opts for cheaper, temporary measures – and then braces herself until the next flood. This majority-Black town on the outskirts of New York City has a long history of sewage problems. Until recently, Mount Vernon has said it can’t afford to fix the infrastructure failures that are polluting rivers and flooding homes. The situation was symbolic, experts said, of how many lower-income or Black communities are locked in a vicious cycle: they lack basic municipal infrastructure and are unable to pay for the problems that result. They are precisely the kind of community that the Biden administration had said would benefit from sweeping infrastructure and wastewater investments. But officials in Mount Vernon now say they’re optimistic about the city’s sewage crisis. Damani Bush, the city’s public works commissioner, said the Guardian’s reporting last year “set fire” to the case, and helped draw renewed state and federal interest in solving the city’s sanitation problems. After a series of meetings with environmental oversight agencies, the city has unlocked $10m in grant funding that would target areas where its pipes are known to be leaking sewage into the environment. Officials called it the biggest grant the city has received in recent memory. “I think the sky is starting to clear a little bit,” said Mount Vernon Mayor Shawyn Patterson-Howard. “It’s not a full sunny day yet. We have a long way to go.” The money is a start – it’s still only a fraction of the help Mount Vernon needs. What’s left to be seen is how much the grant helps, and how long before families like the Tochias can expect to see relief. A long time coming Located in Westchester county, just north of New York City, Mount Vernon sits next door to some of the wealthiest enclaves in the US. The county’s median household income was more than $100,000 in 2019, versus less than $60,000 for Mount Vernon. Mount Vernon also has the most Black residents of any city in Westchester; in the mid-20th century, thousands of Black residents who had been displaced from surrounding cities through urban renewal policies settled in Mount Vernon, which today has a population of 74,000. Nearly a decade ago, the federal Environmental Protection Agency discovered that untreated human waste from Mount Vernon was spilling into the Bronx and Hutchinson Rivers, which border the city and flow south toward the Bronx. Twice, once in 2014 and then again in 2016, the agency ordered Mount Vernon to address the overflows, but the city failed to comply. In 2020, the EPA – together with the state of New York – sued Mount Vernon. City officials estimate that overhauling Mount Vernon’s crumbling sewage infrastructure could cost between $100mand $200m. City officials also are still determining the scope of the problem, and estimate that about 1,000 households are vulnerable to sewage backups. Some residents say they’ve had problems flushing their toilets for decades. Last summer, the New York state Department of Environmental Conservation began working with the city to help unlock funding for infrastructure fixes, according to Bush. In December, the agency awarded the city a $10m grant to fix two sewage outfalls along the Hutchinson River, where local environmental researchers have recorded off-the-charts levels of fecal bacteria. The city still needs more funding, manpower and equipment to completely satisfy all the orders. But officials say the grant signals a new phase of the sewage crisis, where oversight agencies work with the city instead of punishing it. “The water infrastructure challenges confronting Mount Vernon are simply enormous,” said DEC Commissioner Basil Seggos, who is listed as one of the parties suing Mount Vernon over its sewage pollution. He says state regulators plan to collaborate with Mount Vernon on solutions moving forward. No shortcuts As the city continues to lobby for cash assistance, ithas had to find temporary fixes to stop homes from flooding. About a year ago, it installed a bypass pump in the middle of a busy street in a densely populated neighborhood. The device, which runs 16 hours a day, looks like an oversized power generator hooked up to an open manhole, and the smell of sewage is strong. Residents hate walking near it. But if it stops working, hundreds of nearby families would immediately notice problems with their plumbing, city officials said. Last year, Mount Vernon’s six-man sewer crew responded to hundreds of emergency backups, while also performing court-ordered repairs. “We’ve completed more work in the last eight months than we have in the last 10 years,” said Bush, who has served as public works commissioner since 2020. But his crew keeps finding new weak points in the system as they try to fix old ones. “Every street has its own problem. It’s a lot,” Bush added. Cities can bounce back from catastrophic infrastructure failures – it’s happened before. The combined sewer network in Washington DC once discharged a staggering amount of untreated waste into the Potomac and Anacostia Rivers with every rain. In 2005, the city agreed to install massive tunnels deep underground that would reduce overflows by 96%. The project, one of the largest of its kind, is still under construction, 16 years later. The cost: $2.7bn and counting. Yet the effort earned DC good marks for wastewater in June, when the American Society of Civil Engineers last evaluated the city’s infrastructure. Mount Vernon’s sewage network services just 4.4 sq miles, a fraction of Washington DC’s footprint. And the historic $1.2tn bipartisan infrastructure package could bring significant relief to the city’s ailing pipes: This year, the EPA will direct $428m for water and sewage infrastructure into New York state’s drinking water and clean water state revolving funds. The EPA has promised to give priority to under-resourced cities, as part of the plan. The agency says it already has been working with Mount Vernon on its sewage crisis and will continue to seek new solutions, despite its litigation with the city. New York Senator Chuck Schumer, a proponent of the infrastructure package, has advocated on behalf of Mount Vernon in Washington and said through a spokesperson that he will help funding flow toward the city. “Senator Schumer will continue to work in lockstep with his federal, state and local partners to ensure the funding he secured gets to Mount Vernon and will continue to fight for more until the city has the sewer system they’ve long desired and deserved,” said Schumer spokesperson Allison Biasotti. Commissioner Bush said he’ll continue lobbying agencies at every level of government to make sure Mount Vernon gets “its fair share of the pie” from the infrastructure package. The city badly needs funding for roads and bridges – sewage is hardly the only problem area, Bush noted. “This is a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity,” he said. “If we don’t go for this now, there won’t be another shot.”When Eddie Howe became Newcastle’s manager and was tasked with navigating a safe passage towards Premier League survival he swiftly realised there were two distinct routes out of the relegation zone. Both were hazardous but one offered infinitely greater scenic appeal and, ignoring some scary looking hairpin bends, Howe took it. Rather than configuring Newcastle with a back three well drilled in low blocks and hoping that a possession-light side would remain reasonably adept at sneaking wins on the counterattack, he decided to start creating a front-foot, ball-monopolising, sweet-passing XI. Rafael Benítez and, more recently, Steve Bruce may have escaped a series of relegation skirmishes by playing with the handbrake on but the former Bournemouth manager was determined to channel his inner Kevin Keegan and do things differently. It helped that, unlike Benítez – still adored on Tyneside – and Bruce, he was not working for a penny-wise owner in the Mike Ashley mould but extraordinarily wealthy Saudi Arabian overlords determined to make the club the successful centrepiece of a wider exercise in the application of image-altering geopolitical soft power or, as some see it, sportswashing. The only problem was that Howe did not possess sufficient players suited to his blueprint, has won only two of his 11 games since succeeding Steve Bruce and now needs his near-£90m transfer-market spend to pay dividends. All that matters now is whether Bruno Guimarães, Kieran Trippier, Chris Wood, Dan Burn and the loanee Matt Targett can ensure Howe succeeds where Bruce, Steve McClaren and Alan Pardew all, to varying extents, failed. Despite working with very different sets of players the common denominator between those three managers is that, whenever they tried to wean Newcastle off the counterattacking that has, for more than a decade, been the team’s default style, they ran into significant problems. Benítez, well aware he lacked the requisite midfielders to create, control and sustain a passing rhythm, did not even try, preferring to refine the team’s ability on the break. Howe finally possesses a choreographer capable of becoming a cornerstone around which to base Newcastle’s rebuild. Brazil’s Guimarães, a dynamic defensive midfielder, has signed from Lyon for an initial fee in the region of £35m and the speed of the 24-year-old’s adaptation to English football will very possibly determine if and when Newcastle will escape the bottom three. Guimarães, often described as a “complete midfielder”, honed his craft on futsal courts, rarely forfeits possession and is adapt at retaining it in the tightest of tight spots. Much has, quite rightly, been made of Newcastle’s primary weakness being in central defence but a big part of the problem has been the lack of a protective quasi-sweeper anchoring midfield. Guimarães is not dubbed the “Piano Carrier” for nothing and his enforcement abilities could yet make Jamaal Lascelles and co look an infinitely better back four than they have often appeared this season. Much, though, hinges on both how Howe’s new boys gel and how those club stalwarts Bruce privately claimed Benítez had “brainwashed” into a cagey counterattacking mindset adjust to the change in managerial vision. The volte-face in recruitment philosophy has been even more radical. It is impossible to envisage Ashley spending £25m on the 30-year-old Wood, £13m on the 29-year-old Burn and a fee potentially rising to £15m for the 31-year-old Trippier. Ashley was consistently reluctant to acquire players over 25 because of their lack of resale potential but this policy frequently left the team light on experience and leadership and Newcastle were twice relegated on his watch. Should survival be secured, the Saudis will, justifiably, claim the so called “Newcastle tax” was well worth paying to Burnley, Brighton and Atlético Madrid. Although Burn has regularly been rotated at Brighton he has recently been in the form of his career and the 6ft 7in boyhood Newcastle fan may prove one of this month’s most inspired purchases, helping assuage Howe’s pain at missing out on his first-choice defensive targets, Lille’s Sven Botman and Sevilla’s Diego Carlos. Yet if Wood provides essential attacking cover for the injured Callum Wilson, Newcastle’s principal striker, while also weakening Burnley, Howe could yet have cause to pine for the two gamechanging forwards that got away, namely the exciting Reims teenager Hugo Ekitike and Manchester United’s Jesse Lingard. Trippier, a right-back still harbouring England ambitions, already looks a future Newcastle captain; which begs the question of the potential effect on the team’s ecosystem should Howe drop the holder of the armband, Lascelles, to create room for Burn. Given Lascelles can be pretty feisty, the manager may need to locate his inner diplomat. At left-back Targett should offer the sort of width and crosses Howe craves. His presence also creates competition in an over-stocked squad but the manager’s challenge now is to ensure that a decent team on paper pick up points on the pitch. If not, he will surely lose his beauty contest with Watford’s Roy Hodgson, Burnley’s Sean Dyche, Norwich’s Dean Smith, Everton’s Frank Lampard et al and Benítez’s name may once again be mentioned as the solution to Newcastle’s woes. It is no exaggeration to say the next few months could make or break Howe’s career.The Swedes have rejected it, Dr Fauci says the US may soon approve it, the Chinese have started, but the Cubans have already vaccinated almost all young children against Covid. The island is the only country vaccinating toddlers as young as two against the disease, and more than 95% of two- to 18-year-olds have now been fully vaccinated, according to the ministry of public health. “Although Covid hits children less severely, they are an important factor in transmission,” said Dr Gerardo Guillén, the lead developer of Abdala, one of the island’s homegrown vaccines. Child vaccination, one of the world’s highest Covid vaccination rates and high herd immunity after a massive Delta peak last summer, he said, have contributed to significantly lower infection rates in Cuba than in the US and Europe throughout the Omicron wave. With confidence in the community-based health service high – and with a one-party state preventing anti-vax movements from taking root as they have elsewhere in Latin America – Cubans by and large trust their country’s vaccines. Inoculating young children is widely seen as common sense. “Children are vaccinated as soon as they are born,” said Ania Ramírez, 33, collecting her fully vaccinated son, Fabio, age five, from school. “If he’s already got all the other vaccines, why wouldn’t I put this in him?” Around the world, Covid vaccination ages are getting lower: the World Health Organization has recommended that if high levels of coverage have already been achieved in the adult population, countries should consider inoculating children as young as five with the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine. Chile and the United Arab Emirates are now vaccinating three-year-olds. But some countries are bucking the trend: the Swedish health agency last week decided against recommending Covid vaccines to children younger than 11, arguing there were no “clear benefits”. Experts say that there are benefits to vaccinating young children, but concerns remain. Dr Jon K Andrus, former regional immunization programme director at the Pan American Health Organisation and professor of public health at George Washington University, said that while Cuban scientists “make good quality vaccines”, he was wary of seeing children vaccinated before he had more information. “None of the results have been published in peer-reviewed journals, so it’s hard to discuss,” he said. Cuba’s vaccines, he said, are based on a platform “that has been used for decades on tetanus. It’s great technology, but you need the data because there might be an unexpected side-effect for this disease.” Cuban scientists say that phase I and II trials of Soberana 2 and Soberana Plus vaccines in 350 children aged between three and 18 found no serious adverse effects. Trial data, they say, has been sent to peer-review journals and is pending publication. Health officials say that in the coming weeks, all trial data will be sent to the World Health Organization, as they request export approvals. Dr Peter Hotez, dean of the National School of Tropical Medicine at Baylor College of Medicine in Texas, said that vaccination of young children “is essential” given the record number of kids in the US hospitalised with Omicron. But he emphasised the importance of strong public health communication. “The vaccine ecosystem is fragile,” he said. “If you get it wrong, especially with someone’s child, it can have spillover effects and derail other vaccine programmes.” He pointed to the Philippines, where a botched rollout of a new dengue vaccine in 2016 led to a widespread public perception that the vaccine was harmful. The consequence of that was a loss in public confidence in other child vaccines – resulting in a measles epidemic that killed hundreds. Dr Jerome Kim, director general of the International Vaccine Institute, a non-profit based in Seoul, said it “makes sense” to vaccinate young children, primarily to protect family members around them. “If the mum and dad are working, it’s often grandma and grandpa who take care of the child after school,” he said. He also emphasised the role that child vaccination can play in reducing poverty: data indicates that globally, for every dollar spent on vaccination, 44 dollars are saved in indirect costs. “It’s not only the direct cost of hospitalization that you save, but you save costs related to parents having to stay home,” he said.Actor Moses J Moseley has died at the age of 31. He was best known for his role as a pet zombie on The Walking Dead. He also appearanced in HBO’s Watchmen and the 2013 film The Hunger Games: Catching Fire. The actor’s manager, Tabatha Minchew, confirmed the news of his death on Monday. “Everyone loved Moses. He never met a stranger. He loved his fans as much as his family and friends. He was always excited to get auditions and work,” she said. The official Walking Dead account tweeted: “Our thoughts and prayers are with our TWDFamily member Moses J. Moseley.” Moseley portrayed a pet walker belonging to Michonne, played by Danai Gurira, in the zombie series. Jeremy Palko, who appeared alongside him in the show as Andy, said he was “heartbroken”. “Just an absolute kind and wonderful human being,” he wrote. “You will be missed my friend.” Moseley, who was born in Aiken, South Carolina, worked as an actor and a model, the latter of which he started doing in 2010. He began his career as an actor after being approached after a class at Georgia State University and being asked to appear in the movie Joyful Noise with Queen Latifah and Dolly Parton. According to TMZ, Moseley’s family reported him missing earlier this week and an investigation into his death is ongoing.Royal Mail is adding special coding to stamps, making it possible for people to watch videos, messages and other information. The move from Tuesday follows a successful trial, with the aim of connecting a letter with the digital world. Customers can scan the coding – which takes the form of a rectangular 2D barcode – in the Royal Mail app and will eventually be able to watch videos, information about services, or birthday messages and other greetings from senders. At the moment, a video featuring Shaun the Sheep, created exclusively for Royal Mail by the animation studio Aardman, can be viewed. It is the first in a series of planned videos to be released during 2022 that will allow customers sending stamped mail to choose which one the recipient can see when they receive an item of mail. The coded stamps will have a “digital twin” and the two will be connected by the Royal Mail app. The codes match the stamp colour and sit alongside the main body of the stamp, separated by a simulated perforation line. The coding will be available on “definitive” stamps – the regular everyday stamps featuring the profile of the Queen. Non-coded definitive and Christmas stamps will remain valid until January 2023. Nick Landon, the Royal Mail chief commercial officer, said: “Introducing unique barcodes on our postage stamps allows us to connect the physical letter with the digital world and opens up the possibilities for a range of new innovative services in future.” • This article was amended on 21 February 2022 to restore the article’s original description of the new stamp feature as a barcode, and remove “corrections” (to text, and in a 3 February footnote) that erroneously renamed the feature a QR code. A line has also been inserted defining the type of barcode used.In recent months, Michigan should have been a hotbed for attempts to rig elections, like it was in 2011. That year, the Republican-led legislature distorted the voting maps so that the GOP was able to win nine of Michigan’s 14 congressional seats despite never earning more than 50.5% of the vote statewide. A decade later, as the redistricting cycle has come around again, the dynamics are just as toxic. The battleground state broke for Joe Biden by fewer than 155,000 votes, and the Republican-controlled legislature has fought endlessly with the Democratic governor about election “audits”, voter IDs and absentee ballots. But this cycle, the state’s redistricting commission has pulled off something remarkable. Despite a flurry of legal action and very public disputes between members, it has produced some of the fairest maps in the US. How did it manage it – and will the maps survive? Neither party was involved in drawing new maps, a process that is open to abuse if politicians are allowed to allocate particular voters to particular districts in order to guarantee a win there. Instead, the responsibility fell to 13 Michiganders – four Democrats, four Republicans and five independents – who were randomly selected by the state. The Michigan Independent Citizens’ Redistricting Commission (MICRC) includes a foster care worker, a retired banker, an aspiring orthopedic surgeon, a mother of six, a college student and a real estate broker. MICRC, and the approach it epitomizes, came about thanks to Katie Fahey, a Michigan resident and political novice who posted a message on Facebook two days after the 2016 presidential election. She said she wanted to take on gerrymandering and eventually recruited more than 14,000 volunteers to campaign for an amendment to the state’s constitution. It passed with 61% of the vote and created the commission, one of the most successful ways to unrig the redistricting process so far and a potential model for other states. Combatting gerrymandering is no small feat. In 35 states, partisan politicians in the legislatures are mostly or fully in charge of redistricting, and of the maps that have been released and evaluated by the Princeton Gerrymandering Project so far, the average grade is a “D”. States led by both Republicans and Democrats – including Maryland, Texas, North Carolina, Oregon, Ohio, Wisconsin and Illinois – earned the lowest possible grade. While Republicans haven’t gerrymandered as much as Democrats originally feared – in fact, the number of Democratic-leaning seats could increase by a few this year – both parties have nearly eliminated their competition. Of the 287 completed congressional districts, only 42 (14.6%) are competitive, and 13 states have passed maps with zero competitive districts, according to an analysis from the Princeton Gerrymandering Project and RepresentUs. Part of MICRC’s success is that it’s almost entirely insulated from the legislature. In December of 2019, applications to MICRC were randomly sent to 250,000 citizens. The pool of respondents was then trimmed (at random) to 200, though 60 of the applicants had to self identify as Republicans, 60 as Democrats, and 80 affiliated with neither party. At this point, Democrats and Republicans in the legislature were allowed to strike up to 10 commissioners each, after which the final 13 were then chosen, again at random. The results were nearly revolutionary. During perhaps one of the most contentious political processes of the decade, MICRC was able to find cross-partisan agreement. Their final congressional map was approved by eight of the commission’s 13 members – two Republicans, two Democrats, and four independents – and will go into effect before the primaries this year. The congressional map was graded “A” by the Princeton Gerrymandering Project. However, the process still has its critics. Republicans filed a lawsuit claiming that the map arbitrarily “fragments counties, townships, and municipalities” and that it allows too much population deviation between congressional districts. Meanwhile, good government groups were upset about the committee’s first closed-door meeting, and several media outlets sued to have records from the event released to the public. In late December, MICRC turned over documents showing that it was preparing for litigation about how it split Black voters across different districts, while previously they were geographically more concentrated. On 5 January, members of the Michigan house of representatives representing Detroit and others challenged the commission’s maps, arguing that they dilute the voting strength of Black voters, particularly in and around Detroit. However, proving that point in court will be difficult, expensive and time-consuming, says Michael Li, senior counsel for the Brennan Center’s Democracy Program. Federal law dictates that minority voters have the opportunity to elect their candidate of choice, but it doesn’t set a specific threshold for what percentage of voters in a district need to be of that minority group. Li suggested that even if the challenge succeeds, it will probably lead to relatively minor changes around Detroit, as opposed to the commission having to start from scratch. Still, the pressure of drawing – and then having to defend – the map seems to be wearing on the commissioners. One accused the group’s chair of bullying her and introduced a motion to censure her, and members have even disagreed over whether to produce a “lessons learned” documentary about the process, with two refusing to participate at all. Since at least early December, commissioners have also voiced skepticism of their general counsel, who resigned abruptly last week. The episode underscores a potential lesson for states looking to adopt a similar style of commission: non-politicians may be better able to work across party lines but might must be prepared for the rancor, criticism and partisan lawsuits that follow. If the goal is fairer maps, though, the trade-off may be worth it. “On the whole, these maps are really good maps,” says Li, “and markedly different than what we’re seeing around the country.”Zumretay Arkin is remembering the day she thought she might change the International Olympic Committee’s mind. It was October 2020, and human rights groups, representing Uyghur Muslims, Tibetans, and the democracy movement in Hong Kong, were granted a meeting with senior IOC figures to discuss their concerns about the Winter Olympics in Beijing. “I explained how millions of Uyghurs are being arbitrarily detained in concentration camps,” she says. “The IOC was told survivors’ stories of rapes and torture, forced sterilisation and repression. And about families who have not heard from relatives for years. “All of us shared personal experiences of loss and sacrifice,” adds Arkin, who fled Xinjiang when she was 10 years old. “And do you know what the first thing that [the then] IOC vice-president, Juan Antonio Samaranch Jr, said?” She pauses. Shakes her head. “‘The world is a complicated place’.” “That was the tone in which the IOC addressed us throughout the meeting,” she says. “It was extremely condescending. They were just like: ‘Yes, OK, but we’re not here to change the world’.” Mandie McKeown, of the International Tibetan Network, was there too. “I remember an Uyghur colleague of mine telling them about her situation, and how she had many family members missing. And the IOC simply turned around and said: ‘Many countries have had bad human rights – look at Guantánamo.’ It was unbelievable whataboutery.” The IOC did offer their sympathies, according to those present. But it also stressed that it was not the United Nations, and its primary role was to bring people together through sport. McKeown felt at the time that the IOC was burying its head in the sand. She still does. “The IOC is in a massive hole,” she says. “And it is trying to get out of it by ignoring it.” China has consistently denied human rights abuses, of course, and an informed take on the IOC’s thought gymnastics in response is offered by Michael Payne, a former senior marketing executive at the organisation who still has close ties in the Olympic movement. “The IOC has a very fine line to walk, between standing up for its values, and ensuring that during the Olympics are not subject to a given political agenda, while also respecting its host,” he says. “Anything the IOC said supporting the human rights groups would have been immediately leaked to the media and opened up a huge can of worms.” There are some in the IOC who privately believe it is unfair they get so much criticism while multinational groups operating in China rarely suffer opprobrium. Perhaps they have a point. But the IOC made its bed by awarding the Games to China. Now it has to lie in it. The only consolation is that it could have been even more of a public relations disaster. Last month 225 people died during protests in the Kazakhstan city of Almaty, which narrowly lost out to Beijing in 2015. Meanwhile, a lingering question hangs uneasily in the air of the Chinese capital before Friday’s opening ceremony. Will many of those closely associated with these Games take a harder line than the IOC? It is not looking encouraging. Sponsors have been conspicuously quiet. Some broadcasters too, although the BBC is a notable exception. Perhaps the best hope is that athletes speak out. If not, these Winter Olympics will be regarded as another Great Leap Backwards for human rights. One person determined to shake the world out of its apathy is Lhadon Tethong, an exiled Tibetan who made international headlines when she blogged on her travels through Beijing before the 2008 Olympics – until she was deported. Tethong is the co-founder of the Tibet Action Network, which recently released a report on China’s colonial boarding schools in Tibet which makes for disturbing reading. The network “conservatively estimates” that at least 800,000 Tibetan children, 78% of them between six and 18, are separated from their families for weeks and sometimes months to live in schools intended to replace their Tibetan identity with a Chinese one. But there is something new and worrying she is hearing, she says: that kids as young as four and five are now being sent to boarding preschool from Monday to Friday. “Can you imagine it?” she asks. “These are the years when language is most critically being formed, and their identities are being formed, and they’re living in Chinese schools with Chinese teachers speaking Chinese, and not with their parents where they should be. “The numbers are not clear just yet. But we’re talking about, in essence, babies that are being taken from their families, being made to live in these schools, to speak another language, facing political indoctrination at the absolute tenderest age in years in such a extreme environment that even after a few months, Tibetans are reporting that their children can’t engage with their families in Tibetan any more. They just want to speak Chinese or Mandarin.” But it is not just Tibet or Xinjiang. It’s Hong Kong. And it’s the troublesome case of three-time Olympian Peng Shuai – whom Bach is meeting in person in the coming days. Before the 2008 Games in Beijing, the former IOC president Jacques Rogge suggested that hosting the Games might help China liberalise. The current incumbent, Thomas Bach, has wisely made no such promises. He would be laughed all the way back to Lausanne. However, there is little to joke about for the athletes and journalists who have travelled to Beijing with burner phones and laptops, with warnings that they face an “Orwellian surveillance state” and potential trouble for speaking out ringing in their ears. The trust in the host nation is low. And so, as the most controversial Olympics – certainly since Moscow 1980, and arguably Berlin 1936 – rumbles closer, those present face a stark choice: to speak out or stay silent. It is not as straightforward as it sounds given that some groups have urged those in Beijing to hold their tongues for their own safety. “Journalists and athletes are heading into a hazardous environment,” says Minky Worden, the director of global initiatives at Human Rights Watch. “And the thing is, no one knows just how hazardous it is. All this is unprecedented in the modern Olympic era.” It is hardly encouraging either that China is ranked 177th out of 180 countries in the Reporters Without Borders’ Press Freedom Index – ahead of only Turkmenistan, North Korea and Eritrea. However Payne, who as well as being an Olympics insider recently wrote a punchy history of the Games, Toon In!, maintains the IOC will ensure that athletes and media are safe to speak out, even if that occasionally irritates the Chinese authorities. “The IOC, over 100 years, has worked very hard to prevent the Games – and, in particular the host, from being politicised,” he says. “As an example, when the head of state opens the games it’s already scripted by the IOC as to what he can say. In Salt Lake, President Bush tried to change it. And the IOC vetoed it.” Meanwhile, the old canard that sport and politics don’t mix will again be shattered again at Friday’s opening ceremony, which will be boycotted by bureaucrats from many western countries, including Britain and the US, which has referred to these Olympics as the “genocide games”. Some say it is a tribute to Bach’s negotiating skills and the power of sport to unite people that no country has opted for a full athlete boycott. Perhaps. But the IOC is not out the woods yet. Over the next three weeks it will try to perform a high-wire juggling act while being buffeted from powerful forces from all sides. In a statement to the Guardian, the IOC confirmed it had met with the human rights groups and told them that the Olympic Games are the only event that brings the entire world together in peaceful competition. “The IOC has neither the mandate nor the capability to change the laws or the political system of a sovereign country,” it added. “Given the diverse participation in the Olympic Games, the IOC must remain neutral on all global political issues.” Perhaps. But here the words of Archbishop Desmond Tutu, a great friend of the Olympic movement, also come to mind. “If you are neutral in situations of injustice, you have chosen the side of the oppressor,” Tutu famously warned. “If an elephant has its foot on the tail of a mouse and you say that you are neutral, the mouse will not appreciate your neutrality.”The average annual grocery bill is on track to rise by £180 this year as the UK’s worsening cost of living squeeze continues, according to the consultants Kantar. Grocery prices rose 3.8% over the four weeks to 23 January compared with the same period last year, according to the market research firm. Prices are rising fastest for fresh beef and poultry, savoury snacks, crisps, skincare and cat food but are falling for fresh bacon, vitamins and beer. Fraser McKevitt, Kantar’s head of retail and consumer insight, said: “Prices are rising on many fronts, and the weekly shop is no exception. Taken over the course of a 12-month period, this 3.8% rise in prices could add an extra £180 to the average household’s annual grocery bill. “We’re now likely to see shoppers striving to keep costs down by searching for cheaper products and promotions. Supermarkets that can offer the best value stand to win the biggest slice of spend.” The UK’s official inflation rate hit 5.4% in December, the highest since 1992, and is on track to head above 6% in coming months as energy costs soar. Supermarket sales fell by 3.8% over the 12 weeks to 23 January, according to Kantar, because of a tough comparison with the start of 2021, when coronavirus lockdowns boosted shopping, but grocery spending remains 8% higher than pre-pandemic times. As more people embraced Veganuary or Dry January after an indulgent Christmas, sales of plant-based products and no- or low-alcohol drinks rose. Sales of alcohol-free beer climbed 5% and retailers’ own-label ranges marketed as healthy increased by 8%. While fresh fruit, salad and vegetable sales were down compared with last year, plant-based products proved more popular than ever. A record 10.7 million households bought at least one item that was a dairy alternative, a meat substitute or labelled as plant-based this January. The Kantar data also points to more people going out to socialise as Covid-19 restrictions were relaxed. The supermarket sales figures do not include on-the-go food and drink purchases, which are likely to be higher than last year, the firm said. McKevitt said: “Increasing confidence about heading out and about, combined with the return to the office, means we’re starting to see pre-pandemic shopping patterns once again. “Since the first lockdown in March 2020, shoppers have been buying in bulk and visiting the supermarket less often. But basket sizes are now 10% smaller than this time last year, hitting their lowest level since the beginning of the pandemic, while footfall increased by 5% as every major retailer was busier in their stores.” He said changing habits were most marked in London, where take-home sales of food and drink fell by 11%. “This suggests that people in the capital were the quickest to embrace eating out in cafes, pubs, and restaurants as many of us returned to city centres.” There was also evidence of people scrubbing up, as the work from home directive ended and socialising increased. Razor blade sales rose by 14%, while spending on deodorant increased by 20%.An independent publisher, Swift Press, has acquired Kate Clanchy’s Some Kids I Taught and What They Taught Me, after she and her original publisher Picador “part[ed] company” last month following controversy over the racial tropes and ableist descriptions in the Orwell prize-winning title. Swift Press, which was set up in June 2020, said it approached Clanchy after reading that she and Picador were no longer working together. Its reissued version of the title, which details Clanchy’s experiences as a teacher, removes the words and phrases which had prompted widespread criticism from readers and contains a new afterword from Clanchy in which she writes of how she “still think[s] that my beleaguered, faulty text is worth reading”. The announcement about the split with Picador on 20 January followed months of controversy over Some Kids. The title won the Orwell prize and was a bestseller, until Clanchy announced on Twitter that she had wrongfully been accused of racism on Goodreads by reviewers. But readers pointed out racial stereotypes in the book such as “almond-shaped eyes” and “chocolate-coloured skin”, a reference to one student being “so small and square and Afghan with his big nose and premature moustache”, while two autistic students were said to be “jarring company”. Picador initially said the book would be updated, but subsequently announced it would be stopping distribution and returning the rights to Clanchy. Now, Some Kids has been released as an ebook by Swift Press, which said in a statement today that “it is our fundamental view as a publisher that readers should be able to make up their own minds”. According to the independent press, another indie publisher has also approached Clanchy to publish her poetry. “I was pleased to have been approached by Swift Press, and that they will allow my work to remain available to readers, who will be able to judge it for themselves,” added Clanchy. None of the phrases mentioned above, included in the original, are in the new version. “I was glad to re-engage with the text – it is a privilege for any writer – and I have listened to and benefitted from other people’s readings,” Clanchy writes. “The storm focused on particular words and phrases which I have been happy to change.” Swift Press said that Clanchy “writes about her students with deep affection, and it is clear that she wants them to do as well as they possibly can”, pointing to testimonies from her pupils about her “unequivocal care and support” for them. “Partly because she writes with an often self-lacerating honesty, and in a way that explicitly shows her moving from positions of ignorance – or even prejudice – to ones of understanding, reasonable people have disagreed as to whether she was able successfully to capture the potential tensions between difference and sameness without exacerbating them,” said the publisher. “But it is our fundamental view as a publisher that readers should be able to make up their own minds.’Streets were deserted and shops abandoned across many of Myanmar’s towns and cities on Monday, as the public defied threats by the military junta and stayed at home in a “silent strike” on the first anniversary of the country’s coup. Images posted on social media showed usually congested roads with no traffic and stores shuttered. In a photograph shared by Khit Thit Media, the usually busy Sule Pagoda road in downtown Yangon was completely empty. In Mandalay, the second largest city, a normally bustling market had virtually no customers. Images posted online showed similar scenes across the country: from Myitkyina and Namati in Kachin, Myanmar’s northernmost state, to Dawei and Myeik in Tanintharyi region in the south of the country. The military, which has struggled to control widespread opposition to its rule, had threatened charges of sedition or terrorism against anyone who participated in the stay-at-home protest. Business owners had also been told their properties would be seized if they participated. Some opened their stores but left them unattended to get around the threats. In one image shared widely on social media, a seller mockingly left a sign next to their food stall that said: “All menu items are available.” Beside it, empty bowls were labelled “beans”, “tofu” and “kale”. The military ousted the democratically elected government of Aung San Suu Kyi on 1 February 2021, and has inflicted deadly violence and terror in an attempt to crush opposition. A 27-year-old resident in Yangon’s Sanchaung township, who asked not to be named, said he had stayed at home, along with his family members and neighbours. “I heard some voices around by lunchtime from the main road, with people singing a military anthem. They might be military supporters marching on the street to break the silent strike,” he said. He said he was afraid to go out even after the protest had ended. “I don’t want to get into any trouble or get arrested,” he said, adding that soldiers were patrolling. Since the coup, more than 1,500 people have been killed, and at least 11,838 people have been arrested in military crackdowns, according to the Assistance Association for Political Prisoners. Detainees have been subjected to torture and mistreatment, including beatings, gender-based violence and prolonged stress positions, according to research by Human Rights Watch. Despite the risk of further military violence, some activists held small rallies prior to the silent strike on Tuesday morning. Protesters, led by students, sprinkled the streets of Yangon with red paint, the colour associated with Aung San Suu Kyi’s National League for Democracy. Activists shared images of the act on Facebook, writing: “Our blood is red and we will march towards our enemy.” In Mandalay, protesters marched in the morning, chanting: “Who dares to live on the opposite side of the people?” Alongside peaceful protest movements, civilians, including many young people, have taken up arms and formed people’s defence forces. In Yangon several bombings thought to have been carried out by such groups were reported by local media on Monday. Another reportedly occurred at a police station in Myitkyina. Armed resistance groups target the military with guerrilla attacks against military targets and key infrastructure. The military, in turn, has responded by launching airstrikes, burning villages, and blocking aid to civilians. As of 27 December, about 320,900 people were internally displaced across Myanmar, as a result of the crisis and escalating conflict, according to the United Nations. A further 340,000 people were already displaced before the coup. A statement from the office of the UN secretary general, António Guterres, on Monday warned of “an intensification in violence, a deepening of the human rights and humanitarian crises and a rapid rise of poverty in Myanmar”. Before the anniversary of the coup, the US, Britain and Canada announced new, coordinated sanctions against Myanmar officials, including the attorney general, Thida Oo, the supreme court chief justice, Tun Tun Oo, and the anti-corruption commission chair, Tin Oo. The US said they were closely involved in the “politically motivated” prosecution of Aung San Suu Kyi. The ousted leader faces wide-ranging charges that have been widely criticised and faces spending the rest of her life in prison. The measures were welcomed by Anna Roberts, the executive director of Burma Campaign UK, who said countries should impose sanctions on companies and individuals that were financing the military. However, Roberts added that the new sanctions needed to be introduced more quickly. “It is vital to maximise pressure now while the military are more vulnerable,” she said. Rights groups have also called for further measures to block the junta’s access to foreign revenues from oil, gas, and other resources, and for the UN security council to pass a resolution instituting a global arms embargo on Myanmar, and which refers military atrocities to the international criminal court.This is such an easy weeknight meal – all cooked in one tin, with really punchy flavours from the harissa and preserved lemon. Leftovers are fantastic for lunch the following day. A nice firm-fleshed white fish such as pollack or cod would work well in this dish too. Serve with some simply roasted tomatoes alongside if you wish. Find everything you need to cook this one-tin fish dish at Ocado.com, which stocks salmon for every budget – from the own-range fillets used here to brands such as Daylesford and Loch Fyne. Instantly shop all these ingredients from ocado.com/harissasalmon Harissa salmon, preserved lemon and cauliflower pilaf Prep 10 min Cook 25 min Serves 4 200g bulgur wheat 400ml hot vegetable stock 1 preserved lemon, finely chopped 1 medium cauliflower, cut into small florets Greens from the cauliflower, cut into small pieces 4 salmon fillets 4 teaspoons rose harissa 4 slices lemon (reserve the rest of the lemon) 1 tsp sea salt flakes 1 tbsp olive oil 150g spinach, roughly chopped 1 handful mint, torn 1 tbsp extra virgin olive oil Preheat the oven to 200C (180C fan)/390F/gas 6. Tip the bulgur wheat, vegetable stock and preserved lemon into a large roasting tin, and mix gently. Scatter over the cauliflower florets and chopped greens, and place the salmon fillets in the tin around them. Spread each salmon fillet with a teaspoon of rose harissa, then top with a lemon slice. Scatter the cauliflower with the sea salt and olive oil, then transfer to the oven to roast for 25 minutes, until the salmon is just cooked through. Gently remove the salmon to another plate, then stir the chopped spinach, extra virgin olive oil and juice from the remaining lemon through the bulgur wheat. Taste and adjust the seasoning as needed, then return the salmon pieces to the tin and finish with a scattering of mint before serving hot.A few months ago, I decided I wanted to drive the entirety of Highway 12 – a slim highway that snakes along North Carolina’s barrier islands – before the climate crisis alters it further. Though I spent much of my childhood on the southern part of North Carolina’s coast, these overdeveloped, humid islands have piqued my imagination for decades. I wanted to witness what remains, and what is likely to disappear. You can see the precarity of those islands (also known as the Outer Banks) on a map. The nearly 200-mile stretch of barrier islands runs the length of most of North Carolina’s coastline. Around here, change is non-negotiable: the highway lies atop a series of barrier islands – dynamic mounds of sand designed by nature to shift. Plus, the Outer Banks are the most regular hurricane target north of Florida. I knew I had to brace myself for the fact that the islands would no longer resemble what I knew as a child: roadside produce stands, small miniature golf courses, the occasional surf shop. Those flecks of Americana are still there, but the holiday homes are larger and more numerous; the restaurants and surf shops are grander and more corporate; the churning sea has carved up the coastline a little more. I stopped by my sister’s house in Wilmington, North Carolina, in early November, where I planned to start my trip up Highway 12. Northern Buxton, Hatteras Village and Northern Rodanthe had just reported ocean overwash from a nor’easter, and the road was closed. North Carolina’s Highway 12 runs 148 miles, a system of two-lane highways, ferries and bridges connecting islands and peninsulas. It’s a lifeline for the nearly 20 communities, 57,000 residents, small businesses and tourists – but high tides and storms gnaw constantly at the road. Dr Stanley Riggs, a geologist who runs an organization devoted to sustainable practices along North Carolina’s coast, tells me there are “numerous portions of this highway with serious problems that require severe ongoing maintenance. Some segments require total rebuilding multiple times a year. The yellow bulldozers work all year long now. “Before the major economic development boom of the 20th century,” Riggs said, “these islands were allowed to respond naturally to storm dynamics … The barriers are both the ocean’s speed bumps and the land’s safety valves, and must be able to move in response to the storms’ energy.” However, the fixed structures of ocean front development and Highway 12 now lock the barrier islands in place. Nature’s strength and will is undeniable, despite human intentions. In recent years, Hurricanes Irene and Isabel carved Hatteras Island in half, causing locals to use emergency ferries for weeks until the highway was restored. In September 2019, Hurricane Dorian destroyed 1,000ft of Highway 12 in Ocracoke. The road reopened months later, in early December. “We must learn to live with storm dynamics,” Riggs says. “The beach will move, villages will flood, and storm surges will open new inlets to let storm surge water both into and out of the estuaries.” However, the government has allowed further development and built higher dune dykes to protect the highway and homes, which essentially traps storm surge during weather events, making flooding much worse over time. “Before World War II,” Riggs explains, “all the old villages were built on the backside of the islands. Now the oceanfront is totally built out and has locked the system into a guaranteed natural disaster zone.” Development and climate change are straining the islands. Up until the 1990s, about 15 miles of North Carolina’s ocean beaches required re-nourishment sand on an irregular basis in order to have what Riggs calls “a wide and healthy beach for a successful economic year”. Now he says there are over a 100 miles of beaches that need re-nourishment every couple of years, at the cost of $3m to $6m a mile. Static landscapes remind us of who we were; shifting landscapes remind us that we have changed, or perhaps that we have not cared for what matters to us enough. ••• The day before my trip, the North Carolina department of transportation indicated that Highway 12 would reopen earlier than expected, but drivers would need to beware of standing salt water and evening high tides. I set out the next morning at 6am, knowing I had at least a 10-hour driving day ahead of me, and two ferries to catch. First I drove to Beaufort, a small town located on an inlet, where I spent much of my childhood summers. Once quiet and historic, the town is now beloved by developers for its charm and association with the pirate Blackbeard. I drove through the heart of town and past the docks, where I first fell in love with maritime culture. Then, I turned toward Cedar Island to catch the ferry to Ocracoke. The closer I got to the ferry terminal, the more development slowed. I drove past a monument to a seafood processing family, a solitary shrimp boat, houses haphazardly raised on stilts – some looking like a Hail Mary DIY-job. Signs advertising church services rose from the salt marsh. I drove my car on to the hulking ferry, cormorants shooting low over the water next to the boat. A ferry employee asked me what I was doing. I shared that I was an environmental journalist. He pulled me inside the ferry to show me a picture of an island that had disappeared under the rising seas. “I believe in climate change,” he told me, quietly, as if he was afraid someone might overhear him. “But I’m an ugly American. I don’t like to be told what to do. Ask me nicely to wear a mask or recycle. Then I’ll do just about anything for you.” His tone reminded me of the fraught political moment. The Outer Banks locals vote conservatively, and often view environmental policy as liberal overreach. The boat docked slowly at Ocracoke. The town’s recent population hovers near 700, declining roughly 25% in the last decade – though nearly 10,000 tourists inhabit the island during the peak summer season. The Hatterask Indians, known as Croatoan people, once hunted and fished here prior to colonial intrusion. Blackbeard favored the treacherous shoals and was killed near the island in 1718. Now island pastimes include sport fishing and kiteboarding. I stopped at one of the only open restaurants for lunch. Country music blared from a speaker. No one was wearing a mask. I decided to eat a granola bar instead and drove Highway 12 through bits of maritime forest – salt-pruned oaks and low cedars – and high dunes. I pulled over and walked out onto the mostly deserted beach. A few people fished from the open beds of pickup trucks. Sand blew across the road as I moved toward my final ferry, from Ocracoke to Hatteras. A long line formed to board; I was 20 cars back from the cutoff. Those of us in line accepted our fate, turned off our cars, stretched on the road and socialized. Time slowed; I watched an old dachshund stick its head out of the moonroof in the car in front of me. I made the next ferry – the W Stanford White. My car shook as it pulled away from the dock. A faint moon hung over the sea and a spit of land covered in pelicans and cormorants. The sun was beginning to set as I drove slowly through Hatteras. Standing water pooled in front of new construction. At some points, I could see water on either side of the road. I stopped for gas and dinner at a bait shop. “A lot of places are closed,” I said as I paid for a beer. “The workers need rest,” the woman said. She looked tired. I sensed it had been a long year for her, too. As the sun went down I came to the part of Highway 12 I most wanted to see. My headlights illuminated bright yellow signs that warned of “high water”. Moonlight fell upon the bulldozers parked in the dunes. The strip of highway that moves through Rodanthe felt impossibly slim, as if the black water on either side of the road might close in. High tide was coming, and pools of water on the road sprayed upward with oncoming traffic. I could see the dark shape of the new bridge being built alongside the road. In 2017, after a decade of costly work on the so-called S-Curve section of the highway in Rodanthe – including a $3m emergency repair after Irene, and a $20m beach nourishment project in 2012 - North Carolina’s department of transportation commissioned a $145m project to raise 2.4 miles of Highway 12. The raised roadway takes the form of an offshore bridge, known as the “jug handle” as it arcs from the land into the waters of Pamlico Sound. Certain portions of the oceanfront along the S-Curve were losing 11-12ft a year, and forecasts predicted similar scenarios along the corridor. As with many projects in environmentally and culturally sensitive areas, legal actions went in tandem. Among litigants was a group of private landowners contesting the re-routing and elevation of the highway, part of a multi-bridge scheme called the Bonner Bridge replacement project, on grounds that it was rushed without a full exploration of alternatives to appease environmentalists seeking to protect sensitive nesting areas for birds. The Trump administration called it an example of “excessive environmental planning”. Conservation groups, led by the Southern Environmental Law Center, sued to ensure the Rodanthe “jug handle” bridge project moved forward in a climate and wildlife-smart way, ultimately returning 19 acres to the Pea Island National Wildlife Refuge, a critical area for migrating and threatened birds like the American Oystercatcher and Least Tern. The bridge is due to open this year, possibly as early as spring. I drove through Nags Head and turned into town, marveling at the golden sunset and the wild, artificial glow of a Wings Surf Shop. In the Outer Banks, the natural coexists with the artificial, like the grace of a heron as it flies over a miniature golf course. Still, I appreciated the off-season quiet of the drive, locals wishing each other happy birthday on business signs, retired couples making a slow visit to a small post office. Beneath every tourist economy is a town’s old self – what’s left of its traditions and elders, its hospitality workers, the people who are left to pick up the pieces after a hurricane, or care for each other in the winter of a pandemic. As I pulled into my lodging for the night, a tiny cottage underneath a live oak on the outskirts of Kitty Hawk, I thought about the layers of change and loss on islands like these, especially in a time of compound disasters, where both a pandemic and a changing climate press down on small communities. “An economic-system based on unlimited development on mobile piles of sand doesn’t have a very bright future as we know it,” Riggs tells me. “At the present rate of change, North Carolina’s coastal system is looking at a possible one meter rise in sea level by 2100.” This increase is already well underway. “We’ve built ourselves into a situation we can’t engineer our way out of,” he says with a sadness in his voice. When I was younger, I played a part in a play about the Lost Colony, the doomed English settlement on Roanoke Island (every kid who grew up in eastern North Carolina probably did.) At the time, we marveled at how an entire village could just disappear. These days, I am beginning to understand. The Outer Banks have seen waves of Indigenous inhabitants, violent colonization, fishing villages, tourism and intense development – all a struggle for power and resources in a mercurial natural environment. • This article was amended on 2, 3 and 4 February 2022 to correct a misspelling of Ocracoke in an embedded locator map and to add details about the Rodanthe “jug handle” bridge within the Bonner Bridge replacement project; a line stating that the “bridge is opening this fall, ahead of schedule” has also been corrected.On 1 February 2021, Myanmar’s military seized power in a coup in the dead of night, hours before the newly elected parliament was due to convene for the first time. The military alleged voter fraud in the November 2020 election, when its proxy party was trounced by the National League for Democracy, led by Aung San Suu Kyi, which won a landslide re-election victory. A few days after the coup, mass protests erupted in Yangon and across the country. While there were some isolated incidents of violence, security forces largely allowed peaceful demonstrations to take place throughout the month of February. But towards the end of the month, the junta deployed increasingly violent tactics, from water cannon, beatings and rubber bullets to live ammunition. Deaths On 28 February, at least 18 people were killed in crackdowns across the country; from there the violence escalated. The Assistance Association for Political Prisoners (AAPP), a rights monitoring group, has documented more than 1,400 civilian deaths during military crackdowns on the pro-democracy movement. This number does not include those killed by airstrikes, shelling or armed conflict. As of 10 January, 103 of those killed by the military were women. In total, 239 people have died in military custody, of whom 91 were tortured to death during interrogation, according to the AAPP. More than 11,000 people have been arrested, of whom more than 8,700 remain in detention. Despite these brutal tactics, even after a year, the military has been unable to quell the resistance and is struggling to contain uprisings across multiple fronts. The violent crackdowns have inevitably sparked armed resistance, with civilians forming armed revolutionary groups, mostly in rural areas, and often allying with major ethnic armed groups, which have fought for political rights to self-determination for decades. The military have responded with typical brutality, allegedly targeting entire civilian populations in an attempt to snuff out resistance, displacing hundreds of thousands. Displacement Tactics including airstrikes, shelling, arson and mass arrests and killings have caused hundreds of thousands to flee their homes, most of whom are sheltering in the forest or in makeshift displacement camps where the military is also blocking their access to essential food and medical care, rights groups have found. A further 19,000 people have crossed into neighbouring countries since the coup. Those newly displaced since February add to 340,000 people who were already living in protracted displacement situations before the coup, including more than 100,000 Rohingya people in Rakhine State. Fires As part of its broader attacks on civilian populations, the military has burned homes and buildings, including churches. In the town of Thantlang in Chin state, it has launched 18 arson attacks since September, which have destroyed more than 900 homes and displaced all of the town’s 10,000 residents, according to the Chin Human Rights Organisation. As of 27 December the United Nations had identified more than 2,200 houses and civilian properties burned or destroyed since the coup. Poverty Coming on top of the Covid-19 pandemic, the military coup has had devastating effects on incomes and has caused a climb in food insecurity across Myanmar. A survey conducted by the UN Development Programme in May and June 2021 predicted that urban poverty would triple by early 2022 compared with 2019 levels. The UN has identified 14.4 million people across Myanmar in need of humanitarian assistance in 2022, according to its Myanmar Humanitarian Needs Overview, which described an “unprecedented political, socioeconomic, human rights and humanitarian crisis” as a result of the coup and Covid-19. Factors including increasing armed conflict and displacement, as well as deteriorating access to essential public services, have deepened pre-existing needs among already vulnerable groups, including Rohingya people and other populations living in protracted displacement. Reduced income Under military rule, an economy already racked by Covid-19 has further cratered. Hundreds of thousands of civil servants refused to work for the military regime, crippling the public sector, while many others have refused to cooperate with public services, for example by no longer paying electricity bills. In rural areas, military attacks have displaced farmers from their land, leaving hundreds of thousands struggling to plant or harvest their crops. A World Food Programme report covering August to November 2021 identified Myanmar as a “hunger hotspot” and warned of an increase in acute food insecurity; media reports indicate that hunger is already increasing. The UN found prices for key household commodities have risen significantly in some parts of the country, while farming incomes have been negatively affected by factors including lower wholesale prices for some crops, higher input prices and limited access to credit. Further violence and financial hardship look inevitable for people across Myanmar as the junta struggles to maintain its grip on power.Cas Mudde: ‘Joe Rogan is a symptom’ Joe Rogan isn’t a far-right ideologue, pushing a consistent political agenda. Rather, he is a grifter, who hides behind excuses like curiosity, entertainment, freedom and neutrality to push whatever controversy that sells. Now, that controversy is hurting Spotify’s bottom line, which is why they have pushed him to publicly apologize and pledge to “try harder”. Obviously, that will not end the disinformation on his show, on Spotify, or on the many other platforms (like YouTube). Joe Rogan is not the problem, he is the symptom. The symptom of a society in which pandering to a mostly rightwing, but certainly anti-left, minority can be highly profitable. Just like the current Republican party, they live off liberal outrage rather than any consistent political message. This is not to minimize the problem. In fact, this problem is much larger than a disinformation-spreading grifter with millions of listeners. The real problem is not the supply of disinformation but the demand for it. As long as there is a mass demand, you can neither ban nor boycott your way out of disinformation. This is not to say that the boycott of Neil Young and other artists wasn’t useful – it was. It shifted the cost-benefit analysis of the controversy and pushes grifters like Rogan and their promoters like Spotify away from the most egregious disinformation. But it does not weaken the breeding ground. For this, a much more challenging approach is needed, which accepts Rogan and Spotify for what they ultimately are, nihilist capitalists driven by greed, and focuses primarily on their potential audiences instead. Cas Mudde is a Guardian US columnist and the Stanley Wade Shelton UGAF professor in the school of public and international affairs at the University of Georgia Francine Prose: ‘Don’t silence Rogan. Do this instead’ I admire the musicians who have withdrawn their music from Spotify in protest over the spread of Covid misinformation on Joe Rogan’s podcast. But I myself believe that free speech is indivisible. Rogan should stay on Spotify, though with his $100m salary sensibly brought in line with that of, let’s say, an NPR intern. Spotify shouldn’t silence Rogan. First he goes, then someone else’s podcast seems … sketchy, and there’s that slippery slope. So here’s how it might be handled. Before Rogan’s podcast, there should be an announcement, not by Rogan himself, but by the painfully loud, electronic bear-horn voice that interrupts our regular broadcasts with hurricane warnings and Amber alerts. The electronic voice should say: “What you are about to hear about Covid and the vaccine is total and absolute bullshit. If you believe these lies and act on them, you are gambling with your life and the lives of all the people you love.” This warning should be repeated, word for word, every five minutes during the Rogan podcast. If Joe Rogan objects, he can leave Spotify and take his show elsewhere. But if he agrees to remain, the solution (and the publicity it generates) would turn the Rogan podcast from a bad thing into a good one and maybe save a few lives. Francine Prose is the author, most recently, of The Vixen. She was also the president of PEN America Bhaskar Sunkara: ‘This is an attempt to censor Joe Rogan’ Yes, people are trying to censor Joe Rogan. I know many in liberal circles would counter that only the state can censor, therefore attempting to get Spotify to “deplatform” America’s most polarizing podcaster can’t be anything of the sort. “Don’t you know that Rogan is a millionaire with many ways to reach his legions of supporters with his scientifically dubious views and guests?” they say. We’ve seen enough examples throughout history of censorship not involving the state. Think about the protests of Universal Studio after The Last Temptation of Christ in 1988, or the more dramatic book burnings and boycotts of the 20th century. The question, then, is whether censorship is ever justified. I think it can be. Actions undertaken by Lincoln’s government to censor the press and mail were part of winning a civil war that ended with republican liberty expanded, not destroyed. Actions taken by leftwing groups to deny Nazis platform in the media or in academia can sometimes work too (at other times, it might be better to deny the attention that being censored often affords the censored). But is anyone seriously arguing that the stakes of the Rogan affair rises to this level? Or that pushing Rogan off Spotify will slow down the spread of vaccine skepticism and make a material difference in the wellbeing of ordinary Americans? What’s indisputable is that the debate contributes to the further cementing of American politics as a spectacle of culture war without the possibility of shared, mass politics around common issues. Time spent demanding that Spotify do something about Joe Rogan is time we’re not spending demanding the US state guarantee things like universal healthcare. And that’s the surest route I know to defeat not only vaccine hesitancy, but the broader conspiratorial drift of US politics. Bhaskar Sunkara is the founding editor of Jacobin magazine and a Guardian US columnist. He is the author of The Socialist Manifesto: The Case for Radical Politics in an Era of Extreme Inequality Imran Ahmed: ‘Repeal section 230 of the Communications Decency Act’ In a pandemic, misinformation’s pernicious effect is to offer false hope to the anxious; to dissuade people from following guidance from public health professionals; and to make people hesitate before taking a vaccine that has saved millions of lives worldwide. Right now, as you read this, there are people gasping for breath in ICUs because they heard misinformation online or heard it in a podcast like Rogan’s, broadcast to millions. If I ran Spotify, I’d be worried. Sure, legally, thanks to quirks in US law (a 25-year-old provision called section 230 of the Communications Decency Act 1996) they cannot be held liable for the content they host. But what about the rest of us? Can we hold them liable for the fact they continue to happily profit from his show? Worse still, that they paid him a ton of money so that he would bring his enormous audience to their company. Can other artists? Listeners? Shareholders? Activists? Well, yes we can, we should, and we have. This story is a synecdoche of big tech’s arrogance, indifference and greed over the past decade. They are the custodians of the most powerful communication technology in history. But their business model is a short-termist grab for cash that, ironically, destroys their long-term brand value. We should do everything we can in society to force reform. And Congress should repeal section 230, so people can sue if companies have not acted reasonably in their duty of care to users harmed by big tech’s failure. Imran Ahmed is Chief Executive of the Center for Countering Digital Hate Joshua Citarella: ‘This is a Band-Aid solution’ American institutions and media have long ago lost the public trust. Post-pandemic, state level incompetence and partisan opacity have driven vast numbers of people out onto the web in search of alternative narratives. Joe Rogan is a popular source of news and editorial opinion because, contrasted against an increasingly illegitimate mainstream, he appears as a curious and honest narrator in search of a hidden truth. The last few years have seen a narrowing of political speech online. In some cases, such as post-vaccine immunity or the lab leak hypothesis, this has been to the detriment of the public discourse. Expert opinions may now be overturned. Why was this questioning not allowed before? The slow enclosure of online political speech is being offered as a Band-Aid solution for the much more difficult but necessary task of earning the public’s faith in their state and media. Until we are able to address the problem further upstream, it seems to me that we are watching the slow erosion of liberal freedoms without anything being offered in return. Joshua Citarella is an artist and internet culture researcher based in New York City. He is the author of Politigram &amp; the Post-leftGood morning. Ukraine will be responsible for its own destruction if it undermines existing peace agreements, a senior Russian diplomat has warned at a combative UN security council debate on the crisis. The comments from Vasily Nebenzya, Russia’s permanent representative to the UN, came on a day of continued high-level diplomacy aimed at defusing the Ukraine crisis. The state department said it had received a response from the Kremlin to a document the US delivered in Moscow last week, formally outlining areas where the Biden administration believes the two countries could find common ground. US officials would not disclose the contents of the Russian letter, saying they would not “negotiate in public”. Russia’s state news agency RIA reported that Russia had sent follow-up questions rather than a response, and that Moscow was still working on a response. What did Nebenzya say about Ukraine? “If our western partners push Kyiv to sabotage the Minsk agreements, something that Ukraine is … willingly doing, then that might end in the absolute worst way for Ukraine. And not because somebody has destroyed it, but because it would have destroyed itself and Russia has absolutely nothing to do with this.” What happens next? The US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, and his Russian counterpart, Sergei Lavrov, are due to talk on Tuesday. Meanwhile, Vladimir Putin and the French president, Emmanuel Macron, may meet in person soon. Boris Johnson under fire after release of redacted report into lockdown parties Boris Johnson has been challenged by a Conservative backbencher to commit to publishing the full report on Downing Street parties, as his deputy, Dominic Raab, said it was “unclear” if there was further evidence to come. Mark Harper, a former Conservative chief whip, told the Guardian he had asked Johnson to reiterate at Wednesday’s prime minister’s questions his promise – made in private to MPs – to publish the full report. A party in Boris and Carrie Johnson’s flat is one of 12 events being investigated by the Metropolitan police over alleged lockdown breaches, it has emerged, as the Sue Gray report into breaches of lockdown rules found “failures of leadership and judgment” in No 10. Gray, a senior civil servant, criticised the culture in Johnson’s Downing Street that allowed social gatherings to take place during lockdown, which were “difficult to justify”. The findings were released on the government’s website in a shortened and redacted form, after the Met last week said it was investigating some of the gatherings. In a dramatic moment in the Commons where the report was being discussed, Johnson was challenged by Theresa May, his predecessor as prime minister, who said either he “had not read the rules, didn’t understand the rules or didn’t think they applied to No 10”. The police have obtained more than 300 photographs and 500 pages of documents in their investigation. The images include pictures taken at alleged parties and from security-system cameras. Whoopi Goldberg apologises for saying Holocaust ‘isn’t about race’ The US talkshow host and actor Whoopi Goldberg has offered her “sincerest apologies” after saying the Holocaust “isn’t about race”. She said Jewish people around the world had “always had my support”, in a statement after her remarks led to a backlash online. Goldberg, who co-hosts The View on ABC, said the atrocity was about “man’s inhumanity to man”. She made the comments on the show during a discussion about a Tennessee school board’s decision to ban the Pulitzer prize-winning Holocaust graphic novel Maus. In a statement posted on Twitter, Goldberg said: “On today’s show I said the Holocaust ‘is not about race, but about man’s inhumanity to man’. I should have said it is about both. As Jonathan Greenblatt from of the Anti-Defamation League shared, ‘The Holocaust was about the Nazi’s systematic annihilation of the Jewish people, who they deemed to be an inferior race’. I stand corrected.” What did Goldberg say on the show? “Let’s be truthful, the Holocaust isn’t about race, it’s not. It’s about man’s inhumanity to man, that’s what it’s about. These are two groups of white people.” In other news … The Azimuth music festival in Saudi Arabia, a government-backed event that cost $20m, was secretly organised by the youth media company Vice, as part of the organisation’s push to make money in the Middle Eastern state despite its poor human rights record, it has emerged. A video of a woman apparently locked against her will in a filthy shack has gone viral in China, prompting an investigation as well as a conversation about the country’s treatment of people with mental illness. Standing in freezing conditions, the woman appeared to be chained by her neck to a concrete wall. The New York Times has acquired the viral word game Wordle for an undisclosed seven-figure sum, the publisher announced. The newspaper promised Wordle would remain free to play for new and existing players and no changes would be made to its gameplay. The threat to the west from the Chinese government is “more brazen, more damaging” than ever, the FBI director, Christopher Wray, has said, accusing Beijing of stealing American ideas and innovation and launching massive hacking operations. Don’t miss this: are Mattel movies about to take over Hollywood? This weekend, the Mattel Films executive vice-president, Robbie Brenner, gave an interview to Variety, during which she laid out her ambitious plans for cinematic domination. Margot Robbie and Ryan Gosling have signed on to star in a Barbie movie directed by Greta Gerwig, working from a script she co-wrote with Noah Baumbach. Lena Dunham is writing and directing a Polly Pocket movie starring Lily Collins. Akiva Goldsman is writing a Major Matt Mason film that will star Tom Hanks. Climate check: climate crisis threatens future of Kenya’s El Molo people Surrounded by a barren landscape and dotted with black volcanic rocks, Lake Turkana, a Unesco world heritage site, has increased in area by more than 10% over the past decade, submerging close to 800 sq km of land. It has obliterated El Molo’s fishing sites, destroyed freshwater infrastructure, engulfed burial grounds and brought the community in proximity with ferocious Nile crocodiles, hippos and snakes. Last Thing: Rihanna lets the world know she is pregnant in the most Rihanna way possible Leave it to music’s perennially best-dressed couple, the Bajan superstar Rihanna and her boyfriend, the rapper A$AP Rocky, to reinvent the genre of celebrity pregnancy announcement; “papped” by the fashion-friendly photographer Miles Diggs; walking the streets of Harlem, where Rocky grew up, in a snowstorm wearing a hot-pink archive Chanel coat fastened with a single button and a Christian Lacroix necklace draped over her bare stomach, in what can only be described as the most Rihanna way to let the world know she is expecting a baby. Sign up First Thing is delivered to thousands of inboxes every weekday. If you’re not already signed up, subscribe now. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.comAfter arriving in A&amp;E in December 2020, June Roche’s husband, Jake, sat alone and in pain for nine hours before being transferred to a cardiology ward after suffering a heart attack. He died 36 hours later, aged 48. Jake died at a time when there were at least 4,000 extra deaths in hospitals in England during the first year of the pandemic, according to research, due to inadequate care brought on by the strain on health services. “I know they can’t save everybody and I know that he may have died anyway. But I just feel that on that Friday night he did not need to sit there for nine hours. They needed to make him comfortable,” Roche said. “But it wasn’t the doctors making him sit there. It was the system. They were overwhelmed. They couldn’t do anything. They couldn’t get around to people.” She added that there was only one doctor on shift that evening, and that “nobody on the ground in that place could have done anything different”, but she often looks back and wonders whether she could have “kicked up a fuss” to try to get him seen more quickly. “They all say with a heart attack the first hour is the most important,” she said. “You just assume that if someone is having a heart attack, they’ll rush them through, they’ll work on them and make them comfortable but nothing was happening. “My husband was there huddled up in his coat, they had the doors open for ventilation because of coronavirus and it was freezing cold,” she said, adding that she wished she could have livestreamed the situation to the public to show the importance of taking Covid precautions to ease pressure on the health service. A year on – and despite mass vaccinations reducing Covid hospital admissions – staff absences and a shortage of workers mean that many services are still struggling. Colin*, 63, lay in an ambulance outside A&amp;E for 10 hours before he was admitted to hospital in November last year. Once there, he lay on a bed in a corridor, undiagnosed, for three days suffering from septicaemia. “They were that backed up they had to just leave me. To be honest, I was that gone I just didn’t care,” he said. “Because I was there instead of on a ward, I couldn’t get the attention of a nurse so I peed myself and that’s very degrading. “It’s not their fault, but it’s not a one-off. If you haven’t got the staff and the infrastructure because you keep cutting it then what do you expect?” A report in November found patients were dying in the back of ambulances and up to 160,000 more people a year were coming to harm due to being stuck outside hospitals unable to be offloaded to A&amp;E. “The paramedics said they’re quite used to having seven to 10 ambulances stacked back outside. I asked the bloke what happens if you have a heart attack while waiting and he said, ‘Well, you just die.’ They just sit there, totally unable to go out on other calls,” he said. Akshay Patel said he and his family had lost faith in the system after his mother, Bina, 56, died waiting nearly an hour for an ambulance to arrive in October while she suffered a heart attack and stroke. He made six 999 calls during that time while his mother shouted in pain. “I kept looking out the window for the blue lights but they never came. My mum was screaming for help, and kept asking ‘Where are they?’,” he said. He said he was frustrated that it was only on his second call that the call handler mentioned there could be a long wait. “They never told me there was going to be a delay and to make my own way there. If they had told me that on the initial call, potentially I could have done that,” he said. “By the time they told me, I couldn’t move her. On the final call I said she was gone, she was dead.” More than 40,000 people in England who called 999 with a “category 2” condition, such as a stroke or a heart attack, waited more than an hour and 40 minutes for an ambulance in November, data showed, significantly higher than the NHS target to reach them within 18 minutes. Heart attack patients calling 999 in parts of northern England have also been asked to get a lift instead of waiting for an ambulance. “It’s not an isolated case, it’s happening up and down the country. After this happened, I got private health [insurance] straight away. The system, in my eyes, it’s broken,” Patel said. “From a young age we all get told, any kind of emergency, ring this number and someone will be there for you. And it just didn’t happen in my case.” Sue Atkins said her family also had developed doubts about the effectiveness of the NHS after her 27-year-old son, Norman Barker, collapsed and died outside A&amp;E in September 2021 after being told there was a four-hour wait to be seen. She had driven Norman, also known by his friends as James Salvator, to hospital after he was told it was a two-hour wait for an ambulance. “I can’t say anything bad about the resus [resuscitation] team, they worked really hard to try and get his heart beating again. But I feel like the NHS wasn’t there when I needed it for my son,” she said. “We’re still sore, we’re still feeling angry. Maybe they could have saved him, maybe not, but we will never know that do we?” Throughout the pandemic the government has stressed the importance of protecting the NHS, and although he said parts of the service might become overwhelmed in January, Boris Johnson insisted the system was strong enough to “ride out” the latest Covid wave. But for families with experience of trying to get care on the NHS frontline, the situation already feels critical. “The conclusion I’ve come to is that this is what overwhelmed looks like,” said Roche. “I don’t know what I thought it would look like, maybe I thought that it would all just blow up or every department would fall down at once. But it’s not that, it’s single departments falling down at different times and they struggle back up. This is what it is, this is the problem.” * Some names have been changed to preserve anonymity.Immanuel Wilkins appears on a video call from his flat in Brooklyn, looking intently at the laptop perched on top of his Fender Rhodes keyboard. A column of light bounces off his forehead, and his red circular glasses magnify his eyes ever so slightly, making him look particularly absorbed in conversation. We’re speaking before the release of The 7th Hand, the follow-up to his Blue Note Records debut (“an alto saxophonist whose playing is at once dazzlingly solid and perfectly lithe”, trilled the New York Times, as the album topped its best jazz of 2020 poll). He’s warm, effusive and a tad nervous. There’s a tantalising moment where he considers playing the Rhodes to explain a point, before getting tongue-tied, reconsidering and starting again. He’s only 24, and yet this new album – which examines spirituality in its artwork and contemporary dance in its videos – is mature and adventurous. “At the core of Black existence, which is to say jazz music as well, is this idea of the in-between,” he says. “What makes jazz so great – it’s the solo, right? We play the head [the central theme], then we remix, we do our own thing in-between.” He was born in Philadelphia, moving 20 minutes east to the suburb of Upper Darby for grade school: “I had grass. I had a playset in the backyard. I had the quintessential suburban kid life.” An only child, music was Wilkins’ way of making friends, via school bands and the historic Philadelphia Clef Club of Jazz and Performing Arts. Back home, his parents encouraged his music, perhaps living out their abandoned artistic dreams – he recently stumbled upon Archie Shepp and Benny Golson transcriptions compiled by his dad, who flirted with professional work as a trombonist and flautist. Wilkins is a member of the Pentecostal Church of God in Christ, and began his musical career as resident pianist in the worship band at his local church. “I realised early on that there was a correlation between the atmosphere in the room and what I played. That was a turning point for me as a composer, player, everything. The idea of being responsible for how people consumed the spirit.” He moved quickly through his early instruments: “I started on violin when I was three, and yeah, it didn’t really work out. Then I tried piano, and was not good. I tried singing. Yeah …” he says, chuckling. To convince his parents he was serious about the saxophone (and to fork out the money for one of his own), Wilkins returned home from church one Sunday and found he “could already play through one of the hymns [on it], like halfway, just.” They said yes. Growing up, it was all about saxophonist Kenny Garrett (“third grade, fourth grade, fifth, sixth, seventh …”) and tips passed down from Branford Marsalis, whose band his unofficial “big brother” Justin Faulkner had recently joined on drums. Fellow Philly dweller Marshall Allen, leader and longtime member of the Sun Ra Arkestra, invited Wilkins aged 12 to the famed Arkestra House in Germantown, where the interstellar adventurers have lived since 1968. Wilkins got to sit next to Allen and experience his caustic sound. “Marshall used to tie a red rope around the bell of his saxophone, and I got a red wristband and put it round mine to be just like him.” Why did he leave, then? “There’s some good Philly colleges, but I just wanted to go to Juilliard, I wanted to be around Wynton [Marsalis]” – the Pulitzer Prize-winning trumpeter and teacher who typifies august, classy jazz. “So I got up and left.” Marsalis pointed him towards Ornette Coleman’s Town Hall, 1962 album (“Emulating [Coleman’s] sound became a big part of what I do”), and the move to New York also brought him closer to forward-thinking pianist Jason Moran, who would later produce his first album. “I first met him at an Aretha Franklin concert when I was a child. Then, whenever he was in Philly, I went to all his gigs. When his drummer heard me in New York he said to Jason, ‘Hey, you know that cat who used to come to all our gigs? He doesn’t sound that bad, you should probably give him a chance.’” It was at Juilliard that Wilkins also met his quartet (Micah Thomas, Daryl Johns and Kweku Sumbry); there’s now an expectant buzz developing around all four of them. Juilliard’s jazz department shares a floor with the dance and acting divisions, and Wilkins regrets not branching out across disciplines earlier (his mum was a dancer, and still dances in church on occasion). The 7th Hand makes up for lost time, a collective creative statement with roots in Black critical thought. The cover art, featuring Wilkins mid-immersion, remixes established ideas of southern Black baptism, placing women in the traditionally male leadership role. “I guess I’m trying to ask, who is really worthy of being baptised? Or, what is the established imagery around holiness that we see?” Meanwhile, the video Emanation/Don’t Break (featuring Farafina Kan Percussion Ensemble, and directed by Cauleen Smith, above) searches for the connections between Black dance styles – footwork, line-dancing and double-dutch – weaving yet more rich symbolism into Wilkins’ creation. The album’s title comes from the Book of Ezekiel, where God commands Ezekiel to build an altar with the measurements of “six cubits and one handbreadth”. “Hands are at the centre of spiritual life, they’re so powerful,” says Wilkins. “Those lifted hands in the church are some symbol of praise, right? But those same hands are also lifted up at the police.” His philosophy, and music, is utopian in an America that isn’t: “It’s about imagining a scenario that is so far beyond our reach, but that gets us to a certain truth that meets us farther than we are now.” The album continues where Omega’s rhapsody on the totality of Black life left off: seven movements that flow into one another and culminate in the 27-minute immersive tapestry of Lift. Collective improvisation gradually subsumes the quartet as the record progresses; the group morphs into vessels through whom divine inspiration can flow freely. The sound is excitingly diverse, flowing quickly from harsh, driving dissonance towards gentler gospel tones, before exploding back into vibrant improvisation. I ask Wilkins where he stands on the idea of spiritual jazz, a genre now bound up with cosmic psychedelia. “I like the phrase sacred music better,” he says. “Like, John Coltrane had A Love Supreme, and Duke Ellington had Come Sunday. I wonder if maybe this is my sacred music period.” Either way, as band members gradually peel themselves away from the group and embrace Wilkins’ idea of vesselhood with transcendent solos, his music always feels carried by spirit. • The 7th Hand is out now on Blue Note RecordsThe chair of the Beijing Winter Olympics Athletes’ Commission has warned competitors that they “need to be responsible” if they decide to speak out about controversial issues. Athlete freedom has been one of the hot topics before these Games, with human rights groups warning there could be consequences for talking about events in Tibet, Hong Kong and Xinjiang. However, the former speed skater Yang Yang, who won two short-track golds at the 2002 Winter Games, insisted that athletes would be free to talk in mixed zones and interviews under the IOC’s rule 50, which covers “athlete expression” – although podium protests would be banned. But her words at a press conference on Tuesday were ambiguous enough that some in the audience felt she was warning athletes not to publicly criticise China’s human rights record. “We have Rule 50 from the IOC charter,” said Yang, who is also vice-president of the World Anti-Doping Agency. “It says very clearly about the freedom of speech for athletes, what kind of expressions they can make, at what time, during what events. Athletes are role models for the world and there is a lot of attention on them. They have their opinions and if they want to share that, that is important. “There are very strict rules in the charter. At the medal ceremonies, they cannot make their opinions but in press conferences or interviews, athletes are free to express their opinions. But athletes need to be responsible for what they say. We’ll work with the IOC and make sure that Rule 50 is strictly followed.” Yang’s comments follow others from Beijing 2022 deputy director general, Yang Shu, who said last month that athletes could be punished if their comments on human rights issues are “against the Olympic spirit, especially against Chinese laws and regulations”. Meanwhile the Olympic Games executive director, Christophe Dubi, has suggested that venues in Beijing could be between a third and a half full when the action starts in earnest after Friday’s opening ceremony. “There is going to be a scheme for spectators, which is going to be community-based, making sure we have a presence of spectators in the stands, and at the same time, having safety for all participants,” Dubi said. “In terms of capacity we are not there yet, because it has to be fine-tuned at a venue-by-venue basis, but I’d say if we have one person out of three [available spots] or out of two, that would already be a good result.”Craig Fairbrass (Villain, Muscle, Rise of the Footsoldier franchise) is an actor who may lack range but has an undeniable screen presence. He emits an almost radioactive glow with his hulking, jolie-laide physiognomy, amplified by an abraded, East End baritone that seldom rises above a menacing whisper. That charisma goes a long way in this prison drama, written and directed by Ross McCall, which consists of a weary procession of scenes in which Fairbrass’s longtime convict Steve Mackelson growls, glowers and recites monologues full of self-serious pauses about prison life and how hard he thinks he is. All this seems to take place in one or two rooms in one of Her Majesty’s establishments where budget cuts appear to have deprived the cells of lightbulbs. A moderate amount of backlighting is supplied by a strip of window high in one black wall. No wonder the supporting officers (SOs) can never tell what’s going on. The deprivations also extend to the prisoners’ and support officers’ language, worn back to the stubs of self-expression so that they can only speak in prison slang (“tooled up”, “burner”, “peas” and the like) or the word “cunt”, which in this world is so ubiquitous it’s practically a pronoun. The monotony gets broken up a little by a subplot about Steve’s cellmate Marcus (Stephen Odubola), a young man in for a seven-year stretch whom he begrudgingly protects from other criminals who are convinced he’s an informer. Meanwhile, Steve weighs up whether to accept a request to meet his daughter, who was only a little girl when he went away for killing her mother and her lover. Supporting performers Jason Flemyng and Ulrich Thomsen bring their angular cheekbones to the party to fill out the lineup of gaunt, dead-eyed men, while Rosie Sheehy is excellent in the climactic scene as Steve’s daughter. The over-forceful musical score won’t help viewers already straining to understand what the hell is going on, but the chthonic atmosphere is oddly mesmerising, perhaps because – like a prison sentence – it wears you down eventually. • A Violent Man is released on 4 February in cinemas and on digital platforms.Arsenal The squad has long been filled out by mediocrity, so on one level the departures of six players who were not regular starters is welcome. But the fact nobody has come in, despite an obvious need up front and an attempt to sign the Juventus-bound Dusan Vlahovic, rings alarm bells and their push for a top-four spot looks a couple of injuries away from derailment. The sanctioning of Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang’s move to Barcelona without his being replaced speaks to Mikel Arteta’s uncompromising principles but also leaves their attacking ranks perilously thin. Nick Ames Key ins None. Key outs Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang (Barcelona), Ainsley Maitland-Niles (Roma, loan), Folarin Balogun (Middlesbrough, loan), Sead Kolasinac (Marseille), Pablo Marí (Udinese, loan), Calum Chambers (Aston Villa) Aston Villa Financial might and Steven Gerrard’s pulling power could help turn Villa into a potent force. The clearest evidence of that so far is the signing of Philippe Coutinho, whose return to the Premier League was one of January’s most exciting deals. Lucas Digne’s arrival, followed by Matt Targett’s departure, showed that Gerrard has a clear view of how he wants to improve Villa. The overhaul is far from complete – notably they did not upgrade the base of their midfield, although they did fend off interest in Douglas Luiz – but Villa should finish this season strongly. Paul Doyle Key ins Philippe Coutinho (Barcelona, loan), Lucas Digne (Everton), Robin Olsen (Roma, loan), Calum Chambers (Arsenal). Key outs Anwar El Ghazi (Everton, loan), Matt Targett (Newcastle, loan) Brentford The arrival of Christian Eriksen on a deal until the end of the season made headlines around the world and the playmaker should feel at home as one of nine Danish players on the books after the signing of goalkeeper Jonas Lössl this month. Thomas Frank and his assistant Brian Riemer agreed contract extensions to leave Brentford feeling even more unified before the final push for survival. Ed Aarons Key ins Jonas Lössl (Midtjylland), Christian Eriksen (unattached) Key outs Marcus Forss (Hull, loan), Charlie Goode (Sheffield United, loan) Brighton A busier window than might have been expected ended with Yves Bissouma still at the club despite strong interest from Aston Villa and others and the departure of Dan Burn to Newcastle. A deal for a much-coveted striker was agreed, although Deniz Undav will stay on loan with the Belgian side Royale Union Saint-Gilloise until the end of the season after agreeing a four-year deal. Meanwhile, the defender Odel Offiah – nephew of the former rugby league star Martin – extended his contract until 2024. EA Key ins Kacper Kozlowski (Pogon Szczecin), Deniz Undav (Royale Union Saint-Gilloise). Key outs Aaron Connolly (Middlesbrough, loan), Kacper Kozlowski (Royale Union Saint-Gilloise, loan), Dan Burn (Newcastle) Burnley The club are pretty much back where they started on 1 January. Chris Wood was sold after Newcastle triggered his release clause, leaving Burnley with a gaping hole in their forward line. Deadline day brought the arrival of the Netherlands striker Wout Weghorst as a like-for-like replacement. At Wolfsburg the 29-year-old had a record of one goal in every two games, which will give Sean Dyche hope Weghorst can fire the club to safety. They missed out on Dinamo Zagreb’s Mislav Orsic and on Aaron Ramsey, to make it an uninspiring window for a club in trouble. Will Unwin Key ins Wout Weghorst (Wolfsburg). Key outs Chris Wood (Newcastle) Chelsea The club refused to panic after attempts to cut short Emerson Palmieri’s loan at Lyon proved unsuccessful. They are short of cover at left wing-back after losing Ben Chilwell to injury for the rest of the season, but Thomas Tuchel has shown he can be flexible with the players at his disposal. It would not have made sense to buy a left-sided player and Tuchel saw no reason to act once it was clear that suitable loan targets were thin on the ground. Jacob Steinberg Key ins None. Key outs None Crystal Palace Early hopes of signing Manchester United’s Donny van de Beek on loan faded quickly once Everton entered the frame, with similar interest in Dele Alli also failing to ignite. A permanent deal for the striker Jean-Philippe Mateta before the Frenchman’s initial 18-month loan expired could prove a smart piece of business and further recruitment is expected in the summer. EA Key ins Jean-Philippe Mateta (Mainz). Key outs None Everton The deadline-day arrivals of Frank Lampard, Donny van de Beek and Dele Alli injected much-needed optimism into Everton’s season, yet the window as a whole shone an unforgiving light on how the club is run. Rafael Benítez, his authority increased after the departure as the director of football of Marcel Brands, bought in two full-backs for an initial outlay of £29m and sold Lucas Digne after a falling-out. The Spaniard was sacked a few days later. The unplanned signing of Anwar El Ghazi limited his successor’s options for domestic loans. Andy Hunter Key ins Vitalii Mykolenko (Dynamo Kyiv), Nathan Patterson (Rangers), Anwar El Ghazi (Aston Villa, loan), Donny van de Beek (Man Utd, loan), Dele Alli (Spurs). Key outs Lucas Digne (Aston Villa) Leeds Ostensibly a risk-averse window but will Marcelo Bielsa’s decision not to sign one senior player prove a high-stakes gamble? Admittedly the manager wanted Brenden Aaronson, Red Bull Salzburg’s £20m-rated United States forward, but Salzburg would not sell. Although Leeds never contemplated accepting West Ham’s ambitious offers for Kalvin Phillips and Raphinha, Phillips ranks among a raft of injured senior players also including Patrick Bamford. Much hinges on their return. Louise Taylor Key ins None. Key outs None Leicester Brendan Rodgers knew budgetary constraints meant there was no prospect of spending big but he hoped the club would make at least one acquisition: a centre-back. Leicester could not find one available at the right price so they will go into the second part of the season hoping Wesley Fofana, who has resumed light training after the broken leg suffered in pre-season, regains full fitness and top form soon. PD Key ins None. Key outs Filip Benkovic (released) Liverpool It was looking like another quiet window at Anfield until Porto agreed a fee with Tottenham for Luis Díaz and then a well-oiled transfer machine kicked into gear again. Liverpool’s outgoing sporting director, Michael Edwards, and his assistant and successor, Julian Ward, swooped in to capture the gifted winger whom Jürgen Klopp had intended to sign this summer. Mohamed Salah will have taken note. There was late frustration when a proposed deal for Fulham’s exciting teenager Fabio Carvalho fell through owing to time constraints, although a pre-contract agreement is possible. AH Key ins Luis Díaz (Porto). Key outs Nat Phillips (Bournemouth, loan), Neco Williams (Fulham, loan) Manchester City Julián Álvarez, a 22-year-old River Plate and Argentina forward, was Pep Guardiola’s only major piece of business, though he will not join until the summer. Despite the manager’s high-flying defending champions apparently being so far past the need for a centre-forward it is no longer a talking point, expect a move for a dedicated marksman in the next window: Erling Haaland of Borussia Dortmund remains a prime target. Jamie Jackson Key ins Julián Álvarez (River Plate). Key outs Ferran Torres (Barcelona), Taylor Harwood-Bellis (Stoke City) Manchester United The quest for a midfielder who can run games à la N’Golo Kanté, Declan Rice or Kevin De Bruyne continues. Ralf Rangnick’s contact books, built up during a 39-year career as a manager and director of football, have failed to land an addition that would instantly enhance chances of a top-four finish, FA Cup glory and moving beyond Atlético Madrid into the Champions League quarter-finals, at least. January is the harder window for acquisitions, yet not to strengthen with the campaign so delicately poised will disappoint fans. JJ Key ins None. Key outs Axel Tuanzebe (Napoli, loan), Anthony Martial (Sevilla, loan), Amad Diallo (Rangers, loan), Donny van de Beek (Everton, loan) Newcastle Newcastle were left with an amalgam of quiet satisfaction and mild disappointment. While Eddie Howe’s team have been strengthened in central defence, at full-back, centre-forward and, perhaps most significantly, in central midfield – where Brazil’s Bruno Guimarães could exert a significant impact on the relegation battle – they failed to secure some much-coveted targets. Although the centre-halves Sven Botman and Diego Carlos are still at Lille and Sevilla respectively and Jesse Lingard’s creativity remains at Old Trafford, it has been a decent window. LT Key ins Kieran Trippier (Atlético Madrid), Chris Wood (Burnley), Bruno Guimarães (Lyon), Matt Targett (Aston Villa, loan), Dan Burn (Brighton). Key outs Freddie Woodman (Bournemouth, loan), Jeff Hendrick (QPR, loan) Norwich The club said that any transfer incomings would be highly unlikely from the moment the summer window closed last September. That turned out to be accurate, with the relegation-threatened club not even linked to players in the gossip columns. There were no sales either, but the loan move of local boy and former great hope Todd Cantwell to Bournemouth, with a permanent option in the summer, did at least raise a few eyebrows. Paul MacInnes Key ins None. Key outs Todd Cantwell (Bournemouth, loan) Southampton Ralph Hasenhüttl was always relaxed about the window given the depth added to the squad last summer. Armando Broja has been a big hit on loan from Chelsea but the Saints will have to wait – and no doubt fend off others – to pull off any permanent deal. Dynel Simeu, who joined Southampton’s B team from Chelsea last summer, will gain first-team experience on loan at Carlisle for the rest of the season, and the 16-year-old defender Will Armitage has arrived from Cheltenham for about £200,000. Ben Fisher Key ins None. Key outs None Tottenham Antonio Conte would have liked the purge to run deeper – to include a couple of defenders – but it still reverberated loudly. Two in, four out in midfield and wide areas. But it was two he will trust (Rodrigo Bentancur and Dejan Kulusevski) versus four he did not (Tanguy Ndombele, Giovani Lo Celso, Dele Alli and Bryan Gil). So an upgrade? For Conte, it was something, a step in the right direction, but there was no new right wing-back (a big miss) and no back-up striker. David Hytner Key ins Rodrigo Bentancur (Juventus), Dejan Kulusevski (Juventus, loan). Key outs Tanguy Ndombele (Lyon, loan), Bryan Gil (Valencia, loan), Giovani Lo Celso (Villarreal, loan), Dele Alli (Everton) Watford Trying to navigate the choppy waters of the January window is difficult enough in normal circumstances but becomes almost impossible if you change manager during it. By the time Roy Hodgson came in on 25 January Watford’s business was pretty much done, the club strengthening where they needed to with Samir at centre-back, Edo Kayembe in defensive midfield and Hassane Kamara at left-back. Six players were signed for about £20m but will it be enough to stay up? Marcus Christenson Key ins Maduka Okoye (Sparta Rotterdam), Hassane Kamara (Nice), Samir (Udinese), Edo Kayembe (Eupen), Samuel Kalu (Bordeaux). Key outs Maduka Okoye (Sparta Rotterdam, loan) West Ham Have West Ham let a wonderful opportunity slip from their grasp? They will argue that January is a difficult time to do business, but their need for more depth was clear long before Christmas. The squad is light and the failure to bring in cover in defence and attack could cost them in the race to finish fourth. Ultimately, there was not enough vision. Several targets felt unrealistic and David Moyes was reluctant to gamble on certain players. JS Key ins None. Key outs None Wolves Bruno Lage is going to have to continue excelling on modest resources. The manager identified three areas where he hoped to strengthen his small squad: centre-back, winger and striker. He got a promising winger – the 21-year-old Chiquinho – but also lost a unique one in Adama Traoré. For central defence, the club recalled Toti Gomes from a loan at Grasshoppers in Zurich. And they signed a striker who was already at Molineux, with Hwang Hee-chan’s loan move made permanent. PD Key ins Toti Gomes (Grasshoppers, loan ended), Chiquinho (Estoril), Hwang Hee-chan (RB Leipzig). Key outs Adama Traoré (Barcelona, loan)“Close your eyes and breathe normally,” the therapist said. Here I was – a doctor trained in the western school of rational inquiry, empirical evidence and, dare I say it, snobbish cynicism – being hypnotised. But I’d lived with irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) for as long as I could remember, with abdominal cramps bringing regular discomfort and occasional agony. Medications and dietary changes had done absolutely nothing. I was aware of the growing evidence for hypnotherapy’s effectiveness for various painful conditions, but when I sat down on the hypnotherapist’s couch and closed my eyes for the first time, it felt more like a prayer of desperation than a reasoned treatment decision. Through words of suggestion, my hypnotherapist gently guided my attention across my body for about 10 minutes. I felt as though I was selectively shining a torch on sensations I never pay any attention to: the heaviness of my feet, the sound of my breathing. He then pulled my attention down to my sore, cramping abdomen and used imagery to change the way I saw my pain. “Picture your intestines as though they are a river,” he said. “Now, it might seem like a fast stream of rocky rapids, but instead imagine it as the gentle Thames, with languidly moving punts gently drifting downstream.” Over the following weeks, I could still feel painful sensations during flare-ups, but the pleasant imagery I was now associating with IBS was beginning to change my experience of it. It was as though I could take a step back and look at my own pain as an observer. My hypnotherapist treats many clients for phobias, and I wondered whether a similar process was at work with my pain. I used to visualise it like a threatening-looking spider. But now, instead of fleeing into another room or trying to thwack it with a newspaper, I could gently pick it up and rehome it in the garden. After a few weeks of practising self-hypnosis, the pain began to wane, and after a couple of months it completely stopped. To this day, no IBS symptoms have returned. This experience began to rock the foundation of my belief that pain is an accurate measure of injury. On the surface, this seems to make sense, but if we look more closely it’s clear that the relationship between pain and injury is not at all linear. Severe tissue damage can occur without pain: we have all heard stories of soldiers in the heat of battle completely anaesthetised to their missing limb. Pain can also occur without any injury – even without any tissue, as seen in the surprisingly common phenomenon of phantom limb pain in amputees. And all of us have some sense that the same injury is more painful when your mood is low, or if the harm is caused by another person in a threatening situation. If pain were a reflex, a simple signalling system from the body to the brain, then we should always and only feel pain when our tissue is damaged, with the pain directly proportional to the extent of injury. Pain only begins to make sense when you understand a fundamental, revolutionary truth that modern pain science is revealing: pain is a protector, not a detector. Pain is an executive decision made by our brain outside our conscious control, to tell our conscious mind that we are in danger and to motivate us to protect our body. Where another more important survival priority trumps this – take the soldier on the battlefield fighting for their life – the brain might decide not to create pain at all, or to delay it to a later time. In most cases of short-term – or “acute” – pain, hurt is usually an accurate indicator of harm. You shut your laptop on your thumb and it hurts; you slam it in a car door and it hurts more. But the link between hurt and harm begins to wane the longer pain persists. At least a fifth of most populations today live with persistent – also called chronic – pain. Persistent pain ruins millions of lives, but it was only recognised as a disease in its own right in 2019 and is often glossed over at medical schools. In many cases of persistent pain the initial injury has long since healed. Through a mechanism called central sensitisation, the brain has become overprotective and pain becomes “wired” in. I am not for one minute saying that persistent pain is “all in your head” – an issue of incorrect thoughts. Rather it is neurological, as real as epilepsy. But how could this help us deal with pain? It comes down to a simple formula: to rewire your brain out of long-term pain, you need to persistently provide it with evidence of safety and reduce evidence of threat. It’s a matter of gradually calming down an overprotective brain, letting it know that the body is safe. To my surprise, I found hypnotherapy a useful vehicle for this, but there are many other evidence-based ways to make the brain feel safer in its body. One example is movement – from exercise to knitting – that provides your brain with data that your body is strong and safe. And new technology could also help us find our way out of pain. A virtual reality (VR) interactive snowscape helps burns sufferers manage their notoriously painful wound care. A team in France has combined one of the world’s oldest therapies – hypnosis – with one of our newest technologies – VR – to give children recovering from surgery the opportunity to experience hypnotherapy in a relaxing VR environment of their choice, from a tropical beach to a mountaintop. Children given a 20-minute “hypnoVR” session within 72 hours of surgery required half the amount of post-operative morphine compared with those who received standard care. It will be fascinating to see whether VR can also help the brain rewire itself out of persistent pain. Still, most people – including doctors – have an outdated idea of what pain is and why it exists, although public outreach is slowly changing that. Understanding how pain really works is the first step to truly managing it. Monty Lyman is a doctor and the author of The Painful TruthIn all of the debate over “partygate” and Sue Gray’s investigation, very little has been said about how civil servants feel about the events that took place in No 10. Yet the consequences for the civil service, from plummeting public trust to Boris Johnson’s plans to restructure Downing Street, could be serious and long-lasting. After all, the prime minister’s term will come to an end at some point, but government will live on. In my time as head of the home civil service and during a long career of working with civil servants I found that the overwhelming majority believe in doing the right things in the right way. The institution’s core values – integrity, honesty, objectivity and impartiality – are imbued in every new recruit and are genuinely lived. This, of course, does not make the civil service perfect. It has been criticised, sometimes rightly, for paying too much attention to process, rather than outcome, and not responding quickly or decisively enough in an emergency. But doing things properly really matters. The police investigation means that we only have an update from Gray, not the full report we were anticipating. However, even with this limited scope, the picture at the heart of government is damning. For civil servants who set such a high store by good behaviour and doing the right thing, this is anathema. It damages their self-esteem – it wasn’t that long ago that we claimed to have the best civil service in the world – and, equally important, it damages the public’s perception of the civil service. Trust is a precious commodity that takes a long time to build and is quickly lost. There is no doubt that partygate has significantly reinforced the decline in trust between the governing and the governed. The job of being a civil servant has been made a lot harder. For civil servants working in Whitehall, this also applies to their relationship with ministers. To be effective, civil servants need to believe in ministers’ basic integrity. Their job is to help them deliver their policies regardless of their personal views. But what if that basic respect between minister and civil servant is undermined? Or, when push comes to shove, they are left to carry the can rather than ministers taking responsibility? Or, when ministers are found to have departed from the ministerial code, as was clearly the case for Priti Patel, no action will be taken? The most likely conclusion they will reach is that there are better opportunities outside government, which will deprive the government and country of much-needed talent. Gray’s update also points to the need for structural reforms to No 10. There is undoubtedly a good case for change. When Downing Street has worked well, it has often been in spite of rather than because of the way things are organised. The prime minister, in his response to the House of Commons, talked of creating an Office of the Prime Minister with a permanent secretary at No 10, and also of looking again at the code of conduct for the civil service and special advisers. Constitutionalists and former senior civil servants are likely to pile in with opinions on these proposals. It will add further uncertainty at a time when relations in N0 10 are already strained. Whatever the merits of changing structures and codes, however, I fear that they distract from the fundamental issues of leadership behaviour and culture. In government, even more than in other organisations I have worked in, this culture is ultimately set at the top – in this case by the prime minister – and not by the principal private secretary or a special adviser. It may be that the Metropolitan police report and the full Gray findings will shine a brighter light on who should properly take responsibility. Meanwhile, the public’s view as shown in numerous opinion polls is that the rules have been broken and those responsible will not be punished. This is bad news for believers in good government and for civil servants. It is important to remember, too, that most civil servants are based outside Westminster. They deliver public services such as paying benefits, running prisons, helping people into jobs and collecting taxes. Their response to partygate will be much the same as the general public – anger and disbelief when they themselves have made such huge sacrifices. There has been an effort by some politicians to dismiss the Downing Street parties as an irrelevance – that we are wasting our time talking about prosecco parties when we should be responding to Putin. But there are few things more important to our democracy than believing those at the top will follow the rules and tell the truth. Civil servants have particularly good reasons for understanding this fundamental truth. Lord Kerslake is former president of the Local Government Association and former head of the home civil service and permanent secretary at the Department for Communities and Local GovernmentAbout 9,500 homes remain without power in northern Scotland and the north-east of England, with dozens of schools closed for another day, as the effort to clear up after Storms Malik and Corrie continues. Scottish and Southern Electricity Networks (SSEN) was at red alert status after the storms cut power to 114,500 customers in Scotland, with restorations hampered by continuing high winds. By noon on Tuesday, power had been restored to 105,000 customers with about 9,500 customers remaining off supply, SSEN said. The main areas that continue to be affected are rural Aberdeenshire and the Angus border, as well as parts of Perthshire, the Highlands, Western Isles and the Moray Coast. “Small pockets of customers” may not have power until Wednesday, SSEN said, “depending on the extent of damage found and the impact of weather on our teams’ ability to work safely”. Many schools in the affected areas were unable to open because of lack of power and heating, including 37 in Aberdeenshire, seven in the Highlands and six in Angus. In the north-east of England, 61 homes remained cut off on Monday night, according to Northern Powergrid. After the storms, 80,000 customers in the region lost supply, the firm said. Andy Bilclough, its director of field operations, said on Monday night: “Our teams have got through a phenomenal amount of work today, which includes reconnecting around 17,000 customers that were impacted by Storm Corrie, and they are still out there now. “Almost all of the work we have left to do is a blend of repair work that we discovered when we got to site, some difficult conditions that meant we could not complete the work today, or where we would have needed access to the property during the night but have agreed with the customer to complete the restoration tomorrow.” Richard Gough, the director of distribution system operations at SSEN, said: ““Our teams have continued to make strong progress restoring power to customers impacted by Storms Malik and Corrie and all available resources have been deployed to support with restoration efforts. “Although the cumulative impact of Storms Malik and Corrie has compounded the challenge, we have started our final push and aim to restore power to the vast majority of customers today. For the pockets of customers that will remain without supply into Wednesday, we are prioritising welfare and support, working closely with local resilience partners.”Handel considered Theodora the greatest of his oratorios. Few today would disagree with him, though it was surprisingly unsuccessful at its Covent Garden premiere in 1750, and the Royal Opera’s new production effectively marks its overdue homecoming. Notoriety, however, began to cling to Katie Mitchell’s staging well before opening night, thanks to trigger warnings about “explicit violence” on the Royal Opera website, and the much reported employment of intimacy coordinator Ita O’Brien to ensure the performers felt comfortable with the sex scenes. All this has to some extent been a bit of a distraction, as the production is for the most part a reined-in affair, and neither particularly explicit (either sexually or in its depiction of violence) nor quite as inflammatory as anticipated. Mitchell’s stance is typically probing and interrogative. Distrusting Handel’s supposed depiction of his heroine as stoic or passive (with which not everyone would agree) Mitchell makes her a fundamentalist revolutionary rather than a martyr and relocates the oratorio to a modern-day alternative reality, setting it in an embassy that has been infiltrated by Christian resistance members bent on destroying the male-dominated pagan Roman system. The interlocking rooms of Chloe Lamford’s set take us into the kitchen, where we find Julia Bullock’s Theodora and Joyce DiDonato’s Irene making bombs, then to a grand salon in which Gyula Orendt’s psychopathic Valens issues orders and holds official functions, and also into what turns out to be a state-run brothel, where Theodora is forced into prostitution. Mitchell makes more than most directors of the gender implications of the scenes in which Didymus (Jakub Józef Orliński) and Theodora exchange clothes, and presents Septimius (Ed Lyon) as a more duplicitous figure than the compassionate Enlightenment rationalist of Handel’s imagination. There’s a twist at the end that takes us far from the original narrative. The overriding problem, I think, is that fundamentalists are ultimately sympathetic only to other fundamentalists, and it was not always easy to feel involved. One of the finest casts ever assembled for the work, however, means that musically this is breathtaking. Quietly passionate, Bullock sounds lovely in her arias and her voice blends beautifully with Orliński’s in their duets. He sings ravishingly throughout, as does DiDonato: As With Rosy Steps the Morn is a thing of rapt, introverted pianissimos, exquisitely done. Lyon is forthright, handsome in tone and presence, while Orendt is all hauteur and malign intensity. There’s immaculate choral singing, superbly focused and balanced, along with fervour, grace and elegance in Harry Bicket’s conducting. You may be in two minds about Mitchell’s staging, but it’s one of the most beautiful things you will ever hear. • At Royal Opera House, London, until 16 February.Spike Milligan spent the 1940s fighting the war – and the 50s fighting the BBC. That’s the argument ventured by Ian Hislop and Nick Newman in their play about the tormented comedian, who channelled his combat experiences into that “shellshock on radio” sensation, The Goon Show. Spike focuses on the early years of Milligan’s still-fragile success. Audiences love the show, it makes his co-stars Harry Secombe and Peter Sellers famous – but Milligan struggles with overwork, PTSD symptoms and the open disdain of the BBC’s top brass. It’s a sympathetic portrait, then, of the Anglo-Irishman, the more so for John Dagleish’s likably hangdog turn in the title role. It’s Milligan with a pinch of Harry Corbett thrown in: shabby, chippy and unable to stop cracking wise, even when there’s a noose around his neck. Director Paul Hart summons the spirit of the Goons with a fast-paced, capering production, one short scene after another hurling us from the Grafton Arms back to the battlefields of Monte Cassino and forward to the recording studios of the BBC. The dash distracts you from the lack of depth. The play paints Milligan’s fraught psychology in broad brushstrokes. His encounters with broadcasting’s stuffed shirts, as represented by blithering Robert Mountford, are enjoyable but cartoonish. Vivid as they are, George Kemp’s smooth Sellers and Jeremy Lloyd’s hearty Secombe are only ever supporting – and supportive – roles. And there’s no real dramatic shape to the tale Spike tells. The BBC’s snobbishness and Milligan’s fatigue are constants. Milligan’s eventual triumph, as the Goons’ audience figures become irresistible, is told not shown: the battle of wills between corporation and comic lacks a climax. But as an overview of a revolutionary moment in comedy history, it’s nimbly done, with a fun role carved out for Margaret Cabourn-Smith’s Foley artist Janet (and a thankless one for Ellie Morris as Spike’s beleaguered wife). The impression is potent of a talent who needed pricks to kick against, and in doing so – notably here with a Goons Orwell parody mocking “the Big Brother Corporation” – loosed British entertainment from the chains of deference. For that, he deserves thanks – and this buoyant tribute. Spike is at the Watermill theatre, Newbury, until 5 March.Welcome to Pushing Buttons, the Guardian’s gaming newsletter. If you’d like to receive it in your inbox every week, just pop your email in below – and check your inbox (and spam) for the confirmation email. Despite the hundreds of happy hours I spent playing Guitar Hero in the late 00s, I feel slightly resentful towards it. In my late teens I was a decent player of the actual guitar, but Guitar Hero was so much more fun that I ended up ditching my actual instrument and playing that instead. I became superhumanly good at it, and meanwhile I remain an average player of the real guitar to this day. What might have happened if I’d spent all those hours learning my real instrument? Obviously Guitar Hero is the sole reason I’m not currently embarking on my seventh stadium tour. It’s rare that video game and real-world interests conflict. Most of the time the things we happily do in video games would be unbelievably boring in real life. Actual farming is arduous and complex and involves horribly early mornings; Stardew Valley or Minecraft farming is soothing and simple and can be done in bed at 1am when you can’t sleep. I would rather defenestrate myself than be an urban planner, and yet SimCity is ridiculously compelling. (Check out Dorfromantik if you liked those old city-planning games, by the way – it’s a similar principle but much more chill, getting you to create and expand idyllic rural landscapes.) This feels weird to admit in regular society, but I’ve built up a significant knowledge base of some sports and interests without ever having done them in the real world. I have an abiding love of golf that is confined exclusively to video games, for instance. It began with Mario Golf on the Nintendo 64 and continued through to Everybody’s Golf on various PlayStation consoles, via the fab little role-playing Mario golf games on the Game Boy (low-key some of the best sports games in history, if you ask me, because they let you write your own wee rags-to-riches story). I even became briefly obsessed with a Korean online golf game called PangYa in the early days of broadband internet, largely because my caddie was a paper bag with a cat face drawn on it. What I love about golf games is their calming predictability. You can make your calculations, know your drive distance, check the wind direction, add spin with a deft touch of an analogue stick, and send the ball rolling beautifully on to the green or into the hole. You rarely, if ever, mess up your swing. If you get into trouble in a bunker, you can usually get out of it without entirely ruining your round. I feel like I’m amazing at virtual golf. Oh, and the courses have interesting novelties like floating islands or moving platforms or piranha plants that gobble up your ball. Things are rarely boring. In real life? None of that holds true. Golf is awful in real life. I know because my dad loves it, and for my entire life he has come home on a Saturday afternoon after five pitiless hours on Scottish golf courses in a raging mood that morphed slowly into despair by Sunday morning. Unless, presumably, you are extremely good at it, real golf is boring, unpredictable and dispiriting. Even people who like golf know this to be true. See also: skateboarding. I met the directors behind the excellent new skateboarding game OlliOlli World last week – two guys in their 40s who’ve spent 15 years making skating games based around their experiences in their late teens. Making the first couple of OlliOlli games in 2014 and 2015 inspired them to get back into skating in real life, which is absolutely lovely. I, meanwhile, love skateboarding in video games but possess absolutely none of the coordination or flair to attempt it ever in real life. I am more than happy to stick to mad ten-thousand-point combos in Tony Hawk’s, where I can experience the thrill of pulling off a laser flip without repeatedly humiliating in myself in front of teenagers at a skate park or breaking any bones. What to play OlliOlli World isn’t out until 8 February, but I’ve been playing it for a week and this seems like the ideal time to recommend it. I was really looking forward to this surreal skateboarding game, and yet I was not expecting it to be as welcoming and fun as it is – the previous two OlliOlli games were quite punishing, if also mega rewarding once you got into the flow. In OlliOlli World you create a little cartoon skater avatar and explore these far-out fantastical levels, flipping the board with the analogue stick to pull off beautifully animated tricks and clear huge gaps. There’s so much delightful visual detail in here – in the background of a beach-themed level I spotted a bunch of buff seagulls hanging out in sunglasses. It’s so cute, and yet also so rad. (Yes, I’m from the 90s.) Available on: Xbox, PlayStation 4/5, PC, Nintendo Switch Approximate playtime: 10+ hours What to read A huge piece of news that I’ll have to get into properly next week: Sony has bought Bungie, makers of Destiny and formerly Halo, for $3.6bn. This marks an escalation of the acquisitions arms race kicked off by Microsoft in recent years. Josh Wardle, creator of Wordle, has decided to hand it over to the New York Times, having been overwhelmed by its rapid spread. This seems like a good conclusion all round; it’s highly unlikely that the NYT will ruin it. Hello Games, known best for space exploration game No Man’s Sky and the saga around its development and release, has remastered its first ever game, a little stunt-bike puzzler called Joe Danger, and rereleased it on the App Store. This is nice, but what’s lovely about the story is what prompted them to get moving on updating the game: a plea from the dad of an 8-year-old with autism who really loves the game. A beautiful reminder of the significance that games can hold in people’s lives, and of the fact that pretty much any game out there will be hugely important to someone. Remember those Activision-Blizzard employees trying to form a union? The company has refused to recognise it, triggering a studio-wide election that has slim chances of success. I wish I could say I’m surprised. Oh god, British developer Team17 is launching a series of NFTs to commemorate the Worms games. They are called MetaWorms. I truly hope that nobody wants them; gamers have proven extremely resistant to attempts to inveigle NFTs into video games so far (though these digital collectibles won’t actually be used in games, it seems). Incidentally, since I wrote this despairing editorial about the hollowness of the “metaverse” idea last week, I have started receiving more press releases about soul-sapping crypto, blockchain and metaverse “initiatives”. I don’t want it. Please, video games industry, don’t make it my entire job to rage about this nonsense. What to click Sony to buy video game maker Bungie for $3.6bn as takeovers continue Now that I’ve finally played The Last of Us, who wants to talk about that ending? Uncharted: Legacy of Thieves Collection review – victory tour for feelgood blockbusters Question Block Something a little different for Question Block today from reader Joe Murray, who wants to know if anyone remembers a particular game from the mists of time: I would absolutely love to see a remaster of the PlayStation 1 game Pandemonium (also the sequel). When I was younger, I borrowed my uncle’s PlayStation 2 off him and found this PS1 game, popped it on and played it all night. I didn’t have a memory card, so to save my progress I had to write down the unique code given at the end of the level … This game was stressful and difficult, but also fun, vibrant and rewarding, with incredible bosses that used to scare the life out of me (see the Shroom Lord) and great dialogue that I still quote today, even if no one ever gets the references. I’d love if you could have a look through the game yourself and see if you can recall it. I’ve not seen it available anywhere and I don’t own any generation of PlayStation any more so I don’t know if I’ll ever play it again; I imagine the graphics do not hold up at all either, but it was a huge part of my childhood.” This is a game I never played, but I’ve just spent twenty minutes fascinated by clips of it on YouTube. Good news, Joe – you can play it on Steam, though apparently the port is terrible. And Toys for Bob, the original developer, is owned by Activision, which is now owned by Microsoft, which has brought back obscure games like BattleToads – so is it totally out of the question that it might be rereleased? If you, like Joe, have fond memories of Pandemonium, email me on pushingbuttons@guardian.co.uk and tell me about it. He can’t be alone, can he?As winter approached the situation appeared perilous. Not only was the UK in the midst of a Covid pandemic, but experts feared familiar respiratory viruses could also hit hard. “I will emphasise that actually flu could be potentially a bigger problem this winter than Covid,” Prof Anthony Harnden, the deputy chair of the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation, told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme in June. The concern was that lockdown and other measures had not only reduced coronavirus infection levels, but also the global circulation of influenza. According to the Royal College of General Practitioners, the prevalence of flu in the community in England was about 95% lower in the winter of 2020-21 than normal. The upshot, experts said, was that immunity in the population would have waned, leaving people more vulnerable to flu. And that could put further pressure on an already stretched NHS. Nevertheless, flu has yet to deliver on the threat. According to the latest report from the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA), “laboratory indicators suggest that influenza activity is very low,” with a similar picture seen in other metrics such as online searches for flu queries. One important factor is that in many countries, Covid measures have remained in place over the winter, and even where restrictions have eased, behaviour has yet to fully bounce back to pre-pandemic form. According to data from CoMix study from the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, on average adults had just below three contacts per day during December and January – compared with slightly more than 10 according to pre-pandemic surveys. “Maybe we’ve dodged the flu for now. But we’re now waiting for its inevitable grisly return,” said Prof Sir Andrew Pollard, director of the Oxford Vaccine Group. “The flu stayed away because global application of social distancing measures and mask wearing have been enough to keep the virus at bay.” Another factor is that in the run-up to winter, the UK rolled out the largest flu vaccination programme in its history, with 35 million people offered the vaccine. According to latest UKHSA data, uptake among people aged 65 years and over is the highest on record at almost 82%. While low levels of flu means vaccines have had little opportunity to have a big impact, it is reasonable to assume they may have helped prevent some sickness. But the concern remains what will happens once society begins to return to something akin to “normal”. Pollard said: “That could mean that there is an unseasonal outbreak of flu that happens as all the social distancing and restrictions start to be released around the world if there’s enough susceptible individuals that the amount of flu can build up quite rapidly,” said Pollard, although he added outbreaks may not be seen until next winter when conditions are more favourable for its spread.” Dr Laurence Tiley, senior lecturer in molecular virology at the University of Cambridge, also urged caution. “The further we get into February, the more confident we can be that this season will turn out to be a good one,” he said, adding the situation seemed promising. But, he noted: “All bets are off for next season, of course.” Tiley said that, as well as the problem of waning immunity, the low prevalence of the virus made it harder to predict the best candidate for next season’s flu vaccine. “I think we have been extraordinarily fortunate how things have turned out this winter, with Omicron – and apparently for flu too,” he said. “Long may it remain so.” • This article was amended on 1 February 2022. An earlier version referred to flu making a “grizzly” return.Two points about the Ukraine crisis are crystal clear. First, Vladimir Putin wishes to reimpose Russian control over Ukraine, whatever the price. His political dream of restoring the Soviet sphere of influence is echoed in a wishlist of “security guarantees” presented to western governments by Russia in December 2021. Nato, he maintains, should return to the pre-1997 state of affairs; Russia, apparently, need not. Second, whatever Putin decides in the current crisis, there are real fears in central and eastern Europe that settled borders are now under threat. These fears are grounded in reason. What seemed unrealistic in the immediate post-cold war years is now again a real possibility. Questions about our collective safety and security have returned, along with memories of a traumatic and not so remote past. More precisely, we are talking about more than one fear. Central and eastern European angst is existential in nature. In the 1980s, the Czech-French writer Milan Kundera wrote that small nations are constantly anxious about their existence, because their independence is repeatedly questioned. As doubt is cast even over their presence on the map, they experience their sovereignty in a fragile, nervous way. The Russian military menace to Ukraine reawakens old traumas and, paradoxically, not only those generated from the east. Another angst is, to put it bluntly, that the west will again abandon us. Historical precedent for western inaction is used in the current discourse to support doing nothing. The Guardian columnist Simon Jenkins, for example, noted, as he argued against Nato military intervention in Ukraine, that the west “wisely” did not intervene in Hungary in 1956 or in Czechoslovakia in 1968. For central and eastern Europeans, drawing such parallels proves that the Russians are not the only ones who persist with framing today’s events in terms of the cold war. The Ukraine crisis can be interpreted profoundly differently depending on which side of the old iron curtain you sit. This difference of perspective provokes its own misinterpretations and distrust. The evacuation of embassy staff from Kyiv may be understood as a “prudent precautionary measure” from the UK perspective; but for people in central and eastern Europe, it can have quite a different meaning. It suggests a readiness to withdraw that reawakens for us the trauma of being forced to be a part of the Soviet bloc. The instability of US foreign policy in recent years is another source of anxiety for central and eastern European countries, not least because the withdrawal of US troops from Afghanistan has forced many US allies to reconsider their strategic security priorities. But why should one listen to eastern Europeans’ anxieties, anyway, especially given the ambiguity their governments demonstrate towards the EU and the rule of law? It is worth remembering that the governments of Poland and Hungary have electoral legitimacy but don’t fully represent their polarised societies, not to mention the entire region. Yet, in Warsaw, Vilnius, Riga and Tallinn, the mood is full of anxiety. Nervous questions are asked: are western governments reliable allies? Why not defend Ukraine with full conviction? Why not rethink the geopolitical context of the Nord Stream 2 pipeline if upholding “European” values means anything? Many citizens of central and eastern Europe have clear memories of living under Moscow’s rule. For them, 30 years of independence is not long enough to banish the worry that we are trapped in a cycle of ever-repeating history. A cold war framing of the Ukraine crisis undermines, imperceptibly perhaps, democratic legitimacy in the whole region. Thinking in terms of spheres of influence takes us back to a time when the Soviet Union’s satellite countries were unable to freely decide which military alliance or political regime they aspired to belong to. What should be remembered today is that, during the Euromaidan crisis in 2013 and 2014, there were Ukrainians ready to sacrifice their lives to join Europe. The EU and Nato were founded to prevent history from repeating itself: if the west is really committed to democratic values, it should defend Ukraine. Western countries should not accept a return to the outdated logic of spheres of influence. A decisive response to Putin’s belligerence is needed. At the moment, that is a diplomatic one. The so-called Normandy format talks, involving France, Germany, Ukraine and Russia, should continue in expanded form with the US, in an effort to de-escalate the crisis. But any western decision will have far-reaching consequences for Europe. Further geopolitical instability would affect central and eastern Europe militarily, economically and in terms of migration. There is also a risk that this geopolitical distress could reinforce the region’s turn towards nationalism. Fear, as Cardinal de Retz famously remarked, is the passion that weakens judgment most. The fate of Europe will be decided in Ukraine. Karolina Wigura is a historian of ideas, board member of the Kultura Liberalna Foundation in Warsaw and a fellow at the Robert Bosch Academy in Berlin Jarosław Kuisz is a political analyst and essayist, editor-in-chief of the Polish weekly Kultura Liberalna and a policy fellow at the University of Cambridge Guardian Newsroom: Will Russia invade Ukraine? Join Mark Rice-Oxley, Andrew Roth, Luke Harding, Nataliya Gumenyuk and Orysia Lutsevych discussing the developments with Russia and Ukraine on Tuesday 8 February, 8pm GMT | 9pm CET | midday PDT | 3pm EDT. Book tickets hereFood and drink makers have cautiously welcomed a deal that will secure UK production of carbon dioxide, which is used in making meat, beer, baked goods and fizzy drinks, for at least three months. Meat processors, brewers, bakers and soft drink producers all use CO2 in making and packaging their goods. It is also required for the humane slaughter of animals including pigs and chickens, and is used by hospitals and nuclear power plants. A short government statement said the new industry-led deal would enable CF Fertiliser plant in Billingham, County Durham, to continue to operate. The plant was scheduled for potential shutdown this week after a three-month emergency deal brokered by the government came to an end on Monday. That deal was prompted by a crisis in CO2 supplies in late September as high energy prices combined with annual maintenance shutdowns to bring UK production to a near halt. The government was forced to use taxpayer money to fund a three-week bailout for CF Industries, which accounts for 60% of the UK’s CO2 supplies, to stave off supply chain chaos before the first three-month deal was agreed. It said it would not put up further funds. Kate Halliwell, the chief scientific officer at the Food and Drink Federation trade body, which represents hundreds of UK food and drink businesses, said: “UK food and drink manufacturers welcome the deal that will ensure continuity of CO2 supply, keeping our shops, pubs and restaurants stocked with our favourite food and drink.” But industry insiders said there were concerns about what the new industry deal would mean for the cost of CO2, which has risen sharply in the light of soaring energy prices. Emma McClarkin, the chief executive of the British Beer and Pub Association, said: “We are encouraged by the agreement made between suppliers and CF industries, however we urgently need further details on the nature of the arrangement in order to understand the impact on our sector and the longer term sustainability of CO2 supply for the UK drinks sector. “Our sector is still reeling from the impact of a devastating winter and face rising cost pressures from all angles. A swift resolution to the CO2 supply issue is crucial in ensuring a strong and sustainable recovery for the beer and pub sector.” The business department said in a statement: “The government welcomes the industry’s agreement which is in the best interest of businesses.” It added that in the longer term the government would “like to see the market take measures to improve resilience, and we are engaging on ways this could happen”.I am in my mid-40s and married to an amazing woman. She is smart, funny and very attractive. We have three wonderful children. Over the past 18 months I have begun to suffer from premature ejaculation and a loss of firmness in my erections. While I have always felt reasonably competent in my sexual abilities, I have now lost all confidence. When my wife and I do have sex there is usually foreplay and my wife climaxes, but when I ejaculate (prematurely) I am left feeling deflated and inadequate. I am reasonably fit and do not drink often. I have become hyper aware of this issue and feel embarrassed to bring it up with my wife. I also feel that I have no one to confide in about this issue. Any help would be greatly appreciated. There may be a simple reason for this; for example, having three children in the house can curtail sexual activity so it becomes hurried and unsatisfying. Try finding some relaxed time to spend with your wife without fear of interruption. However, the symptoms you are experiencing should be investigated, as they can be signs of underlying medical conditions – and there could be psychological reasons, medication effects or other causes. Early ejaculation can usually be treated quite easily by a competent sex therapist, but it is important to understand why it is occurring. Pay attention, and understand this is not a failing. You deserve to be heard and helped. Pamela Stephenson Connolly is a US-based psychotherapist who specialises in treating sexual disorders. If you would like advice from Pamela on sexual matters, send us a brief description of your concerns to private.lives@theguardian.com (please don’t send attachments). Each week, Pamela chooses one problem to answer, which will be published online. She regrets that she cannot enter into personal correspondence. Submissions are subject to our terms and conditions: see gu.com/letters-terms. Comments on this piece are premoderated to ensure discussion remains on topics raised by the writer. Please be aware there may be a short delay in comments appearing on the site.Lashana Lynch, who made history as the first black female 007 in No Time to Die, is one of five nominees for this year’s Bafta rising star award. The British actor has been shortlisted alongside Kodi Smit-McPhee, Millicent Simmonds, Ariana DeBose and Harris Dickinson for the only Bafta voted for by the British public. Lynch’s standout role as Nomi in Cary Fukunaga’s Bond film drew international media attention. The 34-year-old west Londoner’s casting was part of a push by producers to keep 007 relevant for a contemporary audience. An Observer review said Lynch was “forcefully charismatic in a slightly underwritten role”. The actor’s upcoming projects include historical epic The Woman King, set in South Africa, and the film adaptation of the musical Matilda. Lynch said: “I’m so elated for my fellow nominees who inspire myself and others, as we continue to fight for change within our industry and the world. I’m proud to do that in moments like these.” Meanwhile, Australian actor Smit-McPhee, 25, has been called “the secret weapon” in Jane Campion’s trailblazing The Power of the Dog. He has already won a Golden Globe for his role as effeminate teenager Peter Gordon. His performance also earned him a nomination from the Screen Actors Guild and he was named best supporting actor by the New York Film Critics Circle. Smit-McPhee said that to be recognised by Bafta was to be “able to kind of redeem the blood, sweat and tears” that went into his work. He called Campion “a force of nature and a true genius” who constantly pushed him to be brave. The nominations were announced by last year’s winner, Bukky Bakray, on Tuesday. The prize has been running for 17 years and previous winners include James McAvoy, Kristen Stewart, Tom Hardy, Daniel Kaluuya and Tom Holland. This year’s selecting jury was made up of Bafta chair Krishnendu Majumdar, actors Sadie Frost and Michelle Dockery, casting directors Lucy Bevan and Leo Davis, producer Uzma Hasan and talent agent Ikki El-Amriti. Simmonds, 18, who found worldwide fame starring in 2018’s A Quiet Place and the 2021 sequel, becomes the award’s first deaf nominee. She said she’d had a lot of deaf young people tell her it was “really awesome to see our language, American Sign Language, on the big screen ... I didn’t have that growing up so I feel really honoured to give them a place where they can dream. It’s very inspirational for me.” DeBose’s performance in Steven Spielberg’s West Side Story has already earned her a Golden Globe and she’s also been longlisted in Bafta’s supporting actress category. The 31-year-old said she was “blown away” by the nomination, adding that she hopes the movie brings in more representation for Hispanic people in Hollywood. “There’s not one way to be Hispanic. You can be black and Puerto Rican at the same time,” she said. The list is completed by British actor Dickinson, 25, who stars in Matthew Vaughn’s The King’s Man. He said it meant a lot to be “noticed by such a prestigious institution”. Voting is now open at ee.co.uk/BAFTA and the winner will be announced at the Bafta ceremony on 13 March, which will be hosted by Rebel Wilson at the Royal Albert Hall.If you ever wondered what Jim Jones’s corpse would have looked like if it had spent three weeks getting bleached and bloated by a Guyana river, it floated up to the House of Commons dispatch box yesterday at 3.30pm. Let’s begin with some real talk. The prime minister is under police investigation for multiple breaches of his own Covid laws. At least four gatherings or parties in which Boris Johnson was directly involved are being probed by the Met, including one in his private flat. In total, police are investigating 12 potentially law-breaking Downing Street parties which took place after the British people had been ordered – BY HIM – to live under the most draconian restrictions imposed in peacetime. The Global Britain that Johnson promised saw him yesterday bin off a call to the Russian president, who is apparently on the brink of an invasion, so that he could explain that he needs to wait for police officers to decide if he went to an illicit party in his own home. The Conservative MPs somehow able to make their peace with all this increasingly resemble cult members accepting the latest transparent lies and failures of a cult leader. Suitcases full of Kool-Aid seem to have been wheeled into Boris Johnson’s meeting with Tory MPs last night. Two weeks ago, Birmingham Northfield MP Gary Sambrook was widely reported to be one of the leading lights of a plot to remove Johnson; last night he issued a dispatch from the compound in which he declared the PM to be “the Boris Johnson we love and who has delivered”. Sorry, Gary, but wake up. This ends with a bungling Swat team going through the window and discovering the whole place is wired. As for what Johnson said to his followers last night, he is reported to have compared himself to Othello, who he seems to think was “always seeing the best in people”. Righto. To confirm: the country isn’t just being run by a guy who can’t even understand the plot of Othello, but by a guy who can’t even understand the plot of Othello and is writing a book about Shakespeare. It’s called not giving a fuck, Gary – look it up. That said, good to see the PM getting his excuses in early for shopping Desdemona to the cops for her Abba party. And yet, for someone who normally puts the I am into iambic pentameter, Johnson will still only speak in the first person plural when it comes to “taking responsibility” for what his investigator Sue Gray found to be “failures of leadership”. What a tell. As he preferred it yesterday in his statement to the Commons: “We must look ourselves in the mirror, and we must learn.” Who’s we? Face it, Gary – he’s the least convincing man in the mirror since Michael Jackson. In fact, speaking of paedos, the prime minister chose to use one as a figleaf. Such a Churchill move. When the hour for leadership came, Johnson opted to knowingly advance a grotesque and indefensible conspiracist lie that Keir Starmer failed to prosecute Jimmy Savile when he was head of the Crown Prosecution Service. All Conservatives who regard themselves as decent need to ask if it’s really that much of a leap from this sort of thing to some of the other paedophile-based conspiracies that are increasingly part of the dangerous undertow of global populist policies. If they’re not up to it, it will continue. On past form, the Met will spend months not getting to the bottom of things. Should any fines be issued, I’m sure Johnson will get some Tory donor to set up a blind trust to pay for his. He should start running a cash phoneline during PMQs, like a proper televangelist. At least those who remember what the past two years were actually like – ie everyone – can be glad that Gray’s update acknowledged something crucial. Yes, she stated, working at Downing Street during the pandemic was challenging. “Those challenges, however, also applied to key and frontline workers across the country who were working under equally, if not more, demanding conditions, often at a risk to their own health … The hardship under which citizens across the country worked, lived and sadly even died while observing the government’s regulations and guidance rigorously are known only too well.” This is a vital counter to the frankly eye-popping number of anonymous exceptionalist briefings from Downing Street employees which talk about the “saviour complex” some staff apparently felt. Unsurprisingly, perhaps, no one has ended up being more elitist than the guys who swept to power promising to smash elites, but who turned out to regard themselves as miles above rules that were followed even in extremis by silly little people like the actual head of state. It wasn’t always this way. By chance, one of my children last week visited Bletchley Park, which as you know was the centre of the Allied code-breaking operation during the second world war, without which the war might not have been won, and where heroic efforts are judged to have shortened it by between two and four years. At Bletchley, he tells me, they only started serving beer at the end of a shift in 1944. To put that into perspective, by that stage there was a fourth rotor on the Enigma machine, meaning the possible combinations had leapt to truly head-frying levels, and the staff had been working round the clock at the facility for five years of global war under the constant threat of bombing. Flash forward to 2020. When they were getting pissed at 6pm in the garden in May, the desk johnnies of Downing Street had been stewarding a peacetime lockdown for TWO EFFING MONTHS. I mean, if you can’t do that without intravenous prosecco, then … buck up?! Run along and work in interiors PR? This is the same self-awareness-to-self-regard ratio as people who list their occupation as “film producer”. As things stand, insufficient numbers of Conservative MPs are prepared to wake up and smell the cordite. But all the Tories defending Johnson and skirting over these insults to ordinary people shouldn’t feel alone in the world. They have as their spiritual cousins all those craven Republicans who now refuse to condemn Donald Trump despite the fact they know he is a liar and a crook, know that he only cares about himself and thinks that rules are for little people, and know that he regards even them with a mixture of amusement and contempt. Backing Johnson in the face of all this is really not much different from scuttling down to Mar-a-Lago to pay obeisance and hoping you get smiled at. Come on – what’s the worst that can happen? • Marina Hyde is a Guardian columnist • An evening with Marina Hyde and John Crace: Join in person or online Join Marina Hyde and John Crace live in Kings Place, looking back at the latest events in Westminster. On Monday 7 March, 8pm GMT | 9pm CET | 12pm PST | 3pm EST. Book ticket here If you’d like to hear this piece narrated, listen on Saturday to The Guardian’s brand new podcast, Weekend. Subscribe on Apple, Spotify, or wherever you get your podcasts.There’s some amazing big-screen spectacle in this weird postmodern emo photo-love drama from Japanese anime director Mamoru Hosoda, whose previous film Mirai elevated him to auteur status. Suzu, voiced by Kaho Nakamura, is a deeply unhappy and lonely teenager at high school, who lives with her dad. Her mum died some years ago, attempting (successfully) to save a child from drowning and Suzu can’t come to terms with the zero-sum pointlessness of this calamity: a total stranger was saved but her mother died. Or not zero in fact: while her loss increased the sum-total of unhappiness, the most popular boy in school – a friend since they were little – is tender and protective towards Suzu. Her life is complicated further when she is persuaded to join a virtual reality meta-universe called U, a glittering unearthly city like a next-level Manhattan or Shibuya. (Presumably entry into this fantasy world needs a VR headset, although oddly this is not made plain.) Participants have their biometrics read and get an enhanced avatar of themselves and Suzu finds that she is now “Belle”, an ethereally beautiful young woman with quirky freckles and a wonderful singing voice. To her astonishment, Suzu finds that Belle is becoming a colossally famous singer – but at the very high point of this meta-success she comes across the Beast, who disrupts one of her concerts: a brutish, aggressive outcast figure loathed by the self-appointed vigilante guardians of U. You can spend quite a bit of time trying to guess the Beast’s real life identity – disregarding the obvious red-herring options – and my guesses were wrong. The point is perhaps more that Suzu and Belle, like Peter Parker and Spider-Man, have a poignantly dysfunctional relationship with each other: one is an unhappy loser and the other is a superstar. It is an intriguing story, although I have to admit to feeling a bit bemused at the arbitrary way the Beast story is inserted into the already tense and interesting situation of Suzu/Belle and her relationships with people at home and school. • Belle is released on 4 February in cinemas.I’m fed up with domestic drudgery. Which meals generate the least washing-up? Hannah, London You’re speaking Roberta Hall-McCarron’s language, Hannah: “There’s so much prep and washing up at work, I try to keep things really simple at home,” says the chef/owner of The Little Chartroom in Edinburgh. A broth, she adds, is a good place to start: “That could be chicken or veggie stock, or go down a more Asian route with coconut milk and Thai curry paste.” Hall-McCarron then chucks in whatever vegetables takes her fancy, adding them to the pot according to how long they take to cook, maybe some meat or fish, too, and noodles or rice. “Not only are you getting all the flavour from the broth going into everything you put in the pot, you’ve also got only one pot to wash up afterwards.” A similar tactic is endorsed by Merlin Labron-Johnson, chef at Osip and The Old Pharmacy in Somerset. “When I want to avoid washing up, my go-to dinner is a simple soup. There’s something very satisfying about the act of throwing lots of ingredients into one pot and letting them simmer away.” He usually punts for leafy greens, such as kale, tearing them in by hand “to avoid chopping”, and adds tinned beans for bulk without contributing to the dirty dishes. Traybakes are also a godsend for keeping the sink from overflowing. To build the best, follow food writer Anna Jones’ six-step plan: pick a “main vegetable” (800g winter roots, say, or chopped butternut squash), then a soft one (for example, 200g spinach leaves or half a jar of roast red peppers, chopped) and put in an oven dish. Add substance (a tin of butter beans or chickpeas, or torn bread), liquid (100ml stock or white wine), herbs and a “flavour boost” (lemon or orange zest, and/or a teaspoon of hot smoked paprika), then bake “until the vegetables are soft and golden”. According to Ferdinand “Budgie” Montoya, chef-owner of Sarap Filipino Bistro in London, every home should have a rice cooker: “You can just put everything in, press ‘cook’ and that’s it.” One regular go-to at Montoya’s house is chopped ginger, garlic, jasmine rice and chicken stock (“or water and stock cubes”), which he mixes before laying “two boneless chicken thighs skin side down on top and a stick of lemongrass that’s been bashed to release the flavour”. Once cooked, he stirs through chopped coriander and spring onion tops. “For a little condiment, finely chop coriander stems, chilli, garlic, ginger and spring onion [the white part], then stir in soy sauce, vinegar– I use Filipino coconut vinegar, but apple cider or white-wine vinegar would work – rapeseed oil, sesame oil and salt.” One-pot pastas, in which the sauce is made from that magic pasta cooking water and whatever ingredients you’ve chucked in, are also only a quick boil away. A personal favourite is Jones’ kale, tomato and lemon spaghetti from A Modern Way to Cook, for which she puts the pasta, halved tomatoes, lemon zest, olive oil, salt and boiling water in a pan and brings to a boil. Turn the spaghetti with tongs every 30 seconds or so for six minutes, then lob in some kale or spinach and cook for another couple of minutes. Top with a sprinkle of parmesan, and these are carbs you’ll want to curl up with – and with minimal washing-up for afters, too. • Got a culinary dilemma? Email feast@theguardian.comWhat does it take for someone to impersonate a dead teenager to the grieving mother of the deceased? For M Lamar Keene, a prominent Tampa-based medium in the 1960s and 70s, it was a cinch – all it required was a cocktail of cunning, charisma and sheer audacity. In front of the congregation of his spiritualist church, Keene would enter a trance state and appear to speak as the deceased 17-year-old, Jack, and ask Jack’s mother, Lona, to donate thousands of dollars to the church. One day, Lona asked Jack about the secret name he used for her, to prove it was really him, and Keene was stumped – until he attended a gathering at her house and feigned a headache. While pretending to rest in her bedroom, he searched her belongings and found the name scribbled in a family Bible: “Appleonia”. He pulled it off. Keene confessed to being a conman in his 1976 book, The Psychic Mafia. Jack and Lona’s was just one of many audacious cases he revealed in the exposé, which shook the world of spiritualism so much that it led to an attempt on his life. Someone took a shot at him on his lawn but missed, leaving a bullet in the side of his house. In the book, Keene described how mediums shared client information so that they could conduct “hot readings” based on solid facts. He recounted how they would steal jewellery from clients for a few months, only to pretend a dead family member’s spirit had made it reappear (which usually resulted in generous tips). Ultimately, he confirmed that mediums formed a vast network to fraudulently monetise people’s grief. So why did Keene – the so-called Prince of the Spiritualists – choose to blow the whistle on everyone? Vicky Baker, a journalist with a nose for juicy scandals, knew she had hit the jackpot when she discovered a photograph of Keene dressed in his famous all-white suit and boots. She had Googled “psychic crime rings” to feed a new curiosity about psychic scams while sitting across the road from a medium’s office. Eager to follow up her 2019 podcast series, Fake Heiress (the story of con artist Anna Sorokin, who passed herself off as a wealthy heiress, Anna Delvey), Baker was excited to make Keene its subject. “Now that I think about it, there is a parallel between him and Delvey,” says Baker. “Some people were wowed by her and found her really impressive, others found her quite dull. Some people barely remembered Keene, others he left a massive mark on … an unforgettable showman.” Charisma played a huge part in Keene’s story (“He had this unusual way of speaking that was very theatrical, like he was always putting on a show,” Baker says) and it is illustrated in the podcast by means of dramatisations that verge on cheesy, but fit nicely with the tone of astonishment. Over six episodes, Baker also meets fraud experts, psychologists and sceptics to unpick this absurd world, as well as people who knew Keene – though it was near impossible to get to the roots of his story. Baker knew that Keene’s mother died when he was young. “There was only a certain amount of information I could get my hands on – mostly from the book, and 75 hours of recordings he made for his ghostwriters. Everything else involved a lot of digging,” she says. Not being able to speak to Keene, who died in 1996, further fuelled the intrigue. “The book starts when he is in his 20s, and the guys who interviewed him were more interested in pressing him on other people in the industry, whereas I would have asked more about … well, him.” Baker sent a lot of unanswered emails, before her best lead connected her with Keene’s half-sister, who filled in the wild details about why he had severed ties with his family: “There’s a weird subplot where he convinced an elderly woman that he was her son … it’s a whole new twist that comes up in episode five.” Keene left home to train as a medium with his friend Raoul (a pseudonym). He quickly realised Raoul was an “open-eye” medium, fully aware that he couldn’t contact the dead. After becoming certified as a reverend and opening his own church, Keene attended the popular spiritualism centre Camp Chesterfield, in Indiana. Researching this camp many years later, Baker made an exciting discovery. Baker found out about Mable Riffle, who ran Camp Chesterfield, where desperate guests paid to mingle with mediums and attend seances to try to contact their lost loved ones. Baker describes Riffle, who died in 1961, as the matriarch of mediums: “The fact there was a holiday camp for spiritualists made me so curious to explore more. And her cousin Ethel even set up a rival camp. You could do a whole other podcast on that.” In 1960, another exposé used infrared cameras that revealed the figures who materialised in Riffle’s seances to be humans, entering the room through a side door. For Keene, the camp was an inspiration to go big with his scams, using tips and tricks he picked up there. After many years of success, and a lot of money rolling in, what was it that finally made Keene crack? “It was never quite explained in the book,” says Baker. “But he had a massive run-in with Raoul and felt like he was being pushed out. There was jealousy and accusations on both sides. He described it as the ‘biggest showdown in all of my medium career’. So that’s the argument that caused him to sever ties.” It’s unlikely that Keene revealed the slippery secrets of his trade for moral reasons. Yet Baker was deeply shocked by how his life turned out: after the assassination attempt, he changed his identity and devoted his life to good deeds. Without giving away the revelation brought to light in the final episode of the podcast, Baker says: “I could never have predicted it; I found myself in a completely different world. People who knew him then didn’t even know he was previously a psychic.” Keene’s world might sound utterly absurd, but it still has strong resonance with people’s behaviours and beliefs today. The industry analyst Ibis World reports that the psychic services market in the US is worth $2.2bn, and grew 0.5% a year on average between 2017 and 2022. At a time of collective mass grief, it’s perhaps understandable that spiritualism is having a resurgence. “People wanting to communicate with the dead is timeless,” says Baker. “Today, some psychics refer to themselves as ‘intuitive healers’, which is much more compatible with the wellness industry. Even Goop, Gwyneth Paltrow’s wellness brand, looks at them. Kim Kardashian promotes psychics. Drew Barrymore has them on her chatshow. Nowadays, it’s a wellness treat – rather than a dark secret in a dodgy alleyway shop.” Radio 4’s Fake Psychic is on BBC Sounds from Tuesday 1 February.Consumers are starting to run down the savings built up during the pandemic in order to sustain spending patterns threatened by higher inflation, Bank of England figures suggest. With the cost of living rising, Threadneedle Street data showed a marked drop in December in the amounts being deposited in savings accounts and national savings. The Bank said savings stood at £3.2bn in December, less than a third of the £10.6bn monthly average for the previous 12 months. Consumer credit increased by £800m – of which £400m was on credit cards. Analysts said more people were liable to dip into their savings over the coming months – a period likely to be marked by an increase in the annual inflation rate from December’s 5.4%, higher taxes and higher energy bills. Thomas Pugh, an economist at the consultancy firm RSM UK, said: ‘The latest money and credit figures suggest that consumers are borrowing more and saving less as they try to maintain their lifestyles in the face of surging inflation. “A rise in consumer borrowing over the next year may suggest that consumers are dealing with high inflation and attempting to maintain their lifestyles by borrowing. Indeed, we know that retail sales volumes slumped in December, so it seems unlikely that the £0.8bn increase in consumer credit in December was due to consumers buying more goods.” Samuel Tombs, a UK economist at Pantheon Macro, said it was unlikely households were dipping into savings voluntarily given consumer confidence dropped to an 11-month low in January. Excess savings accumulated while spending opportunities were restricted over the past two years would now be run down to compensate for a likely drop in real (inflation-adjusted) incomes of 1.5% this year. Despite the squeeze on living standards, separate Bank of England figures showed demand for mortgages continued to be strong. There were 71,000 approvals for new home loans in December compared with an average of 66,700 a month in the year ending in February 2020, the period before the start of the pandemic. Meanwhile, the monthly snapshot of manufacturing from IHS Markit and the Chartered Institute of Procurement and Supply found output and employment rose at their fastest pace in six months as firms responded to stronger order books and started to get on top of supply bottlenecks. Rob Dobson, a director at IHS Markit, said: “UK manufacturing made a solid start to 2022, showing encouraging resilience on the face of the Omicron wave, with growth of output accelerating as companies reported fewer supply delays. Causes for concern remain, however, as new orders growth slowed, exports barely rose, staff absenteeism remained high and manufacturers’ ongoing caution regarding supply chain disruptions led to the beefing up of safety stocks.”Donald Trump directed Rudy Giuliani to ask the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) if it could seize voting machines in three key states, the New York Times reported. Citing three anonymous sources, the paper said Giuliani made the call six weeks after Trump’s defeat by Joe Biden but before the January 6 Capitol riot, by supporters trying to stop the certification of electoral college results. A DHS official told Giuliani it did not have the authority to seize the machines, the Times said. The paper also said Trump turned to his personal lawyer after considering a plan to have the Department of Defense seize the machines, and after being told by his attorney general, William Barr, that the Department of Justice would not do so. Executive orders to compel the Pentagon and DHS to act are known to have been drafted. But the newly revealed DHS call, the Times said, “show[s] that Mr Trump was more directly involved than previously known in exploring proposals to use his national security agencies to seize voting machines”. Trump claims the election was subject to massive voter fraud. It was not. His efforts to overturn the election – an outcome he admitted seeking in a statement on Sunday – are being investigated by the House committee on January 6 and by a district attorney in Georgia. The DA, Fani Willis, has requested FBI protection after Trump told supporters they should protest her investigation and others into his business practices in New York. At his Texas rally last Saturday, Trump also promised pardons for January 6 rioters should he be president again. More than 700 rioters have been charged, 11 with seditious conspiracy. The Times said a retired US army colonel, Phil Waldron, was at the heart of attempts to acquire the authority to seize voting machines in key states, altering the plan to include the DHS when Giuliani said using the military would be too extreme. Waldron, from Texas, is linked to Michael Flynn, a retired general who was among conspiracy theorists pressing Trump to seize voting machines. Trump also pressured officials in key states like Michigan and Pennsylvania to seize voting machines. They resisted. Schemes to send “alternate electors” to Congress from battleground states are the subject of a Department of Justice investigation as well as subpoenas from the January 6 committee. Giulaini is a former mayor of New York and candidate for the Republican presidential nomination but his star has fallen as a result of his work for Trump. Suspended from practicing law in New York and Washington DC, he is the subject of a subpoena from the January 6 committee. In a letter to Giuliani last month, the committee chair, Bennie Thompson, said: “Between mid-November 2020 and January 6, 2021 (and thereafter) you actively promoted claims of election fraud on behalf of former president Trump and sought to convince state legislators to take steps to overturn the election results. “According to witness testimony and public reporting, in December 2020 you urged President Trump to direct the seizure of voting machines around the country after being told that the Department of Homeland Security had no lawful authority to do so.”In a skate park under the arches near London Bridge, a couple of game developers called John Ribbins and Simon Bennett are messing around in a half-pipe. (I do not join in – sadly the immense skills that I have built up over 20 years of playing skating games do not in any way translate into real life.) In 2014, their studio Roll7 released a fondly remembered and notoriously tricky skateboarding game called OlliOlli – an experience that prompted them, both lapsed skaters who were obsessive about it in their teens, to get back out on the streets in real life. They had about 10 people working with them back then; now they’re directors of a studio of 80. I’d spent a few days playing Roll7’s latest game, OlliOlli World – an exuberant and characterful tribute to skateboarding, with wild levels full of rails and walls to grind and weird characters such as sentient trees and buff seagulls pottering around in the background. The art, a mix between the kind of mural you might find in a London skate park and the strange but cutesy cartoonish vibe of something like Adventure Time, contrasts with an extremely chill soundtrack that soothes your nerves as you try to pull off awesome chains of tricks. It’s a hugely appealing game – and where Roll7’s previous OlliOlli skating games from 2014-15 were technical, demanding and just a touch sterile, this one couldn’t be more out there. The levels in OlliOlli were once based on the fairly dismal view from John and Simon’s office in Deptford; this game is set in a colourful skateboarding paradise called Radlandia. It seems to me that something has changed, certainly within the studio but perhaps also with skateboarding culture and what (and whom) it represents. “My experience of getting back into skating in my 30s has been with way different groups of people,” says John. “The women’s scene has blown up. There’s always been queer people in skateboarding but you’d never have seen that representation even seven years ago … Making this game, I was thinking of a lot of the people I skate with now; that it would be cool to make a game they feel represented by.” When you think of skateboarding and video games, you may think of Tony Hawk’s Pro Skater, the delightfully gratifying PlayStation classics that blew up around the turn of the millennium – around the time that John and Simon were skating in their late teens and 20s. If Tony Hawk’s represented the skate culture at that time (very male, very competitive), OlliOlli World represents it now: more diverse, more colourful and altogether more welcoming. Unsurprisingly, plenty of the people at Roll7 are involved with the sport in real life. The character design lead used to be a pro, and a team member once joined a meeting from A&amp;E having had an unfortunate collision with a car while skating. “OlliOlli 1 and 2 were made from the perspective of skating when we were younger, when everyone thought they might go pro,” he says. “We’ve reached the age now where we all know our career is not gonna be in skating. People aren’t trying to be the best at it, they’re just doing it because they’re having a really good time.” Simon and John wanted people to have a good time making the game, too – something that comes across in the cheerful aesthetic. “There was a mentality change about how to make video games when we started on OlliOlli World,” says John. “All our previous games had been quite stressful; not a lot of people crunched [worked unpaid overtime] on them, but we as directors definitely crunched, we took on a lot, and it was hell. Going into this we thought: let’s try to actually have fun while we’re making it.” Roll7 has been a remote studio since 2016, but a few months into development on this game, the pandemic hit and took remote work to a whole new level; as Simon points out, people weren’t just working from home, they were imprisoned in their houses. Where previously they’d brought everyone working on the game together every two weeks or so to show their progress and hang out, now that wasn’t an option. As they were for many of us during the pandemic, games became an escape; as Simon sees it, Radlandia became a kind of collective fantasy for everyone working on it. “The team have been so positive throughout what has been the most traumatising thing of our generation,” he says. “I feel like OlliOlli World is their reaction to the world being very, very fucked up. They’ve created somewhere else that they’d all like to be. That’s how I look at the game. I mean, I’d rather be in there, it’s a happy place … I want people to miss their train stop because they got lost in a level, locked into that happy state of flow.” OlliOlli World is released for PlayStation 4 and 5, Xbox, Nintendo Switch and PC on 8 February.A phone call between Boris Johnson and Vladimir Putin that the prime minister was forced to cancel on Monday has been rescheduled for Wednesday, Johnson’s spokesman has said, after the Kremlin rejected a request to hold it on Tuesday. It is not clear if the initial rejection stemmed from genuine scheduling issues or if it was a calculated snub by Moscow to highlight Britain’s irrelevance, and Johnson’s weakness, but in any case it dealt a blow to Johnson’s efforts to present himself as an important diplomatic player in the Ukraine crisis. The Monday call was cancelled so Johnson could make a statement to MPs in parliament over Downing Street parties during lockdown. The prime minister flew to Kyiv on Tuesday offering the Ukraine government £88m to fight corruption, part of a British show of solidarity with the country in its threatened confrontation with Russia. Johnson will be hoping the brief visit takes attention away from his domestic political travails over sanctioning Downing Street parties during lockdown. The foreign secretary, Liz Truss, had been due to accompany Johnson to Ukraine, but was forced to cancel after she tested positive for Covid. Truss appeared unwell as she delivered a Commons statement promising Russian oligarchs would have nowhere to escape UK sanctions if they invaded Ukraine. Britain is seen as one of the staunchest supporters of Ukrainian sovereignty, providing military aid, and its stance has been compared favourably by some Ukrainian politicians with that of Germany, where a debate still rages about whether the government in Berlin can help militarily if at all. Since 2015, British armed forces have trained more than 22,000 Ukrainian troops to defend themselves, as well as providing soft loans for the country to strengthen its navy. The Ukrainian army is already training with new anti-tank missiles provided by the UK. Johnson is one of many European politicians pouring into Kyiv this week, including the Polish prime minister, Mateusz Morawiecki, the Dutch prime minister, Mark Rutte, and numerous foreign ministers. The £88m of new funding to combat corruption is taken from the UK’s good governance fund. The US Treasury is waging a relentless campaign of sanctions and forfeiture against Ukrainian oligarchs, including Igor Kolomoisky, who has been accused of embezzling state funds. The money is also intended to help Ukraine diversify away from its reliance on Russian gas, seen as one of the structural weaknesses in the geopolitical struggle with Moscow. Johnson will need to strike a delicate balance between highlighting the massing of Russian troops at the border and welcoming the continued diplomacy under way between the US and Russia. President Volodymr Zelenskiy has urged Europe not to be hysterical about the Russian threat fearing a sense of panic could drive the delicate Ukrainian economy into a tailspin. In advance of his visit, Johnson said: “It is the right of every Ukrainian to determine how they are governed. As a friend and a democratic partner, the UK will continue to uphold Ukraine’s sovereignty in the face of those who seek to destroy it. “We urge Russia to step back and engage in dialogue to find a diplomatic resolution and avoid further bloodshed.” The UK defence secretary, Ben Wallace, is in discussions with Nato about what further British military support can be offered to support the bloc’s eastern flank. He visited Hungary on Monday, one of the countries in the European Union closest to Putin. Its prime minister, Viktor Orbán, was due to meet the Russian president on Tuesday and Hungary has so far ruled out the deployment of more Nato troops inside its country and appeared lukewarm about imposing further sanctions on Russia. Johnson is due to meet Zelenskiy at the president’s official residence, the impressive neo-classical turquoise Mariinsky palace in Kyiv, overlooking the Dnipro River and next to Ukraine’s parliament. They are scheduled to have a joint press conference at 7pm local time (5pm GMT). The meeting takes place amid differences between the US and UK and Zelenskiy’s government over the nature of the Russian military threat. According to the latest Ukrainian estimates, the Kremlin has assembled 135,000 troops on the border, up 8-10,000 from last week. The Kremlin has said it will hold military exercises in Belarus, beginning 10 February, featuring tactical battalions and heavy weaponry within striking distance of Kyiv. The Biden administration has said it is “distinctly possible” a Russian invasion is imminent. Zelenskiy, however, has dismissed this scenario. He points out his country has been at war with Moscow since 2014, with low-intensity fighting taking place every day in the Donbas region between the Ukrainian army and Russian-backed separatists. Speaking on Friday, Zelenskiy said invasion panic was “unbalanced and unreasonable”. It had damaged the Ukrainian economy, with investor confidence and the national currency badly hit, he said. Referring to the UK’s withdrawal of diplomats from Kyiv, he told the Guardian: “The captains should not leave the ship. I don’t think we have a Titanic here.” Ukrainian officials agree that Putin can order an invasion at any time. But they see the Kremlin’s menacing troop build up as part of a long-scale destabilisation plan, which may yet see Moscow step back from the brink, only to escalate again in the autumn. The Ukrainian defence minister, Oleksii Reznikov, has welcomed Downing Street’s delivery of anti-tank weapons and a $1.7bn (£1.26bn) agreement with London to refit the Ukrainian navy. The weapons arrived in Kyiv last week by military transport. The shoulder-fired system, known as NLAW, has even become a popular meme. One Kyiv blogger, Alexs Joda, posted an image on Instagram of the weapon with the union flag, the Beatles and the words: “All you need is NLAW”. Others have thanked “the British people”. “We don’t care about the Downing Street parties. We care that our soldiers receive an effective weapon to confront Russia,” Oleksii Riabchyn, a former parliamentary deputy and adviser to Ukraine’s gas firm Naftogaz said. He added: “Boris Johnson is popular here. He’s trying to confront Putin. That’s what makes him a great leader. We need more weapons from him.” Other observers, however, said Johnson’s decision to visit Kyiv had little to do with defending democracy from Russian authoritarianism. Instead it was an attempt to escape the Sue Gray inquiry into lockdown socialising in Downing Street, the Met’s investigation and negative headlines at home. “I think the government is correct to support Ukraine,” said David Clark, who was a special adviser to the former Labour foreign secretary Robin Cook. “But I suspect a lot of the policy on this is about deflecting attention from Johnson’s own credibility issues at home rather than doing the right thing on European security.” Clark added: “Johnson has been unwilling to deal with the issues in the Russia report or with the Russian money that has gone into the Conservative party. The Kremlin’s influence operations in the UK are well documented, including the prime minister’s personal contacts.”Amnesty International has joined other leading human rights groups in stating that Israel’s “system of oppression and domination” over the Palestinians amounts to the international definition of apartheid. The report immediately prompted fury among Israeli politicians who called for it to be withdrawn. Among them was Israel’s foreign minister, Yair Lapid, who rejected the report as “divorced from reality”, saying: “Amnesty quotes lies spread by terrorist organisations.” Lapid also accused Amnesty of antisemitism. “I hate to use the argument that if Israel were not a Jewish state, nobody in Amnesty would dare argue against it, but in this case, there is no other possibility,” Lapid said. The report was welcomed, however, by the Palestinian Authority, which said it hoped it would open the way to prosecution of Israel at the international criminal court. “The state of Palestine welcomes the report by Amnesty International on Israel’s apartheid regime and racist policies and practices against the Palestinian people,” the authority’s foreign affairs ministry said. Amnesty called on “the USA, the European Union and its member states and the UK, but also those states that are in the process of strengthening their ties – such as some Arab and African states [to] recognise that Israel is committing the crime of apartheid and other international crimes”. It asked countries to “use all political and diplomatic tools to ensure Israeli authorities implement the recommendations outlined in this report and review any cooperation and activities with Israel to ensure that these do not contribute to maintaining the system of apartheid.”. The 278-page report compiled over a period of four years by the London-based rights group means that Amnesty has joined the ranks of Human Rights Watch and the Israeli rights group B’Tselem who have also accused Israel of apartheid in the last year. “Whether they live in Gaza, East Jerusalem and the rest of the West Bank, or Israel itself, Palestinians are treated as an inferior racial group and systematically deprived of their rights,” Amnesty’s secretary general, Agnès Callamard, said while introducing the report, as she rejected claims of antisemitism. “Israel’s cruel policies of segregation, dispossession and exclusion across all territories under its control clearly amount to apartheid.” While in the past much of the focus of claims of Israeli apartheid has focused on conditions in Palestinian areas seized by Israel during the six day war in 1967, including the West Bank where dual systems of rights and legal administrations exist for Palestinians and Jewish settlers, allegations of apartheid within Israel are more controversial. A year ago, B’Tselem drew criticism from Israeli politicians when it asserted that Israeli policies had been designed to enforce “Jewish supremacy from the Jordan River to the Mediterranean Sea”. The New York-based Human Rights Watch in April last year became the first significant international rights group to publicly level the allegation of apartheid, part of a growing international movement to redefine the Israeli-Palestinian conflict as a struggle for equal rights rather than a territorial dispute. Those efforts have gained strength in the decade since the peace process ground to a halt, as Israel has consolidated its control over the occupied territories and soured on the idea of a Palestinian state. Israel rejects any allegation of apartheid and insists that its own Arab citizens enjoy equal rights. Complicating the issue is the different experiences of Palestinians in the occupied territories compared with Palestinian citizens of Israel. While Palestinians who remained inside Israel lived under military rule until shortly before the 1967 war, those Palestinians now have citizenship, including the right to vote, but still face widespread discrimination in areas such as the job and housing markets. Palestinians in the West Bank live – despite a degree of political autonomy – under Israeli military rule, which includes exposure to the Israeli military justice system, while Jewish settlers on the West Bank are dealt with under Israeli civil law. For their part, those living in Hamas-ruled Gaza – from which Israel withdrew in 2005 while keeping tight control of land and the maritime border – also face a crippling Israeli and Egyptian blockade.The recent decision by Neil Young and Joni Mitchell to pull their music off Spotify amid a backlash over Joe Rogan’s podcast has put fans of the folk icons in an awkward position – and reminded us that music can find a home beyond the now ubiquitous Spotify playlist. Rogan, who has been accused of spreading Covid-19 misinformation through his wildly popular podcast, has since promised to “try harder”, while Spotify has said it will direct listeners toward facts about the pandemic. But for some, it might be too little too late, especially if other artists follow in the boycott. So for users wanting to join the musicians in protest and get their tunes elsewhere, here are some options. Other music streaming services At the risk of stating the obvious, Spotify isn’t the only place to stream. Apple Music, Amazon Music, YouTube Music, and Tidal all have hundreds of millions of titles. And Apple has already capitalized on the Spotify chaos by recently declaring itself the “home of Neil Young”. Export your playlists It takes some effort, but it’s possible to transfer your precious tunes from Spotify to other services. Through third-party tools like FreeYourMusic, Soundiiz, and SongShift, users can select which songs and playlists to transfer, and the software will do the rest. Many have success with the free versions of the software, but if you have an enviable library with thousands of songs, you may have to pay a premium. Look to the early 2000s Y2K mania is already in full force, and the technology of the aughts offers valuable alternatives to music streaming. And what better way to honor the early 2000s than dusting off that iPod Shuffle that your Gen Z cousin has been using as a hairclip? Pandora is another old favorite that can work its way back into the rotation, and you can get Neil and Joni’s music on it, too. Podcast alternatives For fans of podcasts, other options include apps like Apple Podcasts, Stitcher, Audible, RadioPublic, and TuneIn, which probably have most of your favorite programs. TuneIn even offers access to 100,000 radio stations for your listening pleasure. Last.fm – the music site with analytics If sharing Spotify Wrapped playlists and stats has become an end-of-year ritual, fear not. Last.fm is a music streaming site (and app) where at-home analysts can still get their fix. The service has charts galore – it creates stats based on users’ own listening each week and has a myriad of other charts that track what everyone is listening to around the world, every day. And if you’re in the mood to support lesser-known artists, you could turn to services such as Bandcamp and SoundCloud, which cater to independent musicians but also feature bigger names. Good old-fashioned alternatives Young people may prefer streaming over the radio, but with stations for nearly every genre and a professional DJ spinning, it could be high time to reconsider. You could even call into your local station and request your favorite Neil Young hits. Or you could celebrate the remarkable resurgence of vinyl, which set a modern-era sales record in December – and play Neil’s and Joni’s classic albums the way they were meant to be played.The Football Association and Professional Footballers’ Association have revealed the details of the landmark agreement reached on the inclusion of a comprehensive family leave policy, which covers maternity rights, improved illness and injury rights and changes to the termination period in standard contracts for Women’s Super League and Championship players. Under the new terms, a player taking maternity leave will be paid 100% of her weekly wage, as well as any other remuneration and benefits, for the first 14 weeks before dropping to the statutory rate. In addition, there is no qualifying period, whereas players previously had to be employed by a club for 26 weeks before being eligible for the statutory minimum. Players will also now receive their basic wage for the first 18 months following an injury, then half of their wage for the length of the injury thereafter, mirroring the injury rights of male players. The FA’s director of the women’s professional game, Kelly Simmons, said: “I am delighted that we have been able to put this agreement in place and it is another significant step forward for the women’s game. “Player welfare and wellbeing has always been our No 1 priority and this new policy ensures players are better supported, whether that’s going on maternity leave or as a result of a long-term injury.” The PFA cautioned there was still much to be done to achieve parity between male and female football players, despite the significant changes to contracts. The PFA’s director of women’s football, Marie-Christine Bouchier, said that the disparity between the rights of male and female players is emblematic of a wider disparity in conditions. Talks between the PFA and the FA are continuing and Bouchier said they are confident that another issue, which allows a player’s contract to expire before the club exercises its option to retain that player, leaving them in limbo “will be remedied imminently”. She also warned that the new contracts must be implemented wholesale and not staggered in, which would allow for a two-tier employment system to develop: “It is vital that the new changes are adopted by all, as opposed to being implemented on a piecemeal basis, as each player enters into a new contract.” The PFA’s chief executive, Maheta Molango, added that the organisation, which does not currently represent Women’s Championship players, has the objective of doing so but said: “We want to reach a position of professionalisation in the Women’s Championship,” and added: “Currently, there are complexities around how the FA classifies both the league and the participating clubs that needs to be addressed. “These issues impact the contractual rights, working conditions and protections of those playing in the Championship and these will form a significant part of the ongoing discussions with the FA.”A federal judge has rejected a plea deal that would have averted a hate crimes trial for two of three white men convicted of murdering Ahmaud Arbery, the 25-year-old Black man who was chased and fatally shot in a Georgia neighborhood while jogging two years ago. US district Judge Lisa Godbey Wood issued her decision on the proposed deal for Travis McMichael, 36, on Monday, after Arbery’s family reacted furiously to agreements reached with McMichael and his father, Greg McMichael. Though the decision concerned the younger McMichael, his father was offered the same deal. The proposed agreements concern a federal hate crimes trial due to start next month, and were filed late Sunday in US district court in southern Georgia. There was no mention of a deal with the McMichaels’ co-defendant, William “Roddie” Bryan. All three were sentenced to life in prison on 7 January after they were found guilty of murder following a trial last fall. The hate crime charges accuse the McMichaels and Bryan of violating Arbery’s civil rights in February 2020. The McMichaels armed themselves and pursued Arbery in one pickup truck while Bryan joined the chase in another and recorded video of Travis McMichael blasting Arbery with a shotgun. As part of the deal, Travis McMichael agreed to plead guilty, admitting for the first time he was motivated by race. The agreement would have allowed McMichael to spend 30 years in federal prison rather than state prison, where conditions are tougher. After rejecting the agreement, the judge gave Travis McMichael until Friday to decide whether to move ahead with a guilty plea. She acknowledged Greg McMichael had been offered the same deal and also gave him until Friday to decide. Arbery’s father, Marcus Arbery, told reporters he was “mad as hell”. “Ahmaud is a kid you cannot replace,” Arbery said. “He was killed racially and we want 100% justice, not no half-justice.” Arbery’s mother, Wanda Cooper-Jones, described the US justice department’s decision to propose the plea deal despite her objections as “disrespectful”. “I fought so hard to get these guys in the state prison,” she said at court on Monday. “I told them very, very adamantly that I wanted them to go to state prison and do their time ... Then I got up this morning [Monday] and found out they had accepted this ridiculous plea.” The family’s attorney, Lee Merritt, said: “This is an example of the Department of Justice literally snatching defeat from the jaws of victory … the family is throwing themselves at the mercy of the court, asking that they do what the DoJ has refused to do which is listen to the family and respect their wishes.” In their statement on Sunday, the Arbery family said: “This proposed plea deal is a huge accommodation to the men who hunted down and murdered Ahmaud Arbery. The family is devastated at the development, their wishes are being completely ignored and they do not consent to these accommodations.” In a statement emailed to the Guardian on Tuesday, the assistant attorney general Kristen Clarke said: “We respect the court’s decision to not accept the sentencing terms of the proposed plea and to continue the hearing until Friday. “The justice department takes seriously its obligation to confer with the Arbery family and their lawyers both pursuant to the Crime Victim Rights Act and out of respect for the victim. Before signing the proposed agreement reflecting the defendants’ confessions to federal hate crimes charges, the Civil Rights Division consulted with the victims’ attorneys. “The justice department entered the plea agreement only after the victims’ attorneys informed me that the family was not opposed to it.” A national outcry erupted when graphic video of the killing of Arbery leaked online two months after the murder. Georgia was one of just four states without a hate crimes law at the time. Legislators approved one but it came too late for state charges in Arbery’s killing. During the state trial in Glynn county superior court, the defense argued that the white men had authority to chase Arbery because they reasonably suspected he had been committing crimes in their neighborhood. The McMichaels and Bryan were found guilty of murder in November. Before sentencing, the judge, Timothy Walmsley, said: “Ahmaud Arbery was hunted down and shot, and he was killed because individuals here in the courtroom took the law into their own hands.” The three men were sentenced to life in prison. Walmsley ruled that Bryan can seek parole after 30 years but the McMichaels cannot. Joe Biden has called the murder “a devastating reminder of how far we have to go in the fight for racial justice in this country”. On Monday, Judge Wood continued preparations to summon the first 50 potential jurors to the courthouse on 7 February for questioning. The federal judge ordered that a jury pool be chosen from throughout the southern district of Georgia, which covers 43 counties, to improve odds of seating a fair and unbiased jury.Caroline Flack’s former fiance accused the GB News presenter Dan Wootton of being a murderer and a sex offender, a court has been told. A judge in Sheffield heard how Andrew Brady compared Wootton, now also a columnist for MailOnline, to the former Hollywood producer Harvey Weinstein in a series of messages sent over a period of more than two months. Brady said he had a “crusade” against Wootton and posted on social media: “I feel like getting rid of him once and for all today.” He said his intention was to end Wootton’s career, “deal with” him, and repeatedly said he wanted to see the presenter jailed. Brady, a former contestant on the Apprentice, was briefly engaged to Flack but the pair split up before the Love Island presenter’s suicide in 2020. Wootton had regularly written about Flack while working as a celebrity reporter at the Sun, and Brady had blamed the journalist for his ex-fiancee’s death. On Tuesday, Brady, 31, pleaded guilty to one count of harassment at Sheffield crown court in relation to the messages. He will be sentenced on Friday for the offence, which carries a maximum prison term of six months. He had originally pleaded not guilty to a more serious charge of putting Wootton in fear of violence. That case was set for a week-long trial before Christmas only for it to be abandoned on the first day due to legal issues prompted by Brady’s behaviour in court, which resulted in the former reality TV contestant spending Christmas in prison on remand. Prosecutor Laura Marshall told the court that Wootton had been consulted about Brady’s decision to plead guilty to a less serious charge of harassment, bringing the legal proceedings to an end. She said the GB News presenter “simply wants the course of conduct to end”. The court had previously heard that Brady’s online comments about Wootton began near the first anniversary of Flack’s death in 2021. It included threatening voice notes sent to Wootton, expressing a desire for “matters to be settled by violence”. The court also heard that Brady had also posted an explicit picture of himself and invited Wootton to engage in sexual activity. At a hearing last year, Brady’s lawyer said that his client’s defence against the charges would be based on “freedom of expression against a public figure who was very keen to put private matters in the public domain”, but the case will no longer go to trial. Judge Richardson told Brady: “I am pleased that this case has, at last, been resolved. You will be sentenced on Friday. As I have made clear already, the desire of everybody in this case, including myself, is for you to stop doing what you did. You must move on with your life, it is to be hoped, to sunnier uplands.”Tom Brady, the most successful quarterback in NFL history, has brought his brilliant career to an end after 22 seasons and seven Super Bowl victories. News of the 44-year-old’s apparent retirement had emerged over the weekend before he said he was still deciding his future. However, on Tuesday he confirmed his final game came when his Tampa Bay Buccaneers lost to the Los Angeles Rams in the playoffs last month. “I have always believed the sport of football is an ‘all-in’ proposition – if a 100% competitive commitment isn’t there, you won’t succeed, and success is what I love so much about our game,” Brady said in his statement on Instagram. “There is a physical, mental and emotional challenge EVERY single day that has allowed me to maximize my highest potential. And I have tried my very best these past 22 years. There are no shortcuts to success on the field or in life. “This is difficult for me to write, but here it goes: I am not going to make that competitive commitment anymore. I have loved my NFL career, and now it is time to focus my time and energy on other things that require my attention. I’ve done a lot of reflecting the past week and have asked myself difficult questions. And I am so proud of what we have achieved. My teammates, coaches, fellow competitors, and fans deserve 100% of me, but right now, it’s best I leave the field of play to the next generation of dedicated and committed athletes.” Brady’s ruthless commitment to winning was legendary and there were few, if any signs, his skills had dimmed at an age when most NFL players have long since retired. In his final season he was as consistent and as dominant as ever, leading the league in passing yards (5,316), touchdowns (43), completions (485) and attempts (719). His list of achievements is almost as long as his career. His seven Super Bowl wins – six with the New England Patriots and one with the Tampa Bay Buccaneers last season – are the most by any player in NFL history. He also holds the NFL record for career passing touchdowns (624) and passing yards (84,250). “My playing career has been such a thrilling ride, and far beyond my imagination, and full of ups and downs,” Brady said in Tuesday’s statement. “When you’re in it every day, you really don’t think about any kind of ending. As I sit here now, however, I think of all the great players and coaches I was privileged to play with and against – the competition was fierce and deep, JUST HOW WE LIKE IT. But the friendships and relationships are just as fierce and deep. I will remember and cherish these memories and re-visit them often. I feel like the luckiest person in the world.” Brady clashed with the NFL in 2015 after allegedly ordering the deflation of footballs during a playoff game against the Indianapolis Colts. The case went to court and Brady served a four-game suspension. However, Brady was a huge draw for the league and NFL commissioner Roger Goodell paid tribute to the quarterback on Tuesday. “Tom Brady will be remembered as one of the greatest to ever play in the NFL,” Goodell said. “An incredible competitor and leader, his stellar career is remarkable for its longevity but also for the sustained excellence he displayed year after year. “Tom made everyone around him better and always seemed to rise to the occasion in the biggest moments ... He inspired fans in New England, Tampa and around the world with one of the greatest careers in NFL history. It has been a privilege to watch him compete and have him in the NFL. We thank him for his many contributions to our game and wish Tom and his family all the best in the future.” Both of Brady’s teams paid tribute to the quarterback on Tuesday. “Words cannot describe the feelings I have for Tom Brady, nor adequately express the gratitude my family, the New England Patriots and our fans have for Tom for all he did during his career,” Patriots owner Robert Kraft said in a statement. “A generation of football fans have grown up knowing only an NFL in which Tom Brady dominated.” Tampa Bay head coach Bruce Arians said Brady had helped transform the Buccaneers. “Tom joined us as the greatest football player of all time, and he quickly showed everyone in our organization what that meant,” Arians said. “He set a standard and helped create a culture that took our team to the mountaintop. “It has been an honor to be his head coach for the past two seasons. I wish it didn’t have to end, but few players have the opportunity to leave the game on their own terms. Even fewer can do it while playing at an elite level. Tom is the exception. I have a deep appreciation and respect for what he has done for our franchise, and I wish him and his family nothing but the best in this next chapter of life after football.” Brady was famously undervalued coming out of college. 198 players – six of them quarterbacks – were selected in front of Brady in the 2000 NFL draft before the New England Patriots picked him. He started as New England’s fourth-string quarterback and slowly worked his way up to become Drew Bledsoe’s back-up. When Bledsoe was injured early in the 2001 season, Brady took over and never looked back: seven Super Bowl victories, three NFL MVPs, 15 Pro Bowls and a claim as one of American’s finest-ever athletes were to follow.How do you get health workers to do something as personally intimate and publicly important as getting vaccinated? The government’s response was, until this week, “get vaccinated or get out”. Those in the know have long disagreed with this. The British Medical Association is strongly in favour of vaccines and encourages all its members to get the jab – but it admits that “mandating Covid-19 vaccination raises a number of complicated ethical and practical issues”. The Royal College of Nursing strongly recommends that “all members are vaccinated as soon as they can be” – but is also clear that making the vaccine compulsory could undermine its uptake, and “significantly impact on the retention of staff”. Both the BMA and the RCN made their stances clear to the government as early as last September. But ministers did not listen. In December, the RCN once more expressed its concerns and called on the government to delay the vaccine mandate. The government ignored it again – until now, when, with a staffing disaster approaching, ministers have been forced to acknowledge the facts and back off from compulsory vaccination. Perhaps this U-turn is better late than never. But the danger is that in backtracking, the government has sent a message that vaccines aren’t as important as before (indeed ministers are already spinning the story to suggest that their screeching U-turn is actually due to the lowered severity of Omicron). This could undermine uptake in a different way – making people who may have been planning to have the vaccine believe it is no longer necessary to do so. So let us be absolutely clear: the issue is not that vaccine mandates are no longer needed. They were never a good idea to begin with. If the government is to move forward without damaging vaccine uptake, it needs to acknowledge this mistake. The first step is to recognise, as the BMA and RCN have done, that the issue is not about whether NHS staff should be vaccinated. Of course they should – we are still in the middle of a serious pandemic. The issue is how to best maximise uptake of the vaccine. And all evidence points towards the fact that vaccine mandates have mixed effects, which ultimately increase people’s resistance to vaccines. Most people who are unvaccinated are not anti-vaxxers (those who are against vaccines on principle) and are not even vaccine hesitant (those who have genuine doubts and questions about the vaccine). They are vaccine indifferent. They simply haven’t got round to it. For them, little things will make a difference (which is why there is a correlation between vaccine uptake and how far you are from a vaccination centre), as will big things. If you give them a strong reason – like mandation – to get a jab, they will. That is why, when various forms of mandation are introduced you will see an initial surge of people queueing up outside the vaccination centres, as in France. But it is a very different story for those who do have questions and doubts – especially doubts about whether vaccines are being done to them rather than for them. In this case, compulsion runs the danger of confirming their doubts and therefore increases their resistance. If they can escape compulsion (say, by leaving a job), they will. Even if they can’t and they concede in the present, you are only storing up trouble for the future; people will always look for other ways to express their defiance, and may become even more negative about further vaccinations. To put it slightly differently, the issue here is one of trust. When people have doubts, do they listen to those rolling out the vaccines or those opposing the vaccines? If you use compulsion (and also if you berate unvaccinated people as fools and as selfish), you damage trust and drive people who are vaccine hesitant into the arms of the anti-vaxxers who tell them “you see, they are not interested in you, they simply want to control you”. That is why groups with lower vaccination take-up are those which have an already troubled history of trust with authorities – people who are deprived or unemployed, and, in particular groups such as Black Caribbean people, about two-thirds of whom have not yet received three jabs. It is hardly coincidental that a 2020 parliamentary report showed that a similar percentage of Black British people “do not believe that their health is equally protected by the NHS compared to white people”. The best way to increase vaccination rates among these groups is to focus on rebuilding trust. That is why the World Health Organization stressed at the start of the vaccine rollout in January 2021 that “community engagement should be at the centre of all Covid-19 vaccine introduction activities”. That involves working in and through communities. It means starting from a position of respect: acknowledging that people have genuine and serious questions about the vaccine that need answering. It means listening to people, understanding their concerns, answering them and also not hiding any problems. The case for vaccination is strong enough without pretending vaccines are perfect, and overstating the case will only undermine trust as problems emerge. This is painstaking work. It is not glamorous and nor is it an instant fix. But, as scientists argued early on, “participatory community engagement is cost-effective, increases uptake of vaccines, and substantially reduces healthcare resources needed to achieve high vaccination coverage”. Some of the best examples of this come from healthcare settings involving local initiatives with the support of local mosques and predominantly Black churches to reach ethnic minority healthcare workers. There is a more general message in all this. When people don’t listen to you, the answer is not to shout louder and wave a stick. It isn’t to use compulsion. The answer is to listen more, and to respect your audience. That is the way to improve vaccination rates in the NHS. That is also the way to rebuild the trust of the public more generally. Respect the people! Now there’s an idea for this government to mull over. Stephen Reicher is a member of the Sage subcommittee advising on behavioural science. He is a professor of psychology at the University of St Andrews, a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh and an authority on crowd psychologyHello, my name is Arwa Mahdawi and I would like to cancel myself, please. I have a book to sell, you see, and it would seem that the easiest way to drum up a lot of free publicity these days is to declare yourself the latest victim of cancel culture. Suddenly everyone is inviting you on the telly to wax on about how you’ve been cruelly silenced by the woke mob. “Nobody can say anything any more!” the usual pundits lament in their 972nd piece on whether cancel culture has gone too far. “Free speech is dead! It’s just like Nineteen Eighty-Four!” I don’t know if Big Brother is going to let me share this, but I have something terribly shocking to tell you about cancel culture. Here we go: you should definitely be worried, but it’s not the woke mob you need to be worried about. A depressing amount of energy is being expended on arguing whether calling someone out for using language a lot of people perceive as bigoted is “cancel culture”. But, while endless arguments rage about the intolerant left, free speech is under a terrifying assault from the right. Want to know what real cancel culture looks like? Well, just sit back and look at the unprecedented surge of book banning efforts happening across the United States. Last year, for example, a county prosecutor’s office considered charging library employees in a conservative Wyoming city for stocking books about sex education and containing LGBTQ themes. Around the same time, Moms for Liberty, a rightwing advocacy group, tried to get a number of books banned from Tennessee schools because they contained content that disturbed them. They deemed a book about Galileo to be “anti-church”, and were outraged that a book about Martin Luther King contained “photographs of political violence”. More recently, a school board in Tennessee banned Maus, Art Spiegelman’s Pulitzer prize-winning graphic novel about the Holocaust, from its classrooms. Their reasoning? It contained eight swear words and a picture of a naked cartoon mouse. Yep, you read that right. What upset these people most about a book detailing how Jewish people were gassed to death in concentration camps by Nazis were some curse words. Let’s be clear: there is nothing particularly novel about uptight school boards in conservative areas getting worked up over material they deem offensive. However, what is happening in the US at the moment is a lot scarier than a few over-involved parents clutching their pearls over naked mice. As the American Library Association noted last year, there has been a “dramatic uptick in book challenges and outright removal of books from libraries.” The free-speech organisation, PEN America, has voiced similar concerns. “It’s a pretty startling phenomenon here in the United States to see book bans back in style, to see efforts to press criminal charges against school librarians,” the organisation’s chief executive recently told the New York Times. It’s not just school boards trying to police what kids can read about: it’s politicians, too. Last year, Ron DeSantis, the governor of Florida, introduced proposed legislation that would let parents sue schools for teaching critical race theory to kids. To be cute, he called this the Stop the Wrongs to Our Kids and Employees (W.O.K.E) Act. Now, Florida is trying to pass a bill that critics have nicknamed the “Don’t Say Gay” bill, which would let parents sue schools or teachers who bring up topics related to sexual orientation and gender identity. (Just a little reminder to everyone that DeSantis loves describing Florida as a beacon of freedom, in what he deems to be an increasingly authoritarian America.) In an interview with the Washington Post last week, Spiegelman warned that what is happening now should be seen as a “red alert”. Maus being banned was no anomaly, but “part of a continuum, and just a harbinger of things to come”. What can I say? If it’s the “woke mob” that scares you after all this, then you must be fast asleep. Arwa Mahdawi is a Guardian columnistOne of the star attractions in the collection of the Courtauld Gallery in London is Vincent van Gogh’s Self-Portrait with Bandaged Ear, which was painted in January 1889. The artist had mutilated his left ear two days before Christmas, following a quarrel with Paul Gauguin, with whom he had been sharing a house in Arles. Van Gogh looks pale and introspective, clean-shaven, dressed for the winter chill in his yellow room, an easel behind him and a Japanese print on the wall (the Courtauld owns this print, too, but it was stolen in the 1980s and never recovered). The Dutch artist has the hunted look of a man not yet ready to re-enter the world, except through his painting. The open blue door on the right is the same blue door that appears in the picture of his straw-bottomed yellow chair, which now hangs in the same room at the Courtauld. You can take the chair as a kind of self-portrait, too. It is as if he has stepped out for a second, leaving his pipe and tobacco pouch on the seat. Van Gogh: Self-Portraits, the new exhibition at the recently reopened Courtauld gallery in London, is filled with presences, absences, substitutions, and echoes of different kinds. It is a magical and at times mysterious show. An exhibition of electrifying intimacy, it shows the artist at his most self-aware and at his most vulnerable. Every painting is both a kind of analysis and a rescue attempt. During the three and a half years before his death in 1890, Van Gogh painted around 35 self-portraits: some may have disappeared or been painted over. Fifteen are here (not counting that chair), as well as a sheet of three graphite, pen and ink drawings. Some are too fragile to travel, others from private collections could not be borrowed. The curators also wished to avoid unnecessary repetition. Some others were considered too clunky or otherwise unsuccessful. As it is, all the above are illustrated in the catalogue. Van Gogh was described variously by people who knew him as “well built” and “a rather weedy little man, with pinched features”. His appearance in these portraits – bearded or not, hair clipped short, shaved, unkempt, ill, better fed, on the mend, confident, nervous, withdrawn, sunken-cheeked (he had 10 teeth removed in Antwerp, making him look older than a man in his 30s) or wearing his vulcanised rubber dentures – provides an index of his physical well-being, self-image and psychological state. The multiple ways he paints himself are also complicated by his artistic intentions and development, not to mention his material circumstances. The paints and canvases he could afford, as well as his diet, whether he was on or off the drink, his thoughts about colour and touch, the ways he wanted to present himself to others and the state of his mind, all leave their trace. Most works were completed in a single session. He’d paint then move on. Head turned a little to the left, turned slightly to the right, then full frontal – many of his self-portraits, especially the 22 he completed in Paris, might be seen as studies, experiments in artistic and personal style, all played out on a small scale, all derived from looking at his reflection in a small mirror. No chance to step back for a bigger view, or to see himself in profile, which would have needed a second mirror. The earliest here, painted in the winter of 1886-87, has him done up in a heavy coat and dark felt hat: red beard, blue and white cravat, looming out of the gloom, one side of his face in shadow. A couple of months later and he’s already turned up the colour, loosened up the brushwork and let the white of the canvas show through. Then the brushwork gets more rhythmic and he’s playing with the patterning and contours of his jacket, the interplay between drawing with the brush and tonal modelling. In one, his head is surrounded by a swarm of little blue flecks and dabs. He used these notes of colour to affect a transition between the shorthand modelling of his jacket and the dark purplish background, which has since entirely disappeared – the cheap crimson pigment he used contained cochineal, and has faded to nothing. Colour and tonality have gone out of whack in other works too, over time. His beard is well-trimmed and then it isn’t. His eyes go in and out of alignment and he paints himself head-on in a wonky grey felt hat (a bit more sporty and louche than the black number he had on in winter). He’s both serious and natty, but something has gone seriously awry with one side of his face in this one: an eye and a cheekbone warp out at you in a disconcerting way. Once you see it, you can’t stop staring. He must have had to keep turning his head in the mirror to see himself and lost track of the relationship between self and canvas. Next he’s in a painter’s blouse and looking at us over his shoulder. Then he’s in a peasant’s straw hat. The brushwork is speeding up and then hits a gallop, pitter-pattering all over the place. By September, he seems to have reined it in, before beginning to cover everything – jacket, face, hat, background – with bristling arrays of parallel marks, a sort of rhythmic painted tattoo. He looks as prickly as a hedgehog or a werewolf. The painting ran away with him, as if it were mapping unseen energies flowing through everything, and he is trying to weave a self-portrait out of it all. All the while, Van Gogh is trying to do something other than capture brute likeness or appearance, something more like vivid living presence. “I would like to do portraits which would look like apparitions to people a century later,” he wrote. He first turned to portraiture as a possible means of earning a living, and to counter the boom in portrait photography, which he saw as mechanical. But these paintings weren’t made with any eye for the market. Painting himself gave Van Gogh much more trouble than portraits of other people. He’s checking in on himself, in more ways than one. At the beginning of 1888, Van Gogh completed a larger painting in which we see the artist before his canvas, holding his palette and a fistful of brushes. The lumps of pigment on the palette feed into the cross-hatchings he uses to describe the weave of his jacket, the wooden support of the canvas in front of him, his head and his hair. They even fill the background, though the colour is almost flat. Light catches on the textured vertical and horizontal strokes. He may only be pushing the paint about, but this is very beautiful. By the time he leaves for the south, Van Gogh has assimilated all the experimentation of the previous year and this painting has a peculiar dignity and sense of solitary concentration, almost a kind of monumentality. He isn’t looking at us. He isn’t discernibly looking at anything. Next we leap a year to the artist with his mutilated ear and then two final portraits, which have not hung together since he painted them in the asylum in Saint-Rémy-de-Provence. The first is overworked, the impasto strokes delineating his face scraped down and giving his appearance a haggard, ruined look. The shadows are muddy and flat. The doctors had only reluctantly let him paint at this time, fearing he’d eat the paint and try to poison himself. He’d done this before. The second self-portrait, painted a week or so later, sees him holding his palette, his beard and hair trimmed, his expression alert, the brushwork lively, confident and assured, the colour singing and luminous. It might almost be a different man. Van Gogh: Self Portraits is at The Courtauld, London, 3 February until 8 May.The captain of Raith Rovers women’s team has resigned and the club’s shirt sponsor has withdrawn her support in protest at the signing of David Goodwillie, who was found to have raped a woman by a civil court in 2017. Fans and employees of Raith Rovers and sexual violence campaigners have reacted angrily after the Fife club confirmed on Monday night it was signing the striker from Clyde following weeks of speculation and growing concern from supporters. The women’s captain, Tyler Rattray, announced on Tuesday: “After 10 long years playing for Raith, it’s gutting I have given up now because they have signed someone like this and I want nothing to do with it!” Val McDermid, the best-selling crime author, who is a devoted fan of the club and their shirt sponsor, denounced the signing as “disgusting and despicable”. The Raith Rovers manager, John McGlynn, said Goodwillie had “a proven track record as a goalscorer” and that signing him was “crucial to the club’s promotion push in our quest to reach the SPFL Premiership – it is a great signing for Raith Rovers as a club, as David is the top goalscorer in Scotland”. Goodwillie, along with another footballer David Robertson, was sued for damages for rape by Denise Clair, who waived her right to anonymity, in a landmark case in 2017. The pair had not been prosecuted, but the civil court ruled they had raped Clair after meeting her on a night out in West Lothian in 2011, and she was awarded £100,000 in damages. They denied the allegation and appealed against the judgment but lost. McDermid, a prominent feminist who grew up supporting the club, added that the thought of Goodwillie wearing a Raith Rovers shirt made her feel “physically sick”. “I have this morning ended my lifelong support of Raith Rovers over their signing of the rapist David Goodwillie. I have cancelled next season’s shirt sponsorship over this disgusting and despicable move. This shatters any claim to be a community or family club. Goodwillie has never expressed a shred of remorse for the rape he committed. His presence at Starks Park is a stain on the club. I’ll be tearing up my season ticket too. This is a heartbreaker for me and many other fans, I know.” Marie Penman told the Guardian that she has handed in her resignation from her “dream job” as employability officer for the club’s community foundation after learning of Goodwillie’s signing. “I’ve supported Raith Rovers since I was a teenager, and followed them all over Scotland, but I’m disappointed and dismayed, especially with so much prominence given to violence against women right now. What message is this sending to the hundreds of girls who come through the doors of the community club? They will never get that support back.” Other supporters expressed similar sentiments, with a number raising concerns about the message the decision sends to the women’s team – the oldest affiliated women’s team in Scotland – which also runs teams for under-16s and girls. Sandy Brindley, the chief executive of Rape Crisis Scotland, called on the club to change its mind. “We are surprised and deeply disappointed that Raith Rovers FC are happy to send such a clear message of disregard to survivors of rape and sexual violence in signing David Goodwillie. “Fundamentally – though it seems Raith FC do not agree – women’s lives are more important than men’s talent or careers. Footballers are role models – particularly for young people – and it’s not OK to have someone in this position who has been found by a senior judge to be a rapist. We wonder whether those who took this decision thought for a second about how it may look or feel to survivors to have to watch someone judged to have committed rape be celebrated and applauded.” Goodwillie, now 32, was fined £250 for punching a man in a Stirling nightclub in 2008, and four years later pleaded guilty to assaulting a man in Glasgow city centre. In a statement on Tuesday evening, the club said: “As David has previously played for Raith Rovers earlier in his career, we consider him to be part of Raith Rovers football club.” It said it “completely respects” differing views on the signing and would “continue to engage” with fans and stakeholders. “While acknowledging the gravity of what happened 10 years ago, as a club we fully support and encourage rehabilitation, and many factors influenced our signing. But first and foremost, this was a football related decision.”When hundreds of thousands of workers across the country walked out of their jobs in protest at the military’s seizure of power in Myanmar on 1 February 2021, Grace* was among the first to join. Although she was seven months pregnant, the middle-school teacher from Chin state was determined to resist the military by refusing to work under its administration. Joining her was her husband, also a government employee. What they didn’t then know was that nearly a year later, their hands, once accustomed to holding chalk and pens, would instead be holding hoes and shovels, calloused and blistered from farming under the scorching sun. Nor did they ever imagine that they would be living in hiding, on the run from soldiers and police. “My husband and I decided to strike soon after the coup was staged. For fear of being arrested by the police, we haven’t been able to return home for nine months,” says Grace, talking to the Guardian from an undisclosed location. “Two of my family members were arrested because of me. Our houses were raided. We have no regular source of income and have to struggle every day to make a living. But never have I ever regretted joining the civil disobedience movement, not even once. We are part of the revolution against the military dictatorship.” *** In the year since the coup, Myanmar has been plunged into chaos and a spiralling economic crisis as the military responds to the widespread civilian defiance to its rule with deadly violence and mass arrests. Some of its main targets are the hundreds of thousands of public sector workers, including teachers, nurses and doctors participating in a campaign of civil disobedience and refusing the serve the regime. Public hospitals are barely functioning, and when state schools opened in June, more than half the teachers were absent. Private and public bank workers have also been striking en masse, and even withdrawing cash is now near-impossible. In an effort to crush the movement and make people return to their jobs, military forces have started hunting down striking public sector workers across the country and raiding their homes. Since the strikes began in February, at least 140 people have been arrested for their participation, of whom 107 remain in detention, the Guardian was told by the Assistance Association for Political Prisoners (AAPP), a Myanmar-focused rights monitoring group. The AAPP says at least eight of those taking part in the civil disobedience movement have died in military interrogation centres, and seven of the bodies showed signs of torture. Families have also been targeted. Since the coup, 46 people have been taken as hostages in an attempt to force their family members participating in civil disobedience to turn themselves in; 39 of these hostages are still in custody, according to the AAPP. *** Grace went into labour shortly after she left her home. With family members being targeted by police raids, she was so scared of being arrested she registered at the hospital under a fake name. Her husband did not dare accompany her. The military has also attempted to force those who are taking part in the strikes to return to work by making it harder for them to survive. It has evicted thousands from worker housing, and stopped paying salaries. Last May, more than 125,000 striking teachers had their contracts suspended in an attempt to try and force them back into the classroom. The Guardian spoke with seven teachers in Chin state who are still on strike. They all said their only financial support was community donations, which were irregular and amounted to less than half of their former income. For Grace and her family this is not enough to survive. In June, the couple began farming corn. On weekends, they sell fried snacks to make ends meet. They still face the constant risk of arrest. *** As violence and military attacks escalate across the country, many teachers and other public sector workers who have gone on strike are now also living under the shadow of war. Since May, fighting has dramatically increased. The military has sought to quell armed resistance by attacking entire civilian populations, and the UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs estimates that more than 400,000 people have been displaced from their homes. Intensifying military attacks caused Ling Kee*, a high school headteacher who joined the civil disobedience movement and went on strike last year, to leave the town of Thantlang in August with his three adult daughters, also strikers, and his wife. They took shelter with relatives in Hakha township, but a month later had to flee again upon hearing that soldiers were going door to door hunting down strikers. With nothing but the nightclothes they were wearing, they drove motorbikes through the night along mountain roads until they crossed the border into India. . Unable to work there, they are relying on their savings to survive. *** Students have also joined taken action against military-run services. After weeks of protests over a military “slave education system” in May, only 10% of the country’s nearly 10 million people of school age registered this year, according to the Myanmar Teachers’ Federation. When state schools opened across the country in June, many of them guarded by armed soldiers, classrooms were empty. To ensure that youth do not miss out on their education, churches, civil society organisations and striking teachers have established multiple grassroots education channels, supported by community donations. But funds are limited, and teachers also worry that their classes could get caught in the crossfire of the ongoing fighting, a teacher from Kanpetlet township told the Guardian. Biak* had just one year of high school left when the coup happened. Now living in a refugee camp in Mizoram, India, after her home was destroyed in a military attack, she is unable to study because there are no education facilities. “Currently, my family doesn’t have a house to live in, and I have no chance to study. All of my dreams were reduced to ashes, just like the homes in Thantlang, including mine,” she says. * Pseudonyms have been used for security reasons Flora Lian is an independent researcher from Chin State, Myanmar and writes about current issues in Chin State. She holds a master’s degree from Chiang Mai University. She is writing under a pseudonym for security reasons. Additional editing by Emily FishbeinThe governor of Florida, Ron DeSantis, has pushed back against calls to condemn a series of neo-Nazi protests that took place over the weekend, saying people are attempting to “smear” him. On Saturday and Sunday, a group of 15 to 20 protesters donned Nazi symbols and chanted antisemitic slurs along the North Alafaya Trail in Orlando. According to videos that quickly circulated across social media, the protesters gave Nazi salutes, yelled “White power!”, waved an anti-Biden banner and at one point got into a brawl with a driver. The protests have been met with disgust from Democrats and Republicans alike. However, DeSantis did not publicly condemn the marchers until Monday during a press conference, and then largely to deflect blame on to his political opponents. “So what I’m going to say is these people, these Democrats who are trying to use this as some type of political issue to try to smear me as if I had something to do with that, we’re not playing their game,” he said. DeSantis also accused the Democrats of fostering antisemitism on Capitol Hill: “I’m not going to have people try to smear me that belong to a party that elevated antisemites to the halls of Congress.” He called the protesters “some jackasses doing this on the street” and suggested the matter was a police issue. “First of all, state law enforcement is going to hold them accountable because they were doing stuff on the overpass, so they are absolutely going to be doing that and they should do that.” DeSantis’s comments came a day after his press secretary, Christina Pushaw, drew widespread criticism over a tweet that she posted, then deleted, on Sunday. She wrote: “Do we even know they’re Nazis? Or is this a stunt like the ‘white nationalists’ who crashed the Youngkin rally in Charlottesville and turned out to be Dem staffers? I trust Florida law enforcement to investigate and am awaiting their conclusions.” The “stunt” Pushaw referred to was an incident last October in which the Lincoln Project, an anti-Trump Republican political action committee, sent a group of people pretending to be white supremacists to an event for the Republican gubernatorial candidate Glenn Youngkin in Charlottesville, Virginia. In response to Pushaw’s comments, the Anti Defamation League wrote that it was “alarmed that @ChristinaPushaw would first give cover to antisemites rather than immediately and forcefully condemning their revolting, hate-filled rally and assault”. The Orange county sheriff, John Mina, announced that his office is launching an investigation into the protests, saying: “This hatred has no place in our society. Any reports of criminal activities will be thoroughly investigated.”The family behind Blackwell’s, the UK’s largest independent bookseller, has put the business up for sale after ditching a plan to hand it to employees. A deal would take Blackwell’s, which operates 18 shops and a website, out of family control for the first time in its 143-year history. The retailer said it was looking for an external investor after a plan to put the business into employee ownership fell through. It said that goal “ultimately proved to be difficult, due in large part to the ongoing uncertainty on the high street caused by Covid-19”. Blackwell’s, which was founded in Oxford and operates Heffers in Cambridge as well as flagship stores in London and Edinburgh, said underlying sales for the year to December 2021 rose 1.9%, a figure that suggests falling store sales and rising online trade. Julian Blackwell, the group’s owner and president, said: “I would have loved to have handed over the company to its staff, but I also accept that in order to grow and remain competitive in the future, it is time for new ownership, ideas and investment. “I have always stood for innovation and transformation in the constantly changing world of bookselling. I am delighted to have supported, and now see, Blackwell’s become a significant player in online bookselling.” Potential buyers are likely to include Waterstones, which is owned by the aggressive New York hedge fund Elliott Advisors. It snapped up rival independent Foyles in 2018 and previously took over smaller booksellers Dillons, Hatchards and Ottakar’s. While such a deal might attract attention from the competition watchdog, the scale of competition from Amazon and WH Smith means it could gain approval. David Prescott, the chief executive of Blackwell’s, said: “The sale of Blackwell’s represents a genuinely unique and exciting opportunity for any potential buyer to own a much loved and trusted bookselling brand. The business has been quietly and successfully transitioning itself in recent years to establish a substantial global online presence alongside a core portfolio of iconic shops. We hope that a new owner and investment will help us to secure a long-term future for Blackwell’s and its booksellers for many years to come.” The potential sale was first reported by Sky News.Nicola Sturgeon has called on the prime minister to tackle the corrupting influence of Russian oligarchs in London’s financial industry and the Conservative party, suggesting that his inaction has directly contributed to Vladimir Putin’s sense of impunity over Ukraine. As Boris Johnson flew to Kyiv on Tuesday – in a show of solidarity and with hopes of distracting from the continuing domestic crisis around Downing Street’s lockdown parties – Sturgeon urged him to “rebuild his government’s tattered reputation” by taking overdue action on Russian funding in the Conservative party and “Londongrad”-style influence operations in the UK. Writing for the Guardian, Scotland’s first minister said: “We cannot be blind to the circumstances which have led to the current crisis, and that includes the situation where wealth with direct links to the Putin regime has been allowed to proliferate here in the UK with often the scantest of regard paid to its provenance or to the influence it seeks to bring to bear on our society. “[Johnson] must recognise that both his government and his party have enabled this situation, and he must acknowledge that the most resolute action he can take is at home, to rebuild his government’s tattered reputation.” Describing the current political and military threat to Ukraine as “unspeakable”, Sturgeon said: “Like any European country, Ukraine must be free to organise its governance and security alliances as it sees fit.” She added: “As someone who has spent my life campaigning for the sovereign right of the people of Scotland to determine our own futures, this is a principle fundamental to my own worldview. To see such pressures being exerted on a state which has resolutely set itself on a path to integration with the liberal democratic order is unspeakable.” Sturgeon went on to repeat her call for Westminster to legislate on the improper use of Scottish limited partnerships, a type of investment fund heavily criticised for facilitating the laundering of international criminal proceeds. “Corruption and lack of transparency is a drag on liberal democracy, and authoritarians have become adept at using these scandals as a way of saying to people ground down by them that somehow all forms of government are the same, and all politicians are as bad as each other.” On Monday, the foreign secretary, Liz Truss, unveiled legislation to allow Britain to hit banks, energy companies and “oligarchs close to the Kremlin” with economic sanctions in the event of Russian invasion of Ukraine, but anti-corruption campaigners urged the UK government to act now.Towards the end of her life, Christian broadcaster and recording star Tammy Faye Bakker, wife of disgraced televangelist and fraudster Jim Bakker, achieved a kind of camp redemption in an archly celebratory documentary released in 2000 called The Eyes of Tammy Faye, narrated by RuPaul. She was praised for her courage in supporting the LGBT community and people with Aids in the 80s, defying the homophobia of the Christian right in Ronald Reagan’s America. The film suggested a kind of martyrdom for Tammy Faye, drawn into her husband’s mess. The title was about her permanent eyeliner and liquid mascara but with a cheeky hint that like Laura Mars in the famous horror movie, she saw things that involved her – sure – but for which she couldn’t be held responsible. The documentary has now been turned into a feature film starring Jessica Chastain who gives a hilarious turn as Tammy Faye: like Tammy Wynette with a bit of Nancy Reagan and Eva Perón. She is a devoutly Christian young woman who falls in love at bible college with the charming but slippery Jim, excellently played by Andrew Garfield. Creepy Jimmy has a free-and-easy way with other believers’ money and he ruthlessly gouges his TV flock for donations with which he builds up a Christian entertainment empire and lavish personal lifestyle. He fathers two children with Tammy Faye, but is reluctant to “snuggle” with her, preferring to blow off steam by rough-housing with his male assistant. The film also persuasively suggests that the famous TV preacher Rev Jerry Falwell (Vincent D’Onofrio) deliberately fanned the flames of the media scandal which brought the Bakkers down, so that he could step in and take over their media empire. This very enjoyable biopic skates over the matter of Jim’s #MeToo scandal: he was accused of rape by a female assistant and church money was used in an attempt to buy her off. Jim denied the allegation; the film doesn’t use the R-word and implies that it was just a matter of infidelity, perhaps to prevent Tammy Faye’s LGBT-ally status from being contaminated. Despite this issue, Chastain’s performance remains outrageously entertaining. • The Eyes of Tammy Faye is released on 4 February in cinemas.The prospect of war in our continent is more than enough to avert our gaze from the latest Whitehall troubles. However, a prime minister who has found it so hard to speak the truth throughout his career surprised us all with a hard dose of it when he stood before parliament last week to address the situation in Ukraine, saying: “Ukraine asks for nothing except to be allowed to live in peace and to seek her own alliances, as every sovereign country has a right to do.” It was a sentiment echoed by the leader of the opposition, by my own party’s Westminster group leader, Ian Blackford MP, and by every other SNP MP who responded to the statement. As someone who has spent my life campaigning for the sovereign right of the people of Scotland to determine our own futures, sovereignty is a principle fundamental to my own worldview. To see such pressures being exerted on a state that has resolutely set itself on a path to integration with the liberal democratic order is unspeakable. Like any European country, Ukraine must be free to organise its governance and security alliances as it sees fit. A Europe split into 19th-century “spheres of influence” is not one in which small independent countries would prosper. The wealthier and more equal the nations of Europe become, the more equitable the relations between them should be. Indeed, the great steps that the likes of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania have taken in the past 30 years are testament to the invigorating effects of independence in Europe. However, my agreement with the prime minister on these principles did not last long: question after question from the floor of the House of Commons brought him back to the issue of Russian funding in the Conservative party, and the continuing existence of “Londongrad”-style influence operations in the UK. Meanwhile, as long as the fortunes of Russia’s elites are based abroad, threats of economic sanctions are limp and ineffective. It has been two and a half years since the publication of parliament’s “Russia report”, which laid bare the extent of links between the Kremlin and Russian-backed financial interests – and the resulting endless flows of illicit cash through the City of London. The UK’s allies are beginning to take note of the intractability of the problem. A report from the Center for American Progress – a thinktank close to the Biden administration – stated last week that “uprooting Kremlin-linked oligarchs will be a challenge given the close ties between Russian money and the United Kingdom’s ruling Conservative party, the press, and its real estate and financial industry”. After all, clear mechanisms to crack down on these practices exist. My government has long called for Westminster to legislate on the improper use of Scottish limited partnerships – just one favourite instrument of financial exploitation – to ensure that they are no longer used to facilitate the sort of financial corruption that has benefited authoritarians and their wealthy cronies for far too long. Corruption and lack of transparency are a drag on liberal democracy, and authoritarians have become adept at using these scandals as a way of saying to people ground down by them that all forms of government are the same, and all politicians are as bad as each other. And so I can only call on the prime minister to finally take action. He must recognise that his government and his party have enabled this situation, and he must acknowledge that the most resolute action he can take is at home, to rebuild his government’s tattered reputation. To quote the author and journalist Oliver Bullough from his book, Moneyland, which documented so much about the London “laundromat”: “Without trust, liberal democracy cannot function.” And as Bullough wrote more recently about the situation in Ukraine: “No one is more to blame than us for the fact that Russia’s richest can treat war like a spectator sport.” And while during such periods the temptation is to focus on individuals in power, this can lead us to forget the role of the competing factions within the Russian security state and the pressures they are exerting on the situation, and it may lead some to forget the pressure this is putting on 40 million Ukrainians – our fellow European citizens – as they go about their daily lives. In some ways, this is a reality many have been dealing with since 2014, especially those in Russian-occupied eastern Ukraine. As we deal with the effects of our own cost of living crisis, with a spike in food and energy prices, it is worth remembering that Ukrainians have been facing this for some time, and as a direct consequence of the Russian government’s actions. So while Ukrainians must and will defend themselves from aggression if attempts at diplomacy fail, we cannot be blind to the circumstances that have led to the current crisis, and that includes the situation where wealth with direct links to the Putin regime has been allowed to proliferate here in the UK with often the scantest regard paid to its provenance or to the influence it seeks to exert on our democracy. Nicola Sturgeon is first minister of Scotland and leader of the Scottish National partyANOTHER DEADLINE DAY IN THE CAN Jim White’s yellow tie was nowhere to be seen. WhatsApp long ago killed the artifice of having two mobile phones on the desk. Fans hanging around a training ground to cheer a new signing in bovine fashion is just another casualty of Covid-19. Things ain’t what they used to be. But, as it SLAMMED SHUT, The Fiver had to admit that January 2022’s transfer window had actually been almost interesting. Of the big boys, Manchester City signed the new Sergio Agüero/Vicente Matías Vuoso in Julián Álvarez. Liverpool landed Luis Díaz and will probably go back in this summer for Fulham’s Fabio Carvalho, despite paperwork not being complete in time. Chelsea signed nobody. Manchester United shed Anthony Martial but Jesse Lingard was kept on. The battle at the bottom rests on whether Newcastle got their pants pulled down in spending £85m of Saudi loot on Kieran Tripper, Chris Wood, Bruno Guimarães and Dan Burn, with Matt Targett loaned in from Villa. At Watford, Mr Roy must make do with the regen talents the Pozzo family expected Claudio Ranieri to do better with. Norwich bought nobody, their sole deadline-day business the loaning of heavy Pantene user Todd Cantwell to Bournemouth. And with Wood cashed in, Burnley can now get it launched to Dutch man-mountain Wout Weghorst. There’s Frank Lampard’s The Ev, of course, keeping up proud club traditions by acting as a repository for fallen talent in borrowing Donny van de Beek and signing Dele Alli. Will that be enough to reach the heights of 13th? A club needs ambitions, after all, something unhappy Hammers are wailing after David Moyes added precisely zilch to his squad. The cries of “spend some effing money” are yet louder at Arsenal, louder even than at Tottenham, two Juventus players to the good and with Antonio Conte placated for this week at least. A thin squad unable to fulfil its fixtures a couple of weeks ago shed even more players, with Calum Chambers joining Villa. Then there’s Pierre Emerick-Aubameyang, who while taking what his people called a “family holiday” in the Catalan capital, somehow ended up becoming a Barcelona player. What are the chances? For a while, a 2022 reboot of the Peter Odemwingie caper, using private jet rather than Range Rover, looked on the cards. Aubameyang has joined Barcelona, less than a club, now more a Catalan recreation of ‘Arry Redknapp’s Portsmouth of the late-2000s, where top, top players turn up for no particular reason despite finances being tighter than The Fiver’s dungarees after another lockdown Christmas. Chambers and Aubameyang joined a list of Sokratis, Shkodran Mustafi, Sead Kolašinac, Henrikh Mkhitaryan and Mesut Özil in being given Mikel Arteta’s ice-cold shoulder. That lot cost £194m, Arsenal receiving nowt from a transfer strategy that resembles a market stall handing out freebies at closing time. QUOTE OF THE DAY “My gang &amp; I have hit a path and we won’t stop until we’re in every stomach and baked in every oven at some point! A man! A pizza! Let’s see how far Uefa goes! BUY THE WORLD’S HOTTEST MUSHROOM PIZZA, everyone!” – the owners of Pizza Wolke, a small restaurant in Germany, respond to news that Uefa is taking legal action against them because they sell a pizza called “The Champignons League”. Keep on fighting the good fight, Aleksander. RECOMMENDED LOOKING The $exy Beast reboot you never knew you needed, from David Squires. FIVER LETTERS “I didn’t think that Friday’s strapline of ‘Fiver Letters on its own Winter Break’ was serious on Friday? Why does Fiver Letters get a winter break? It’s not as if they do a lot of work. Or did I miss something in yesterday’s Fiver? And now I’ve just used the word ‘missed’, which may imply a personal attachment to The Fiver, which isn’t what I mean at all!” – Katie Maddock. “I noticed that Frank Lampard’s Everton manager Frank Lampard called FLE a ‘unique’ club in his announcement spiel, instead of the usual platitude of ‘huge’. Perhaps already laying the groundwork for when it all goes horribly wrong?” – Gerry Rickard. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’ the day is … Katie Maddock. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS Police have been given extra time to question Manchester United’s Mason Greenwood on suspicion of rape and sexual assault. Tyler Rattray, the captain of Raith Rovers’ women’s team, has resigned and crime writer Val McDermid has ended her sponsorship in protest at the signing of David Goodwillie, who was found to have raped a woman by a civil court in 2017. “This shatters any claim to be a community or family club,” said McDermid. “Goodwillie has never expressed a shred of remorse for the rape he committed. His presence at Starks Park is a stain on the club. I’ll be tearing up my season ticket too. This is a heartbreaker for me and many other fans, I know.” The PFA has warned there is still much to be done to achieve parity between male and female players, despite “significant” changes to new contracts for the women’s game. Meanwhile, the NWSL has agreed a collective bargaining agreement with the players’ association that includes a minimum salary of €35,000. Aaron Ramsey says that he chose to join the Pope’s Newc O’Rangers because they’re dead big. “I had a number of offers on the table, but none matched the magnitude of this club,” cooed the on-loan Juve midfielder. Barça chief suit Joan Laporta has directed another lazer beam of blame at his predecessor Josep Bartomeu for the club’s sorry financial state. “Our audit found payments that we understand were improper management of club funds,” he blabbed, handing Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang €1 and an official Barcelona pen as payment for his first day’s work. Cork City defender Cathal Heffernan, 16, has only gone and signed for Milan. “Words can’t describe how happy I am,” cheered the defender who was born one month before this. Takumi Minamino and Junya Ito fired home the goals as Japan beat Saudi Arabia 2-0 to boost their own – and flamin’ Australia’s – hopes of qualifying for the Human Rights World Cup. Dele Alli can’t wait to take his flask and lunchbox to Finch Farm to start work at Frank Lampard’s Everton. “I’m eager to get started and can’t wait for my first game in a [Frank Lampard’s] Everton shirt,” cheered the midfielder, who will cost between £10m and £40m depending on how useful he is in said shirt. And Jermain Defoe is ready to give League one defences some sleepless nights after rejoining Sunderland. STILL WANT MORE? The final transfer window verdict: how every Premier League club fared in January. And for added fun, why not trawl through every move in Europe’s big leagues. Ben McAleer picks out 10 standout deals from across Europe so that you don’t have to. Eddie Howe must show the Newcastle transfer tax was worth paying, writes Louise Taylor. And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! HE MAY BE RETIRED BUT WE’RE STILL NOT OVER THISEuphoria, the slick, explicit, high-budget teen drama halfway through its second season on HBO, has from the start been a soap layered in heady seriousness. The show, adapted by Sam Levinson from an Israeli series of the same name and co-produced by Drake, took on a near encyclopedia of Today’s Teen Issues – sex shaming, drug addiction, body insecurity, web personas, revenge porn, pregnancy and abortion, emotional abuse, toxic masculinity, self-harm and depression, and more – with a bracing, revelatory frankness and thick lacquer of gloss (and full-frontal nudity). By its first season finale in 2019, in which main character Rue (Zendaya, who won an Emmy for the role) nearly dies in a graphic drug overdose, Euphoria had drawn a legion of fans (the finale drew 1.2 million night-of viewers and became HBO’s second-most tweeted-about series ever, behind Game of Thrones) and managed to balance shock with sensitivity. It established beloved characters – in particular the fragile, alchemical bond between Rue and Jules (Hunter Schafer), a trans character – as well as a distinctive visual palette: saturated color, shimmery beats, high-voltage fantasy, meta narration, a zeitgeist-aiming show with a small hint of irony and a large dollop of excess. The long-anticipated second season, which premiered in January and opened with a brash, 10-minute, Scorsese-style sequence on drug dealer Fezco’s (Angus Cloud) gun-toting criminal grandmother (played by The Sopranos’ Kathrine Narducci), has leaned even more to that excess, to a divisive degree. The ratings are up – 10.3 million people have watched the season premiere, and this week’s episode was up 41% from the week before – but reception is mixed. Online reactions toggle chaotically between sincere enjoyment and hate-watching or, for many, something inarticulably in between. The chasm between real high school (boring) and Euphoria high school (increasingly unhinged) has become distractingly vast, a joke turned into its own TikTok meme on its peacocking fashion. Whereas the first season felt like submerging, high, in a warm bath of high-school memories shot through with glitter, dialed up to 11, and distorted in a funhouse mirror, the second season – self-indulgent, luridly violent, still lush, expensively soundtracked – has taken on the feeling of a chore. Euphoria feels stuck – a stressful, self-conscious drag. Take, for instance, one of its signature fantasy sequences early in this season’s third episode, in which Rue delivers a monologue on her character’s wearying relapse with drug addiction, a downward spiral that has tested fans’ morale and provided one half of the season’s loose amalgamation of plot. “As a beloved character that a lot of people are rooting for, I feel a certain responsibility to make good decisions,” she says to the camera, pointer in hand, miming a schoolteacher instructing on the ABCs of hiding a relapse from friends and family. “Now, in all fairness, I did say from the beginning that I had no intention of staying clean. But I get it. Our country’s dark and fucked up and people just want to find hope. Somewhere. Anywhere. If not in reality, then in television. “Unfortunately,” she adds, without apology, “I’m not it.” It’s a fascinating meta moment – Levinson explaining, via Rue, why he’s testing the limits of her likability; the show itself acknowledging that it’s not really successful escapism, nor trying to be. It also feels like an admission of viewers’ fatigue with Rue’s addiction, which has drawn the season into near gang movie territory. Euphoria, like its floundering main character, has shirked the teen plot. This is not to complain that Euphoria is ridiculous, because ridiculousness is part and parcel of the teen soap genre, of which this show, despite its HBO pedigree, is a part. It’s probably best summarized, as the writer Molly Lambert put it, as “just A24 Degrassi”. (A24, the independent entertainment company behind such stylized, visually saturated features as Spring Breakers, Moonlight, Midsommar and Uncut Gems, also produces Euphoria.) It shares many tried and true staples of shows like Dawson’s Creek, One Tree Hill, The OC, Gossip Girl, Degrassi, Skins, Australian staples like Home and Away and Neighbours, including: an outsider who is still strikingly beautiful (in Euphoria, the second season character of Lexi, played by Maude Apatow); a love triangle involving a blonde and a brunette (Cassie, Maddy and Nate – the second season’s other contorted plot); at least one lost parent; uncontrolled house parties, obviously. All of these beloved teen shows were powered by consistent, cyclical melodrama and sustained by an implicit suspension of disbelief (that older actors at all resembled pimply teens, that teens were either having no sex at all or incredibly good sex, etc.) Ridiculousness can be extremely entertaining, as in any of the aforementioned shows or even in unintentionally chaotic series such as Apple TV’s The Morning Show. But when not harnessed to character development, plot momentum, or narrative pay-off, it feels self-indulgent, grating, even flat. Teen show violence isn’t unique to Euphoria – think a school shooting plot on Degrassi, that and more on One Tree Hill, even an ill-conceived murder-as-self-defense-from-rape plot-line on Friday Night Lights. But whereas those shows incorporated genuinely farfetched (and traumatic!) events for the sake of plot, suspense and drama, Euphoria increasingly appears to do so for the sake of aesthetics. The show has always toed the line between style and substance, and this season crossed into the former. An addict side character shooting up outside an LA suburbs motel, Rue strip-searched by a menacing dealer in a shower, Fezco pummeling Nate’s (Jacob Elordi) face, the camera lingering on the blood and crunch of his nose – all of it feels, in Euphoria’s lurid, hyper-real style, queasy and too much, explicitness spoilt to exploitation. The show is, by genre definition, ridiculous, but not in on the joke of its own excess. There are parts of Euphoria that felt genuinely refreshing – a nuanced portrayal of one teenage girl’s (Kat, played by Barbie Ferreira) foray into the mazy morass of internet sex; the introduction of Jules (Schafer), a trans girl whose transness is neither the point of her character nor the source of her demons; the too often manic pixied Jules’s gravitational, consuming connection with Rue. The show’s at times unsparing and deglamorized handling of Rue’s addiction was refreshing if gutting; same, too, for its depiction of sex as a curious, high-stakes battleground between the girls and boys. Euphoria, at its best, approaches the concerns of today’s teens (and parents) with revelatory candor, even at its most laughably and delightfully outlandish. But this season has catered to its worst, bloodiest impulses – ones it could use some good old teenage soap to wash out.Tom Brady was always going to leave on his own terms. “When I suck, I’ll retire,” Brady said in 2014. But of all his achievements, the timing of Brady’s announcement that he will step away from the game after 22 seasons may be the most remarkable of all. He is not walking away because injuries sapped his greatness or because his play has declined as he approaches 45. Brady is coming off two seasons in Tampa in which he was still one of the best players in the NFL and clinched his seventh Super Bowl in his 10th appearance. He still moves as well as he ever. Remarkably, there is more zip on his fastball now than there was six years ago. No, he is walking away because, in middle age, there is a life for him beyond football. “I said this a few years ago, it’s what relationships are all about,” Brady said last week on his Let’s Go! podcast. “It’s not always what I want. It’s what we want as a family.” He is walking away because his three children aged quicker than his game; because he wants to build a clothing brand before he starts creaking. The NFL will not be the same without Brady. He has presided over the top of the sport – a droning, nagging, staple of excellence – for 20 years. He retires as the most successful player to ever grace the league. The early portion of his career cemented his legacy: the overlooked, disrespected kid, drafted 199th overall, who grew to become the biggest sports star in America. He spent the second third of his career chasing – and surpassing – the legends of the game. And the final third chasing himself – seeing how much distance he could put between himself, the legends of the past and the legends to come. It was a self-dubbed battle of Tom v Time, one man against the concept of aging. By the end, he was lapping the field. Before he turned 37 in 2014, Brady was already one of the greatest quarterbacks in history. Whether he was the greatest at that point was debatable. There was Brady’s ruthless efficiency; Joe Montana’s perfection; Peyton Manning’s dominance; Dan Marino’s genius. Pick your flavor. Since then, Brady has added a further six MVP-caliber seasons and four more Super Bowl titles to his resume. He stacked one Hall of Fame career on top of the other. He threw more touchdown passes in his 40s than he did in his 20s. No athlete, in any sport, has ever aged this way. The records speak for themselves. Brady will retire top of the NFL in: Wins: 243 Super Bowl titles: 7 Passing touchdowns: 624 Passing yards: 84,520 Starts: 316 Playoff wins: 35 Playoff passing yards: 13,049 Playoff touchdowns: 86 Game-winning drives in the playoffs: 14 Most passing yards in a playoff game: 505 Touchdown passes in the Super Bowl: 21 Passing yards in Super Bowls: 3,039 Super Bowl MVPs: 5 The volume of fans who enjoyed the early story, grew tired of his success, were happy when he failed, accused him of cheating, and grew to grudgingly respect his persistence and excellence: Infinite On and on the records roll. In all, Brady has appeared in 18% of Super Bowls ever played. There is no longer scope for debate. There is Brady, a stretch of highway, then everyone else. His perception of success has warped the very meaning of ‘winning’ in the NFL: a couple of Super Bowl runs is no longer enough. Legends are built on stories, and it’s the story that pushes Brady beyond all challengers. He went from an overlooked college quarterback selected as the 199th pick of the 2000 NFL draft to a pillar of arguably the most successful sports dynasty in modern sport. Along with head coach Bill Belichick and team owner Robert Kraft, Brady’s New England Patriots ruled the NFL for 20 years, defying a league in which the salary cap and draft are designed to ensure no team dominates for too long. And then came the divorce. Brady, Belichick, and Kraft separated. Like so many New Englanders before him, Brady entered middle age eying retirement in Florida. Two seasons in Tampa yielded 24 wins and 88 touchdowns. Another Lombardi Trophy on the mantle – maybe the most personally gratifying, a title all of his own away from Belichick and the Patriots infrastructure. Brady built his legend despite never being the greatest athlete on the field. A photo of his unimpressive physique (by the standards of a professional athlete, at least) coming out of college became famous, and he didn’t lost speed as he got older because he didn’t have much to lose in the first place. His game was based on uncommon accuracy and decision-making. His own standards were exacting; completing passes wasn’t enough, they had to be completed in the right spot. “The word ‘accurate’ means that if the ball is supposed to be thrown to the receiver’s right number, that is where the ball is thrown,” Belichick told author Michael Holley. “It does not get thrown to his left number.” Belichick demanded perfection, and Brady delivered. While other quarterbacks could create magic on the fly, relying on their physical gifts to extend plays or launch balls downfield, Brady prided himself on unceasing efficiency. He was monotonous. Hit the back foot, get the ball out. Again and again – 111,137 times all told. By the end, neither lineman nor lawyer could stop him. He knew every defense, and could uncrack any opposing defensive scheme with ease. Brady played for a decade longer than even his most durable contemporaries, and yet it still feels like he is stepping away a year or two early, that he could comfortably return next year and pilot another team towards a championship. With a year left on his contract with the Bucs, there was the thought that Brady could return for a farewell tour. But to what end? His legacy was set in New England, and confirmed in Tampa. He is the greatest there has ever been – perhaps the greatest there ever will be. He played in four distinctive generations, and conquered them all.Almost 1,500 jobs are at risk at Tesco as the supermarket ditches night shifts in more than 80 stores and almost 40 petrol stations. The potential job cuts emerged only a day after the UK’s biggest supermarket chain said it would be shutting its Jack’s discount chain, with the potential loss of about 130 jobs, and closing more of its deli and meat counters. Overnight stock replenishment will now be done during the day in 36 large stores and 49 convenience stores. At 36 stores, petrol stations will be converted to be “pay-at-pump only” overnight. Jason Tarry, the chief executive of Tesco’s UK and Irish business, said: “We operate in a highly competitive and fast-paced market and our customers are shopping differently, especially since the start of the pandemic. “We are always looking at how we can run our business as simply and efficiently as possible, so that we can reinvest in the things that matter most to customers. The changes we are announcing today will help us do this.” The job cuts are part of Tesco’s efforts to save £1bn in costs over the next three years as it tries to fend off competition from discounters Aldi and Lidl in a price-sensitive market. As inflation bites, shoppers are monitoring the prices of their goods more closely than ever and Tesco, like rival Sainsbury’s, has responded by matching Aldi prices on key items. Clive Black, an analyst at Shore Capital, said Tesco was “creating the resources to compete”. He said other supermarkets had already cut costs by closing deli counters or reducing store management positions, and there would be more job cuts to come, partly with the help of technology such as self-scanning systems in shops. “Bit by bit the industry is on a journey to be more productive and that means fewer people and more digitisation and automation,” he said. Tesco said it had 3,000 vacancies in the business and aimed to work with each affected member of staff to try to help them find another role. Daniel Adams, a national officer of the shopworkers’ union Usdaw, said the union was engaging with the supermarket in an effort to protect jobs and secure the best deal for those affected. Adams said: “Tesco has informed us that they are looking to undertake a number of restructures across the business … Clearly, this will be incredibly unsettling for those who may be affected. “We should not forget the role that key workers have played throughout the coronavirus pandemic and to receive this news is devastating. Tesco has almost 3,000 stores in the UK, including 800 large supermarkets, and it is not clear if it will adjust night shifts in further stores in future.A British Airways jet was forced to abort a landing attempt at Heathrow airport as it was buffeted by high winds during Storm Corrie. Footage captured by plane spotters on Monday showed the jet, which had departed from Aberdeen, sway heavily on to its left side as it approached the runway. The video, shown on Big Jet TV, showed the plane almost lean heavily to one side as its tail appeared to make contact with the ground, creating a cloud of what aviation enthusiasts call plane dust. The pilot managed to steady the jet and pull it up before flying off for another - successful – landing attempt. In the video, witnesses can be heard gasping in horror as the tail looked to make contact in a “tail strike”. The plane appeared to rock from side to side before leaning heavily on to its left side before pulling clear. A British Airways spokesperson said of the incident on Monday: “Our pilots are highly trained to manage a range of scenarios, including extreme weather conditions, and our flight crew landed the aircraft safely. Our customers and crew all disembarked as normal.” Back-to-back storms at the weekend left more than 45,000 homes without electricity across the country. A nine-year-old boy in Staffordshire and a 60-year-old woman in Aberdeen died after trees were torn down on Saturday as Storm Malik took hold. Storm Corrie brought winds of 92mph to Stornoway in the Western Isles of Scotland late on Sunday before pushing into the North Sea in the early hours of Monday, leaving behind cold and blustery conditions.Name: Hypnotic cinema. Age: New for 2022. Appearance: Just like a film. But, in this case a piece of film-making so mesmerising and incantatory that it leaves viewers in a kind of trance? No, just a regular film. They hypnotise you before it starts. Where? In Sweden. At every film? For now, the policy is only in place before some films at this year’s Göteborg film festival. What happens? Audiences are treated to a preliminary session with a hypnotist, the aptly named Fredrik Praesto, who stands in front of a projection of a large spinning spiral. Are you sure this isn’t a film? I think I’ve seen it. I’m sure. After about 20 minutes of relaxation exercises, everyone closes their eyes for a countdown. Once they’re under, they open their eyes, and the film starts. Afterwards there’s another quick countdown to lift the spell. Why do they do this? “To experiment with the film experience, to challenge our ideas about how to watch a film,” said Jonas Holmberg, the director of the festival. Oh. I thought maybe it was to stop people using their phones. Audience members did report higher levels of concentration, so maybe they were less prone to that sort of distraction. I mean, anything to stop the constant talking and all the laughing in the wrong places. That’s not a bad idea – perhaps hypnosis could be deployed more widely as a way of controlling unruly audiences. I guess people have forgotten how to behave in public since Covid forced a two-year break from going out. Well, there have been a few recent incidents. A studio audience member was criticised for shrieking maniacally during a recent broadcast of Dancing on Ice. Annoying, but it’s not exactly Turandot, is it? And, just before Christmas, the singer Beverley Knight was complaining about rowdy drunks repeatedly spoiling performances of her West End show The Drifters Girl. “My advice is to stay your ass at home,” she said. But, can hypnosis really calm drunkards intent on wrecking an evening of musical theatre? It’s got to be worth a try, don’t you think? I’m worried they might include a hypnotic suggestion to stop me bringing my own Maltesers from home. As long as you don’t eat them too loudly, no one will know. Do say: “I really enjoyed The Matrix Resurrections. Somebody snap me out of it, for pity’s sake.” Don’t say: “Your eyelids are getting heavy. Your limbs are like lead weights. So stay your ass home.”Ministers spent almost £9bn on personal protective equipment that was either substandard, defective, past its use-by date or dramatically overpriced, according to figures released on Monday. The Department of Health and Social Care paid £12bn while emergency-buying PPE for England in the year to 31 March 2021, its annual accounts show. Tonnes of items bought for £2.6bn were never usable by the NHS – this figure is now £2.7bn – and a further £670m worth of PPE was not usable at all in any healthcare setting. This was mostly because it was defective, the annual report stated, and items costing £750m passed their safe date before they could be used. By far the biggest figure , however, is the £4.7bn amounting to the difference between the dramatically inflated prices the DHSC paid for PPE to fill England’s tiny stockpile, and the value of that equipment now. The accounts, audited by the National Audit Office, do not identify to where that extra £4.7bn was paid, whether in increased prices charged by PPE factories, mainly in China, or in significant profits made by UK companies and their intermediaries. Gareth Davies, the NAO’s comptroller and auditor general, also noted that PPE procurement had been vulnerable to fraud, as normal competitive tender processes were suspended and multimillion-pound contracts awarded to many companies with no previous experience. As much of the equipment supplied remains in sealed containers, Davies said he had been unable to carry out sufficient checks to be satisfied that substantial fraud had not taken place. “The level of fraud risk has increased as a result of Covid-19-related procurement,” he stated. “A significant increase in new suppliers, a lack of timely checks on the quality of goods received and poor inventory management all contributed to this heightened risk. In these circumstances … I have not been able to obtain assurance that there has not been a material level of losses due to fraud.” Davies’s cautionary note on possible PPE fraud follows the resignation last week of the former Cabinet Office minister Theodore Agnew, who complained of “arrogance, indolence and ignorance” in the government’s attitude to tackling fraud, after £4.3bn fraudulently claimed in Covid loans was written off. The DHSC accepted in the annual report that its PPE procurement was susceptible to “heightened risk” of fraud, as “goods subject to detailed technical requirements were purchased from new suppliers … some of whom did not have experience in supplying these types of product”. The department justified its processes, however, saying it had to act quickly to buy “scarce resource amidst a global pandemic”, and was confident in its anti-fraud precautions including financial checks on suppliers and payment on delivery. “In the department’s view, these factors give assurance that the possibility of significant levels of fraud existing in respect of PPE inventory purchasing is remote,” the DHSC said. The government’s frantic process to replenish an empty stockpile of PPE has since become one of the most severely criticised elements of its pandemic response. Last month the high court ruled in favour of a legal challenge by the Good Law Project that the “VIP lane”, which gave high priority to companies with political connections, was unlawful. Companies with many years’ experience supplying the NHS complained they were ignored by the procurement process, while some people with no previous PPE experience but with Conservative party connections were awarded multimillion-pound contracts. The NAO has previously reported that companies referred to the VIP lane by Conservative ministers, MPs and peers or government officials had a success rate for contracts 10 times greater than companies dealt with in the other procurement route. Pat McFadden, the shadow chief secretary to the Treasury, said of the DHSC accounts: “These levels of waste destroy any claim the Conservatives have to be careful stewards of the public finances. “Along with the government’s laissez-faire attitude to fraud, this will be particularly galling to hard-working households wondering how they will pay the higher taxes the chancellor is imposing this April.” A DHSC spokesperson said: “Our absolute priority throughout this unprecedented global pandemic has always been saving lives. “In a highly competitive global market where many countries imposed export bans, we acted swiftly to obtain 30,000 ventilators by the end of June 2020 and we have delivered over 17.5bn items of PPE to the frontline, with 97% of PPE we ordered being suitable for use. “The supply of these vital items helped keep our NHS open at a moment of national crisis to deliver a world-class service to the public. We are seeking to recover costs from suppliers wherever possible.” • This article was amended on 1 February 2022. The original referred to the UK’s PPE drive. The DHSC figures are actually for England only.Scientists are developing a “revolutionary” test to predict a woman’s risk of four cancers using a single sample collected during cervical screening. Using cervical cells from a routine smear test, experts may be able to spot ovarian and breast cancer or predict their likelihood of developing, according to two papers published in the journal Nature Communications. Further results are due on the ability of the WID-test – women’s cancer risk identification – to predict womb and cervical cancer, researchers said. The test could eventually enable earlier detection of all four cancers in younger women, and even “stop cancer before it starts”, experts said, which would be a “game changer” for women’s health. “This could create a step change in screening for key cancers – not detecting them early but preventing them from developing,” said Athena Lamnisos, the chief executive of the Eve Appeal, which is funding the research with the European Research Council. “Creating a new screening tool for the four most prevalent cancers that affect women and people with gynae organs – particularly the ones which are currently most difficult to detect at an early stage – from a single test could be revolutionary.” Ovarian cancer is responsible for the largest proportion of deaths associated with gynaecological cancers. Currently, 75% of ovarian cancers are diagnosed at a late stage, when the tumours have spread. Being able to detect the disease earlier may improve treatment outcomes. Breast cancer is the most common cancer in women and is usually detected using mammography followed by a biopsy. “This research is incredibly exciting,” said Liz O’Riordan, a breast cancer surgeon who has herself been diagnosed with the disease. “At the moment there is no screening test for breast cancer in women under the age of 50. If this test can help pick up women with a high risk of developing breast, ovarian, cervical and uterine cancer at younger age, it could be a game changer.” Researchers used cervical cell samples from 242 women with ovarian cancer and 869 without. They then measured 14,000 epigenetic changes and identified a unique DNA signature that could be used to spot or predict the presence of ovarian cancer. This enabled them to identify 71.4% of women under 50 and 54.5% of women over 50 with ovarian cancers with 75% specificity. The findings were further validated in an additional cohort of women, where 47 had ovarian cancer and 227 did not. In the second study, researchers analysed epigenetic changes in cervical cell samples from 329 women with breast cancer with a poor prognosis and 869 women without the disease. They were able to identify women with breast cancer based on a unique epigenetic signature. The finding was confirmed in a smaller set of samples from 113 breast cancer patients and 225 women without breast cancer. “Our studies have taken a completely novel approach and evaluate an individual’s risk for more than one cancer by assessing several different epigenetic footprints in a single cervical screening sample,” said Prof Martin Widschwendter, of the University of Innsbruck and UCL, who is leading the research. “The WID-test will look for the footprints on a woman’s DNA as she goes through life, recording the track she is taking and whether she is heading towards cancer. The WID-test will revolutionise screening and enable a more personalised approach to cancer prevention and detection, where women will be screened, monitored or treated based on their individual, and changing, risk.” In the future, the Eve Appeal said, women could get separate risk scores for each of the four cancers. Those with high scores could be offered more active monitoring, regular mammograms, risk-reducing surgery, or therapeutics, the charity said. Widschwendter cautioned that further research and large-scale prospective clinical trials would be needed to confirm the tests could effectively predict the likelihood of women developing cancer. Health minister Maria Caulfield said it was “great to see how this new research could help alert women who are at higher risk to help prevent breast, ovarian, womb and cervical cancer before it starts”. In the meantime, cervical screening remained vital, she added and urged all women aged 25 and above to attend their appointments when invited.Could human urine be liquid gold for horticulturists? A new trial is examining if “number one” could be a cheap and sustainable source of fertiliser for plants and lawns in Australia’s city parks. The study, by Griffith University, aims to find out if “urine diversion toilets” being trialled in Brisbane and Sydney, might stop valuable excretions of potassium, phosphorus and nitrogen from disappearing down the S-bend. “It’s the perfect liquid gold and currently we just flush it down the toilet,” associate professor Cara Beal, of Griffith University’s Cities Research Institute, said. Beal said the four-year project would investigate different toilet designs and incorporate new technology developed by a University of Melbourne chemical engineer. In its purest form, human urine can be sterile, but the reality is it can contain undesirables such as pathogens, hormones and antibiotics that need to be processed. “But the good stuff is the nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium that plants love. The technology is important, but that’s not the barrier to closing that nutrient loop and reusing our most precious resource we generate,” Beal said. “We have the technology. The issue is looking at the regulatory approvals and getting our health and planning departments to understanding this.” The trial is part of an initiative known as Nutrients in a Circular Economy being led by the University of Technology Sydney and including other universities, such as Griffith, and commercial and government partners. The trial will look at any health risks from using human urine, as well as investigating how it stacks up economically as a source of fertiliser. Potential sites in parks in Brisbane and Sydney had been identified, but there were still consultations and regulatory approvals to be negotiated, Beal said. Toilets could be installed by the end of this year. Beal said generating nitrogen was energy intensive and phosphorus was a finite resource that was mined. She said: “As a society, if we are to get to net zero carbon emissions we are going to have to move away from synthetic fertilisers.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Tackling the community’s instinctive “yuck factor” would also be part of social studies to be carried out under the trial. The trial will use technology being developed by Dr Stefano Freguia, a chemical engineer at the University of Melbourne who has designed a self-powering system using electrical charges and membranes to separate the valuable elements from urine. “It’s one of several technologies that have been developed over the last 10 years. We have used human waste since the beginning of time, but recently we have become justifiably picky,” he said, saying modern life had added contaminants such as pharmaceutical products and pathogens to our human waste stream. “Our lifestyles have changed. This technology we’re developing needs to address this,” he said. He said the liquid fertiliser produced by the technology – which can be as small as a 20cm cube depending on the volume needed – has a smell of ammonia “which isn’t so hard on our noses” as human urine. Prof Stuart Khan, an expert on wastewater management at the University of New South Wales who is not involved in the project, said in the future phosphorus was likely to become scarce and societies would be forced to find new sources. “There’s a lot of interest in urine separation, particularly in parts of Europe and Scandinavia,” he said. “Phosphorus isn’t renewable but we use it as a fertiliser and grow all our vegetables with it and then ultimately we flush that down the toilet. “We have no way to recover it from the ocean and there’s no new phosphorus that’s being deposited. “There are public health risks that need to be managed, but there are good reasons to think this can be done very well. “Once people understand the importance of sustainable use of limited resources, I think that will outweigh any kind of yuck factor.” Would the picnicking public agree?Fossil fuel companies backing large gas projects across Australia gave nearly $1m in political donations to the three major parties last financial year. The analysis comes from campaign group 350.org which examined donations records from the Australian Electoral Commission to identify how much oil and gas companies were giving to Labor, the Liberals and the Nationals. Australia has more than 100 fossil fuel developments in the pipeline that could result in nearly 1.7bn tonnes of greenhouse gases a year – equivalent to about 5% of global industrial emissions – if all were to go ahead. Combined the total amount donated by eight oil and gas companies or their lobby groups amounted to $959,115. Broken down between the parties, the lion’s share of this money went to the Liberal party, which received $506,810. Next was Labor, which received $392,354, and last was the Nationals, which received $59,991. The Greens were not included as the party has a policy of refusing donations from fossil fuel companies and received none. By far the biggest donor was Woodside Energy, which announced last year it was pushing ahead with its $16bn project to open up the Scarborough gas field, and gave $124,000 to the Coalition and $108,350 to Labor, making for a total of $232,250. The next biggest donors were the Minerals Council of Australia, which gave $193,943 ($101,192 to the Liberals, $28,091 to the Nationals and $64,660 to Labor), and the trust for “coal baron” Trevor St Baker, which donated $165,202. Of this, $112,758 went to the Liberal party and $52,444 to Labor. In many cases, the amounts donated skewed towards the Liberal party with groups like the Australian Petroleum Production and Exploration Association (Appea) giving the Liberal party $72,610 compared to $31,650 for Labor. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Other companies with controversial gas developments were also spending big. Santos, which is pursuing the $3.6bn Narrabri gas project, donated $44,000 to the Labor party but nothing to the Liberals. Meanwhile, Empire Energy Group, a gas company with strong links to the Coalition that is working to frack the Beetaloo Basin, gave $40,000 to the Liberal party and $25,000 to Labor. Shani Tager, the senior campaign manager at 350, said it was clear fossil fuel companies attempting to develop projects facing significant community opposition were attempting to buy political support. “It’s companies that have high-profile projects that have a really strong pushback against them that are making these donations to shore up political support,” Tager said. With “more money than ever” being donated by fossil fuel companies, Tager said political donations from the oil and gas sector should be banned over the risk it may influence policymaking in a way that stops action on climate change. “The Morrison government has been really, vocally supportive of the gas industry and in addition to being supportive, they have really put their money where their mouth is, they give money to these groups,” Taber said. “This money is buying what these companies want, and that is more subsidies and special conditions for their projects going ahead.” The federal minister for emissions reduction, Angus Taylor, and the Labor shadow ministers, Ed Husic and Chris Bowen, were contacted for comment. Last year the International Energy Agency said limiting global heating to 1.5C, a goal set out in the Paris agreement, meant exploration and exploitation of new fossil fuel basins had to stop in 2021.Australians are waiting 60% longer than usual for their passport applications to be processed, as the reopening of the international border drives a huge jump in demand and a flood of calls to the passport office. Guardian Australia can reveal the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade has issued more than 275,000 new passports since 1 November – almost triple the number issued compared with the same period a year ago. “Due to the increased demand [following the reopening of the international border] passports are currently taking longer to process,” a spokesperson for Dfat said. “At present, processing times are, on average, around 16 business days, compared to within 10 business days previously.” The spokesperson said this processing time was “well short of the timeframe the public are encouraged to renew their passport” – up to six weeks ahead of their planned international travel. Australians have complained of long waits when phoning the passport office, or even having their calls disconnected, even as Dfat attempted to manage demand by hiring an extra 130 staff. Several users contacted Dfat on social media to say they had applied for passports more than two months ago and had not yet received them – but in some cases the call centre was too busy to accept calls. Dfat’s Twitter account has been replying to complaints about being unable to reach the call centre by providing an email address for the passport office. It is understood Dfat has recruited 130 additional new staff, as well as returning large numbers of passport staff who had been on temporary redeployment to other roles while passport demand was low. This move is believed to have bolstered the number of staff currently undertaking passport-related work to more than 600, which is similar to pre-pandemic staffing levels. More staff are expected to be recruited between now and 2023 amid expectations of further increases in international travel. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The Dfat spokesperson said the number of passport applications currently in progress – 80,000 – was about 30,000 above pre-pandemic levels. “Dfat expects this to return to previous levels by February.” Early in the pandemic, Guardian Australia reported that the disruption to overseas travel had resulted in a massive drop in Australian passport applications, a decline of about 400,000 in the first half of 2020. That also meant the government missed out on tens of millions of dollars in application fee revenue. Over the past 12 months, it is estimated about 1.8 million Australians have either put off renewing their expired passports or applying for a passport for the first time. The latter category includes new Australian citizens. But the surge in applications has been driven by the progressive reopening of the international border, which began when the government allowed fully vaccinated Australian citizens and permanent residents to freely travel abroad from 1 November. Officials at the Australian Passport Office (APO) had anticipated a need to prepare for a “spike in applications”. In an operational briefing to the new Dfat secretary, Kathryn Campbell, in July 2021, departmental officials said: “A key challenge for the APO is lower passport demand, which will likely continue for the remainder of 2021.” The briefing document – obtained under freedom of information laws – said the APO “has a well-developed plan in place aimed at bringing forward some of this pent-up demand and managing a future spike in applications when travel restrictions ease”. It is understood this plan included sending out email and SMS messages to more than 2.2 million Australians over the past year to remind them that their passport has either expired or is about to expire. The department has also been in touch with travel and tourism industry firms to enlist their help in urging customers to renew their passports early.If I’ve been infected with Omicron, what is my risk of catching it, or another Covid variant, again? It is now clear that it is possible to catch Covid more than once, including strains you have previously been infected with. It is also known that being infected with Covid-19 boosts your protection from reinfection. What is less clear is how long that extra protection against the same strain lasts – and whether it is as effective against other strains. A small laboratory study published in December suggests one reason Omicron is replacing Delta is that being infected with Omicron offers a high level of protection against Delta, while the reverse is not true. Dr Maria Van Kerkhove, the Covid-19 technical lead with the World Health Organization’s health emergencies program, said another reason for a sharp increase in Omicron cases in recent weeks was its potential for “immune escape”. “This means people can be reinfected either if they had a previous infection, or if they’ve been vaccinated,” she said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “Now you have to remember, vaccines are incredibly effective at preventing severe disease and death, but they don’t prevent all infections and they don’t prevent all onward transmission. So it is still absolutely critical to get vaccinated because it will save your life, but it doesn’t prevent all infections or transmission.” How long could protection from infection last? Kirby Institute virologist Associate Prof Stuart Turville said Omicron has only been around a couple of months so it was too early to estimate the risk of reinfection or how long any protection from an infection lasts. “We can only base our answer on what we have observed in previous variants,” he said. “Several large studies from Qatar have looked at reinfections.” A recent preprint from Qatar states: “Protection afforded by prior infection in preventing symptomatic reinfection with Alpha, Beta, or Delta is robust, at about 90%. “While such protection against reinfection with Omicron is lower, it is still considerable at nearly 60%. Prior-infection protection against hospitalisation or death at reinfection appears robust, regardless of variant.” How long this protection lasts is unclear and depends on factors including the number of vaccinations, whether you’re immune-suppressed, and the length of time since vaccination. If I caught Delta last year and am also double-vaccinated am I safe from Omicron? Turville said a complicating factor to immune response is the severity of any Covid-19 infection. His research team are examining people infected with Delta in late 2020 onwards to see how their antibodies hold-up post-vaccination. “If you were infected and then vaccinated with two doses of either AstraZeneca or Pfizer, your response is very similar to three doses of Pfizer,” he said. “But that’s assuming you have a decent response to the virus initially. If you have had an initial low response to the virus, your response will be driven more by the vaccine dose. As a broad brushstroke, if you had a mild case of Covid in 2020, your response will be relatively low. If you had a case that made you very sick, so high disease severity, you will have had a better response. I’ve had two vaccine doses and I caught Covid. Do I really need a booster, and if so, how soon after infection? There is no need to delay vaccination. Health guidelines state you can get a booster once you have fully recovered from the virus, which for most people is four-to-six weeks after infection. In the short-term boosters can further strengthen your protection up to 86% against reinfection and 98% against serious illness, NSW Health states. The independent expert advisory group on vaccination, Atagi, says the same thing, and that “previous infection is not a contraindication to vaccination … vaccination can occur following recovery of acute illness from Covid-19”. Atagi also decreased the maximum timeframe allowable for deferral of vaccination after Covid infection from six months to four months but suggests those with very severe Covid cases should check with their doctor. Atagi decreased the timeframe “due to the increased risk of re-infection with the Omicron variant, particularly for those who had a Delta variant infection in 2021,” the guidelines state. Turville said viewing Omicron as a “natural booster” making a third vaccine dose unnecessary was unwise. “That exercise is an uncontrolled experiment where you will have no control of the dosage, or in other words the level of viral infection, and thus the outcome,” he said. “Vaccination is a set dosage that is safe with a predictable response in most people.” I’m triple-vaccinated and caught Covid. How soon after recovering can I catch Covid again? “It is a great question but one we will likely only know in the next few months,” Turville said. “In brief, we do not know as the numbers of people in that setting are on the low side and it will take a while to study in cohorts where people have volunteered for researchers to follow their response. The other issue is this will change with future variants.” I’ve just recovered from Covid and finished isolating, and I’m vaccinated. I’m now a close-contact of someone with Covid. Do I really need to isolate again? The advice is similar in each state and territory. In Victoria, if a recently recovered Covid-19 case becomes a close contact of a confirmed case, they do not need to quarantine again if the re-exposure was less than 30 days since the recovered case’s onset of symptoms, or since their first positive test if they had no symptoms. In the ACT, if you are identified as a household or high-risk close contact, or a moderate risk casual contact within four weeks of your clearance from isolation, you do not need to isolate again. The ACT advice states if you have recovered from Covid while there is still someone in your household who has it, you can leave the house, but must separate from other people with Covid-19 in the household as much as possible and observe hand hygiene, mask wearing and social distancing as per public health advice. Queensland Health advice states that you are not a close contact if you have had Covid-19 in the past four weeks. It is best to check with your state or territory health department if you are unsure, and for definitions of “close contact”, which have changed over time.Supply chains already stretched due to Covid-related staff shortages have been severed after floods in South Australia washed away parts of the railway linking the eastern states with Western Australia and the Northern Territory. Parts of the Australian Rail Track Corporation network between Adelaide and Tarcoola in SA have temporarily ceased operation, as repair works are under way along a section of track over 300km in length. The operations to Perth and Darwin have been suspended since 21 January with the ARTC expecting the tracks to remain closed for “at least 12 days”. The disruption has sparked calls for greater strategic planning for key transport and logistics routes as climate disasters are projected to continue. The chief executive of Australia’s largest private rail freight company Pacific National, Paul Scurrah, described the Trans-Australian Railway as “the umbilical cord connecting our continent’s eastern and western seaboards – it’s a vital link in Australia’s supply chain”. Scurrah said while short term solutions are important, in the long term the rail network needs to be more resilient. The chief executive of Western Roads Federation, Cam Dumesny, said that 80% of WA’s land-based freight arrives via rail. The floods have also damaged key roads, including the Stuart Highway. Dumesny said the floods have exposed the vulnerability of the nation’s transportation networks and that a better national strategy is needed. “We’ve only got the two sealed roads across the continent, one on the north and one on the south, with 2000km in between … And we’ve got railway lines which run parallel to both roads so any event generally washes road and rail out simultaneously,” Dumesny said. The executive officer of the NT Road Transport Association, Louise Bilato, said the only way for supplies to get into the NT is now through Queensland across the Barkly Highway, with trucks forced to take a 3000km detour from Adelaide distribution centres. Bilato said the additional two days of driving time is not only problematic because of the shortage of truck drivers. It is also significantly more expensive with the price of the diesel exhaust fluid AdBlue surging over 300% since December. Bilato said even the Queensland entry point is vulnerable with substantial water on the Barkly Highway as well as heavier traffic “because it’s the only road open”. “It’s the perfect storm unfortunately because we were already compromised by the distribution of networks in NSW and Victoria impacted by Covid,” she said. She warned that rail entry into the NT could be out for another month, with more record breaking rain expected in the next day or two in the same region in SA. Gillian Fennell, who runs beef cattle in remote SA, has been frustrated by the lack of planning that has left her family with only potatoes and onions for fresh produce. “I find it mind-boggling that there’s only one major freight corridor that supplies all of the northern part of Australia through the centre and there’s no plan for when it gets cut,” she said. The situation isn’t new to Fennell who said that in the last two years there was a vehicle fire which saw the Stuart Highway close, with unsafe dirt roads the only option other than waiting for clearance. Fennell, along with her husband and three children, usually drives 75km to the town of Marla to do their grocery shopping but it hasn’t been resupplied for the past two weeks. On Monday the defence force dropped groceries to Coober Pedy, which is still 300km away for Fennell but she said she was mindful “there were a lot more vulnerable people in Coober Pedy who needed access to those groceries”. Fennell said because her family live remotely they are used to periods of isolation and are fairly well stocked. But she said because her children learn through distance education and mail hasn’t been delivered, they are starting the school year without learning materials such as reading books. The divisional general manager of South Deliveries for Australia Post, Shane Plant, said services have been disrupted since 21 January. Plant said Australia Post have been prioritising deliveries of medicine and essential services. He said in his experience while “it’s almost a given at one point there will be a delay, it’s normally measured in days not weeks”. The chief executive of Foodbank, Brianna Casey, said her organisation goes into every summer knowing they will see at least one significant disaster, but that this year is unique with the floods in SA coinciding with Covid-19. “Food insecurity and hunger in Australia isn’t just a product of the pandemic and isn’t just a product of natural disasters, it’s happening year round and things like the pandemic and floods simply exacerbate the problem.” Casey said. Scurrah said a long term plan for the country’s rail network should include projects like the $14bn inland rail infrastructure project to build a line from Melbourne to Brisbane. “I think the opportunity we’ve got is to get inland rail right and thinking needs to go into it, particularly that climate change will make flooding more frequent, make sure [the] asset is prepared for that,” Scurrah said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning A spokesperson for the ARTC said, “we have the utmost confidence in our inland rail flood modelling which has been conducted by world-class Australian companies and is being independently verified. All of the modelling conducted meets national guidelines and state engineering requirements.” “Inland rail is being built to strengthen supply chains and address Australia’s increasing freight challenge.”The bonus payment is not going to keep aged care workers in the game because it’s a temporary handout. It’s a Band-Aid – it’s not addressing the problem. Of course aged care workers are going to welcome this payment because the salaries are really low. But it’s not tax-free. At the start of the pandemic they got the retention bonus and then it was taxed. For me, because I’m part of the “lifestyle” section – working directly with aged care residents – I’m not even sure if I’m getting a bonus payment. If not, I won’t be happy. I’m doing the same kind of job as others in the facility – I wear the same PPE and I’m expected to get tested all the time. So this makes me feel like I’m unappreciated even though mental health and social isolation have been identified as some of the biggest problems facing aged care residents. My role in the aged care home is to give residents some kind of normality. I have seen a massive decline in residents’ mental health over time. Just before the first lockdown ended, our residents were allowed to come out of their rooms and stretch their legs. I had to be gowned-up – it was only one on one, they weren’t allowed to do it on their own. Even though it was just a little walk, oh my God, they were so happy. At the aged care facility I work in we are still in full lockdown – residents have not left their rooms for nine days. The first Covid outbreak was on Christmas Day. The next day PPE was everywhere – luckily we had plenty. After three weeks we went down to phase two restrictions. Now we’ve gone back to phase three – no one is allowed to come in, the whole building is in lockdown. On the corridor that has a positive case, we’re keeping the doors shut so there is no traffic going up and down the corridor. When a resident tests positive there’s no mention of who the resident is. You just suddenly see PPE outside the nurses’ station. There’s also tape outside the resident’s room. That’s how we learn we have a positive case. There is no communication, no emails, nothing. We don’t get told about staff testing positive either – we don’t know until they come back and they say, “I was isolating, I was positive,” or whatever. We’ve been told it’s because of privacy laws, and that they can’t tell us anything. If another staff member tested positive on a Monday, and I was working with them the day before, I might not be a close contact but I was still with them, so I think I should be told – as a safety issue and out of concern for me. I don’t want to bring Covid home – I’ve got family, elderly parents and babies around. Management is telling us to wear the same gown for the whole day unless we have worked with a positive resident – then you can change gowns. We didn’t have any rapid antigen tests, we didn’t do them. Just late last week we got some. We have N95 masks but not everyone has been fitted – I haven’t. We have been given face shields and were told to wipe them down – although my understanding was they were disposable. When I first started in the aged care sector the reason I loved it was the residents – it’s about the special interaction, getting to know each person. It’s not so much about what they do now, it’s what they have done all through their lives. To me it’s like talking to my grandparents. If you have patience and time, you can do so much. I have worked in aged care for eight years. I’ve now come to a point where it’s all too much and I want out. This latest outbreak has made it 10 times worse. • The author is an aged care worker in South AustraliaNew South Wales is promising to build more than 1,000 charging stations for electric vehicles under a four-year plan that would create the most extensive EV network in the country. Wednesday’s announcement comes after data was released showing sales of new EVs in Australia tripled in the past 12 months with more than 20,000 drivers in the country choosing the low emissions option in 2021. The NSW treasurer, Matt Kean, said on Wednesday the government was initially offering $35m to fund up to 50% of the capital costs for businesses to construct fast and ultra-fast charging bays along key travel routes. “This is expected to unlock around $160m in private investment under our plan to build the biggest electric vehicle charging network in Australia,” Kean said. “Construction is expected to start in the second half of 2022 with construction of all charging stations approved in this first round to be completed within two years. Drivers can put range anxiety in the rearview mirror.” The state government flagged the program would likely be repeated over the next four years to construct more than 1,000 fast and ultra-fast chargers state-wide. Ultra-fast chargers can take as little as 15 minutes to provide charge for 400km. The total charging infrastructure program was expected to cost $171m over four years, Kean said. Applications for co-funding will be assessed over two stages, with the first stage assessing eligibility and high-level merit criteria, and a more detailed application for charging sites required in the second stage. “EVs will play a critical role in halving our emissions by 2030 and achieving net-zero emissions by 2050. Investments in renewable generation and charging infrastructure will also help our economy recover from the Covid-19 pandemic,” Kean said. First stage applications are due to be finalised in April with successful bidders and sites announced in mid-2022. Data from the Electric Vehicle Council this week suggests incentives introduced by state governments have created slow but growing demand in the EV market in Australia. In 2021 Australia recorded 20,665 EV sales, up from 6,900 in 2020, with sales growing to 1.95% of new vehicle purchases. With many price tags still sitting around $100,000, cost remains a key barrier for many people, but it is expected to fall to match the price of internal combustion engine cars within a decade. At that point, it is predicted EVs will dominate the market. On Monday the EVC chief executive, Behyad Jafari, told Guardian Australia that this year’s sales figures had represented a milestone. “We’ve been waiting for quite a few years to hit the 1% mark, so to skip that and go straight to 2% is a big deal,” Jafari said. While the bump in sales was very welcome, the country could be a world leader in EV take-up with federal government support. “There’s no reason why we shouldn’t be up to 20% already,” Jafari said. “We have a federal government talking about hitting those targets by 2030 when really we could be there today. It’s just a matter of them doing their jobs.”Midway through the last season of Married at First Sight Australia, Bryce Ruthven’s fate as one of reality TV’s most loathed “villains” was sealed. Tasked by producers with ranking every female participant in order of attractiveness, he placed his bride, Melissa Rawson, in fourth position while sitting next to her. “I know you were probably hoping you’re number one … but you know that I can’t lie,” he told the visibly upset Melissa. “I think if I put you at number one, you’d be able to tell that [I’m lying].” The program, which returned for its ninth season in Australia on Monday night, matches complete strangers who meet for the first time at the altar. This scene was a particularly low moment in the series for Bryce, who had already been accused by viewers of appearing to gaslight and manipulate Melissa. But moments like this are part of what has helped make MAFS, as it has become known, a spectacularly successful reality phenomenon. Abroad, everyone from Promising Young Woman director Emerald Fennell to musician Sam Smith have sung praises for the Australian version of the show; in Australia, the most recent season finale drew 1.398 million viewers – even more than Meghan and Harry’s explosive Oprah Winfrey interview. One of them was writer Clementine Ford, who has mixed feelings about the show’s return. “How can you love something that you hate so much? Yes, I’m a huge MAFS fan,” she tells Guardian Australia. Or, rather: “I wouldn’t say that I’m a fan of MAFS the show. But I am a fan of the extreme emotions that MAFS makes me feel week after week.” The “marriages” that begin the season aren’t legally binding, but over the weeks that follow we watch the relationships develop into something real, or, more often, spectacularly crash and burn. To help stoke the embers of marital discord, couples are subjected to tests – like being asked to rank their partner’s appearance. Ford has regularly spoken out on social media about the often-toxic relationship dynamics that feature on MAFS – but it’s too complex, she says, for a simple condemnation. Referring to how Bryce appeared to treat Melissa in the series, Ford says: “I think is a really, really damaging thing for people to see play out on screen. On the other hand, it’s kind of helpful to be able to talk about those patterns.” Tara McWilliams, the executive producer of Australia’s Married at First Sight, knows that what viewers saw of Bryce and Melissa’s relationship in the series “wasn’t everybody’s cup of tea”. “We’re not there trying to encourage that kind of behaviour in a relationship, we’re there to document it,” McWilliams says. “But what I like about MAFS is that it starts the conversation with people about your own experiences, about what you think is wrong or right, and acceptable or not. I think the Bryce and Melissa relationship certainly did that.” “But I want to be really clear – if we think that somebody is unsafe, or in harm’s way, or at risk of being in harm’s way, we would intervene. We wouldn’t allow that to happen for the sake of a good storyline,” she adds. Bryce and Melissa – along with other couples from previous seasons – have disputed how their relationship came across in the show, attributing it to editing. “They have to have a villain and for some reason I got picked out,” Ruthven said recently. McWilliams believes that the “unpredictability” of the relationships on the show is what keeps people tuning in. “We’ve often compared it to a telenovela, in that it’s very addictive viewing,” she says. Last year, MAFS got a new audience hooked: the show became a surprise lockdown hit in the UK, pulling in 1.57 million viewers an episode at its peak. While the UK has its own MAFs, it’s Australia’s version that Britons have fallen for – perhaps thanks to the extra havoc, scandal and sex it packs in. There have been affairs, physical altercations, wine tipped over heads; last season, in an act of revenge, one husband used his wife’s toothbrush to clean faeces off their toilet. “It’s a bit of a mystery, in some ways, as to why people are so open and honest on such a public platform, but we’re very grateful they are,” McWilliams says. But MAFS hasn’t always been quite this messy. In its first four seasons, the show’s format was different: it featured fewer couples, the cast lived separately, and the weekly dinner party and commitment ceremony episodes, which regularly create explosive conflict, did not exist. But when McWilliams took over in season five, Channel Nine gave MAFS four episodes a week, and the show became a hit. That seasonwas the point, Ford says, was when MAFS changed from being a show that “genuinely explored the psychological growth and love between two people” into “the absolute unrepentant garbage fire that we know and love-hate it as today”. “They had some really toxic personalities on it [in season five]. That sucked me in – so well done, Tara, one of the most diabolically genius producers ever to have existed,” she laughs. The show has only become more salacious since season five, which Ford believes is due in part to its notoriety. As it has become more popular, more participants have signed up for what some people call “the wrong reasons” – reality TV parlance for those looking to get famous, rather than finding a soulmate. And the “science” the show’s producers claim determine their couples hasn’t often worked. Of the 71 couples the show has matched, only five remain together today. Bryce and Melissa are actually one of the few success stories: the pair are now engaged and recently welcomed twin boys. McWilliams insists that, despite perceptions, producers try to cast those genuinely looking for love: “We understand that’s not the only motivation [for going on MAFS] … but I think you’d be hard pressed to find someone who is single that doesn’t actually want to meet someone great.” But while meeting someone is one thing, Ford believes that insisting the contestants “try and make it work at all costs” could be a damaging message for viewers – particularly women. “Reality television should be seen as a diversion, not as a guide,” she says. “Generally speaking, any kind of narrative that enforces this idea that partnership leads to happiness and singledom leads to despair is really toxic and fucked up. And the idea that women are better off being with anyone, no matter how unfulfilling it is … that’s really messed up. I think that women should be taking away the message that oftentimes it’s better to be single.” Of course, that doesn’t mean she won’t tune in. “Every year, I’m like, I’m not gonna watch it. This is trash,” Ford says. “And every year I watch it.” The ninth season of Married at First Sight is airing now on Channel Nine in Australia. International broadcasts have yet to be announced This article was amended on 2 February 2022, to correct McWilliams’ surname.Queensland authorities abandoned their own contingency plans to protect vulnerable disability housing residents in the event of a Covid outbreak, instead telling accommodation providers to manage positive cases themselves and just “do what you reasonably can”. Emails obtained by Guardian Australia reveal the extent to which Queensland’s health system planning quickly became overburdened by the Omicron outbreak. Last year, the Queensland government developed a “rapid response” plan for any potential Covid outbreaks in disability residential services, which recognised “critical risks” for residents and the need to isolate any suspected case in consultation with public health officials. But on 26 January, when a disability housing provider contacted the Queensland Metro South public health unit seeking urgent assistance to relocate a positive Covid case who could not effectively isolate at the facility, they were told they would have to manage alone. “Unfortunately, the rise of Omicron means that the opportunities for ideal responses have passed, and we must all just do the best we can,” the response from a public health physician read. “I appreciate that as an organisation, you have been aware of the risk of Covid spreading within your facility, and have raised your concerns with various government bodies. “As discussed, future cases that arise will need to be managed onsite. There is limited capacity for Covid-19 cases in acute hospitals, and admission is based on clinical need. Isolation hotels are unable to accommodate people with complex needs, limiting their effectiveness for your client group. “The best advice I can provide is to do what you reasonably can.” The government’s original rapid response plan said it was “identified as being necessary given the congregate living arrangements and co-morbidities identified as being critical risks for residents living in residential services”. It identified the need to work alongside state public health units to implement infection control. The formal advice changed on 28 January, noting that where isolation was not possible facilities should “do what is within your capacity to minimise the risk of transmission”. Currently, when cases are detected, accommodation providers say phone calls to state public health units often go unanswered. It can take several days before they even receive an email response. The Supported Accommodation Providers Association represents the “unfunded” disability accommodation sector, which plugs a gap in the system for people, mostly with psychosocial disabilities or complex mental health conditions, who would likely otherwise end up homeless. Nathan Johnson, a spokesperson for Sapa, said in many cases they were homes “of last resort”. In many of the facilities, there is limited ability to isolate. Residents share bedrooms, bathrooms and common areas. Those who smoke often share cigarettes. ‘Falling through the cracks’ Johnson said the sector was “in crisis” and that facilities have been unable to obtain enough rapid antigen tests or protective equipment. A staff member at one facility said they had attempted, unsuccessfully, to find alternate accommodation for six separate Covid cases. Each time the resident was rejected for admission to a government-run medi-hotel. “Effectively our residents are falling through the cracks,” he said. “They’re not aged care, they’re not classed as homeless, so they don’t meet the criteria (to go into a medi-hotel). “The most upsetting thing is seeing how other industries are being catered to and we can’t get our emails answered. None of the things we were told would get done have come to fruition.” Another staff member at a disability housing complex told Guardian Australia they had been attempting to routinely test residents for Covid three times a week. She said the Queensland government’s Metro North public health unit advised her to stop screening and only test residents or staff who were symptomatic. “Given our cohort, it’s difficult to ascertain whether they are symptomatic,” the staff member said. Paige Armstrong, the chief executive of the Queenslanders with Disability Network, said lives were at risk because governments had given “a total lack of priority” to the needs of people with disabilities. Armstrong said people with disabilities and their families should be formally recognised as a priority cohort – similar to the aged care sector – to help access supplies, services, and support. Having tried unsuccessfully to elevate concerns for more than two weeks, Johnson said he had a “productive” meeting on Tuesday with staff of Leeanne Enoch, the state communities and housing minister. The Queensland health minister, Yvette D’ath, has previously acknowledged that Covid outbreaks had placed pressure on the health system on top of existing demand. Queensland Health said in a statement: “Queenslanders can be assured everyone who attends a Queensland Health facility will be treated, and we will prioritise those requiring the most urgent care first. “We have been responding to the pandemic for nearly two years and, thanks to good planning, our public health system is sufficiently resourced to manage current demand despite the pressure Covid-19 is placing on our hospitals. “We will continue to monitor our response to Covid-19 and adjust accordingly to ensure we can continue to deliver effective healthcare to Queenslanders.”Australians overwhelmingly support a pathway to permanent residency for migrants on temporary visas who have lived and worked in Australia for several years, new research shows. An independent survey found 78% of Australians believe migrants already living and working in Australia should have a pathway to permanent residency. The survey, commissioned by the Human Rights Law Centre, found that a majority of people believe migrants help fill skills shortages for particular jobs (58%) and bring cultural diversity to Australia (54%). One-third (33%) believe migrants work in lower-paid jobs that Australian citizens wouldn’t want to do, and nearly a quarter (24%) believe migrants counteract Australia’s ageing population. A majority of respondents (55%) agreed with the statement: “migrants should have stability to plan for their future here no matter what type of visa they hold”. A minority (26%) said migrants should only be allowed to stay in the country “for as long as an employer wants them”. The survey, conducted by Essential, interviewed 1,095 Australian residents in December. David Burke, legal director at the Human Rights Law Centre, said every person should have the opportunity to plan their life with some security. “But the federal government’s visa system is keeping people in limbo and often unable to reunite with their family even when they have lived and worked here for years. “These results show that people clearly recognise the injustice of policies that are leaving their neighbours, colleagues and friends stuck in uncertainty simply because of the visa they hold.” Burke said the disruption caused to Australia’s migration program caused by the pandemic has given Australia the opportunity to reset its approach to immigration. “Our political leaders should take steps to ensure this system reflects the values of the community by allowing migrants and refugees living in Australia to have a stable future.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Australia’s migration system was significantly reformed in the second half of the 1990s to prioritise skilled migration over family reunification, and to emphasise temporary migration to Australia. While the number of temporary visas granted has grown massively – particularly driven by an increase in international students – the number of permanent places has not grown proportionately. The “two-step” model of Australian migration – a temporary visa being converted to permanent residency – has broken down for many temporary migrants unable to find a pathway to permanency. The Covid-19 travel restrictions have dramatically reduced all forms of migration over the past two years. A report from the Migrant Workers Centre in November argued the growth of temporary migration visas had turned Australia into a “guest worker state”, and created an underclass of young, vulnerable and often exploited migrant employees. The report found nearly two-thirds (65%) of temporary visa holders had experienced wage theft. The absence of a lack of a pathway to permanent settlement exacerbated vulnerabilities: 91% of those workers who experienced wage theft had no pathway to permanent residency. “Australia’s migration regime has lost balance. The government issues an unlimited number of temporary visas while tightly controlling the number of permanent visas issued. As a result, most migrant workers are forced to hop from one temporary visa to another until exhaustion.” The chief executive of the Migrant Workers Centre, Matt Kunkel, told the Guardian “unless you’ve navigated Australia’s visa system, it’s hard to understand the huge psychological toll being ‘permanently temporary’ can cause”. “We know from our research that migrants who have a pathway to permanency are less likely to be mistreated at work and that’s a good thing for all workers in Australia.” The issues faced by temporary visa holders have been consistently identified by government agencies. The government’s productivity commission identified in 2016 that the pathway from temporary visas to permanency was “problematic”, noting that “temporary immigrants face a higher risk of being exploited by their employers than the general workforce”. The ACTU told the productivity commission “employer-sponsored visas where workers are dependent on their employer for their ongoing visa status increase the risk for exploitation as workers are less prepared to speak out if they are underpaid, denied their entitlements, or otherwise treated poorly”. The Australian Bureau of Statistics, in the same year, noted there was a threefold increase in the number of people who had arrived on a temporary visa and remained on a temporary visa eight years later, compared with the same survey from November 2013.To create his new show for the Melbourne international comedy festival, Damian Callinan raided his parents’ diaries. His mum’s records of life and love in postwar Melbourne gave the comedian plenty to work with, especially when contrasted with his dad’s retirement journals – which document the tragedy that eventually brought their relationship to an end. As well as being great material, his mum’s diaries are unsurprisingly a cherished sentimental object for Callinan. Here, he tells us why he’d rush to save those pages in a fire, as well as the story of two other important personal belongings. What I’d save from my house in a fire On the night of my dad’s funeral a few years ago, we were going through his things and I found a small notebook none of us had ever seen before. It was mum’s diary from 1946. I began reading it aloud to my siblings and the 19-year-old version of mum came back to life. The diary is a time capsule of life in Melbourne after the second world war as she balanced her social life with weekly visits to read to wounded servicemen at Heidelberg Military hospital. The diary is the focus of my Melbourne international comedy festival show. However, the journal is not all chocolates and roses. It turns out she was also a member of a Catholic cult. They wore blue cloaks, tattooed rosary beads around their necks and sacrificed the weakest altar boy on Ash Wednesday – though I haven’t cross-referenced my sources on those last couple yet. My most useful object Like many music collectors, I was quickly seduced by the economy of scale of the CD in the 90s. My sizeable vinyl collection gathered dust in a friend’s garage while I tested the integrity of my lounge room wall by adding yet another Ikea CD tower to my row of skyscrapers. I didn’t know how much I missed the ritual of putting on a record until my wife, Zillah, bought me a vintage Pye Stereogram. It is easily the best thing I’ve ever been given. Apart from looking like it’s been taken from the studio set of The Mod Squad, the sound is incredible, and it’s even got a ‘loud’ button. I’m pleased to say I am now happily reunited with my estranged vinyl family and it continues to grow and grow. I play a record at least once a day and none of us talk about the CDs packed away in boxes in my friend’s garage. The item I most regret losing From the age of seven, I obsessively collected footy cards. Such was the level of my addiction that I used to take my lunch money out of the paper bag and buy a packet of cards on the way home. I was essentially living on a daily diet of a single pink strip of Scanlens gum. My nanna supported my habit by giving me her valuable collection of vintage cigarette and liquorice sporting cards. Chicken Smallhorn and Gordon Coventry now lay face to face with Bernie Quinlan and Twiggy Dunne. Despite the sentimental (and actual) value of the collection, I just kept in an old box under my bed. In my university years when I was still living at home, my nephews often used to play with the cards. One day I was overcome with a sense of dread and checked that the box was still there. It wasn’t. Apparently one morning in my hungover state, I had said yes when they asked if they could have them. By the time I got to my brother’s place to get them back, they had already taken them to school and swapped them for a racing car set. It’s a pity I had to cut them out of my life; they were lovely kids.Inspectors from the Food Standards Agency are to check on school lunches in England to make sure they meet national standards, as part of government plans to tackle obesity within its levelling up white paper to be published on Wednesday. The white paper is also expected to include a new push to teach students about healthy eating and food preparation, with all students expected to leave school knowing how to prepare and cook at least six basic recipes, as well as adopting measures championed by the celebrity chef Jamie Oliver. The move comes amid fears that schools in some parts of the country are struggling to meet the national school food standards that have been in place since 2015, such as including no more than two portions of deep-fried food in school lunches each week. There is also evidence that childhood obesity increased markedly during the Covid pandemic, which saw physical education, school sports and other activities for children cancelled or restricted. “Obesity has got worse because of Covid. This has been especially bad in the most deprived areas. Many of our most deprived children are carrying a lockdown legacy around their waists, which is affecting their life chances,” a Whitehall source said. “No one has got this wrong deliberately but we need to make it a lot easier for everyone who is involved with feeding our kids.” Geoff Barton, general secretary of the Association of School and College Leaders, said he applauded the change in the government’s “snobby attitude” towards children learning skills, but added: “We are wary of the idea of yet another agency carrying out checks on schools on top of all the other agencies that already do so. And if there is an aim to teach every secondary school child how to cook it is difficult to see where this could now be shoehorned into an already over-crowded curriculum.” A pilot scheme to be announced in the white paper will mean the agency starts inspecting food offered by schools in a small number of local authorities later this year. The aim is to improve ways to help schools comply with the existing standards. There will also be new funding to train secondary school teachers in cooking and food preparation, with £5m over three years to give training to a teacher from every state secondary and create courses. The government wants every child to leave school knowing how to cook six recipes. The white paper also adopted a policy promoted by Oliver and Bite Back 2030, the charity the chef co-founded to lobby to improve food for young people. Last month, Oliver and the leaders of 600 state schools called for each school to publish annual food reports showing what progress it had made in meeting standards on health and nutrition. According to the white paper, the reporting of schools food arrangements will initially be voluntary but the intention is for it become mandatory. School governors are also to be given extra training on their responsibilities to improve food standards. A recent report by Bite Back highlighted the different lunch choices offered at schools across the country, with pupils on free school meals reporting they were given fewer choices. But the white paper is not thought to improve funding for children receiving free school meals, which includes all infants up to year two. The government pays £2.34 for each child’s food a day, only slightly more than it did a decade ago despite rising prices.Seth Meyers Late-night hosts responded to a shocking if not surprising admission from Donald Trump this weekend, with a Sunday night statement that said the quiet part out loud: that Vice-President Mike Pence could have overturned the election. “One thing you can always count on with Trump is that eventually he’ll tire himself out and just confess,” said Seth Meyers on Late Night. “He can’t help it. He just blurts it out. He did it with collusion, he did it with Ukraine, and that’s exactly what he did over the weekend with a statement in which he admitted he wanted his vice-president, Mike Pence, to overturn the election.” In the statement, Trump claimed “fraud and many other irregularities” in the 2020 election (no such fraud has been found) and asked: “How come the Democrats and … Republicans, like Wacky Susan Collins, are desperately trying to pass legislation that will not allow the vice-president to change the results of the election? “Actually, what they are saying, is that Mike Pence did have the right to change the outcome, and they now want to take that right away. Unfortunately, he didn’t exercise that power. He could have overturned the election!” “There’s no crime Trump could commit that he wouldn’t later confess to,” said Meyers. “He’d just exhaust all the excuses until he says, screw it, I’m guilty, baby! If it had been him instead of OJ, the quote would’ve been: ‘The gloves don’t fit, but you don’t need gloves to stab a guy.’” Trump also promised at a rally in Texas on Saturday to pardon those charged with seditious conspiracy for their role in the 6 January attack on the Capitol. “At some point you just have to admit this is a pro-insurrection movement,” Meyers argued. “If you’re at a party, and someone starts doing cocaine and someone else says, ‘hey, can I get some of that cocaine?’ and then someone else says, ‘hey, I went to the bank on the way here to get new hundred dollar bills to snort that cocaine with,’ you might turn to your spouse and say, ‘I think we’re at a cocaine party.’” Stephen Colbert On The Late Show, Stephen Colbert acknowledged the retirement of the Tampa Bay Buccaneers quarterback Tom Brady after 22 seasons and seven Super Bowl titles. “So bad news for your dad: there’s a new retiree about to dominate the pickleball league,” Colbert joked. The 44-year-old QB accomplished more than any other quarterback in the history of the NFL, even though he was drafted 199th overall. “Which just goes to show you that anyone can be successful as long as you’re one of the most gifted and attractive people in human history,” Colbert noted. “Now that Brady appears to be hanging up the old football skates, the world may finally see what we’ve all longed for: Dad Bod Brady,” he added. “Do it! Give us hope, Tom!” In other news, “while the January 6 select committee continues to look for the cause of the Capitol riot, the cause admitted to everything and threatened to do it again,” Colbert said, referencing Trump’s rally in Texas this weekend, in which pledged to “treat those people from January 6 fairly” and promised pardons. “Well, as long as you’re doling out pardons, fuck you,” Colbert retorted. Trevor Noah Donald Trump is “basically the ex that America kicked out for throwing an open-house party at the Capitol”, said Trevor Noah on The Daily Show. “And like many exes, he really wants a second chance. But instead of promising to do better next time, he’s threatening to do even worse.” Noah played clips from Trump’s weekend rally, in which he continued to spread his myths about the “stolen” 2020 election and promised to pardon those who led the 6 January attack on the Capitol. “When you think about it, it’s really smart what he’s saying,” said Noah. “Because he could’ve pardoned all of his people when January 6 happened. You realize that, right? He was the president. But he didn’t pardon them. He let them get prosecuted, and now they’re all going to jail. He let this happen! But now that his ass is on the line, now he’s like ‘man, if I was president, I’d have never let this happen to you.’ “Trump leans on his supporters really hard,” he continued. “I mean, first they had to storm the Capitol because he lost the election. Then their donations went to his legal fees, because he’s always getting sued. Now they have to protest if he gets charged? Where does it end? If Trump does go to prison, is he going to make these poor people smuggle cigarettes up their butt?”Denmark midfielder Christian Eriksen has been signed by Brentford on a deal until the end of the football season. The footballer has not played since he suffered cardiac acrrest during the Euro 2020 finals last summer. We would like to hear from people about their experiences of returning to work after being seriously ill. Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.Police and councils are potentially downplaying the scale of child sexual exploitation by criminal gangs over concerns about negative publicity, a public inquiry has found. Charities labelled the findings a “damning indictment” of responses to child exploitation across England and Wales, and called for urgent change to support and protect victims. The Independent Inquiry into Child Sexual Abuse (IICSA) said there was “a flawed assumption” that child sexual exploitation was “on the wane”, with councils and police forces denying the scale of the problem, despite evidence to the contrary. The report concluded this might be down to their determination to ensure they are not seen as “another Rochdale or Rotherham” – towns blighted by recent child sexual exploitation revelations – rather than a desire to “root out … and expose its scale”. Prof Alexis Jay, who chaired the inquiry, said: “The sexual exploitation of children by networks is not a rare phenomenon confined to a small number of areas with high-profile criminal cases. We found extensive failures by local authorities and police forces in the ways in which they tackled this sexual abuse.” The report detailed how child victims had reported being raped, abused and, in one case, forced to perform sexual acts on a group of 23 men while held at gunpoint. They were often blamed by authorities for the ordeals while some even got criminal records for offences closely linked to their sexual exploitation. Mark Russell, the chief executive of The Children’s Society charity, said the report was a “damning indictment” of responses to child exploitation. “It is simply not good enough that many children who have suffered horrendous abuse are still being failed. How many wake-up calls will be needed?” he said. “It is desperately sad that children who report abuse are too often not taken seriously by professionals or made to feel they were complicit in their exploitation.” Harriet Wistrich, the director of the Centre for Women’s Justice (CWJ) charity, which contributed to the investigation, said although welcome, the report had not engaged with the failure of the criminal justice system to prosecute these crimes. “From CWJ’s point of view, the report is helpful in identifying the need to name and understand the problem properly which includes the proper collection of data. However, [it] represents a huge missed opportunity,” she said. “There is a lack of hard-hitting recommendations which will result in real change.” The report, the 18th from the IICSA since it was established, featured testimony from more than 30 young witnesses across six case study areas – Bristol, Durham, St Helens, Swansea, Tower Hamlets and Warwickshire. It said there was evidence of child sexual exploitation by networks in all six areas, but the relevant police forces were “generally not able to provide any evidence about these networks”. Two areas – Swansea and Tower Hamlets – said there was no data to suggest there had been any child exploitation by gangs, despite evidence to the contrary. The report concluded: “It was clear from the evidence that none of the police forces or local authorities in the case study areas in this investigation had an accurate understanding of networks sexually exploiting children in their area.” There were also examples of victim-blaming, the report found, with children being described as “promiscuous” and “putting themselves at risk” in referrals to a support charity in St Helens. Similar language about victims’ behaviour was reflected across the inquiry. Survivors, many of whom had a history of self-harm and running away from home, repeatedly described how their allegations against their perpetrators were routinely dismissed by police. In one case, a girl abused from the age of 12 described how she was convicted of several offences including possession of a weapon after chasing her abuser with a bread knife after he assaulted her. John O’Brien, the secretary to the inquiry, said the claim from some authorities that there was no evidence of child exploitation on their patch went down “badly” with the IISCA panel. “It absolutely does require a culture shift. All organisations in this need to see the victim in this, not the crime,” he said. In the UK, Rape Crisis offers support for rape and sexual abuse on 0808 802 9999 in England and Wales, 0808 801 0302 in Scotland, or 0800 0246 991 in Northern Ireland. In the US, Rainn offers support on 800-656-4673. In Australia, support is available at 1800Respect (1800 737 732). Other international helplines can be found at ibiblio.org/rcip/internl.htmlA motorist who fatally drove his car into a man to try to stop him stabbing a woman has been released by police and will face no further action. The 26-year-old man known only as Abraham has been hailed as a hero for his attempts to stop the killing of Yasmin Chkaifi, 43, last week in Maida Vale, west London. At the time he was arrested on suspicion of murder, after Chkaifi’s killer, her abusive former partner Leon McCaskie, also died in the incident. On Tuesday, Scotland Yard announced the driver had been released and that he would now be treated as a witness. The move came after Abraham issued a statement via his solicitor to make it clear he had no intention of killing McCaskie and was only trying to stop him attacking Chkaifi. More than 75,000 people have signed an online petition hailing the driver as a hero and calling for him to face no charges. Abraham said he was grateful that police had taken “this sensible course of action”. In another statement issued through his solicitor, Tasnime Akunjee, Abraham said: “I will of course continue to assist them and any coroner’s inquest should the need arise. I once again wish to express my gratitude to the British public, who supported me so vocally at this most stressful and trying time.” He added: “I hope that in my actions a message has been sent to society: should you see an evil it is a duty upon you to stop it with your hands, if you cannot then you should stop it by speaking out, if you cannot then at the very least you should hate it with your heart. May peace be upon you all.” DCI Neil Rawlinson, who is leading the investigation, said: “Having reviewed the CCTV evidence and taken statements of numerous members of the public and attending officers, as well as reviewing the legal position regarding self-defence and defence of another, a decision has been taken that the driver of the car, a 26-year-old man will face no further police action. “He is considered a vital witness to our investigation and will be offered support from professionals to help him come to terms with the terrifying situation he was confronted with.” Earlier on Tuesday an inquest heard that McCaskie was wanted by the police for breaching a stalking prevention order. Chkaifi, died from multiple stab wounds when she was attacked by him at about 9am on 24 January in Chippenham Road, Maida Vale, the inquest into her death was told. Giving evidence, Rawlinson said McCaskie and Chkaifi had been in a relationship that ended years ago after “allegations of domestic abuse”. He confirmed that McCaskie, who lived “very close” to his ex-partner, had been subject to a stalking prevention order and had been charged with breaching it. A warrant was issued for McCaskie’s arrest on 4 January when he failed to appear for his first court hearing about the breach, Rawlinson said. He also confirmed that the Metropolitan police’s handling of McCaskie’s case was being examined by the police watchdog, the Independent Office for Police Conduct (IOPC). Reading his statement about the attack, Rawlinson said: “Leon accosted Yasmin in the street and repeatedly stabbed her with a knife. A member of the public, in a passing car, saw this, and used his vehicle to drive into Leon in an attempt to stop the assault. Both Leon and Yasmin were declared deceased at the scene.” Rawlinson, who leads the investigation, said police had secured CCTV footage of the attack and taken statements from several witnesses. The hearing was also told that Dr Simon Poole, a forensic pathologist, gave the interim cause of death as “multiple incised stab wounds”. Prof Fiona Wilcox, the senior coroner for inner west London, expressed her shock at the manner of Chkaifi’s death and conveyed sympathy to her family. Chkaifi’s two teenage sons, her husband, Joseph Salmon, and other members of the family were watching the proceedings via video link. Addressing the family, Wilcox said: “It is a truly shocking and distressing death, and I cannot imagine what you must be going through as a family at this time.” Wilcox formally opened and adjourned the inquest until 25 July. She said she hoped there would be a “significant update from the IOPC investigation” by then. Wilcox also opened and adjourned a separate inquest into the death of McCaskie. The interim cause of his death was given as “multiple injuries”, she said. Addressing McCaskie’s mother, Angela, who was listening to the proceedings remotely, the coroner said: “I am terribly sorry that you have lost your son in such awful circumstances.”Israel’s national police force has found evidence pointing to improper use of spyware by its own investigators to snoop on Israeli citizens’ phones. The announcement on Tuesday came two weeks after an Israeli newspaper reported a string of allegations that the police had used the NSO Group’s Pegasus software to surveil protesters, politicians and criminal suspects without authorisation from a judge. The report caused outrage in Israel and prompted the attorney general and lawmakers to launch investigations. Last month, police said a preliminary internal investigation had found no evidence of misuse of the controversial spyware. But on Tuesday, the police said a secondary inspection “found additional evidence that changes certain aspects of the state of affairs”. The statement made no mention of NSO, indicating that surveillance products developed by other Israeli firms might be under scrutiny. The company had no comment. The force’s deputy chief of investigations and intelligence, Yoav Telem, told a parliamentary oversight committee that the inspection had found “anomalies” that meant the legality of some of the police’s information collection was debatable. These led to the gathering of materials “over which there is a legal debate – whether they are covered by the world of secret monitoring”, a transcript published by the panel quoted him as saying. The police had previously denied the newspaper’s findings and said they operate according to the law. In light of the police’s findings, Israel’s outgoing attorney general, Avichai Mandelblit, said he had instructed the police “to adopt procedures immediately in order to prevent breach of authority”. Mandelblit, who completed his six-year term on Tuesday, also said he instructed his fact-finding team to submit a report about allegations of unlawful surveillance of civilians by 1 July. NSO is Israel’s best-known maker of offensive cyberware, but it is far from the only one. Its flagship product, Pegasus, allows operators to infiltrate a target’s mobile phone and gain access to the device’s contents, including messages and contacts, as well as location history. NSO has faced mounting scrutiny over Pegasus, which has been linked to snooping on human rights activists, journalists and politicians across the globe. In November, the US Commerce Department blacklisted NSO, along with an Israeli competitor, Candiru, barring the company from using certain US technologies, saying its tools had been used to “conduct transnational repression”. NSO does not identify its clients but says it sells its products only to state security agencies after receiving approval from Israel’s defence ministry. It says the products are intended to be used against criminals and terrorists and says it has strict safeguards in place to prevent abuses. Still, it says it does not control how its clients use the software and has no knowledge of who is targeted. NSO says it has cut off several customers after discovering abuses but, comparing itself to other weapons makers, it says it cannot be held responsible for the actions of clients.A whistleblower has alleged that an executive at NSO Group offered a US-based mobile security company “bags of cash” in exchange for access to a global signalling network used to track individuals through their mobile phone, according to a complaint that was made to the US Department of Justice. The allegation, which dates back to 2017 and was made by a former mobile security executive named Gary Miller, was disclosed to federal authorities and to the US congressman Ted Lieu, who said he conducted his own due diligence on the claim and found it “highly disturbing”. Details of the allegation by Miller were then sent in a letter by Lieu to the Department of Justice. “The privacy implications to Americans and national security implications to America of NSO Group accessing mobile operator signalling networks are vast and alarming,” Lieu wrote in his letter. The letter was shared with the Guardian and other media partners on the Pegasus project, a media consortium led by the Paris-based Forbidden Stories that has investigated NSO and published a series of stories about how governments around the world have used the company’s spyware to target activists, journalists, and lawyers, among others. NSO said it had no business with the mobile security company. The Guardian and media partners have separately learned that NSO is the subject of an active criminal investigation by the Department of Justice, according to four people familiar with the investigation. The investigation, they claim, is focused on allegations of unauthorised intrusions into networks and mobile devices. One American citizen whose mobile phone was hacked by a client of the spyware maker – and who asked not to be identified – said they were interviewed at length about the 2021 hacking incident by US authorities. Security researchers had found the individual was hacked while living outside the US and using a non-US mobile number. The DoJ also interviewed the Mexican journalist Carmen Aristegui, whose iPhone was hacked using NSO technology, according to security researchers who have analysed her mobile phone. According to another person familiar with the criminal investigation, the DoJ has also been in contact with a company whose users are alleged to have been targeted by clients of NSO using Pegasus spyware. The DoJ declined to comment. NSO has previously said that it does not know how its clients use its spyware, but that the clients are meant to target only serious criminals. It has said its technology has saved “thousands of lives” by thwarting terror attacks. It has also said that it investigates credible allegations of wrongdoing by its clients. NSO has for years been considered among the world’s most sophisticated makers of spyware. When it is successfully deployed, a user of Pegasus can intercept phone calls, read messages on encrypted apps, view photographs, and turn a phone into a remote listening device. The Biden administration announced in November that it was adding NSO to the commerce department’s “entity list” – in effect, an export blacklist – after it said it found evidence that the Israeli company had supplied spyware to foreign governments, which used the tools to “maliciously target” government officials, journalists, businesspeople, activists, academics and embassy workers. The allegation at the heart of congressman Ted Lieu’s letter to the DoJ dates back to 2017. In 2017, Gary Miller – the whistleblower who agreed to be interviewed by the Guardian, the Washington Post, and Forbidden Stories – was working for a company called Mobileum, which designed, developed and sold software to protect the decades-old SS7 network, a global messaging system used for legitimate purposes by mobile phone companies, but can also be used to track mobile users’ physical location. Miller was asked to lead a web voice call that he alleged in records provided to authorities was attended by NSO executives Shalev Hulio and Omri Lavie, two of the group’s co-founders. NSO, Miller said, was interested in learning more about Mobileum’s access to hundreds of mobile networks around the world. Specifically, Miller has alleged the NSO executives wanted to discuss how gaining access to the mobile networks would allow NSO to “enhance the capabilities of their surveillance software”. “They stated explicitly that their product was designed for surveillance and it was designed to surveil not the good guys but the bad guys,” Miller said. He added: “They stated multiple times that their work was authorised by government agencies. They didn’t get in the details of who those government agencies were.” As the meeting progressed, Miller alleged, a member of his own company’s leadership at Mobileum asked what NSO believed the “business model” was of working with Mobileum, since Mobileum did not sell access to the global signalling networks as a product. According to Miller, and a written disclosure he later made to federal authorities, the response allegedly made by Lavie was “we drop bags of cash at your office”. Miller said the meeting ended soon thereafter. A few months later, Miller said he submitted an anonymous “tip” to the FBI in which he reported some details of the August conversation but did not hear back from authorities. In a statement to the Guardian, Lavie’s spokesperson said: “No business was undertaken with Mobileum. Mr Lavie has no recollection of using the phrase ‘bags of cash’, and believes he did not do so. However, if those words were used they will have been entirely in jest.” A representative for Lavie also said in an email to the Guardian that Lavie “strongly denies having suggested any action that was unethical or illegal”. An NSO spokesperson said in a statement to the Guardian: “The company [has] never done any business with this company. We are not aware of any DoJ investigation. In addition, NSO does not do business using cash as a form of payment. Any suggestion otherwise demonstrates a profound lack of understanding about our company.” Hulio did not respond to a request for comment. Miller has since left Mobileum and is being represented by attorney John Tye at Whistleblower Aid. Miller is currently working as a mobile security researcher at Citizen Lab at the University of Toronto. He filed his whistleblower complaint to authorities at the DoJ, the Securities and Exchange Commission, and the Federal Communications Commission in June 2021. He then shared his account with Lieu in December 2021. There is no evidence that Mobileum ever engaged in another meeting with NSO or gave the company access to any mobile networks. Eran Gorev, who at the time was a managing partner at Francisco Partners, a US-based investment company that had an interest in NSO in August 2017, and is listed in Miller’s disclosures to authorities as having attended the meeting, said in a statement to the Guardian that he had not been involved in NSO for more than three years and had “no recollection” of ever meeting with or speaking with Mobileum. He said if such a meeting did take place, he would “absolutely never make a comment like this” and that if someone else did, “it would “clearly have been made in jest and a colloquial expression/cultural misunderstanding”. Gorev also said that during the time he was “involved” with NSO, the company complied with all applicable laws with “strict oversight by the Israeli government” and had instituted a business ethics committee. Asked about the details of the meeting, Mobileum said in a statement shared with the Pegasus project: “Mobileum does not have – and has never had – any business relationship with NSO Group.” It added: “Mobileum takes the data privacy of its customers information very seriously and has implemented a robust cybersecurity program to prevent any breaches. Mobileum does not have any direct access to the customer’s network and is unable to provide any kind of access, including SS7 access, to any third party.” There is no evidence that the DoJ is actively investigating Miller’s allegations. In an interview with the Pegasus project, Lieu, a former prosecutor, said: “It just looks really fishy, and it doesn’t smell right, which is why I wanted the justice department to investigate.” NSO declined to comment on Lieu’s remark.Time to wrap up - here are today’s main stories: We’ll be back in the morning. GW Britain’s FTSE 100 index has begun February with a 1% rally. The blue-chip stock index has closed 71 points higher at 7536 points. Silver miner Fresnillo (+4%) and technology-focused investor Scottish Mortgage Investment Trust (+3.6%), followed by a clutch of miners and oil giant Shell. Banks and travel companies also had a solid day. But Ocado led the fallers, dropping almost 5%. Concerns about the pace of US interest rate rises may have faded a little, as michael Hewson of CMC Markets explains: European markets have got off to a strong start to February, after last night’s push back by a number of Federal Reserve officials, who poured cold water on some of the hawkish narratives being put out with respect to the Federal Reserve’s hiking timeline. This timely corrective, from the likes of Bostic, George and Daly, appears to have reset expectations of a 25bps move in March, and away from the narrative that had been suggesting we might see a move of 50bps. This corrective could get added weight later this week, if we get a weak January payrolls report on Friday. Over the last two weeks we’ve seen consensus expectations revised lower from 238k to 150k, although we are seeing some estimates which suggest that we might see a negative number, due to an increase in sickness levels as a result of Omicron. Amongst the best performers we’re seeing some decent gains amongst the basic resource and banks, with the likes of Rio Tinto, Glencore, and Anglo American near the top of the pile, while HSBC and Lloyds Banking Group are also doing well. Supermarkets have been a mixed bag after the latest Kantar grocery sales data for the 12 weeks to 23rd January showed a fall of 3.8%, on a like for like basis. Rising prices also played a part in the decline, with prices rising sharply in the period after Christmas, by as much as 3.8%, a rise of 0.3% from December. In terms of market share only Tesco and Waitrose improved their market share over the 12-week period, despite weaker sales compared to a year ago, helping to push Tesco shares up on the day. Sainsbury saw sales fall 4.8% year on year, as well as losing some market share, with the shares slipping back. Vodafone and BT shares are also lower ahead of their earnings numbers later this week. The family behind Blackwell’s, the UK’s largest independent bookseller, has put the business up for sale after ditching a plan to hand it to employees. A deal would take Blackwell’s, which operates 18 shops and a website, out of family control for the first time in its 143-year history. The retailer said it was looking for an external investor after a plan to put the business into employee ownership fell through. It said that goal “ultimately proved to be difficult, due in large part to the ongoing uncertainty on the high street caused by Covid-19”. Blackwell’s, which was founded in Oxford and operates Heffers in Cambridge as well as flagship stores in London and Edinburgh, said underlying sales for the year to December 2021 rose 1.9%, a figure that suggests falling store sales and rising online trade. Oil giant Exxon Mobil has posted its biggest profit in almost eight years, as it reaps the benefits of the rally in energy prices. Exxon made fourth-quarter profit of $8.8bn, which works out at $2.08 per share, above analysts’ forecast of $1.94. Soaring oil and gas prices, higher volumes and asset sales all boosted its income. In the same quarter a year ago, Exxon made adjusted profit of 3 cents a share. For the full year, Exxon made profits of $23bn, a recovery from the $22bn loss in 2020. It is conducting a $10bn share buyback programme to return money to shareholders. Exxon’s CEO, Darren Woods, says: “Our effective pandemic response, focused investments during the down-cycle, and structural cost savings positioned us to realize the full benefits of the market recovery in 2021,” That market recovery has also driven up the cost of fuel at forecourts and petrol stations, and is about to see UK families hit with a surge in energy bills in April. Back on Wall Street, the S&amp;P 500 index is still trading lower - down around 0.4%. The number of openings at US companies has risen, while the number of Americans quitting their jobs remains high. There were 10.925m unfilled positions at US firms in December, up from 10.775 in November, back towards the record highs last autumn. The Labor Department also reports that nearly 4.4m workers quit their jobs last month, slightly down on the record 4.5m quits in November. Just 1.17m workers were laid off, down from 1.3m in November, as firms looked to hold onto staff due to problems filling vacancies. The report shows that America’s jobs market remains tight, even as the Omicron variant hit the economy at the end of last year. Here’s some analysis from economist Nick Bunker of jobs site Indeed.com A second survey of America’s factories, from the Institute of Supply Management also shows that growth slowed in January, but prices kept rising. The ISM’s healthcheck on purchasing managers report found that the sector kept expanding, in a “demand-driven, supply chain-constrained environment”. Its January Manufacturing PMI came in at 57.6%, a decrease of 1.2 percentage points from December’s 58.8%, with growth in new orders and production both slowing. The prices charged by manufacturers increased, “indicating that supplier pricing power continues to rise.” The employment index rose, while many firms still reported problems with suppliers and deliveries. US manufacturing grew at the slowest rate since October 2020 last month, as demand softened and factories struggled to hire staff. Data firm IHS Markit’s US manufacturing PMI, just released, found that output and new order growth slowed last month, amid supply and labor shortages. The rate of job creation eased to the lowest rate in the 18-month sequence of growth, while absences due to the surge in omicron cases also led to staff shortages. But encouragingly, business confidence picked up to 14-month high, with purchasing managers hopeful that supply chain problems were easing. This meant the IHS Markit US Manufacturing Purchasing Managers’ Index dropped to 55.5 in January, down from 57.7 in December, showing slower growth. It’s a little higher than the earlier released ‘flash’ estimate of 55.0, implying the sector picked up towards the end of January. Shares in logistics giant United Parcel Service have jumped 13% after it reported strong results before the opening bell. UPS beat expectations with its profits and revenues in the last quarter, as its domestic package business continued to perform well, and lifted its quarterly dividend by almost 50% UPA also gave a rosy outlook for 2022, predicting revenues would beat market expectations, as higher shipping rates and e-commerce demand boosted its operations. After ending a volatile January with a late rally, Wall Street has begin February cautiously. The Dow Jones industrial average is flat in early trading, while the broader S&amp;P 500 index has dipped by 0.2%. The Nasdaq Composite index of tech stocks has dropped by 0.6%. In other car news...Aston Martin plans to phase out vehicles that rely solely on the internal combustion engine, and only sell electric or hybrid cars within four years. Lawrence Stroll, chair of the luxury carmaker, has told the FT: “By 2026 we will be fully electrified.” Customers will still have the option of a combustion engine in its hybrid cars, though, with Stroll saying: “I can’t tell you that 100 per cent of Aston Martin customers want an electric vehicle. Tesla is recalling nearly 54,000 cars and SUVs because their “Full Self-Driving” software lets them roll through stop signs. Associated Press has the details: Documents posted on Tuesday by US safety regulators say Tesla will disable the feature with an over-the-internet software update. The “rolling stop” feature allows vehicles to go through intersections with all-way stop signs at up to 5.6mph (9 km/h). Tesla agreed to the recall after two meetings with the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA), according to documents. Tesla said it knows of no crashes or injuries caused by feature. The recall covers Model S sedans and X SUVs from 2016 through 2022, as well as 2017 to 2022 Model 3 sedans and 2020 through 2022 Model Y SUVs. Selected Tesla drivers are “beta testing” the “Full Self-Driving” software on public roads. The company says the cars cannot drive themselves and drivers must be ready to take action at all times. A firmware release to disable the rolling stops is expected to be sent out in early February. The pound has risen to its highest level in nearly a week against the US dollar, as traders move out of safe-haven assets into riskier currencies. Sterling has gained half a cent to above $1.349, as markets anticipate UK interest rates rising on Thursday. Lawrence Kaplin, chief market strategist at international business payments firm Equals Money, says: Market attention is now firmly on Thursday’s Bank of England rate-setting meeting where rates are 100% priced in to rise from 0.25% to 0.5%. Following last week’s US Fed meeting where markets were completely wrong-footed by a very hawkish Chair Powell, positioning ahead of the MPC is returning to neutral as traders square up for fear of being caught out again. Back in the markets, shares have pushed higher in the City and across Europe. The FTSE 100 index of blue-chip shares is nearly 80 points higher, or 1.05%, while the pan-European Stoxx 600 is 1.5% higher as stocks make a good start to February. Production of carbon dioxide for use in producing meat, beer and fizzy drinks has been secured for at least three months under a new industry deal. Meat processors, brewers, bakers and soft drink producers all use CO2 in making and packaging their goods. It is also required for the humane slaughter of animals including pigs and chickens, and is used by hospitals and nuclear power plants. A short government statement said a new deal would enable CF Fertiliser plant in Billingham, County Durham, to continue to operate. The plant was scheduled for potential shutdown this week after a three-month emergency deal brokered by the government came to an end on Monday. That deal was prompted by a crisis in CO2 supplies in late September as high energy prices combined with annual maintenance shutdowns to bring UK production to a near halt. UK food producers and brewers had warned there could be shortages of meat, beer and fizzy drinks, as well as higher prices, unless CO2 supplies were secured. Here’s the full story: UK bank Virgin Money struck an upbeat tone about the UK recovery this morning, as the economic backdrop strengthened and Covid-19 restrictions are eased. Virgin Money’s chief executive, David Duffy, told the City: “Virgin Money’s performance in the first quarter has been strong. Our balance sheet is performing well, asset quality remains robust and we have increased guidance on net interest margin for 2022. We are optimistic about the pace of recovery of the UK economy based on growing consumer and business confidence, underpinned by lower unemployment.” The net interest margin is the difference between the rates at which Virgin Money raising money through deposits, and lends it out to borrowers. Virgin Money also reported a 3% rise in unsecured lending, driven by growth in credit cards, while mortage lending dipped 0.5%. Business lending fell by 2.2%, due to “weaker market demand, seasonality and lower Government-backed lending”. Almost 1,500 jobs are at risk at Tesco as the supermarket ditches night shifts in more than 80 stores and almost 40 petrol stations. The potential job cuts emerged only a day after the UK’s biggest supermarket chain said it would be shutting its Jack’s discount chain, with the potential loss of about 130 jobs, and closing more of its deli and meat counters. Overnight stock replenishment will now be done during the day in 36 large stores and 49 convenience stores. At 36 stores, petrol stations will be converted to be “pay-at-pump only” overnight. Jason Tarry, the chief executive of Tesco’s UK and Irish business, said: “We operate in a highly competitive and fast-paced market and our customers are shopping differently, especially since the start of the pandemic. “We are always looking at how we can run our business as simply and efficiently as possible, so that we can reinvest in the things that matter most to customers. The changes we are announcing today will help us do this.” Unemployment across the eurozone has dropped to a record low, as the region recovered from the economic shock of Covid-19. Despite the impact of the Omicron variant, the number of unemployed people fell by 185,000 in the euro area last month, and by 210,000 in the wider EU. That pulled the eurozone unemployment rate down to 7% in December, the lowest since the eurozone was created. A year earlier it was 8.2%, before vaccine rollouts helped hospitality firms, shops and travel businesses to reopen, spurring the recovery. Government spending programmes and job protection schemes, and the European Central Bank’s stimulus package, also supported the economy. Paolo Gentiloni, European Commissioner for Economy, says the drop in unemployment shows the success of the ‘collective response’ to the crisis. Carsten Brzeski of ING points out there are still wide regional differences, despite the recovery. Except for the Netherlands, all eurozone economies saw unemployment rates dropping or at least remaining constant in December. Still, there are significant differences across the eurozone with unemployment rates ranging from 3.2% in Germany to 13% in Spain. Demand for workers remains strong, resulting in vacancy rates breaking pre-pandemic highs. Admittedly, furlough schemes still support – part of – the job market, but the support has been reduced and we expect a further drop in furlough schemes in the coming months without adverse effects on unemployment. Staff at the UK’s financial watchdog have taken a step closer to striking over planned cuts to pay and conditions, following an indicative ballot in favour of industrial action, my colleague Julia Kollewe reports. The Unite union said its members who work for the Financial Conduct Authority had voted by 87% in support of industrial action in a non-binding ballot, without giving further details on the number of people who had voted. It urged the FCA to come to the negotiating table and threatened to proceed to a full industrial action ballot unless a negotiated settlement is reached. Unite, which is not formally recognised by the FCA as its staff union, argues that the pay cuts, drawn up by the new chief executive Nikhil Rathi as part of a transformation plan, would damage the interests of savers, borrowers and businesses by creating a “bargain basement regulator”. The City watchdog plans to overhaul itself after scathing criticism over its handling of the London Capital &amp; Finance (LC&amp;F) investment scandal, which wiped out the savings of 11,600 investors. The FCA chair Charles Randell, a former Slaughter and May lawyer, is stepping down early from his post amid the turmoil. The plan involves abolishing cash bonuses (which make up 10%-12% of pay), as well as what the union calls “unfair” changes to the staff appraisal system, plans to cut staff pension rights and lower pay for staff in Edinburgh. Unite said pay inequality was unusually high by the standards of public sector regulators, arguing that the FCA has around 40 executives who earn more than the prime minister. The union said the changes had sent morale among FCA staff plummeting and led to an exodus. The FCA, which employs 4,200 people, denied that the staff appraisal system was changing. It said it had already responded to staff concerns, by upping pay rises for those who meet their performance objectives to 5% this year and 4% next year from an initially planned 2%. New pay bands, including different pay ranges for those based outside London, meant that 800 of the lowest paid staff, such as support, would receive average pay rises of £3,800 this year, it added. Sharon Graham, Unite general secretary officer, said: “It is time for the FCA management to come to the negotiating table and ensure they avoid damaging the important work of the regulator. Unite will sit down and negotiate through ACAS [Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration Service] as soon as the FCA agrees; the ball is in FCA’s court now. “While the proposed cuts at the regulator is good news for fraudsters and rip-off merchants it is bad news for people with savings, loans, mortgages and pensions as experienced and committed staff are being forced out of the door.” An FCA spokesperson defended the planned changes, saying the regulator had held 77 meetings with staff: “The proposals in the consultation would ensure the FCA continues to provide one of the best, if not the best, employment packages of any regulator or enforcement agency in the UK. Under the proposals, most colleagues will receive base salary rises of at least 5% this year and 4% next, with many receiving significantly higher amounts. “We have undertaken significant consultation with our colleagues on these proposed changes and expect to publish the outcome by March, following consideration by the FCA board.” German unemployment fell in January, official figures showed this morning, despite the recent surge in Covid-19 cases. The Federal Labour Office said the number of people out of work fell by 48,000 in seasonally adjusted terms to 2.345 million, pulling the seasonally adjusted jobless rate down to 5.1%. Economists polled by Reuters had forecast a fall of 6,000. Daniel Terzenbach, a senior official at the Labour Office, says: “The job market got off to a good start in 2022.” Back in the housing market, UK lenders approved more mortgages than expected in December. The Bank of England reports that approvals for house purchases, an indicator of future borrowing, rose to above 71,000 in December, up from 67,859 in November. That’s above the average in the year before the pandemic. It’s another sign that the housing market remained solid at the turn of the year, despite the end of the stamp duty holiday and the Omicron surge. Joshua Elash, director of property lender MT Finance, explains: ‘With inflation beginning to bite and interest rates expected to rise further, we anticipate increased demand for mortgage borrowing in the immediate to short term as would-be homeowners seek to secure a good, fixed-rate mortgage before they become less attractive. The BoE’s data also shows consumers borrowed an extra £831m in credit last month, including £386m more on credit cards. That’s a little lower than the £1bn increase in November, showing that Omicron didn’t put a big dent in household borrowing. Adam Hoyes, assistant economist at Capital Economic, says: The £0.8bn rise in consumer credit in December shows that consumers exercised a touch more caution as Omicron COVID-19 cases surged at the end of last year, but it still suggests the economy didn’t collapse. What’s more, with restrictions now eased and COVID-19 cases now much lower than they were at their peak in early January, consumers’ appetite for borrowing may soon strengthen a bit. Household savings slowed in December, though. Around £2.7bn was deposited in banks and building societies, and £500m into National Savings and Investment accounts - much slower than the average monthly net flow of £10.6bn in the previous year. Fhaheen Khan, senior economist at Make UK (which represents manufacturers) warns that cost pressures will continue to rise this year, piling pressure on producers: Manufacturing continues to expand and recruit thanks to a robust backlog of work, although January has evidently been a bit slow for business as many companies aimed to get ahead of the inflation spiral by stock building just before the end of last year. Fortunately, there are early signals of lead times improving and the pace of input inflation slowing, signs which offer a glimmer of hope for the sector’s desire to return to normal. However further cost pressures are just around the corner and this year will test the limits of manufacturers’ ability to survive as the economy continues to rebound. For now, it’s too early to say whether the precautionary “just in case” decisions manufacturers are making will serve to shield them from upcoming challenges.” Factories fared well in the face of the omicron variant, says Maddie Walker, Accenture’s Industry X lead in the UK: “The uptick in production output shows the UK economy is making a jump start in 2022, with manufacturers showing remarkable resilience during the Omicron wave. While the pandemic continues to pose threats on factories and labour shortages, we are seeing evidence that supply chain bottlenecks are easing. However, with inflation set to surge, a sharp rise in prices of raw materials will be a major cause of concern this year. Many manufacturers continue to invest in digital technologies, like intelligent automation and 5G connectivity, to help overcome inflationary pressures and maintain their margins. It’s a vital reminder that British manufacturers must revise their operations and upskill their workers in order to embrace digitisation and work towards long-term growth, improved worker safety, and productivity.” Victoria Scholar, head of investment at interactive investor, points out that export growth remains modest, despite the improvement at supply chains: UK January final manufacturing PMI hit 57.3, firmly above the 50 boom-bust divide and comfortably topping expectations for 56.9. However it was a slight slowdown month-on-month following December’s 57.9 point reading, extending the declines we’ve seen since the peak in May last year. In the UK’s latest monthly GDP estimate for November, manufacturing was the biggest contributor to the production sector, increasing by 1.1%, with positive growth in 9 out of the 13 manufacturing sub-sectors. As supply chain bottlenecks start to ease, manufacturing and production have started to pick up. However demand growth remains sluggish driven by a slowdown in exports. Duncan Brock, Group Director at the Chartered Institute of Procurement &amp; Supply, says: “The UK economy continued to strengthen at the beginning of the year buoyed up by strong confidence amongst the UK’s makers, higher job creation levels and output at the strongest rate since July 2021. “There was some disappointment in the lowest levels of new orders since February 2021 but moderate improvements in export orders balanced out the weaker rise in domestic work. But price pressures remain at “stomach-churning levels”, he adds: Prices rose for another month and every month for the last two years as higher food, energy and material prices continue to act as a drag on business costs and recovery in the UK marketplace.” British manufacturing output grew at the fastest pace in six months in January as factories shrugged off the impact of Omicron, and global supply chain pressures began to ease. Factories have reported that output and employment grew at a faster rate last month, while inflation pressures became less intense. The IHS Markit/CIPS Purchasing Managers’ Index (PMI) showed the output index rose to 54.5 in January - its highest since July 2021 - up from 53.6 in December. That’s stronger than an initial flash estimate of 53.8 released last month, indicating that the economy may have strengthened as Covid-19 cases fell back from record levels last month. Markit says: Production volumes rose for the twentieth successive month in January. The rate of expansion accelerated for the third month running to its highest since July 2021. Increased output reflected rising new order intakes, efforts to tackle backlogs of work and a slight improvement in export demand. Some firms also noted that supply chain stresses, staff shortages and slower growth of new work had stymied efforts to raise production further. The headline PMI, which measures activity across the sector, dipped to a four-month low of 57.3 in January from 57.9 in December. It was pulled down by a slowdown in new order growth, and faster deliveries from suppliers, as the strains on global supply chains eased (delays push up the PMI, as they typically show higher demand, rather than supply chain disruption). But, manufacturers did warn that raw material shortages, supplier capacity, transportation delays and difficulty in sourcing goods were still issues. Rob Dobson, Director at IHS Markit, says: “UK manufacturing made a solid start to 2022, showing encouraging resilience on the face of the Omicron wave, with growth of output accelerating as companies reported fewer supply delays. Causes for concern remain, however, as new orders growth slowed, exports barely rose, staff absenteeism remained high and manufacturers’ ongoing caution regarding supply chain disruptions led to the beefing up of safety stocks. Here’s a breakdown of how UK supermarkets fared in the last three months: Supermarkets were up against ‘tough comparisons’ against the high demand of the lockdowns at the start of 2021, with spending still 8.0% higher than pre-pandemic times. Eurozone factories grew at the fastest pace in five months in January, as the manufacturing sector gained momentum. Data firm IHS Markit reports that production, new orders and employment all grew at a faster rate, alongside encouraging signs that supply chain issues are starting to abate. Its latest survey of purchasing managers across the euro area found that: Final Eurozone Manufacturing PMI at 58.7 in January, up from 58 in December, showing faster growth [any reading over 50 indicates expansion] Faster expansions in output and new orders; employment growth improves to five-month high Least marked deterioration in supplier performance for a year Austria (whose economy shrank in the last quarter of 2021 during Covid-19 lockdowns) had the strongest-growing manufacturing sector in January, while faster expansions were also seen in the Netherlands, Germany and Ireland. Manufacturing growth in Spain was strong and unchanged from December, while slower improvements were seen for Italy, Greece and France. Input price inflation eased to a nine-month low, meaning costs rose at a slower rate. But firms took “a more aggressive approach to price setting”, with factory gate charges rising at a faster rate -- showing that inflationary pressures are still rippling through the economy. Chris Williamson, chief business economist at IHS Markit said: “Eurozone manufacturers appear to be weathering the Omicron storm better than prior COVID-19 waves so far, with firms reporting the largest production and order book improvements for four months in January. Prospects have also brightened, with a further easing in the number of supply chain delays playing a key role in prompting producers to revise up their expectations for growth in the coming year to the highest since last June. Prices of savoury snacks, crisps and beef rose the most as grocery inflation increased to 3.8% in the four weeks to January 23, reports Reuters, adding: Kantar also noted there was evidence of people scrubbing up as work from home directives ended and socialising increased. It said razor blade sales rose by 14% and spend on deodorant increased by 20% as Britons strived to make themselves presentable. There was also a Dry January effect -- sales of alcohol-free beer rose by 5%, while sales of retailer’s own-label ‘healthy’ ranges were up 8%. Annual shopping bills in the UK are set to rise by around £180 on average as inflation pushes up the cost of groceries. Market analysts Kantar report that annual grocery price inflation rose to 3.8% over the last four weeks (to 23 January), up 0.3 percentage points from December. Prices are rising on many fronts, and the weekly shop is no exception, says Fraser McKevitt, head of retail and consumer insight, at Kantar’s Worldpanel Division. Like-for-like grocery price inflation, which assumes that shoppers buy exactly the same products this year as they did last year, increased again this month. Taken over the course of a 12-month period, this 3.8% rise in prices could add an extra £180 to the average household’s annual grocery bill. This squeeze is likely to push shoppers towards low-cost products, McKevitt adds: We’re now likely to see shoppers striving to keep costs down by searching for cheaper products and promotions. Supermarkets that can offer the best value stand to win the biggest slice of spend.” Last month, journalist and campaigner Jack Monroe warned that lower-cost alternatives were “stealthily being extinguished from the shelves”, hurting the poorest in society: Kantar also reports that supermarket sales in the UK fell by 3.8% over the latest 12-week period, despite the omicron variant hitting hospitality over the Christmas period. Basket sizes are now 10% smaller than this time last year, hitting their lowest level since the beginning of the pandemic, while footfall increased by 5% as every major retailer was busier in their stores. McKevitt adds: Changing habits were most marked in London, where take-home sales of food and drink decreased by 11%. This suggests that people in the capital were the quickest to embrace eating out in cafés, pubs and restaurants, as many of us returned to city centres. Retail analyst Steve Dresser, the chief executive of Grocery Insight, has tweeted more key points: In the City, stocks have made a solid start to February. The FTSE 100 index of blue-chip shares has jumped 0.9%, or 70 points, to 7534 points. Investment trust Scottish Mortgage, which invests in technology companies, is leading the risers, up 3.3%, following the recovery on the Nasdaq last night. Mining companies are also higher. European stock markets have also rallied in early trading, after a weak January. Graham Cox, founder of the Bristol-based Self-Employed Mortgage Hub, reports that the cost of living squeeze is weighing on demand: “Mortgage demand has picked up a little in the second half of January. But overall, we’re noticing borrowers are turning cautious, fearful of the economic outlook. While there is a fundamental shortage of properties on the market, and housing supply generally, all the factors on the demand side are going in the wrong direction. National Insurance, energy bills, the cost of food, fuel and mortgages are all going up. There could be a rude awakening in 2022 for those who believe house prices can only ever go up.” Limited supply of homes on the market could support prices, though, points out Andrew Montlake, managing director of the UK-wide mortgage broker, Coreco: “Though the property market smashed it in January, the rest of the year will likely see a cool-down in the rate of price growth due to inflation and rising interest rates. However, values are unlikely to fall as mortgage rates remain exceptionally low, people are keen to avoid renting and the ‘race for space’ continues apace. As ever, prices are also being propped up by a chronic lack of supply.” Britain’s housing market has made its strongest start to the year since 2005, with annual house price growth rising to 11.2%, according to the UK’s biggest building society. Nationwide said the average price of a home hit £255,556 in January, the sixth consecutive monthly increase. The annual growth rate accelerated 0.8 percentage points from 10.4% the previous month, reaching its highest level since June. Robert Gardner, Nationwide’s chief economist, said: “Housing demand has remained robust. Mortgage approvals for house purchase have continued to run slightly above pre-pandemic levels despite the surge in activity in 2021 as a result of the stamp duty holiday, which encouraged buyers to bring forward their transactions to avoid additional tax. “Indeed, the total number of property transactions in 2021 was the highest since 2007 and around 25% higher than in 2019, before the pandemic struck. At the same time, the stock of homes on estate agents’ books has remained extremely low, which is contributing to the continued robust pace of house price growth.” Here’s the full story: Irn-Bru owner AG Barr is lifting its prices as it battles rising cost pressures. In a trading update, AG Barr reports that it is facing inflationary pressures, particularly across packaging and energy linked commodities, and responding with higher prices. We have initiated several cost control actions to reduce the impact of these rising costs and have adjusted our pricing with customers where appropriate. With the published rate of inflation in the UK now above 5%, the highest level for 20 years, we will continue to seek opportunities across the coming year to offset the impact on our business. AG Barr also makes the Rubicon sparkling drinks range, and Funkin cocktail mixers. It says trading was strong in the year to 30 January 2022, with sales expected to be 17.5% higher than the previous year -- marginally ahead than its revised guidance issued in November. Irn-Bru was a surprise hit at the Cop26 climate talks three months ago, with US congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez posting an Instagram video of herself praising the beverage. Marc von Grundherr, director of London estate agent Benham and Reeves, says demand is picking up in the capital (after the pandemic encouraged people to move of London): The London market looks poised to outperform the wider UK over the coming year. We’ve seen a huge uplift in both tenant and homebuyer demand following the pandemic inspired exodus and many have now realised that London is where they want to be, not just where they need to be. Foreign homebuyers are also returning at quite a rate, many of whom are unphased about rising inflation or the resulting increase in interest rates and this will help rejuvenate the London property market considerably.” Property experts are agreeing that the market will slow during 2022, after a rapid start to the year: Jeremy Leaf, north London estate agent, says the market was resilient in January: ’[Nationwide’s survey] It confirms what we have seen on the ground – a resilient market with prices still rising in response to improving but continuing low stock levels. ‘Looking forward, higher interest rates and inflation will inevitably have some impact on the pace of price increases and number of transactions.’ Tomer Aboody, director of property lender MT Finance, says an ‘overflow’ of deals boosted the market in January: ‘A strong start to 2022 with the overflow of deals which didn’t transact in December continues the trend of the extraordinary past 15 months or so, with near continuous growth month-on-month. ‘There’s still huge demand from buyers who are taking advantage of the low interest rate environment and stretching themselves to get their dream home. ‘However, with interest rates expected to increase along with inflation, impacting disposal income and deposits saved by buyers, the market is likely to slow down this year as affordability gets tougher.’ Emma Fildes of property agency Brick Weaver also sees a slowdown later this year: While the outlook remains uncertain, it is likely that the housing market will slow this year, adds Nationwide’s chief economist Robert Gardner. He points out that house price growth has outstripped earnings growth by a wide margin since the pandemic struck and, as a result, houses are less affordable: “For example, a 10% deposit on a typical first-time buyer home is now equivalent to 56% of total gross annual earnings, a record high. Similarly, a typical mortgage payment as a share of take-home pay is now above the long run average, despite mortgage rates remaining close to alltime lows. The pressures on household finances will also dampen demand: “Consumer price inflation reached 5.4% in December, its fastest pace since 1992.This is more than double the Bank of England’s 2% target and inflation is set to rise further in the coming months as the energy price cap is increased. This rapid rise in inflation has been an important factor denting consumer confidence in recent months, especially how people see their own personal financial situation evolving, although as yet, this has done little to dent housing market activity. Plus, higher interest rates could cool the markets -- if it leads to higher mortgages rates, Gardner concludes: This will further reduce housing affordability if it feeds through to higher mortgage rates, although to date a significant proportion of the rise in longer term interest rates seen in recent months has been absorbed by lenders Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. UK house prices have begun 2022 with strong gains, as robust demand and a shortage of properties for sale continue to support the market. Average house prices jumped by 0.8% in January, lender Nationwide reports this morning, which lifts the annual rate of house price inflation to 11.2%, up from 10.4% in December. It’s the strongest start to the year since 2005, and takes the average house price on Nationwide’s survey to £255,556 mark. It’s the sixth consecutive monthly increase in house prices, explains Robert Gardner, Nationwide’s chief economist: “Housing demand has remained robust. Mortgage approvals for house purchase have continued to run slightly above pre-pandemic levels, despite the surge in activity in 2021 as a result of the stamp duty holiday, which encouraged buyers to bring forward their transactions to avoid additional tax. “Indeed, the total number of property transactions in 2021 was the highest since 2007 and around 25% higher than in 2019, before the pandemic struck. “At the same time, the stock of homes on estate agents’ books has remained extremely low, which is contributing to the continued robust pace of house price growth. Higher borrowing costs might slow the market this year, though, as the cost of living crisis also squeezes household budgets. The Bank of England is widely expected to raise UK interest rates on Thursday, from 0.25% to 0.5%, after inflation hit its highest levels in almost 30 years. Also coming up today Surveys of purchasing managers in the UK, US and eurozone will show how factories were hit by omicron, and the persistent supply chain problems, in January. European stock markets are on track to open higher, as investors look to put January behind them. As we blogged last night, the pan-European Stoxx 600 fell almost 5% last month, the worst month since October 2020. On Wall Street, the US S&amp;P 500 lost 5.3% during January, its weakest performance since March 2020, as worries about US interest rate rises hit tech stocks hard. 2022 has certainly been volatile, with energy stocks surging and technology notable weak: Markets are adjusting to the Federal Reserve’s phasing out of the massive stimulus provided over the last two years, says Naeem Aslam of Avatrade. Moving forward, the American economy is expected to expand further, and companies are expected to report solid earnings supported by strong demand and a global economic recovery. Furthermore, the Federal Reserve is likely to continue tapering with extreme caution so that investors are not scared off and a tantrum is avoided. This perspective was evident in Esther George’s, President of the Kansas City Fed, comments that it is in “no one’s interest to try to upset the economy with unexpected adjustments” and that Fed officials are working hard to keep shifts in its monetary policy “gradual” and less “disruptive”. The agenda 7am GMT: Nationwide house price index for January 8.55am GMT: German unemployment report for January 9am GMT: Eurozone manufacturing report for January (final reading) 9.30am GMT: UK manufacturing report for January (final reading) 9.30am GMT: US mortgage approvals for January 10am GMT: Eurozone unemployment report for December 1.30pm GMT: Canadian GDP report for November 2.45pm GMT: UK manufacturing report for January (final reading) 3pm GMT: JOLTs Job Openings (DEC)Downing Street has said this afternoon that, if Boris Johnson is fined by the police over illegal parties at No 10, the public will be told. At a lobby briefing this morning the PM’s spokesman refused to give that assurance, prompting protests from the opposition. (See 4.27pm.) The Commons Speaker has rebuked Johnson for making a false insinuation that Keir Starmer refused to prosecute the serial sex offender Jimmy Savile, but stopped short of demanding an apology. Johnson is about to hold a press conference in Kyiv with Volodymyr Zelenskiy, the Ukrainian president. There will be live coverage here. The Boris Johnson press conference in Ukraine will be starting soon. My colleague Oliver Holmes is covering it on our Ukraine live blog. Getting concessions out of the Downing Street press office is akin to squeezing blood out of a stone. Yesterday No 10, and Boris Johnson himself, spent most of the day, refusing to commit to the full Sue Gray report once the police investigation is over, before backing down shortly before Johnson had a private meeting with his MPs (some of whom were furious that he would not make this promise). This morning No 10 refused to commit to disclosing the names of anyone in Downing Street who might be fined by the police over parties, including Johnson himself. (See 1.48pm.) This line also sounded unsustainable – not least because, even though the Met says it would not disclose the names itself [see 2.21pm], it is notorious for leaking information like this to the media. And this afternoon No 10 shifted its position. At the afternoon lobby briefing, talking about this issue, the prime minister’s spokesperson said: Obviously we are aware of the significant public interest with regard to the prime minister and we would always look to provide what updates we can on him, specifically. Asked if that meant No 10 would say if Johnson was given a fine, the spokesman said: “Hypothetically, yes.” Earlier Labour said it would be unthinkable for the public not to be told about the PM being fined in these circumstances. (See 3.30pm.) Peter Aldous, who represents Waveney in Suffolk, has become the latest Tory MP to declare that he has written a letter to the chairman of the 1922 Committee calling for a vote of no confidence in Boris Johnson. He says Johnson resigning would be best for the country, the government and the party. Victims of Jimmy Savile, the TV personality and persistent paedophile and sexual predator, have been “disgusted” by Boris Johnson’s false claim that Keir Starmer was to blame for him not being prosecuted (see 9.28am), according to Richard Scorer, a prominent child abuse lawyer who represents many of Savile’s victims. The Welsh government has announced that it is doubling the value of its winter fuel support payments, which are available to low-income households. The one-off payments are going up from £100 to £200. Some £8.7bn spent by the government on personal protective equipment (PPE) during the pandemic has been written off, PA Media reports. PA says: New documents from the Department for Health and Social Care (DHSC) show huge amounts wasted on useless equipment, while millions of pounds has been spent getting out of contracts or storing PPE at ports. According to the 2020/21 accounts, some £673m worth of equipment was found to be totally unusable, and £750m was spent on items that were not used before their expiry date. Nearly £2.6bn was spent on “items not suitable for use in the NHS”, but which the department thinks can be sold or given to charities. The DHSC also said the value of its remaining stock had been slashed by £4.7bn as the price of PPE dropped. At the start of the pandemic, prices for protective equipment rose sharply as countries clamoured to get hold of items such as face masks. The accounts further reveal that the DHSC expects that equipment that was scheduled to be delivered after the end of the financial year will lose £1.2bn in value. The government was also charged £111.5m for not moving containers full of PPE from a port to their storage facility on time. ITV’s Robert Peston has been tweeting about this story in a thread starting here. And here is the extract Peston from the annual accounts (pdf) is quoting. This is Angela Rayner, the deputy Labour leader, responding to No 10 refusing to confirm that it will tell the public if Boris Johnson gets fined for breaking Covid rules. Tom Hunt, who was elected Conservative MP for Ipswich at the 2019 election, has issued a statement saying the findings in the Sue Gray report published yesterday (or “update” - Gray did not call it a report, because so much material was held back) were not “acceptable, excusable, or defensible”. He said: I’m not a sycophant. If some of my colleagues want to behave like this then that’s up to them, but it’s not me, nor will it ever be me. When the leader of our party makes a big mistake, I think it’s important to call this out and not morph into some kind of Corbynista groupie that ignores the reality of what’s happened. No one is beyond question or reproach. Hunt also said some of the media interventions by Boris Johnson’s supporters had been “so cack-handed that the best way they could be of assistance to the prime minister would be to disable all their social media platforms and cease carrying out media interviews”. Hunt said that Johnson had his support for now and that it was not the time to “depose the prime minister”, but that a line could not be drawn under the saga until the full report was published. Boris Johnson told Conservative MPs last night that Sir Lynton Crosby, the strategist credited with masterminding David Cameron’s surprise general election victory in 2015, would be playing a role as part of his overhaul of the Downing Street operation. This morning Dominic Raab, the deputy PM, confirmed the move, saying Crosby would be an “important part” of the shake-up. (See 10.39am.) But Crosby’s role may have been exaggerated, because Crosby himself says he is not taking a formal job in No 10. In an article for Middle East Eye, Peter Oborne says he spoke to Crosby last night, and Crosby said that he was in Australia, that he had been there for months, and that he would not be back in the UK for several weeks. Crosby also told Oborne: I am not going into No 10 or working in that way. If any Conservative PM asked for advice I would give it. The Metropolitan police has said it is not intending to name those issued with fines as part of its partgate investigation into Downing Street and Whitehall. In a statement issued today the Met said: As it has for all fixed penalty notices issued during the pandemic, the MPS will follow the College of Policing Approved Professional Practice for Media Relations which states that ‘Identities of people dealt with by cautions, speeding fines and other fixed penalties – out-of-court disposals – should not be released or confirmed.’ Our approach during the pandemic has been to confirm the number of FPNs issued to people at particular events and to explain what those FPNs were issued for. Amid expectation that the PM and his wife may need to be spoken to by Met detectives over a party in their flat in November 2020, and other events Johnson attended, the news will cause concern. Police policy is to usually name people only when they are charged or summonsed for an offence and a criminal investigation has progressed to the stage where guilt or innocence will be determined by a court. There are limited, ill-defined exceptions. Thus those interviewed as witnesses, or suspects, are not usually named. And here are some non-partygate lines from the Downing Street lobby briefing. Boris Johnson will hold a press conference in Ukraine with the president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, this afternoon, the PM’s spokesman said. The spokesman claimed that Boris Johnson has been “very much spearheading the international response” to the Ukraine crisis. “I don’t think there can be any doubt that he continues to play a leading role in this space,” the spokesman said. When it was put to him the French president, Emmanuel Macron, has spoken to the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, twice in the space of four days, suggesting that France is leading the international response, the spokesman replied: I don’t think totting up the numbers of calls is necessarily the sole arbitrating factor of how this is decided. Johnson is expected to speak to Putin tomorrow afternoon, the spokesman said. The two leaders were meant to talk on Monday, but the call was delayed because Johnson was making a statement to MPs about the Sue Gray report. Johnson took a Covid test, which was negative, before he left for Ukraine, the spokesman said. Yesterday Johnson was in close contact with Liz Truss, the foreign secretary, who tested positive last night. Michael Gove, the levelling up secretary, told cabinet that the levelling up white paper being published tomorrow will “change the economic geography of the country”, the spokesman said. He said: The prime minister said the policy represented a great moral mission that has the potential for fantastic economic benefit. Levelling up secretary Michael Gove said the aim of levelling up was to change the economic geography of the country and that the white paper set out the tools needed to achieve this, including investment in education and skills and further devolution of powers outside of Westminster. The prime minister said the white paper would mark a significant milestone in setting out the government’s vision for the country, building on the work already achieved and making it clear to the public that we have a plan in place to deliver on the people’s priorities. Here are the main lines from the Downing Street lobby briefing on partygate. The prime minister’s spokesman refused to commit to No 10 disclosing the names of anyone in Downing Street fined over illegal parties. Asked if No 10 would disclose this information, the spokesman said: I’m not going to get into speculating. It’s a matter for the police what they say with that regard. The spokesman also said the fact that the police are investigating 12 events does not necessarily mean the rules were broken. “The police have said this does not itself mean that they will decide to take further action or that there has necessarily been a breach of regulations,” he said. (In fact, Dame Cressida Dick, the Metropolitan police commissioner, said last week that these cases were only being investigated because there was little chance of their being a “reasonable defence”.) The spokesman said that No 10 intended to publish the full version of the Sue Gray report after the police investigation is over - but that some confidential details could be withheld. Asked if the full final report would be published, he So I’m not going to speculate on exactly what she she might provide. I think, As I said before we published this update, it is absolutely our intention to publish what we receive. Publishing names and certain details from from fact-finding work may compromise our commitment to confidentiality and anonymity if that applies. So we’d needed take heed of that. But the spokesman said their intention, when the final document was published, would be to publish the full text of what they received from Gray, which is what they did yesterday. The spokesman said that Johnson “stands by” what he said about Keir Starmer and Jimmy Savile in the Commons yesterday (a false slur), but the spokesman would not repeat the allegation himself. “As a civil servant it wouldn’t be right for me to repeat something which relates to a political aspect of the prime minister’s work,” he said. He said the partygate scandal was not discussed at cabinet today. Sir Lindsay Hoyle, the Speaker, also told MPs that he was concerned about what was happening to the reputation of parliament. Just after he reprimanded Boris Johnson for his anti-Starmer Jimmy Savile smear (see 12.49pm), Hoyle said people assumed he had a power to police what gets said in the chamber that he does not possess. He told MPs: Unfortunately the public out there think I’ve got this magic power. You give me the power. If you’re not happy with the power I’ve got, it’s in your hands to change it. As Speaker, Hoyle has to enforce Erskine May, the parliamentary rulebook, which bans MPs from using unparliamentary language. Calling another MP a liar is one example. But the Speaker does not have the power to stop MPs saying things that are untrue. And although ministers who do mislead the Commons are expected to correct the record, the Speaker has no power to compel them to do so. In the Commons Chris Matheson (Lab) has just used a point of order to ask about Boris Johnson’s Jimmy Savile slur against Keir Starmer yesterday. (See 9.28am.) He said: There are many, many victims of that awful, awful person and for [Johnson] to use that scandal and that tragedy in the way that he did, I felt that was inappropriate, tasteless, but perhaps out of order. Sir Lindsay Hoyle, the Speaker, says nothing disorderly (ie, technically against the rules) was said by the PM. But he went on to strongly deprecate what Johnson said. This is what he said. I am not responsible for members’ contributions and will seek not to intervene unless something is said which is disorderly. Procedurally nothing disorderly occurred but such allegations should not be made lightly, especially in view of the guidance of Erskine May about good temper, moderation being the characteristics of parliamentary debate. While they may not have been disorderly, I am far from satisfied that the comments in question were appropriate on this occasion. I want to see more compassionate, reasonable politics in this house, and that sort of comment can only inflame opinions and generate disregard for this house. I’ve got to say, I want a nicer parliament. And the only way we can get a nicer parliament is by being more honourable in the debates that we have. Please, let us show each other respect as well as tolerance. At the Downing Street lobby briefing the prime minister’s spokesman refused to commit to disclosing if Boris Johnson, or other people working at No 10, get fined by the police for breaching Covid rules, my colleague Peter Walker reports. I will post more from the briefing shortly. Nadine Dorries, the culture secretary, has unveiled a “sector vision” review to be published in the summer as part of the government’s commitment to levelling up. As PA Media reports, opening the Creative Coalition Festival 2022, Dorries revealed she was intending to provide “close to £50m” to support creative businesses across the UK. The investment includes a £21m UK Global Screen Fund and an £18.4m extension for the creative scale up programme to “support the fastest growing creative businesses across the country”. The UK’s Covid-19 death toll has passed 180,000, according to new figures from the Office for National Statistics. A total of 1,264 deaths occurred in England and Wales in the week ending 21 January which mentioned Covid-19 on the death certificate, taking the UK-wide total to 180,622. The number of deaths in the most recent weeks was above the five-year average in private homes, but below the average in hospitals and care homes. The figures also show that there have now been just under 45,000 deaths in care homes in England and Wales since the start of the pandemic. Around one in nine or 11.6% of all deaths registered in England and Wales in the week to 21 January mentioned Covid-19 on the death certificate. Ian Blackford, the SNP leader at Westminster, said this morning he refused to withdraw his claim in the Commons yesterday that Boris Johnson had misled MPs because he did not want to stoop to Johnson’s level. Blackford’s behaviour led to him being told to leave the chamber (although he left first anyway) because he was in breach of parliamentary rules saying MPs must not call each other liars in the chamber. Blackford told ITV’s Good Morning Britain: It seems, I have to say, slightly perverse that I’m the one that is to be thrown out of the House of Commons on the basis of standing up and telling the truth. Now, if I had withdrawn what I’d said yesterday in the House of Commons I would have been guilty of doing what the prime minister has done, and that would have been lying to everybody watching. One of these days the prime minister is going to have to accept that he has abused the trust that was put in him when he became prime minister. He should have gone by now. Blackford also said that calling Johnson a liar in the chamber, and getting thrown out, was not a premeditated stunt. Keir Starmer was doing an interview round too this morning, and he described Boris Johnson’s claim in the Commons yesterday that as DPP he had failed to prosecute Jimmy Savile as a desperate “slur”. (See 9.28am.) He told ITV’s Good Morning Britain: It’s a slur, it’s untrue, it’s desperate from the prime minister. I was really struck yesterday in the house at how many Conservative MPs were disgusted at that untruth from the dispatch box. Of course, on our side people were disgusted. But his own MPs couldn’t believe their prime minister had stooped that low. He’s degraded the whole office. And this is how he operates. He drags everybody into the gutter with him. Everybody he touches, everybody that comes into contact with him is contaminated by this prime minister. Starmer also ridiculed Johnson’s refusal to say yesterday whether or not he was at the event in his Downing Street flat on 13 November 2020 that was reportedly a party with Abba music hosted by Carrie Johnson, his wife, to celebrate the departure of Dominic Cummings. Johnson told MPs yesterday that he could not answer, because this was a matter for the police investigation. Starmer told BBC Breakfast: What happened was the Metropolitan police asked that the full report not be published at the moment, but the idea that that prevents the prime minister from saying whether he was at a party on a particular day is absolute nonsense. Absolute nonsense. I think the spectacle of the prime minister standing at the dispatch box being asked, ‘Were you at this party on the 13th of November in your own flat?’ And he says, ‘I can’t answer that because of the investigation ...’ He knows very well whether he was in the flat – and he’s taking us for fools. I think one of the features of this particular set of circumstances is not only did the prime minister and others break the rules, but they’ve taken the country for fools by insulting our intelligence in the cover-up that’s gone on since. Here are some more lines from Dominic Raab’s media interviews this morning. Raab, the deputy PM, claimed Conservative MPs “overwhelmingly” support Boris Johnson. He told Times Radio: On the specific issues Sue Gray cited, I think [Johnson] has addressed all of those questions in a fulsome way and, frankly, at the political level, my experiences in the chamber but also at the meeting of Conservative MPs – overwhelmingly MPs backing him, wanting to see us getting on with the job. The economy is firing, the vaccine rollout has been a spectacular success. People, and I think our constituents, want to see us getting on with the job. Raab cast doubt on whether the full Sue Gray report would eventually be published. Last night, after a day refusing to commit to publishing it once the police investigation is over, No 10 bowed to pressure from Conservative MPs who were calling for this, and said Gray would be free to publish all her findings at that point. But in an interview with LBC Raab at one point implied there was not much more for Gray to say. He said: It’s not clear to me that there is anything more, other than any conclusions that she will draw once that investigation is concluded, that will come forward. But later in the same interview Raab said: “Anything further that she gives the PM will be published.” Gray has made it clear that she does have a lot more to say. She called the document released yesterday an “update”, not a report, and she said she could not produce a “meaningful report” because she had been asked by the police to hold so much material back. It is not clear whether Raab was deliberately implying that the full findings might be held back, or whether he was just speaking carelessly, and trying to imply there was nothing much new to learn. Raab confirmed that Boris Johnson will give the Tory election strategist Sir Lynton Crosby a role in No 10 as part of his move to improve the way Downing Street operates. Johnson announced this to Tory MPs when he addressed them in private last night. Raab said Johnson wants the party to “get back to doing the job that people elected us to do”. He went on: Lynton Crosby is an important element of that. He has got a good strategic nose and a good sense of the direction of public opinion and a good place – not to formulate, that’s not what we do – but to test the work that we are doing to make sure we are nailing the priorities of the people. Raab played down the significance of Johnson missing his call with the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, yesterday. He said there were “always scheduling issues between any two heads of government”. Raab said the findings of the police inquiry into partygate should be published. He said: Justice must be done and seen to be done. But I don’t think I need to lecture or indeed advise the Metropolitan police about how to conduct an investigation. This might seem like a statement of the obvious, but the police intend to issue fines to people who have broken Covid rules at No 10, and normally the police do not publicise the names of people fined in these circumstances. Raab sidestepped a question about whether Johnson would resign if he was personally issued with a fine. Andrew Mitchell, the Conservative former chief whip and former international development secretary, told Boris Johnson in the Commons yesterday that he could no longer support him. This morning, in an interview on the Today programme, he said that the partygate scandal could break up the coalition that sustains the Conservative party. He said: I think this is a crisis that is not going to go away and is doing very great damage to the party. It is more corrosive in my judgment than the expenses scandal was and it will break the coalition that is the Conservative party. Mitchell was referring to the Conservative party’s ability to retain support from significant chunks of both middle-class and working-class voters, or Telegraph readers and Sun readers, to put it crudely. This has always been a strength for the party, although Johnson’s appeal to “red wall” voters tipped the balance somewhat. He also accused Johnson of running the government like a medieval court. I think the problem is that Boris is running a modern government like a medieval court. You need to rule and govern through the structures, through Whitehall, through the cabinet for National Security Council. Many of us thought he would govern in the way he did when he was mayor of London, through being a chairman of a board, running a very good team – that is not what has happened here. Some may wonder why it took Mitchell quite so long to conclude that Johnson was a liability for his party. Last year he published his memoir in which he recalled how, before he backed Johnson for the Tory leadership, Johnson promised him that he would keep the Department for International Development as a separate department, and that he would stick to the 0.7% aid spending target. Johnson subsequently broke both promises. Julian Smith, the Conservative former chief whip and former Northern Ireland secretary, has said that Boris Johnson’s Savile smear against Keir Starmer cannot be dismissed as just part of the cut and thrust of parliamentary debate, which is what Dominic Raab, the deputy PM, tried in his Today programme interview this morning. (See 9.28am.) Gavin Barwell, who was chief of staff to Theresa May in Downing Street when Smith was chief whip, says he agrees. Good morning. Boris Johnson reminded Tory MPs last night that Covid almost killed him, but his own conduct has led to him suffering a series of political near-death experiences and he went through another yesterday. By the end of the day he was in a better position than he was at the end of his statement to MPs – he belatedly promised that the full Sue Gray report would eventually be published one day, having refused to make that commitment earlier, and his speech to Conservative MPs at a private meeting in the evening went down much better than his hubristic and tone-deaf performance in the Commons – but nothing has been resolved. Once again, Westminster is waiting for the full Gray report before knowing how this scandal will end. Here is our overnight story, by Rowena Mason and Jessica Elgot, about yesterday’s drama in the Commons. Dominic Raab, the deputy prime minister, and Keir Starmer, the Labour leader, have both been giving interviews this morning. Starmer’s comments are in line with his much-praised speech shaming Johnson in the Commons yesterday, and he has repeated his call for the PM to resign. Raab has mostly been urging viewers and listeners to wait for the police investigation into partygate to conclude. But Raab, who is justice secretary as well as deputy PM, found himself unable to repeat or substantiate one of Johnson’s smears in the Commons yesterday. Replying to Starmer, Johnson said the Labour leader was “a former director of public prosecutions – although he spent most of his time prosecuting journalists and failing to prosecute Jimmy Savile, as far as I can make out”. As this Reuters fact check explains, the claim that Starmer was to blame for Savile not being prosecuted is false. On the Today programme, Raab described the remark as part of “the cut and thrust of parliamentary debates and exchanges”. But he admitted that he was not prepared to repeat the remark himself, and he added: “I don’t have the facts to justify that.” Asked if Johnson had the facts to justify his claim, Raab said that was for the PM to say. I will post more from the Raab and Starmer interviews soon. Here is the agenda for the day. Morning: Boris Johnson chairs cabinet. 11.30am: Downing Street holds a lobby briefing. 11.30am: Rishi Sunak, the chancellor, takes questions in the Commons. After 12.30pm: MPs begin a debate on a Labour motion criticising the government for writing off £4.3bn lost to Covid fraud. Afternoon: Johnson is in Kyiv for talks with the Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy. The two leaders are expected to hold a press conference. I try to monitor the comments below the line (BTL) but it is impossible to read them all. If you have a direct question, do include “Andrew” in it somewhere and I’m more likely to find it. I do try to answer questions, and if they are of general interest, I will post the question and reply above the line (ATL), although I can’t promise to do this for everyone. If you want to attract my attention quickly, it is probably better to use Twitter. I’m on @AndrewSparrow. Alternatively, you can email me at andrew.sparrow@theguardian.comThe author of an acclaimed play about the future of the monarchy has taken on the “Shakespearean” figure of Donald Trump and his battle to regain the White House in 2024 in a new work in blank verse. “I never thought I would go back to writing Shakespearean form again, but then I had an instinct that Trump is like a Shakespearean king, so it felt like a match,” said playwright Mike Bartlett, whose acclaimed King Charles III focused on a power struggle and constitutional crisis following the death of the Queen. Bertie Carvel, who plays Tony Blair in the next season of The Crown, takes the part of Trump in The 47th, which opens at the Old Vic in March. “For me, he was the obvious choice,” said Bartlett, who previously worked with Carvel on the television drama Dr Foster. The 47th imagines Trump’s bid to win the 2024 US presidential election and his opponents’ efforts to defeat him and rightwing populism. “Can it be defeated? And, on the other hand, what is the appeal of the thing Trump offers – which is clearly huge?” said Bartlett. The play was intended “to interrogate where America is now, and where it’s headed” while entertaining audiences. “One of the appeals of the Shakespearean form is it can move tone between something that’s very witty and very funny, and something that’s deadly serious – and it can do that within a paragraph.” Bartlett added: “It was a joy writing Trump in Shakespearean form. He lends himself to that beautifully, he just writes himself. He’s hilarious, and devastating. And this has opened my eyes to exactly what his rhetorical tactics are, where his wit is, where he’s intelligent, and where he’s not intelligent.” The 47th is directed by Rupert Goold, who also directed the Olivier award-winning King Charles III, which premiered in 2014 and later became a TV film. It too was written in blank verse – also known as unrhymed iambic pentameter – in common with many Shakespeare plays. Richard Goulding, who played Prince Harry in both play and film, said in 2017: “This blank verse form heightens all the exchanges and it makes things much more operatic, much more dramatic, and everything much more significant … It’s all about the rhythms and the way the language is used.” Bartlett said his inspiration for The 47th stemmed from Trump denying the results of the 2020 election, and “seeing that the assaults on the Capitol and feeling the country was headed towards potential civil violence. Suddenly that power struggle is the story.” He added: “I feel like I have the absolute right to do this, given the political power, the sway [these people] have over every single person’s life. This is what theatre should be doing – looking at these figures, looking at what motivates them, asking what can they do, what the future is going to be. “A great play will ask existential questions. What are our ambitions? How good are we? Why are we fascinated by Trump? Do we have a devil in all of us? And does the devil have the best tunes?” Carvel, he said, was “all-in as an actor. He fully embodies the character and he’s totally fearless to present someone on stage that you might not like at all.” Whether Miss Trunchbull in Matilda the Musical, Simon Foster in Dr Foster, or Rupert Murdoch in Ink, “these are not people that are well liked. “He just has a complete pursuit of the truth of the story and the character. And to play Trump, you absolutely want someone that has that intimidation about them that Trump has in real life.”Leonard Fenton, who has died aged 95, was approaching 60 when he joined the original cast of EastEnders in 1985 as Dr Harold Legg, the friendly Jewish GP and much-loved pillar of the community. He continued in the BBC soap for 34 years, appearing in more than 250 episodes. The character was six years older than Fenton and widowed during the second world war when his wife was killed by a bomb. He was already at retirement age in the first episode, but he continued to serve the fictional Walford’s residents – and enjoy reminiscences with Dot Cotton (June Brown), Ethel Skinner (Gretchen Franklin) and Lou Beale (Anna Wing). In the serial’s early days, he helped Sue Osman (Sandy Ratcliff) come to terms with the cot death of her baby and humoured the hypochondriacal Dot. But his judgment was sometimes brought into question, such as when he decided not to tell Colin Russell (Michael Cashman) he was showing early signs of multiple sclerosis and failed to diagnose Vicki, the daughter of Michelle Fowler (Susan Tully), with meningitis, resulting in the three-year-old almost dying and Harold retiring. Nevertheless, he was back at his Albert Square surgery within months and continued to treat residents until his official retirement in 1997. Fenton returned in the role on and off, with Harold popping in to catch up with old friends. In 2018, when he gave Dot the news that he was dying of cancer, she insisted that he move in with her. Fenton and Brown were together for the GP’s final moments the following year as Harold reminisced about meeting his late wife in the 1930s: “And I kissed her. And she kissed me back. The most perfect kiss ever. What I would give...” As his eyes closed, Dot told him: “Go and kiss her. Go and kiss her again.” An East Ender himself, Fenton was born Leonard Finestein in Stepney to Fanny (nee Goldberg), of Latvian descent, and Morris Finestein, a women’s garment-maker whose parents came to Britain from Lithuania. Like his soap character, Leonard remembered marches by Oswald Mosley and his Blackshirts in east London in the 1930s, and during the second world war his Jewish family changed their name to Fenton. On a happier note, he recalled: “My family’s doctor in Bethnal Green was a kind and caring man. Dr Legg is in the same mould – an intelligent man who has chosen to remain working in the East End community in which he grew up.” When war broke out, Fenton’s school, Raine’s, in Bethnal Green, was evacuated to Brighton. He then qualified as a civil engineer by taking a degree at King’s College London, did his national service as an officer with the Royal Engineers and spent five years with a firm of consulting engineers. Evening art and music classes at Toynbee Hall in east London led to a starring role in a Christmas performance and a place to train as an actor at the Webber Douglas Academy of Dramatic Art. Fenton gave up his job, supporting himself by teaching maths at Westminster Polytechnic, and graduated in 1955, winning the Spotlight prize. Acting in repertory theatre at the Sheffield Playhouse, then with other companies, was followed by his big break when Orson Welles auditioned him for his play Chimes at Midnight, featuring Shakespeare’s character Falstaff, and cast him as the thieving Bardolph, one of the knight’s entourage – but voiced in a cockney accent. The production ran in Belfast and Dublin in 1960. Later, Fenton starred as Willie, taciturn husband of Billie Whitelaw’s Winnie, in Samuel Beckett’s Happy Days, directed by the writer at the Royal Court theatre (1979). There were also stints with the Royal Shakespeare Company (1970, 1980-83 and 2008-09), including his final stage role, Vincentio, in The Taming of the Shrew. On television, he had bit parts as police officers, prison warders, taxi drivers, accountants, Jews and Germans, as well as more substantial roles: Friedrich Merz, a member of a wealthy Jewish family in A Legacy (1975), based on Sybille Bedford’s novel set in the decades leading up to the first world war; Corporal “Miff” Moffat in The Fourth Arm (1983), about secret agents parachuted into occupied Europe; and Erich Gottlieb, a baker, in two series (1984-85) of Shine on Harvey Moon, set in the post-second world war East End. As a keen artist painting landscapes in watercolour, he had exhibitions at the National Theatre, when it showcased works by actors, and the Primrose Hill gallery. In 1967, Fenton married the cellist Madeline Thorner. They later separated and he is survived by their three sons, Daniel, Sam and Toby, and daughter, Nina. • Leonard Fenton (Leonard Finestein), actor, born 29 April 1926; died 29 January 2022The Saudi International may draw glances at present but it is not really a major problem for golf’s ecosystem. It is the tip of the iceberg when it comes to Saudi Arabia’s ongoing, ultimate disruption plan. On Tuesday morning Greg Norman, the frontman for the golf operation of Saudi Arabia’s Public Investment Fund, promised that the 10-event international series on the Asian Tour was “just the beginning”. Norman will believe this, even if the general tone of his carefully controlled press conference was uninspiring. Plenty of rhetoric, very little substance. “The most compelling indicator for me is the number of calls we have had from corporations and other individuals excited about the opportunity,” Norman said. Agents of footballers are suddenly very interested in Newcastle United, too. Bottomless pits of cash tend to have that effect. As players flock to Jeddah this week to collect exorbitant appearance fees the rest of us can shake heads at the lunacy of it all. Nobody much cares about the Saudi International but those inside the ropes are also barely interested about the scepticism attached to their involvement. Players keep heads down, avoid awkward questions about the butchering of a journalist or human rights atrocities, bank the dollars and slip home via private jet. We are supposed to accept that “global players” keen to “grow the game” have more in mind than tsunamis hitting their bank accounts. For existing tours, the Saudi International is a bit of a nuisance. The international series merely could be but the more fascinating part of the picture is Saudi’s desire to make players commit to their platform and ultimately move towards a Super Golf League. Should they do so – barring u-turns or legal challenges – the unwillingness of the DP World and PGA Tours to work in alliance with Saudi will fracture the golf environment completely. Logically, the Saudis have pursued deals with individuals at the latter stages of their careers for whom a guaranteed payday of tens of millions of dollars triggers the rubbing of hands. Younger golfers are also known to be interested. Should, for argument’s sake, Bryson DeChambeau, Phil Mickelson, Henrik Stenson, Ian Poulter and Lee Westwood be tempted by this promised land then their future involvement in the Ryder Cup either as captains or players becomes almost impossible to square. The debate in this case would be a furious one; is it fair for players to effectively turn their backs on an event that has done so much for their profile, or would administrators on either side of the Atlantic be wrong to ostracise them? Even in the short-term, if Europe cannot or will not appoint Stenson as the captain for 2023 in Rome because of Saudi links then their Ryder Cup environment is undermined. And that, whatever the rights and wrongs, is a key issue. Two discussions with high-profile players at last week’s Dubai Desert Classic resonated. One was adamant that, as a businessman, he is fully entitled to exert maximum value for professional services and provide for his family accordingly. When I pointed out the public perception that sportsmen of his standing already have sufficient wealth, the response was that nobody would choose to downscale their way of life if there was an alternative. I actually admired his candour. Player two stated a belief that Saudi’s staging of golf tournaments increases focus on the kingdom and, in turn, should force them to improve upon behaviour and policies. Simply shutting a country off, under this theory, serves no actual purpose. Nonetheless, this notion of a force for good is contradicted by the unwillingness of golfers so far to speak out on Saudi’s hitherto appalling human rights record when in this very domain. While afforded a captive audience, golfers instead shuffle uncomfortably and trot out the wholly unsatisfactory line that they are “not politicians”. They are also being paid to front up the “new” Saudi Arabia. Altruism this is not. Norman spoke effusively about his connection with the Asian Tour. It is worth remembering that the Saudi International was the domain of the DP World Tour before that entity forged a strategic alliance with the PGA Tour. Yes, the DP World Tour’s earlier dance with the Saudis was dubious in itself but it is amusing to hear Norman’s chat about Asian opportunity as if this was always the grand plan. What the Asian Tour does is provide the Saudis with legitimacy via, for example, world ranking points as are actually wildly distorted when fortunes are being paid in appearance money to prop-up tournaments. On Sunday, the winner of the fourth Saudi International will be named and instantly forgotten in the wider world. Worthy of more attention is the potential impact of the broader scheme.Downing Street has U-turned on its refusal to confirm whether it would reveal if Boris Johnson had been fined for breaching Covid rules, acknowledging there would be “significant public interest” in the issue. Nevertheless, it remains unclear if No 10 would comment on whether any staff were fined for lockdown-breaking parties in Downing Street, because of the fact that fixed penalty notices are issued to individuals and it is officially up to them to disclose them. Earlier, Labour and the Liberal Democrats argued the public would have a right to know if Johnson had been fined after a Metropolitan police investigation, after No 10 refused to say this would definitely happen. The Met later confirmed that it did not routinely release or confirm names of people who had been given fixed penalty notices, and that this would be the case with any imposed for No 10 parties. Asked again about the issue, Johnson’s spokesperson said: “Obviously we are aware of the significant public interest with regard to the prime minister and we would always look to provide what updates we can on him, specifically.” Questioned if this meant No 10 would say if the PM was given a fixed penalty notice, the spokesperson said: “Hypothetically, yes.” Speaking earlier, Johnson’s spokesperson had declined to confirm whether he would confirm any fines, as he was “not going to get into speculation” during the police investigation. Labour’s deputy leader, Angela Rayner, : “I can’t believe this needs saying. The public have a right to know if the prime minister is found to have committed an offence by the police.” The Lib Dem leader, Ed Davey, said: “Boris Johnson must come clean with the public and resign if he’s broken the rules and been fined by the police.” Johnson’s spokesperson did say No 10 planned to release any fuller findings by Gray, the senior civil servant tasked with looking into parties, when the police investigation was over. On Monday, Downing Street released a 12-page “update” from Gray, who had been asked by police to edit out most details amid their inquiries. Johnson’s spokesperson said: “As we set out yesterday, while I can’t speculate on what Sue Gray might think is suitable to set out, he has been clear that we want her to come forward with a further report, a further update, however she might frame it, and we will our intention is to publish what we receive from her.” The only exception, he added, would be to potentially remove personal details that could “compromise our commitment to confidentiality and anonymity”. Dominic Raab, Johnson’s deputy and the justice secretary, had said earlier on Tuesday that it was unclear if there was further evidence to come, placing apparent doubt on No 10’s commitment to full transparency. Mark Harper, a former Conservative chief whip, told the Guardian he had asked Johnson to reiterate at Wednesday’s PMQs his promise – made in private to MP colleagues – to publish the full report. The prime minister had originally declined to do so when asked by Harper in the Commons on Monday during his statement on Gray’s update. Raab had appeared to row back on commitments made by Johnson to publish further evidence once the Met investigation into 12 separate events in Downing Street has concluded. Speaking to LBC, Raab said: “It’s not clear to me that there is anything more, other than any conclusions that she will draw once that investigation is concluded, that will come forward.” In an update published on Monday, Gray said she had “extensive factual information” including speaking to at least 70 people – that could not be published until the Met had finished its investigation. She said she had declined to publish details of several other events that were not under investigation in order not to skew the findings. “I will secure storage and safekeeping of all the information gathered until such time as it may be required further,” she wrote. The police are examining about 300 photographs as part of the investigation into alleged parties. Raab told Sky News it was a “good question” why there were so many pictures of gatherings that were claimed to be work events.A man convicted of murdering his fiancee, who is now accused of murdering his wife six years earlier, told a jury his marriage was “perfect” and that he tried to resuscitate his spouse after finding her collapsed in their garden. Ian Stewart, 61, who in 2016 was convicted of murdering Helen Bailey, author of the Electra Brown series of children’s books, denies killing his wife, Diane Stewart, 47, at their home in Bassingbourn, Cambridgeshire, in 2010. His wife’s cause of death was recorded in 2010 as sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (Sudep), but police opened an investigation after a jury found Stewart guilty in 2017 of murdering Bailey. Giving evidence at Huntingdon crown court, Stewart recalled that he had found his wife’s body crumpled in the garden after he returned from a shopping trip to Tesco that was aborted because he had forgotten his wallet. As his two sons listened from the public gallery, he said: “The first thing I did was try to get her in the recovery position. That was hard, I couldn’t get her legs out from under her.” He said he tried to clear her mouth, and then “put her on her back to put her in the position for CPR” and then did “30 compressions and then mouth to mouth”. He had no idea how long he performed CPR, he said. “At the end I was exhausted.” A doctor and nurse lived opposite, the court heard. “I didn’t ring 999, I went over to them to try to get help,” said Stewart, who told the court there was no answer at his neighbours’ door so he returned to his wife to try CPR again, believing she was still alive because of “froth” around her mouth. He said he did not know how long he continued CPR before calling 999, telling operators his wife had “had a fit”. Stewart told jurors he “never, ever saw Diane fit”, but she did have epilepsy. Asked by Amjad Malik QC, defending, if he was “trying to help Diane”, Stewart replied: “I was trying to save her life, obviously trying to get her to breathe again.” Asked to describe his feelings towards his wife in June 2010, Stewart said: “We were in love, very happy, very much so. It was, just looking back, too perfect really, too good.” Stewart went on: “I don’t think we ever had a big fallout, ever.” The jury has previously heard that tests on his wife’s brain tissue, donated for medical research, showed that her “breathing had been restricted”. Earlier, the court heard that Stewart received a total of £96,607.37 following the death of his wife, from her bank accounts – including£28,500.21 from a life insurance policy. Asked by his lawyer if he wanted the money, Stewart said: “No, I don’t want that money, I didn’t need that money, it was for the boys’ futures.” Questioned about a red two-seater MG car he bought after his wife’s death, he said he bought it as “it’s what Diane and I had up until [their son] Jamie was born”. “This was the red one we always wanted, it was just a memory,” he added. Malik asked him: “The prosecution say you caused Diane Stewart to die and that you carried out an action, asphyxiation, upon her. What do you say to that?” Stewart replied: “Total rubbish. I was trying to save her life that day, the exact opposite of what they say happened.” The trial continues.Graham Nash has joined his former bandmate Neil Young in taking his music off Spotify, in protest over the Covid misinformation disseminated by the streaming company’s star podcaster, Joe Rogan. The Crosby, Stills, Nash &amp; Young singer and guitarist, who also co-founded 1960s pop group the Hollies, said in a statement: Having heard the Covid disinformation spread by Joe Rogan on Spotify, I completely agree with and support my friend Neil Young and I am requesting that my solo recordings be removed from the service. There is a difference between being open to varying viewpoints on a matter and knowingly spreading false information which some 270 medical professionals have derided as not only false but dangerous … The opinions publicised by Rogan are so dishonest and unsupported by solid facts that Spotify becomes an enabler in a way that costs people their lives. Last week, Young requested his music be removed from Spotify, arguing that the platform had allowed Rogan – who was signed by Spotify in 2020 to make podcasts in a deal reportedly worth more than $100m – to advance “fake information about vaccines – potentially causing death to those who believe the disinformation being spread by them”. He later added to his criticism, accusing Spotify of “selling lies for money”. A Spotify spokesperson said: “We regret Neil’s decision to remove his music from Spotify, but hope to welcome him back soon”. In April 2021, Rogan said: “If you’re like 21 years old, and you say to me, should I get vaccinated? I’ll go, no”, but when challenged, said “I believe [vaccines] are safe and encourage many people to take them”. In January, he claimed the risk of teenagers getting myocarditis (heart muscle inflammation) from the vaccine outweighed the risk of getting Covid, a view challenged by a podcast guest and other researchers. He has wrongly argued vaccines use “gene therapy”, and promoted the use of anti-parasitic drug ivermectin, which has not been proven to be effective against Covid-19. He also hosted virologist Robert Malone, who promoted conspiracy theories including that leaders had hypnotised the public into taking the vaccine. The Malone appearance was cited in an open letter from 270 US healthcare leaders criticising Rogan’s podcast. Rogan apologised to Spotify in the wake of Young’s protest and said he bore the singer no ill will. He said he would “try harder to get people with differing opinions on” and “do my best to make sure I’ve researched these topics”. Another successful musician, four-time Grammy winning soul singer India.Arie, has joined Young’s protest this week, writing on Instagram: I have decided to pull my music and podcast from Spotify. Neil Young opened a door that I must walk through. I believe in freedom of speech. However, I find Joe Rogan problematic for reasons other than his Covid interviews… For me it’s also his language around race. What I am talking about is respect – who gets it and who doesn’t. Paying musicians a fraction of a penny? And him $100m? This shows the type of company they are and the company that they keep. I’m tired. In a conversation in January with writer and lecturer Jordan Peterson, discussing the ethnicity of Black US academic Michael Eric Dyson, Rogan said: “Unless you are talking to someone who is like 100% African from the darkest place where they are not wearing any clothes all day ... the term Black is weird.” Rogan and Spotify have not responded to Nash and India.Arie’s criticism. Joni Mitchell and Bruce Springsteen guitarist Nils Lofgren also voiced support for Young in recent days and announced that their music will be removed, though both theirs, Nash’s and India.Arie’s music remains on Spotify for now. Spotify has responded to the furore by appending resources with correct Covid-19 information to podcasts on the subject. Its stock market price, which had fallen slightly after Young’s decision, has rallied this week.As a 38-year-old first-time mother, I am solidly within the demographic of your article (Record numbers of women reach 30 child-free in England and Wales, 27 January). Why have I left it so long to have my first child? There’s only one answer: cost. The childcare that enables me to hold down a full-time, 40-hour-a-week London-based job costs a little over £25,000 a year. The median full-time salary of a Londoner this year? £37,856 (that’s £29,404 after tax). You do the maths. Alison Smith London • I overheard a child asking her mother whether we would be going to war with Russia. I recall asking my mother that 60 years ago. She replied that she didn’t know, but that finer minds than ours were working on preventing it. That may or may not have been true when she said it, but it seems a shame that no one would even think of saying that now. Barrie Wells Deganwy, Conwy • The Town Moor is a large open space in Newcastle. My grandfather used to say of my great-aunt – who had a reputation for meanness – that she could “cover the Town Moor with a quarter of ham” (Letters, 31 January). Marion Kuit Kendal, Cumbria • A colleague summed up Sam Vimes’s doctrine with a proverb from his native Bulgaria: “I am not so rich that I can afford to buy cheap things” (Letters, 31 January). John Young Monkswood, Monmouthshire • The Dutch language puts it succinctly: “Goedkoop is duurkoop” (cheap is expensive). Peter Kaan ExeterThe Italian League leader, Matteo Salvini, has proposed creating a rightwing political force styled on America’s Republican party in a move that threatens to spell the end of his tense partnership with his far-right sometime rival Giorgia Meloni. Salvini’s League and other parties including the centre-left Democratic party and populist Five Star Movement that make up Italy’s broad ruling coalition have been left in disarray after failing to agree on a mutually acceptable candidate for head of state in last week’s presidential election, culminating with Sergio Mattarella, 80, being elected for a second term against his earlier expressed wishes. His call was made in Il Giornale, the Silvio Berlusconi-owned newspaper, as he scrambles for survival under pressure from those within his own ranks over the presidential election debacle. He wrote that the rightwing parties that support Mario Draghi’s government could create a force modelled “on that of the American Republican party” and will reportedly meet Berlusconi, the Forza Italia leader, to discuss the proposal. Salvini’s ultimate endorsement of Mattarella for president infuriated Meloni, the leader of Brothers of Italy, which allies with the League and Forza Italia in elections but unlike them stayed out of Draghi’s government. She accused them of “betrayal” for their behind-the-scenes dealings with their coalition partners. Her party has steadily grown to overtake the League in opinion polls since the formation of Draghi’s government a year ago. Italian media described Salvini’s proposal as signalling a potential “divorce” with Brothers of Italy. Salvini and Meloni have in the past put on a united front, but the latter’s growing influence has intensified competition between the pair for leadership within the rightwing alliance as they eye general elections in spring 2023. Meloni said the rightwing bloc needed to be “refounded” while at the same time suggesting it would be “better to go it alone than in bad company”. Brothers of Italy currently polls as the second biggest party in Italy, behind the centre-left Democratic party. “Salvini is afraid of Meloni,” said Roberto D’Alimonte, a political science professor at Luiss University in Rome. “But the real issue is technical and goes back to the electoral system – under the present system, Meloni and Salvini would have to run together.” The government is expected to hold a debate about Italy’s electoral system later this year, which could result in it reverting back to proportional representation, eliminating the necessity at present for coalitions to be formed before the vote. D’Alimonte said that Salvini is “scrambling to find a way out of a corner” but that he didn’t expect Brothers of Italy to gain much higher than its current 20.5% rating in the polls. Unless the political system changes, they will most likely stick together, he suggested. “They are trying to divorce but divorce is not guaranteed.” In his call for a new rightwing grouping, Salvini posited “a political space where we find hospitality for the various souls who have sensibilities of an alternative culture to leftwing progressivism”. Mattia Diletti, a political professor at Rome’s Sapienza University, doesn’t expect Salvini’s proposal to come to fruition, adding that the rightwing alliance will probably patch up their differences. “We know from the past that in the end they always find an agreement, as they know they need each other when it’s time to collect votes,” he added. “In the meantime, Meloni can gain as she’s the only clear opposition to the government. But this 20% or so is nothing if she doesn’t have an alliance with the League.”It was interesting to read about Dr Gavin Francis’s book Recovery in your editorial on the value of convalescence (23 January), but there was no mention of the kind of convalescent home that I went to after surgery in the 1980s and 90s, and my mother in the 1950s and 60s. During a stay of a couple of weeks, you had someone checking you were all right, a doctor looking in once a day and, most importantly, good meals and company. These homes do not seem to exist any more, as the post-treatment role seems to have been taken over by hospitals (ie bed-blocking) or care homes, though long-term care is not generally needed. It would be an excellent idea to bring them back to relieve pressure. Marian Nyman Whitstable, Kent • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.My husband, Bob Casey, who has died of sepsis aged 65, was a youth worker who spent most of his life working with disadvantaged young people in inner city and rural areas of Britain. The eldest of three children of Enid (nee Bradshaw), a ward clerk at the Royal Preston hospital, and Jim Casey, a messenger for what is now NatWest Bank, Bob was born and grew up in Preston, Lancashire. He served an apprenticeship at British Aerospace and worked there as an engineer before leaving in the early 1980s to test his vocation to the priesthood at Ushaw College, Durham. Following five years in the seminary, he left before ordination to train instead as a youth and community worker in London. Bob was committed to youth work and had great drive, with a talent for engaging difficult-to-reach young people. He worked with challenging behaviour in a manner that meant young people were not excluded from activities and he encouraged the teams he managed to do likewise. He excelled at building-based work and ran well-attended, vibrant youth clubs in deprived areas of London, Newcastle, Lancaster and Preston. He was able to adapt his skills to many other settings and in the mid-1990s he set up and ran a pupil referral unit with Gabrielle Cox and Irvine Williams at the Hideaway Youth Project in Moss Side, Manchester, providing education to young people who had been excluded from school. In the early 2000s he managed the Single Regeneration Budget in north Lancaster, where he was instrumental in transforming a disused building on Ryelands Park into a youth centre. During this time, he worked with Helen Clugston at the Dukes theatre, Lancaster, supporting her Shattering Images theatre group for young people with disabilities. Bob and I met in 1992 when we were both working at the St John Boste Youth Centre in Newcastle upon Tyne. We were married in Colombia in 2008. For the past decade we had lived in Cambridgeshire, from where Bob facilitated the West Norfolk Youth Advisory Board, enabling young people to influence youth provision through representation to their local authority. Beyond youth work, Bob and I provided foster care for a number of children in Cambridgeshire. He undertook several charity bike rides, including by tandem from John O’Groats to Land’s End with his brother Jimmy. He enjoyed walking and completed the Pennine Way with his brother John. He also adored our rescue greyhounds, Hector and Tallulah. Bob was known for his keen sense of humour, generosity of spirit and courage to speak truth. Recently a colleague remarked that Bob had helped so many to find their smile. He is survived by Enid, Jimmy and John, our daughter, Joy, and me.Colin the Caterpillar has shaken hands with rival Cuthbert in a resolution of the supermarket cake wars. Marks &amp; Spencer has reached a deal with Aldi after taking legal action to protect its bestselling bug-shaped Colin cake. M&amp;S had called in the lawyers over concerns that the German discount grocer’s rival chocolate sponge roll, Cuthbert, was making copycat appearances at birthday parties and picnics. Details of the deal, which was finalised in the high court last week, have not been revealed, but it is understood that Cuthbert will not appear again in quite the same form. Marks &amp; Spencer, which launched the legal action against Aldi almost a year ago, said: “The objective of the claim was to protect the [intellectual property] in our Colin the Caterpillar cake and we are very pleased with the outcome.” Aldi, which is in another legal spat with M&amp;S over a light-up Christmas gin, has indicated that Cuthbert, who was featured as a soft toy in its stores over Christmas and as a cake last spring, will be back, however. The discounter said in a tweet labelled #freecuthbert: “Getting out early on good behaviour, keep an eye out for Cuthy B this Spring.” An Aldi spokesperson added: “Cuthbert is free and looking forward to seeing all his fans again very soon!” Colin the caterpillar, whose name has risen to prominence on social media in recent weeks as a potential attender at Downing Street’s lockdown birthday events, made his debut in 1990. M&amp;S has three trademarks relating to its caterpillar cake, including the words “Colin the Caterpillar” and the packaging. With more than 15m cake sales under his belt he is one of M&amp;S’s key food brands alongside Percy Pig. He is also known for his philanthropy, thanks to a tie-up with the cancer charity Macmillan. His fame has led to a number of brand extensions, including his girlfriend (cake) Connie. But popularity has also led to many similar larval-based confections popping up in rival retailers. Tesco has Curly, Asda has Clyde, at Waitrose it’s Cecil and Sainsbury’s turns over a new leaf with Wiggles. Only Cuthbert appears to have stepped over the line prompting legal action from M&amp;S.Three critical issues surrounding the future of the Sizewell C project were missing from the recent announcement (Ministers invest £100m in EDF’s £20bn Sizewell C nuclear power station, 27 January). The first is the appalling state of EDF’s finances. This is coupled with shutdowns at its French power stations, using similar technology to Sizewell C. Newer nuclear power stations are not working. The second is that China General Nuclear Power has a 20% stake in Sizewell C. How does the government intend to play its cards here? How much will it pay to ask CGNP to stand down? £100m? The third is that the £100m represents just 0.5% of the total build. It will not be enough to attract any sizeable pension funds. As a consequence, our energy bills would need to go up to provide the £20bn-plus of funding. My estimate is that this would put, over a 25-year period, about £330 a year on our energy bills. And this addition would be on top of price rises due to, say, Russia invading Ukraine or the cap coming off later this year. Derek Wyatt Labour MP for Sittingbourne and Sheppey, 1997-2010 • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Instead of counting empty beds (Millions wasted on empty secure children’s home beds in England and Wales, says Labour, 27 January), we need to be counting children and asking ourselves why we are depriving so many of our vulnerable young people of their liberty in the first place. While the number of children held in custody has indeed declined over the past decade, the numbers being held for their own welfare have been rising. A growing body of evidence shows that these two groups are largely the same children. We know that up to half of children in custody have been in care at some point in their lives. Children placed in secure settings – whether through youth custody or because of risks to their safety – have had similar experiences of trauma and disadvantage from early childhood and therefore have similar needs. Hidden in these figures are the most vulnerable children of all who, in dramatically rising numbers, cannot be found a place in a secure children’s home because of a lack of available beds or because they are deemed too “challenging”. These children simply disappear from view. They don’t appear in published data. We don’t know how many there are, or where they are placed. We need to rethink how we improve the lives of the most vulnerable children in our society and be clear about the purpose of depriving young people of their liberty – is it care or incarceration? Lisa Harker Director, Nuffield Family Justice Observatory • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Sue Gray’s update omitted any reference to the ministerial code, despite its inclusion in her terms of reference. While the Metropolitan police investigation may have precluded consideration of alleged criminal behaviour, it should not have prevented further examination of her finding of “failures of leadership and judgment” and “a failure to observe ... the high standards expected of those working at the heart of government”, in relation to the prime minister himself. Her reluctance to enter this minefield may well be due to the requirement in the code that “ministers who knowingly mislead parliament will be expected to offer their resignation to the prime minister”. Clearly this is unworkable and is not addressed by Boris Johnson’s proposals for reform, which conveniently refer only to codes of conduct for civil servants and advisers (Johnson creates Office of the Prime Minister after Sue Gray criticism, 31 January). However, there is an even deeper problem. Johnson inhabits a parallel linguistic universe where phrases such as “I take full responsibility” do not have their usual meaning. Gray’s report could never have established wilful mendacity, a meaningless concept for a fantasist who cannot distinguish truth from fiction. Only Tory MPs have the power to bring this farce to a conclusion. Any of them with a shred of decency left should act to do so now. Dr Anthony Isaacs London • John Crace (Sketch, 31 January) quite rightly identifies the anomaly at the heart of our constitutional crisis, namely that we are labouring under a dysfunctional parliamentary system in which Ian Blackford is removed from the Commons for stating the truth that Boris Johnson has lied and misled the house, while the prime minister is allowed to remain and continue lying. That dishonesty cannot be called out, nor the dishonest held to account, would not be acceptable under any decent written constitution. The time is long overdue for a resurrection of the aims of Charter 88 in “drawing up a written constitution anchored in the ideal of universal citizenship”, under which no one should be censored for speaking truth to power any more than those in power should be able to promote untruths. Perhaps a Charter 22 could make the case for such reforms. And certainly, the recruitment of large numbers of signatories to such a charter would be easy in the age of social media. Austen Lynch Garstang, Lancashire • Never has the contrast between Keir Starmer and Boris Johnson been thrown into sharper relief than during the former’s magnificent speech in the Commons on Monday. One man radiated decency and demonstrated true respect for the sacrifices and losses the British people have endured these last two years. The other shied yet again from accepting personal responsibility, and for good measure sought to tar his opponent with the name of a paedophile. Whatever decision Tory MPs make in the coming weeks about Johnson’s future, I am hopeful that Britain will soon have a prime minister it can be proud of. Daniel Peacock Manchester • Congratulations to the compiler of the Guardian Codeword for incorporating into Tuesday’s puzzle (Journal, 1 February) three words so appropriate to Boris Johnson: buffoon, clown and oafish. Jennifer Jenkins London • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Days of protests against pandemic policies and a deep rift within Canada’s conservative movement have highlighted the growing power of rightwing populist movements in the country. On Tuesday, retail stores and vaccine clinics in Ottawa remained closed as protesters, who had travelled to the nation’s capital under the guise of protesting vaccine mandates for truckers, refused to leave. “There’s a million people that live in Ottawa. I hear you. I hear the protesters, the province hears the protesters, the country hears the protesters,” said the Ontario premier, Doug Ford. “Now it’s time to let the people in Ottawa get back to their lives.” Ford, a conservative politician who rose to power on a successful populist campaign, had previously said the protestors – some of whom defaced statues, carried swastika flags and harassed soup kitchen employees – had “no place” in Ontario or Canada. But as Ford condemned the protest movement, Canada’s federal Conservative leader faced the prospect that he might be ousted amid growing discontent in his party. Erin O’Toole has encountered repeated criticism not only for losing an election to Justin Trudeau, but over how he’s handled a number of issues in recent months. O’Toole was one of the last Conservatives to publicly announce he would meet with protesters. By then, a number of prominent Conservatives had touted the patriotism of the movement, even has concern grew that a number of far-right groups had attached themselves to the convoy. “Canada needs us to be united and serious,” O’Toole said on Facebook. “It’s time for a reckoning. To settle this in caucus. Right here. Right now. Once and for all.” But the precariousness of O’Toole’s tenure as leader, and the speed with which his colleagues embraced the protesters, speaks to a possible shift in the country’s political landscape. “Any politician looking at this right now sees two things: this group raised a ton of money in a very short period of time. And more importantly, these people are excited,” said Stephanie Carvin, a professor of international affairs at Carleton University and former national security analyst for the federal government. “They’re enthusiastic to be out there doing what they think is democracy, even if those ideas are unconstitutional, unworkable, unrealistic and a tremendous public health hazard. But they’re putting something out there that’s different – and that’s appealing to people.” Recent polling found most voters were largely apathetic to party offerings in the most recent election. Carvin compared Canada’s growing populist movement to Tea Party politics in the United States, which in the late 2000s harnessed populist energy around issues of taxation and limited government to dramatically alter the landscape of Congress. While most of the truckers and supporters have departed the city, Ottawa police say the protests could last until next weekend – a reality that has frustrated residents. “I’m calling for the full resumption of our services (library, vaccine clinics, schools) and support of residents who should not be subjected to hatred, intimidation and constant debilitating noise in our city,” tweeted Shawn Menard, Ottawa city councillor. A similar protest has paralyzed an Alberta border town for days, after dozens of trucks blocked access to the highway in protest of public health policies. The mayor of Coutts, a border town, says he wants the truckers gone, as mail can’t be delivered and some buses have been unable to take students to school. The Royal Canadian Mounted police in Alberta say the protest is no longer lawful, and plan to begin making arrests and towing away vehicles. After a series of Indigenous-led blockades in 2019, Alberta’s conservative government passed a law last year that allows for additional penalties against protesters blockading highways and other infrastructure. Carvin sees both protests as animating a segment of the population frustrated with the pandemic. While the Westminster system is less vulnerable to political extremism than the US system, it is not fully immune, she said. “We definitely are seeing a populist movement Canada. But it’s still an open question whether it can reframe itself after the pandemic ends,” said Carvin. “It’s tapping into the frustration a lot of people feel right now about the pandemic. But what happens when the pandemic ends? Can a political party or leader capture that enthusiasm and excitement we’re seeing, or will it just dissipate?”The writer Keri Hulme, who has died aged 74, was the first New Zealander to win the Booker prize, in 1985, for the bone people (as she chose to style the title), and the first person to win for their debut novel. Keri had recently received the Pegasus prize for Māori literature and was in the US on a promotional tour when the Booker ceremony took place in London. Representatives from her publishers, Spiral Collectives, extended a karanga (formal greeting) and accepted the award on her behalf. Keri’s own response, in a phonecall with the literary critic Hermione Lee, was: “You’re pulling my leg. Bloody hell.” Others shared Keri’s surprise. “The guests … on the whole, seemed baffled by the choice of winner,” noted the Financial Times. “Certainly the strangest novel ever to win the Booker,” according to the Guardian. Yet she was acclaimed in her home country, where the prime minister welcomed her with a parliamentary reception. These contrasting responses reflect reactions from publishers, critics and readers ever since Keri, an expert fisher, first presented the manuscript deliberately woven as a “word-net”, with “holes” in the narrative. She wanted every reader’s experience to affect what they trawled, beginning with her mother, Mary Miller, also an expert fisher, and Keri’s first reader and only editor. Described by Keri as a “new kind of novel, blending reality with dreams, melding Māori and Pākehā (New Zealanders of European descent), weaving strange and hurtful pasts into strangely bright futures”, the bone people is about three damaged individuals. Two are Māori, Kerewin, an “offshoot” of Keri, who “escaped out of my control and developed a life of her own”, a reclusive and asexual artist estranged from her family and unable to paint, and Joe, who has lost his wife, his child and hope. The third is Joe’s foster child, the mute, feral and enchanting Simon. They almost become an unlikely whānau (family). But, separated by violence, they make individual voyages of renewal before reuniting, the adults committed, as tangata whenua (indigenous people), to protect the land’s mauri (life force and essence). Keri defined the book as essentially a lament, with destructive and furious elements. It explains why individuals and communities alienated from the “old ways” of the spiritual world “do terrible things to themselves and to others”; and illuminates how keeping the faith and restoring authentic māori (human) values can help heal the most horrific abuse. As Tiaki Mira, the book’s kaumātua (elder), concludes, “Eternity is a long time … Everything changes, even that which supposes itself to be unalterable. All we can do is look after the precious matters which are our heritage, and wait, and hope.” Keri began writing the bone people in 1965 after Simon appeared in her dreams. But publishers that she approached either rejected the book or wanted radical rewrites she was unwilling to make. She held a wake for the manuscript, planning to encase it in perspex for use as a doorstop. Then, in 1981, as a regular exhibitor at the Women’s Gallery in Wellington, she encountered Spiral Collectives, a women’s literary and arts group that had never published a novel. Irihapeti Ramsden, Miriama Evans and (no relation) Marian Evans, one of the writers of this piece, the trio who later accepted Keri’s Booker prize, trusted the integrity of her “word-net” because of their own experiences. Irihapeti recalled lying in the wharenui (ancestral house) as a child, listening while the elders conversed through the night; she responded to how, on the page, Keri conveyed the feeling of that oral tradition’s rhythms and patterns. Miriama characterised it simply as a good Māori novel that she and her relatives would read. In print since 1984, in English and other languages, the bone people was most recently translated into Spanish (2018). Born in Ōtautahi, or Christchurch, Keri was the eldest of Mary (nee Miller) and John Hulme’s six children. Mary came from South Island iwi (tribes) Ngāi Tahu and Kāti Mamoe, as well as Orkney, Scotland, and John from Lancashire, England. Both ran businesses, John a sawmill at one point. After John died when Keri was 11 she helped Mary care for her siblings; until her death in 2019 Mary was central to Keri’s life. From an early age and throughout her time at Aranui high school Keri was a storyteller, reader and artist. Her studies in law at the University of Canterbury (New Zealand), lasted only four terms, but, taught to respect all her ancestral lines, she continued her scholarly investigations into mātauranga Māori (Māori knowledge) and western arts and science; both systems and her love of Papatūānuku (Mother Earth) imbued her literary and artistic inventions, and playful use of language and form. Until the bone people’s success, Keri sustained herself through occupations that ranged from tobacco picker to journalist, supplemented by grants, residencies and help from family. She also built herself a house at Ōkārito, on the South Island’s west coast, where she lived for more than three decades, with frequent sojourns in Moeraki on the east, model for the bone people’s Moerangi. Keri’s stated priorities were: “First in my life is my family. My friends. My kāitahutaka (Ngāi Tahu culture). This wondrous archipelago we’re privileged to live in. And next, my recreations: fishing, food, art – including writing – reading and music.” A loner, but companionable, “because tribe and community are sanity”, and renowned for her hospitality and generosity, Keri described herself as androgyne, aromantic and asexual. At the Women’s Gallery in 1980, as “a neutral observer at the fringe of the fire”, she presented the longform poem He Hōhā (Annoyance) about her experience of the female body: “It is a cliche that once a month, the moon stalks through my body, / rendering me frail and more susceptible to brain spin; / it is truth that clamp and clot and tender breast beset – but then / it is the tide of potency, another chance to walk the crack / between worlds”. Other literary publications include a novella, Lost Possessions (1985); a short-story collection, Te Kaihau: The Windeater (1986); Homeplaces, with the photographer Robin Morrison (1989), a poetry collection, Strands (1993), a libretto for Anthony Ritchie’s opera Āhua, the Story of Moki (2000), and a collection of stories and poems, Stonefish (2004). One short story, Hooks and Feelers, was made into a film (1983). Keri’s last major publication, in 2016, was a two-volume artist book of her first poetry collection, The Silences Between: Moeraki Conversations (1982). She left two unfinished novels: Bait and On the Shadow Side. Keri is survived by three siblings, Diane, John and Kate, two nieces and five nephews. • Keri Ann Ruhi Hulme, writer and artist, born 9 March 1947; died 27 December 2021Ministers face a backlash from climate groups after giving the green light to a new North Sea oilfield just weeks after the Cop26 UN climate talks in Glasgow. The Abigail oil and gas field off the east coast of Scotland was quietly approved by the government’s Oil and Gas Authority (OGA) last month, defying climate experts who warned at the Glasgow conference in November that no new fossil fuel developments would be compatible with the world’s climate targets. Climate campaigners object to the field, which will be developed by Israeli owned Ithaca Energy, because its diminutive gas reserves will do little to help secure the UK’s energy supplies while contributing to carbon emissions. Tessa Khan, the director of Uplift, a group which campaigns for a fossil-free UK, said the field would “see little to no benefit for UK energy customers or taxpayers, which only worsens the climate crisis, and where the only winners are the oil firm behind the project”. Khan said the government should instead cut the UK’s reliance on “very expensive, highly polluting energy” in favour of a “serious response” to both unaffordable energy bills and the climate crisis based on renewable energy. “The government needs to stop rolling over for the oil and gas industry, stop dishing out licences, and get on with making sure people have access to affordable, renewable energy,” she said. An OGA spokesperson said; “The OGA will continuously hold the operator to account on emissions reductions as part of our stewardship.” The government has also faced opposition for failing to insist that a major new oil development at Cambo in the North Sea comply with incoming legislation which would apply a “climate compatibility checkpoint” for new fossil fuel projects. Work at the Cambo field was halted late last year by private equity-backed fossil fuel explorer Siccar Point Energy, after its project partner Shell pulled out of the project following fierce opposition from environmental activists. Caroline Rance, a climate and energy campaigner for Friends of the Earth Scotland, described the government’s climate checklist as a “farcical plan” which was “designed to set the bar so low that the oil industry gets to lock us into their climate-wrecking business as usual for decades to come”. “The UK government should immediately stop granting permission for new oil and gas projects, and instead begin a managed phase-out of existing fields while ensuring a just transition for affected workers and communities,” she said. “The simple fact is that there is no such thing as a climate compatible oil and gas development. Climate science is crystal clear that burning fossil fuels is the key driver of the climate crisis and that there can be no new oil and gas fields anywhere in the world if we’re to limit warming to the 1.5C limit,” Rance added.Boris Johnson faces a backlash from Conservative MPs after allies briefed that the prime minister had won over his party, as splits appear in the One Nation group of Tory centrists about how to proceed. On Tuesday, the veteran MP Peter Aldous said he had submitted a letter of no confidence and MP Tom Hunt criticised the “cack-handed” backers of the prime minister, though stopped short of saying he should resign. Gary Streeter, the MP for South West Devon, also declined to say he had confidence in the prime minister. It is understood Johnson saw at least four former ministers late on Monday night after at least three others told him their support was either lost or conditional on Sue Gray’s final report on Downing Street’s lockdown breaches, now being investigated by police. Aldous became the latest MP to say he had written a letter of no confidence in Johnson. “After a great deal of soul-searching, I have reached the conclusion that the prime minister should resign,” Aldous tweeted. “I have never taken such action before and had hoped that I would not be put in such an invidious position. Whilst I am conscious that others will disagree with me, I believe that this is in the best interests of the country, the government and the Conservative party.” Charles Walker, the vice chair of the 1922 committee of Tory backbenchers, added his voice to the mix, saying he would applaud Johnson for resigning. “I think there’s so much grief and pain out there that if he was to say [that he would resign], that would show great courage,” he told Channel 4 News. “I would applaud him for doing that but that is his decision.” Elliot Colburn, MP for Carshalton and Wallington, also revealed to a constituent that his “patience has now snapped” with Johnson and the partygate scandal in a hint that he could be among those to have put in a letter. “If I were the PM, I’d be considering my position,” he said. Streeter said it was not true the prime minister’s meeting with MPs had been “well received” on Monday evening. “This one is not over yet,” he told BBC Radio Devon. “It has got legs. A lot of us are thinking very seriously about what we should do about it. “It’s a serious matter of course to express no confidence in a prime minister … I’m reflecting and certainly over the next couple days will make a decision.” Johnson’s critics admitted there was “no plan and no coordination” among those who believed the prime minister should go. One senior MP who has been publicly critical of Johnson said they had been aghast at colleagues’ response to the prime minister’s private meeting with his MPs on Monday night. “The Tory party’s reputation for ruthlessness is a complete lie. It’s actually never been true and we’re seeing it happening before our eyes,” the MP said. One former minister who said they were among a number of colleagues prepared to move as a collective after the Gray report, described it as a “deeply unwelcome delay” but said they still held the view that a no-confidence vote would have a greater chance of success once the full evidence had been disclosed. But another former cabinet minister, who has seen Johnson, said that the idea of a leadership contest was “filling people with horror” about the damage that in itself could do to the party. “We would be on to our fourth prime minister. What does that say about the party? For better or worse, we did throw our lot in with him and we won a big majority.” But the MP said that would change if Johnson was fined by the Met. “He’s not out of the woods, no. He’d be very foolish to have a ‘mission accomplished’ banner. At the point where he has committed a criminal offence, of course that changes things. And it depends how bad is the final Gray report.” Among those who have expressed anger and frustration are some of the more critical 2019 MPs who have privately told more experienced colleagues they feel betrayed. Hunt has said the limited findings made in Gray’s update were not “acceptable, excusable, or defensible” but stopped short of saying it meant he had submitted a letter of no confidence. The MP for Ipswich said some of the interventions by Johnson’s allies had been “so cack-handed that the best way they could be of assistance to the prime minister would be to disable all their social media platforms and cease carrying out media interviews”. “Silence would be preferable,” he said. He said it was not the time to “depose the prime minister”, but that a line could not be drawn under the saga until the full report was published.“We have learnt a huge amount from Jack’s,” said Jason Tarry, chief executive of Tesco UK and Ireland, as he pulled the plug on the group’s experiment in running an Aldi copycat format. One lesson is probably an old one: pure discounting is best left to specialists. Trying to run a limited-range discount chain is hard when your core business is, and always will be, mainstream grocery retailing. Sainsbury’s had a go a few years back in partnership with Danish group Netto and also got nowhere. In Tesco’s case, only 13 Jack’s outlets appeared, so no more than the 10-15 billed as “an initial phase” by former chief executive Dave Lewis back in 2018. It suggests the case for expanding Jack’s never got close to borderline. One can see why boards of big supermarket chains are sometimes overcome by the urge to try to play Aldi and Lidl at their own game. The rise of the discounters is the most significant development in UK grocery retailing over the past 25 years. What the big players tend to overlook, though, is that it took Aldi and Lidl more than a decade to become a serious fighting force. The former launched here in 1990, and the latter in 1994, but it was only after the turn of the century that the privately owned German duo became more than an irritant to the leading chains. Their biggest growth came after the helpful plunge in commercial property prices that followed the financial crash of 2008. Such investment horizons tend to be far too long for quoted companies. The smarter tactic is the one that Tesco and Sainsbury’s have increasingly adopted: just try to match Aldi’s prices on basic goods, especially fresh food, and champion the fact. It is jarring to see Tesco, the UK’s biggest beast, admit, in effect, that a smaller competitor is the real price-setter, but customers get the message. If adventures such as Jack’s were ever going to work, the moment was a couple of decades ago, before Aldi and Lidl got into their stride. Yes, best to stick to the day job. Cost of living squeeze tightens on savers Here’s an unhelpful straw in the economic wind for Rishi Sunak. Consumers saved less and borrowed more than usual in December, according to the Bank of England’s figures. And savings habits enforced involuntarily during lockdown now seem to have reversed entirely. Household deposits in banks are back at pre-pandemic levels. These figures look suspiciously like the arrival of the cost-of-living squeeze, even before April’s hike in energy bills adds to the pressure. The actual announcement of the new price cap on energy bills comes next Monday, which is the real trigger for the chancellor to reveal what he intends to do to soften the shock. Remember that it is virtually nailed-on that the cap will rise from its current level of £1,277 for an average annual dual-fuel bill to about £2,000. The latest whisper in the energy supply sector is that Sunak will opt for a two-part approach. First, an extension of the warm homes discount scheme that is available to qualifying low-income households. Second, a measure that applies to everyone: the removal of a portion of the increase in bills (perhaps as much as £200) by deferring the hit to future years. The latter element would be the controversial one since nobody knows when wholesale gas prices will fall. The deferral approach carries a strong whiff of hopeful thinking. But one can see why the chancellor might be tempted: if he’s not going to budge on April’s national insurance increase, he needs to find something to grab attention. The squeeze is on. Paltry fines will hardly dent auditor profits Jon Holt, chief executive of KPMG in the UK, says the auditing and advisory firm will “deal with and learn from our legacy issues”. In the meantime, the firm’s 571 partners can enjoy average pay packets of £688,000 for 2021, an increase of a fifth on the previous year. No doubt Holt is sincere about tackling those awkward legacy issues, but pre-tax profits of £436m, pumped up by advisory work on clients’ deals, puts into context the size of fines dished out for failures in the auditing division. Last year’s lowlight at KPMG was a £13m penalty in a long-running case related to the sale of the bedmaker Silentnight to a private equity group in 2011. The sum was a near-record fine from the Financial Reporting Council, but it barely touches the sides.A report from the Independent inquiry into child sexual abuse has found “extensive failures” in the way child sexual exploitation by criminal gangs is tackled. Over the course of two months in 2020, the inquiry heard evidence from more than 30 witnesses which revealed how police and local authorities failed to properly tackle the problem. Evidence offered only a glimpse of the ordeals suffered by young victims. One victim, identified only as CS-A371, said her parents were heroin addicts and she was taken into foster care when she was 10 years old. From the age of 13 she was regularly sexually exploited by adult men who also supplied her with alcohol, cannabis and cigarettes. They were subsequently prosecuted, but the victim described the trial as “very much like I was being bullied” and said defence barristers accused her of being racist and “a slag”. Another victim, CS-A372, grew up in a family where there was neglect and domestic violence. From the age of 12 she was sexually exploited by a 30-year-old man who forced her to have sex with other men. She said children’s social care opened and closed her case on multiple occasions, with records showing one of the reasons behind a decision to close her case was because they thought she was “putting herself at risk”. Aged 14, she was forced to perform oral sex on more than 20 adult men. This was also filmed. A number of men were charged, although the charges were later dropped. CS-A317 spent her childhood in a number of council-run children’s homes. From the age of 14, she was sexually abused and made to have sexual intercourse with adult men. She said staff in the children’s homes were “aware that she was having sex with an older male” but were dismissive and took no action to protect her. The abuse escalated and she said when she was 18 years old, she was raped by the main perpetrator of her exploitation. No action was taken by the police, who considered that she had consented. She had a breakdown and tried to take her own life. CS-A317 felt that “it was easier for the police to criminalise the children rather than go after the abusing adults”. In the UK, Rape Crisis offers support for rape and sexual abuse on 0808 802 9999 in England and Wales, 0808 801 0302 in Scotland, or 0800 0246 991 in Northern Ireland. In the US, Rainn offers support on 800-656-4673. In Australia, support is available at 1800Respect (1800 737 732). Other international helplines can be found at ibiblio.org/rcip/internl.htmlAn NHS doctor who was found by a court to have poisoned three people, killing one of them, has been suspended from practising medicine in the UK by the General Medical Council. The Guardian revealed earlier this week that a London court had found that the doctor had poisoned his partner and her parents with thallium, killing her father. The General Medical Council (GMC), which regulates the UK’s 306,185 doctors, on Tuesday said that it had suspended the medic and is investigating the events that led to the court deciding that he was a killer. “The doctor is suspended from practice pending an investigation into the allegations against him. The doctor was suspended in January 2022”, a GMC spokesperson said. The regulator declined to give any more details. It is thought that it is still assessing whether there are enough grounds to refer the doctor to the Medical Practitioners Tribunal Service, which investigates medics accused of wrongdoing and sanctions those who are found guilty. In the family court last year Mr Justice Williams ruled that the doctor had poisoned the trio, but he forbade either the medic or his ex-partner from being named. The poisoning came before the family court, despite it being a civil rather than criminal court, when in 2018 the doctor began seeking access to the son he had when he was still in a relationship with his ex-partner. Their relationship broke down in October 2012, a month after he – the court later established – put thallium in coffee that she and her parents drank while they were all staying together in Bulgaria, their home country. She and her mother became very ill but survived. Williams found that on the balance of probabilities the doctor had administered the poison, hurried back to the UK with his then partner and their child, and then declined to use his medical knowledge and contacts to get her appropriate care. His ex-partner told the Guardian she was “shocked” that the GMC had taken so long to suspend the doctor, given that he had first been accused of the poisoning in a previous case involving the custody of their child. That hearing, in 2020, also found that he had administered the thallium, a tasteless and odourless poison. However, the doctor appealed that ruling and the court of appeal ruled there must be a rehearing of events surrounding the poisoning, at the end of which Williams said he was satisfied that the man had carried it out. “The GMC was made aware of the outcome of the first trial at the end of April 2020. I was shocked that my ex-partner was allowed to practie medicine since then. “I would have assumed that if the GMC was going to conduct any investigation, then such [an] investigation should have been initiated immediately. I am shocked that things move forward very slowly, bearing in mind that a doctor was found to have killed a man”, she said. Simon Bruce, a specialist family lawyer who represents the woman, said: “The mother was intensely worried that her son’s father was practising as a doctor in England for years. “The General Medical Council has been informed of developments in the case on a periodic basis when this was permitted.” Bruce has acted for the woman – a bookkeeper – since late 2020 in his capacity as the director of a legal clinic run by Dad’s House, a charity based in London. Through the clinic lawyers provide pro bono advice to help people negotiate legal disputes. He added: “The president of the family division gave a speech in October 2021 in which he said that over half of the cases involving children in our family courts involved allegations of violence. “That may well be, but hardly any involve the killing of individuals, as this one did.” Delphine Philip Law, the doctor’s solicitors, declined to comment on the suspension but had earlier said that the doctor vehemently denies the mother’s allegations that he poisoned her or her parents.He is the toast of New York, of London – and of a small village called Llanddewi Rhydderch. Just four months after Josh Wardle invented the wonderfully simple and soothing puzzle Wordle, he is a megastar in the world of games and is a great deal wealthier after the New York Times acquired his creation for a seven-figure sum. But back in his home village in south-east Wales, which has a church, a chapel, an ancient yew tree and not much else, Wardle’s family expressed quiet joy at their son’s success, and also, perhaps, a little bemusement. “We’re very proud but it won’t change him at all,” said his father, Christopher, a farmer. “He’s not interested in the money side of things. He just likes creating. This all got so big so quickly.” His mother, Tessa, said: “I think this [selling the game] was the best way for him to manage things.” Wardle, who left the UK to pursue a career as a software engineer and is now based in Brooklyn, invented the game during Covid lockdown to entertain his partner, Palak Shah. Wardle shared it with family members and, realising that it may be worthy of a wider release, unleashed it on the world in October. While he had an inkling he was on to something, Wardle has made it clear he could never have imagined it would become so big – especially as he had originally created it for an audience of just one person. In his statement on the sale, Wardle said it had been incredible to watch the game bring so much joy to so many. “I feel so grateful for the personal stories some of you have shared with me, from Wordle uniting distant family members, to provoking friendly rivalries, to supporting medical recoveries,” he said. “On the flip side, I’d be lying if I said this hasn’t been overwhelming. After all, I am just one person, and it is important to me that, as Wordle grows, it continues to provide a great experience to everyone.” Wardle is the youngest of three brothers. He lived in Llanddewi Rhydderch when he was a boy and the family farm cattle and sheep. They also have a lively sheepdog called Shep. The village is tranquil, with views of one of Wales’s most popular hills, Sugar Loaf, or Mynydd Pen-y-fâl. Llanddewi Rhydderch last received publicity for a curious reason when it emerged that the Pacific nation of Kiribati had an honorary consulate there. Wardle attended King Henry VIII state school in Abergavenny, before studying media arts at Royal Holloway, University of London. His father said he decided to head to the US to study at the University of Oregon partly because of his love of the sport Ultimate Frisbee. “He liked to plough his own furrow, to use a farming phrase.” After college Wardle began working for Reddit, working on collaborative social experiments. There must be something in the water of Llanddewi Rhydderch. The writer Owen Sheers grew up there while Wardle’s brother, Tim, is a successful documentary maker. On his Twitter feed Tim Wardle described the news of the New York Times buyout as “big news in the Wordlesphere”. He said it had been fun to see his brother’s game “blow up”, adding: “Ironically, he decided not to do all the things you’re supposed to do to make a viral hit – like allowing people to play for hours or putting a hyperlink in the sharing function. It works because it’s atypical.” Wordle requires players to guess a five-letter word within six guesses, with grey, yellow and green coloured bricks used to indicate if guessed letters are part of the answer and whether they match the right place in the correct word. Once solved, players are able to share their own results on social media via rows of the same coloured bricks but with the letters removed, so others can see how they did without having the puzzle ruined for them. While the world debated the New York Times sale, at the farm in Llanddewi Rhydderch they were getting on with looking after their animals. “Josh had no idea it would take off like this,” said his father. “I think it’s come as a bit of a shock. He’s a very private kind of person. I don’t think he likes the attention much.” Jonathan Knight, the general manager for games at the New York Times Company, said the firm was thrilled to be adding Wordle to its portfolio and confirmed it had “no plans at this time” to change the game’s free-to-play nature, saying Wardle’s creation was “lightning in a bottle”.Some of the White House records turned over to the House committee investigating the January 6 attack were ripped up by Donald Trump, the National Archives said. It also emerged on Tuesday that the former president thinks his own vice-president, Mike Pence, should be investigated by the committee, for failing to reject electoral college results on the fateful day. Documents obtained by the January 6 panel include diaries, schedules, handwritten notes, speeches and remarks. The supreme court rejected Trump’s attempt to stop the National Archives turning them over to Congress. In a statement, the Archives said: “Some of the Trump presidential records received by the National Archives and Records Administration included paper records that had been torn up by former president Trump. “These were turned over to the National Archives at the end of the Trump administration, along with a number of torn-up records that had not been reconstructed by the White House. The Presidential Records Act requires that all records created by presidents be turned over to the National Archives at the end of their administrations.” The Archives did not say how it knew Trump had torn the records but his habit of tearing up documents has been widely reported. In 2018, Politico spoke to Solomon Lartey, a records management analyst who spent time “armed with rolls of clear Scotch tape … sift[ing] through large piles of paper and put[ting] them back together … ‘like a jigsaw puzzle’.” Lartey and another staffer who taped records were fired by the White House that year, they said summarily. Lartey said: “They told [Trump] to stop doing it. He didn’t want to stop.” After a process that reached the supreme court, the Archives gave more than 700 documents concerning the Capitol attack to the House committee last month. More than 700 people have been charged over the riot, in which Trump supporters tried to stop certification of his election defeat. Eleven members of a far-right militia are charged with seditious conspiracy. More than 100 police officers were injured. Seven people died. The committee has recommended criminal charges for two Trump associates, the former White House strategist Steve Bannon and chief of staff Mark Meadows. Bannon refused cooperation and pleaded not guilty to contempt of Congress. Meadows cooperated, then withdrew. He has not been charged. In a surprise statement on Tuesday, Trump said he thought Pence should also be subject to the committee’s attentions. His vice-president, he said, should be investigated because he “did not send back the votes for recertification or approval, in that it has now been shown that he clearly had the right to do so!” Pence concluded that he did not have the right to reject electoral college results, and resisted pressure from Trump to do so. He was rewarded with the attentions of the mob that stormed the Capitol, some chanting for him to be hanged. Trump has seized on moves in the Senate to reform the Electoral Count Act of 1887, mainly by removing ambiguity over the vice-president’s role. Constitutional scholars agree the vice-president does not have the right to reject results, even under the act as written. Marc Short and Greg Jacob, close aides to Pence, have reportedly spoken to the January 6 committee in the past week. Both men were present at an infamous Oval Office meeting on 4 January when John Eastman, a constitutional scholar, tried to convince Pence he could reject electoral college results. Regarding the torn-up White House materials turned over to the committee, Stephen Gillers, a New York University law professor, told the Washington Post destroying White House documents “could be a crime under several statutes that make it a crime to destroy government property if that was the intent of the defendant. “A president does not own the records generated by his own administration. The definition of presidential records is broad. Trump’s own notes to himself could qualify and destroying them could be the criminal destruction of government property.” Trump did not comment on the Archives statement. Nor did the House committee. It was also reported on Tuesday that text messages were turned over to the committee by Kayleigh McEnany, Trump’s last press secretary. ABC News reported that McEnany appeared before investigators on 13 January. It also said the texts were the source for conversations with the Fox News host Sean Hannity, which were quoted by the committee in a request for information from Ivanka Trump, the former president’s daughter and adviser. “1 – no more stolen election talk,” Hannity texted McEnany after the Capitol attack. Referring to possible attempts to remove Trump from power, he added: “2 - Yes, impeachment and the 25th amendment are real and many people will quit.” McEnany replied: “Love that. Thank you. That is the playbook. I will help reinforce.” Trump was impeached but acquitted. The 25th amendment, which provides for the removal of a president incapable of fulfilling his or her duties, was not invoked. Trump continues to claim the election was stolen. McEnany is now a Fox News host. She and her employer did not comment. One former Trump White House insider told the Guardian: “She’s an honest woman.”A multimillionaire Azerbaijani politician and his family have been ordered to hand over £5.6m of suspect funds brought into the UK via a complex money-laundering scheme nicknamed the “Azerbaijani laundromat”. A judge on Monday ordered that Javanshir Feyziyev and his family forfeit £5.63m held in various bank accounts after ruling the funds “arise from criminal conduct” and “money laundering”. The National Crime Agency (NCA) said Feyziyev, a serving member of the Azerbaijan parliament, brought millions of pounds of illicit wealth into the UK via the laundromat. The money laundering scheme was revealed in 2017 when confidential banking records were leaked to the Danish newspaper Berlingske and shared with the Organized Crime and Corruption Reporting Project, the Guardian, and other media partners. The data showed that the Azerbaijani leadership, accused of serial human rights abuses, systemic corruption and rigging elections, made more than 16,000 covert payments between 2012 and 2014 – worth on average about $3m a day. The National Crime Agency (NCA), which is investigating the international money laundering ring, had applied to the court to seize £15.3m of suspect funds from the family. Westminster magistrates court district judge John Zani ruled on Monday that Feyziyev, his wife Parvana Feyziyeva, their son Orkhan, and a nephew, Elman Javanshir, must hand over a total of £5.6m after finding “key elements of money laundering”. THe NCA said the judge agreed there was “overwhelming evidence” that documents, including invoices and contracts, purporting to support legitimate and substantial business transactions between three shell companies were “entirely fictitious and were produced in order to mask the underlying money-laundering activities of those orchestrating the accounts”. A spokesman for the family said: “While the family is disappointed that any of the frozen funds have been forfeited, they are pleased to have succeeded in the majority of the claim and to have had the court confirm that neither ‘Javanshir Feyziyev or any of the Respondents have been engaged in corruption.’” Feyziyev, who lives in a multimillion-pound Grade I-listed John Nash-designed mansion overlooking Regent’s Park in London, is chair of the UK-Azerbaijan all-parliamentary cooperation committee and co-chair of the EU parliament’s equivalent body. Andy Lewis, head of civil recovery at the NCA, said: “This is a substantial forfeiture of money laundered through the Azerbaijan laundromat, and our success highlights the risk to anyone who uses these schemes. “We were able to recover these millions without needing to prove the exact nature of the original criminal activity. We will continue to use civil powers to target money entering the UK via illegitimate means.” Last year the NCA seized £4m from another London-based Azerbaijani couple in connection with the laundromat scheme. Suleyman Javadov and his wife Izzat Khanim Javadova, the well-known Ibiza DJ Mikaela Jav, agreed to hand over the money in July after admitting in a settlement that it came into the country illegally. Javadov is the son of a former Azerbaijan deputy energy minister. Javadova is the daughter of oligarch Jalal Aliyev, an uncle of the country’s president Ilham Aliyev. • This article was amended on 1 February 2022. An earlier version incorrectly reported an NCA statement as suggesting that the court found Javanshir Feyziyev’s family supplied documents that were fictitious and produced to conceal money-laundering. There is no suggestion of that and there has been no finding that the family produced or supplied such documents.Here’s the thing. You won’t find any sentient being who will tell you anything other than that Boris Johnson was a total disaster during his Commons statement on the Sue Gray report on Monday. Narcissistic, tin-eared, deceitful and graceless would be some of the kinder descriptions of his behaviour. And yet. Little more than an hour later, Big Dog was locked in a committee room in Portcullis House with almost the entire Tory parliamentary party, giving the performance of his life. At least that’s how those backbenchers – surrounded by ministers and party whips – who were present, chose to report it. MPs who had gone into the room as sceptics left an hour later totally charmed. Clearly you had to have been there to fully appreciate his killer reference to himself as Othello. Though hopefully someone later explained to him and Carrie what happened to Desdemona. The Suspect clearly has a lot of work to do before starting on his Shakespeare biography. Like reading some of the plays. Then, it’s uncanny that it always seems to be that way. One way or another, Johnson saves his best efforts for when there is no reliable audience. Just a few tame stooges who are easily bullied. Perhaps it’s stage fright. If only he could reproduce his star quality on the big stage, then we might all appreciate his exceptionalism. His genius. Think how frustrating it must be for Big Dog to realise how few of his best lines reach the general public and that all most people know of him is that he’s a shit liar. Think also how frustrating it must be for The Suspect to have to rely on other halfwits to spread his talent on the news channels. People like Nadine Dorries, who spit and snarl conspiracy theories into any passing microphone, safe in the knowledge she’ll never hold a cabinet post again. People like Jacob Rees-Mogg, who has never knowingly been right about anything. People like Paul Scully, who will be suffering from PTSD for years following his mauling at the hands of Emma Barnett on Newsnight. People like Dominic Raab. Come Tuesday morning, it was the justice secretary and deputy prime minister who had drawn the short straw of trying to explain why The Suspect had done nothing wrong even though No 10 was the subject of 12 separate police investigations. It didn’t go well. Long before the end of the final interview, Dom’s anger vein was pumping wildly with psychotic rage. It would be at least another three murder day for him. He just had to hope the bodies weren’t recovered from the Thames for some weeks. So what was the prime minister sorry for, Nick Robinson asked on Radio 4’s Today programme. Raab literally didn’t have a clue. Apart from the obvious about being sorry he had been caught. There again, how could he? Even Big Dog doesn’t know why he’s saying sorry and can’t bring himself to even affect sincerity. He still somehow believes he is the innocent victim in this and that somehow all the parties happened to him. All that Dom could manage for a full seven minutes was an increasing tetchy and terse “no comment” as Robinson tried to find one thing that Johnson might conceivably feel sorry for. Raab just shrugged. He supposed the fault might have lain in the structures of No 10. Perhaps if there had been a proper office for the prime minister then someone in the building might have noticed that endless parties with everyone getting pissed was not a good look. But, as it was, there was no way Big Dog could possibly have known any parties had taken place – not that he was admitting there had been parties – because no one had told him he was breaking the rules he had made. As Robinson became more and more frustrated, Dom retreated further and further into his shell. It was all Raab could do to stop himself from referring to Johnson as “The Suspect”. Or “My Client”. Not that you could imagine anyone wanting Dom as their lawyer as his knowledge of the law appears extremely limited. He also claimed that The Suspect couldn’t possibly comment on any of the parties he attended as it might prejudice the ongoing police investigation. It would if Johnson tried to lie about them, I suppose. Then what else would Boris do? Raab ended by saying he hoped the Metropolitan police wouldn’t investigate too thoroughly – why break the habit of a lifetime? – and besides it was possible they turned up nothing in which case there would be no need to publish the full Sue Gray report. After all, who wanted to see pictures of Boris lying face down in a flower bed? Or staff shagging on the children’s swing. And he definitely wasn’t going to repeat the Jimmy Savile conspiracy theory lie, even though he saw no harm in Big Dog having accused Keir Starmer of protecting one of Britain’s most notorious paedophiles, just in case he got taken to court for slander. There was no lower for Raab to get, so the BBC showed him the door. There was no need to open it. He could ooze and seep underneath it. It wasn’t difficult to wonder if all the grown-ups had long since left No 10. A feeling reinforced later in the day when first a spokesperson said Downing Street had no intention of revealing if the prime minister received a fixed penalty notice, only to reverse ferret several hours later when someone realised it would be impossible to keep this a secret. As for Big Dog, he was in Kyiv trying to persuade the world he was doing something other than trying to hang on to his own job. A day trip that ended with a press conference that only confirmed the futility of the jaunt. Both the BBC and PA asked Johnson about the parties and observed if he was a serious player in the efforts to secure peace, he’d have taken Vladimir Putin’s call the day before. The Ukrainian media ignored The Suspect entirely. They knew he was irrelevant and they focused all their questions on President Volodymyr Zelenskiy. Johnson’s search for meaning remained unrequited. • An evening with Marina Hyde and John Crace: join in person or online Join Marina Hyde and John Crace live in Kings Place, looking back at the latest events in Westminster, on Monday 7 March, 8pm GMT | 9pm CET | 12pm PST | 3pm EST. Book tickets hereExtreme heat in the world’s oceans passed the “point of no return” in 2014 and has become the new normal, according to research. Scientists analysed sea surface temperatures over the last 150 years, which have risen because of global heating. They found that extreme temperatures occurring just 2% of the time a century ago have occurred at least 50% of the time across the global ocean since 2014. In some hotspots, extreme temperatures occur 90% of the time, severely affecting wildlife. More than 90% of the heat trapped by greenhouse gases is absorbed by the ocean, which plays a critical role in maintaining a stable climate. “By using this measure of extremes, we’ve shown that climate change is not something that is uncertain and may happen in the distant future – it’s something that is a historical fact and has occurred already,” said Kyle Van Houtan, at the Monterey Bay Aquarium, US, and one of the research team. “Extreme climate change is here, it’s in the ocean, and the ocean underpins all life on Earth.” Van Houtan and his colleague Kisei Tanaka are ecologists and began the study because they wanted to assess how heat extremes were related to the loss of kelp forests off the coast of California. “Ecology teaches us that extremes have an outsized impact on ecosystems,” Van Houtan said. “We are trying to understand the dramatic changes that we’ve seen along our coasts and in the ocean, on coral reefs, kelp, white sharks, sea otters, fish, and more.” Other scientists reported in 2019 that the number of heatwaves affecting the planet’s oceans had increased sharply, killing swathes of sea life like “wildfires that take out huge areas of forest”. Van Houtan and Tanaka found no measure of extreme heat existed and so extended their work globally. The study, published in the Plos Climate journal, examined the monthly temperature in each one-degree-by-one-degree part of the ocean and set the highest temperature in the 50-year period as the benchmark for extreme heat. The scientists then examined temperature records from 1920 to 2019, the most recent year available. They found that by 2014, more than 50% of the monthly records across the entire ocean had surpassed the once-in-50–years extreme heat benchmark. The researchers called the year when the percentage passed 50% and did not fall back below it in subsequent years the “point of no return”. By 2019, the proportion of the global ocean suffering extreme heat was 57%. “We expect this to keep on going up,” said Van Houtan. But the extreme heat was particularly severe in some parts of the ocean, with the South Atlantic having passed the point of no return in 1998. “That was 24 years ago – that is astounding,” he said. The proportion of the ocean experiencing extreme heat in some large ecosystems is now 80%-90%, with the five worst affected including areas off the north-east coasts of the US and Canada, off Somalia and Indonesia, and in the Norwegian Sea. “You should care about turtles, seabirds and whales, but even if you don’t, the two most lucrative fisheries in the US, lobster and scallops, are in those exact spots,” said Van Houtan, while 14 fisheries in Alaska have recently been declared federal disasters. The heat content of the top 2,000 metres of the ocean set a new record in 2021, the sixth in a row. Prof John Abraham at the University of St Thomas in Minnesota, one of the team behind the assessment, said ocean heat content was the most relevant to global climate, while surface temperatures were most relevant to weather patterns, as well as many ecosystems. “Oceans are critical to understanding climate change. They cover about 70% of the planet’s surface and absorb more than 90% of global warming heat,” Abraham said. “The new study is helpful because the researchers look at the surface temperatures. It finds there has been a big increase in extreme heat at the ocean’s surface and that the extremes are increasing over time.”Almost no corals on the planet will escape severe bleaching once global heating reaches 1.5C, according to a new study of the world’s reefs. Reefs in areas currently regarded as cooler refuges will be overwhelmed at 1.5C of heating, and just 0.2% of reefs will escape at least one bleaching outbreak every decade, according to the research. The team of scientists from the University of Leeds, Texas Tech University and James Cook University used the latest climate model projections to confirm that 1.5C of global heating “will be catastrophic for coral reefs”. Corals bleach when ocean temperatures are too high for too long. Algae that provide corals with much of their food and colour separate from the coral during heat stress. Severe bleaching can kill corals, but they can recover from milder outbreaks if there are several years with no further heatwaves. The world’s oceans are heating due mostly to the burning of fossil fuels. The study comes as the world’s biggest coral reef system, the Great Barrier Reef off Australia’s Queensland coast, is on the verge of another mass coral bleaching event. In the study, the team analysed climate projections across all of the world’s shallow-water coral reefs, which constitute the vast majority of reefs and provide habitat, tourism revenue and coastal protection. About 84% of the world’s corals exist in areas that are expected to bleach less than once a decade and are regarded as “thermal refugia”, the study said. But the analysis suggests at 1.5C of global heating, only 0.2% of the area covered by reefs is in water cool enough to avoid bleaching at least once every five years – a frequency considered too short to allow corals to recover. The only area to escape, the study claims, would be in a region of the east Indian Ocean in an area of natural upwelling of cooler water. Even areas with strong currents that can protect corals from heat, such as those in Panama, Florida and the Lesser Sunda Islands in Indonesia, would be overwhelmed by the heat. Associate Prof Scott Heron, a marine scientist at James Cook University and a co-author of the study, said coral reefs sustained a billion people around the world. He said the study, published in the journal PLOS Climate, showed corals worldwide were at even greater risk from climate change than previously thought. That meant it was crucial that conservation work continued on reefs to give corals a fighting chance of survival, he said. “Until we reach the point where I can’t see a single coral, it isn’t too late. “We have to keep pursuing our best practices to protect coral reefs. Real people rely on these reefs and that is a driver to keep gathering the best knowledge possible.” Adele Dixon, lead author of the study and a PhD student at the University of Leeds, said corals in French Polynesia and southern Indonesia may be exposed to heat stress less frequently, and the study did identify a small number of “hope sites”. “Corals in these locations, such as the eastern Pacific, may be better able to cope with temperature extremes,” she said. But one prominent coral reef expert challenged the findings, and doubted the real world outcomes would be as catastrophic as the research suggests. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Prof Peter Mumby, a reef expert at the University of Queensland studying the effects of climate change on corals, agreed that at 1.5C corals worldwide would be under greater stress than they are today. “But I don’t agree that this research provides evidence that corals are untenable under 1.5C of warming,” he said. Mumby said the levels of heat stress used in the study to identify severe bleaching were arguably too low, and the method was unlikely to capture local conditions that could protect some reefs. Even reefs that are hit by bleaching every five years could include areas of coral that would survive, he said.Lynton Crosby, the Australian campaign guru, will “be around” to give strategic advice to the prime minister without being given a formal job in No 10, according to Tory sources. Boris Johnson buoyed Tory MPs on Monday night by revealing he had rehired the strategist, who helped with the party’s election campaigns in 2015 and 2017. MPs and aides claim they already detect the hand of the “Wizard of Oz” in No 10’s fightback against the partygate scandal. However, Crosby, who is currently in Australia, will not be taking on an official job that could clash with his business interests and may not spend that much time “physically in the building”, according to sources. Instead, he will be on hand to give more guidance to the prime minister on the reshaping of his operation in No 10 and strategic priorities. Those who know Crosby well say he has made clear that he is an expert on campaigns, not someone who can run a government, but one of his often repeated phrases about political leaders thinking ahead to an election is that you “can’t fatten a pig on market day”. Although many Tories believe Johnson will not still be leader at the next election, MPs say the prime minister himself has not accepted his ejection from office to be a likely option. “Lynton already speaks to him anyway. He has always been his unofficial sounding board. He’s the person he turns to and that conversation has been going on all along,” according to one person who has worked closely with Crosby. Relations between the two men cooled after Crosby helped with Johnson’s leadership campaign in 2019, partly fuelled by tensions over the role of the prime minister’s now-wife Carrie Johnson. But he has come back into the prime minister’s sphere of influence in the last year. One Tory strategist said there was also still hope among the right of the party that Johnson could give a formal chief of staff or parliamentary liaison job to one of Crosby’s strategists, David Canzini, who was involved in the hard Brexit campaigns of Theresa May’s premiership. However, this has been consistently denied by those in No 10. They also said the stream of coordinated announcements over the last few days bore the hallmarks of Crosby and his allies, particularly Johnson’s attempts to bind himself to his rivals for the leadership, Rishi Sunak and Liz Truss, with a joint op ed and planned trip to Ukraine respectively. As Sue Gray’s report into the partygate scandal dropped on Monday, Johnson had already lined up competing policy statements with his commitment to continuing with the national insurance rise on Sunday, a visit to Ukraine to showcase his international credentials on Tuesday and his long-awaited levelling up white paper on Wednesday. Downing Street sources claimed these were all in the offing for some time and any timing alongside the Gray report was coincidental. Crosby is also renowned for the “dead cat” strategy, where politicians try to change the national conversation from one scandal to another eye-catching talking point, however negative. Although the strategist is not expected to begin his work with No 10 for some weeks, Johnson appeared to have adopted such a distraction tactic in the Commons on Monday, as he made a false claim that Keir Starmer, the Labour leader, failed to prosecute paedophile Jimmy Savile while director of public prosecutions. This then took up air time on Tuesday, even though the prime minister was being heavily criticised from some on his own side over the comments. Alongside Johnson’s effort to renew his focus on policy, he is expected to shake up his team in the days and weeks ahead. Following the Gray report he announced that he would create a new “office of the prime minister” to make No 10 more of an official government department with clearer oversight and accountability. But there are reservations among some of his critics and even some in cabinet that this could actually centralise power for the prime minister. There is also scepticism about his idea of creating backbench “policy boards” to allow Tory MPs to feel heard and that they are contributing. It is understood Graham Brady, the 1922 chair, has a role in putting forward names to chair these boards, but one Tory MP said it was a “tired idea” that many prime ministers reach for when trying to appease their backbenchers. Another senior Conservative MP who believes Johnson should go but has not yet put in a letter said changes to staffing and advice would not help when the prime minister himself is the problem. “What happens when more about the Jennifer Arcuri stuff comes out? What happens when more about the PPE scandal comes out? There will always be another problem.”A Russian invasion of Ukraine would end in a humanitarian, political and military disaster for Russia and the world, Boris Johnson has warned as he stood alongside the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, in Kyiv, saying the UK would be judged by the level of help it gave to Ukraine. On a flying visit to the Ukrainian capital, he denied the US and the UK were exaggerating the scale of the Russian threat, saying they were not trying to “big up” the intelligence. “The grim reality” was that Russian troops were “massing on Ukraine’s border. This is a clear and present danger,” he said, adding that the troop concentration was “perhaps the biggest demonstration of hostility to Ukraine in our lifetimes”. Johnson said it dwarfed the Russian forces mounted before the invasion in 2014. The British prime minister said by holding a gun to the head of the Ukrainian people Vladimir Putin was trying to get the west to dismantle the new security architecture set up after the fall of the Berlin Wall. He said the UK was trying to bring the west together, saying this crisis is about something bigger than Ukraine. “He [Putin] is trying to redraw the security map of Europe and to impose a new Yalta, new zones of influence. It would not just be Ukraine that was brought back into the Russian zone of influence. It would be Georgia and Moldova and other countries. This is absolutely critical, this moment.” The press conference came after Putin, speaking in Moscow, accused the US of ignoring Russia’s security proposals in his first public comments on the growing crisis over Ukraine since December. A phone call between Johnson and the Russian president that the prime minister was forced to cancel on Monday has been rescheduled for Wednesday, after the Kremlin rejected a request to hold it on Tuesday. The Monday call was cancelled so Johnson could make a statement to MPs in parliament about Downing Street parties during lockdown. Johnson was dogged by questions at the press conference about whether his domestic political crisis over the parties was making it impossible for him to focus on the Russian crisis. He insisted he was fully focused and said he would be talking to Putin on Wednesday. Their scheduled call had to be cancelled on Monday as Johnson was forced instead to spend two hours answering questions about the allegations of parties in Downing Street in breach of Covid regulations laid out in the report written by the civil servant Sue Gray. At one point during the press conference he was forced to say that he would publish everything he can of the final version of Gray report. He did not say he would publish everything Gray gives to him. The Ukrainian president largely protected Johnson by refusing to repeat claims that the west was creating panic by hyping an imminent Russian invasion, and instead warned of a great war. Zelenskiy said there were 35,000 to 50,000 Russian troops in Crimea, 35,000 in occupied Donbas, and 100,000 on his country’s international border with Russia. “I’m looking forward to Russia withdrawing its army from our borders. We don’t need words. Just make that one step,” Zelenskiy said, adding Russians didn’t want to die in a war with Ukraine. He urged the west to slap sanctions on Russia now, rather than after the invasion had started. Johnson had said the sanctions would come into force as soon as “the first Russian toecap” crossed into Ukrainian territory. “It’s vital that in Moscow they understand that there will be automaticity in the way that we apply these sanctions, so that the minute there is a further incursion into sovereign Ukrainian territory then those sanctions will apply,” Johnson said. “We’re bringing forward the new legislation [that] will enable us to pinpoint … strategic commercial interests of Russia in a very direct way, as well as individual Russian commercial interests.” He added: “There are 200,000 men and women under arms in Ukraine, they will put up a very, very fierce and bloody resistance. I think that parents, mothers in Russia should reflect on that fact.” In an attempt to put himself at the centre of events, he listed the world leaders to whom he has spoken in recent days, adding: “The people of Ukraine have the inalienable right to choose how they are governed and which organisations they aspire to join.” But he stressed a step back from the brink is still possible, adding that he is ready to engage in dialogue.Vladimir Putin has accused the US of ignoring Russia’s security proposals in his first public comments on the growing crisis over Ukraine since December. During a press conference at the Kremlin, Putin told journalists he was unsatisfied with the US response to Russian demands that Nato remove troops and infrastructure from eastern Europe and agree never to accept Ukraine into the alliance. “It’s already clear … that Russia’s principal concerns were ignored,” Putin said after talks with the Hungarian prime minister, Viktor Orbán. In emotional remarks, Putin also said the west was using Ukraine as a “tool to hinder Russia” and hypothesised that Ukraine’s entrance into Nato could lead to a conflict over Crimea, the peninsula annexed by Russia in 2014. Putin said he was ready to continue negotiations with the west, which has said it is ready for dialogue but views Moscow’s demands as a non-starter. But Russia has also continued deploying thousands of troops and offensive weapons to the Ukrainian border, appearing to threaten a strike if the Kremlin does not get its way. Putin’s remarks broke almost a month of silence on the issue from the Russian leader, who has been mostly absent from public life as concern has grown in western capitals that Moscow was preparing an invasion. His next move remains unpredictable. Joe Biden has said that he believes Putin has not decided whether or not to launch an attack but that he expects that he will “move in”. The US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, spoke with the Russian foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, in an effort to defuse the crisis earlier on Tuesday. “If Putin doesn’t intend war or regime change, this is the time to pull back,” Blinken told Lavrov, according to a senior state department official. “The sense here is still that we don’t know that Putin has made a decision about what he’s going to do. So until President Putin makes that decision, we need to continue to prepare for these different outcomes,” the official told reporters. The state department spokesperson, Ned Price, said that the next step in the diplomatic exchange between Washington and Moscow would be a formal Russian response to a US “non-paper” setting out US positions on European security. “When President Putin has had a chance to review it and approve it, it will be coming to the United States,” Price said. “We understand that once that takes place, the Russians too are willing to engage in continued dialogue.” Price insisted the US “non-paper” did not ignore Russian concerns. “It did address the points that have been raised by the Russian Federation. That doesn’t necessarily mean that the Russians will agree with the way in which they were addressed,” he said. He repeated the US and Nato position that the inviolability of borders and the sovereign right of Ukraine and other countries to decide on their own national security arrangements were “non-starters”. On those issues, he added “there is no trade space”. On Tuesday, Putin railed against deliveries of lethal aid to Ukraine, saying he believed that the country was being “packed full of weapons”. Earlier, Poland announced it would provide shells, mortars and surface-to-air missiles that would boost Ukraine’s defence against low-flying attack aircraft. The US, Britain and other European countries have stepped up deliveries of anti-tank weapons, ammunition and other military aid to Ukraine to ward off a potential invasion. The Russian leader imagined a situation where Ukraine joined Nato and then sought to retake Crimea, the peninsula annexed by Russia in 2014. “That’s sovereign Russian territory,” Putin said. “So now we have to start a war against the Nato alliance?” “Did anyone think about this?” he asked hypothetically. “I don’t think so.” “In this sense, Ukraine itself is just an instrument to achieve this goal,” he said. “This can be done in different ways, by drawing us into some kind of armed conflict.” He rejected US arguments that every country has the right to choose their own alliances, saying that one state must not be allowed to increase its security to the detriment of another state, namely Russia. On Tuesday evening, Putin said that the US had not given “adequate consideration” of Russia’s “three key demands”, including a halt to Nato expansion, a refusal to place missile systems on Russia’s borders and remove Nato troops and infrastructure from central and east European countries that joined the alliance after 1997. The Kremlin is putting together a response to a formal statement of the US position, which would have to be approved by Putin before being delivered to the state department, US officials said. During a telephone call on Tuesday, Blinken told Lavrov that the US was ready for a “substantive exchange with Russia on mutual security concerns” but demanded an “immediate Russian de-escalation and the withdrawal of troops and equipment from Ukraine’s borders”. He also threatened “swift and severe consequences” if Russia launched a “further invasion of Ukraine”. According to the Russian foreign ministry, Lavrov told Blinken that “instead of escalating aggressive rhetoric and pumping up the Ukrainian armed forces with various types of weapons, to use US influence on the Ukrainian authorities to force them to fully implement the Minsk agreements,” a 2015 peace agreement that appears close to collapse. Behind the scenes, US officials said that the Russians appeared to be prepared to consider the US offer for negotiations on confidence-building measures such as limits on missile deployments and military exercises. “They did agree that the ideas on both sides that have been exchanged formed the basis for serious discussion,” one official said. “Why else would they continue to have this engagement?” Bloomberg News reported on Tuesday that one of the US offers was to allow Russians to verify there are no offensive missiles such as Tomahawks at Nato missile defence bases in Poland and Romania. It is longstanding concern of Moscow that the missile defence system, intended as protection against Iranian missiles, could be used to launch a surprise attack on Russia. And Putin said that he may hold talks in Moscow with the French president, Emmanuel Macron, in the coming weeks. “I hope that we will, eventually, find a solution, though not an easy one. We are aware of that. But for now I am not prepared, of course, to say that it will be [found],” he said.Here is the full report on Boris Johnson’s trip to Ukraine today from our diplomatic editor, Patrick Wintour. Another busy day today. Here is a summary of all the developments: Vladimir Putin accused the US of ignoring Russia’s security proposals in his first public comments on the growing crisis since December. Boris Johnson travelled to Kyiv and held talks with President Volodymyr Zelenskiy. UK foreign secretary Liz Truss got Covid and missed the trip. Johnson said there was a “clear and present danger” of an imminent Russian campaign. He warned Putin that the UK would impose sanctions the “moment the first Russian toecap” entered Ukraine. Zelenskiy said Ukrainians would “stand until the very end” in a war, which he warned would engulf Europe. US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, told his Russian counterpart, Sergei Lavrov, that the consequences of an invasion would be “swift and severe”. Johnson and Putin’s phone call was finally rescheduled to Wednesday afternoon. Poland promised to provide Ukraine with arms supplies, including artillery shells, light mortars, and surface-to-air missiles. Italy’s defence ministry confirmed the presence of six Russian warships in the Mediterranean Sea but said Moscow was not showing “escalatory behaviour”. Putin not taking any risks with Covid. Compared to Johnson: Here is our Moscow correspondent’s story on Putin’s comments: Vladimir Putin has accused the United States of ignoring Russia’s security proposals in his first public comments on the growing crisis over Ukraine since December. During a press conference at the Kremlin, Putin told journalists he was unsatisfied with the US response to Russian demands that Nato remove troops and infrastructure from eastern Europe and pledge never to accept Ukraine into the alliance. “It’s already clear … that Russia’s principal concerns were ignored,” Putin said after talks with the Hungarian prime minister, Viktor Orbán. Putin said he was ready to continue negotiations with the west, which has said it is ready for dialogue but views Moscow’s demands as a non-starter. But Russia has also continued deploying thousands of troops and offensive weapons to the Ukrainian border, appearing to threaten a strike if the Kremlin does not get its way. The press conference has ended. Johnson shook the Ukrainian leader’s hand (Covid alert!) and then Zelenskiy made a joke: “We are free.” “Someone said were we exaggerating the threat; [that] the US and UK are trying to big this up,” Johnson said. “That’s not the intelligence we are seeing. It’s a clear and present danger”. The PM added there were Russian preparations for an “imminent military campaign”. Johnson said Putin was holding “ a gun to Ukraine’s head”. Johnson recalled watching the Berlin wall fall as a “young man”, a historical event he said meant any country was free to choose its security alliances. “Putin is trying to undermine this, to impose a new Yalta and zone of influence,” Johnson said. He warned the Kremlin’s ambitions would continue. “It wouldn’t just be Ukraine. You have to think about Georgia and Moldova and other countries.” In his opening remarks Volodymyr Zelenskiy – a former comedian – made a joke, pointing out 1 Februarywas the anniversary of the publication of the Oxford English dictionary. He said he hoped the word for 2022 would be “peace”. Johnson grinned broadly. Thanking “Volodymyr”, Johnson said it was “absolutely fantastic” to be in Kyiv and see the excitement and buzz of this capital. He says the Ukrainian army has also changed substantially in the past few years. “This is not going to be a war between Ukraine and Russia; this is going to be a European war, a fully-fledged war,” he says. Johnson said the single most important thing “we can do” is to communicate to the Russian public that the Ukrainian army will fight. He predicted “bloody resistance” should the Kremlin further invade the country. “Parents, mothers in Russia should reflect on that fact. I hope President Putin steps back from that conflict and engages in dialogue,” Johnson said. Johnson adds that the US will also automatically impose sanctions on Russian invasion. He used the word “automaticity”. Boris Johnson says “we have the sanctions ready”. He adds a Russian invasion would be a political and military “disaster”. In Kyiv, Boris Johnson and Volodymyr Zelenskiy have arrived at the podium to give statements. In his first substantial public remarks on the crisis this year, Putin raised the possibility of war between Russia and Nato if Ukraine joined the alliance and then attempted to take back Crimea from Russia by force. “Let’s imagine Ukraine is a Nato member and starts these military operations. Are we supposed to go to war with the Nato bloc? Has anyone given that any thought? Apparently not,” he said. Putin said ways needed to be found to protect everyone’s security. After a string of combative statements, the Russian leader says he hopes to continue talking with world leaders. Putin said he will discuss the Ukraine issue with the French president, Emmanuel Macron, when he visits Moscow. Putin appears to be accusing the US of seeking to “drag” Russia into war so it can impose sanctions on Moscow. The Russian leader says the US wants to contain Russia, and is using Ukraine to do that. Orbán now says the policy of sanctions is a tool that is “doomed to fail”. Context: The west has warned it will impose severe and swift sanctions if Russia invades Ukraine. Here is Putin’s quote: “It’s already clear now ... that fundamental Russian concerns were ignored,” Putin told a news conference in Moscow. Viktor Orbán is also speaking. He said that the EU is united and no one wants a conflict with Russia. While few EU leaders would want the Hungarian authoritarian speaking for them, that is probably a fair assessment. Vladimir Putin is talking following a meeting with the Hungarian leader, Viktor Orbán. He says Russia’s proposals were “ignored” by the west. The west did not satisfy Russia’s two main security demands, he adds. That is a reference to Moscow’s requests that include a ban on Ukraine entering Nato and a limit to the deployment of troops and weapons to Nato’s eastern flank. Our central and eastern Europe correspondent, Shaun Walker, is also at the palace: It turns out that the last time a British prime minister was in Ukraine was John Major in 1996. Back then, just five years after Ukrainian independence, the questions on the agenda were British support for Ukraine and the clean-up of the Chernobyl site. It’s taken 22 years for another British prime minister to arrive, and Johnson is only staying in town for a few hours. Nicola Sturgeon has called on the prime minister to tackle the corrupting influence of Russian oligarchs in London’s financial industry and the Conservative party, suggesting that his inaction has directly contributed to Vladimir Putin’s sense of impunity over Ukraine. As Boris Johnson flew to Kyiv on Tuesday – in a show of solidarity and with hopes of distracting from the continuing domestic crisis around Downing Street’s lockdown parties – Sturgeon urged him to “rebuild his government’s tattered reputation” by taking overdue action on Russian funding in the Conservative party and “Londongrad”-style influence operations in the UK. Writing for the Guardian, Scotland’s first minister said: “We cannot be blind to the circumstances which have led to the current crisis, and that includes the situation where wealth with direct links to the Putin regime has been allowed to proliferate here in the UK with often the scantest of regard paid to its provenance or to the influence it seeks to bring to bear on our society. “[Johnson] must recognise that both his government and his party have enabled this situation, and he must acknowledge that the most resolute action he can take is at home, to rebuild his government’s tattered reputation.” The US state department has released a readout of the call between the secretary of state, Antony Blinken, and his Russian counterpart, Sergei Lavrov. Blinken said Washington was willing to continue a “substantive exchange with Russia”. But he repeated that the US wanted Russia to withdraw its troops from Ukraine’s borders. If Moscow were to launch an invasion, the consequences would be “swift and severe”, Blinken said, according to the readout. A reader has pointed out that a maskless Johnson was very close to a maskless Liz Truss yesterday in parliament. Truss tested positive hours later. Here’s a photo of them: Wonder if President Volodymyr Zelenskiy will keep his distance today. During his brief trip to Kyiv, Boris Johnson is also doing some local sightseeing. He is holding talks shortly with Volodymr Zelenskiy at the president’s official residence, a vividly turquoise baroque palace overlooking the Dnipro River. The architect of the Mariinski building is Bartolomeo Rastrelli, who also designed the winter palace in St Petersburg, as well as other imperial masterpieces. After a press conference scheduled for 6.45pm local time (4.45pm GMT), Johnson and Zelenskiy are due to visit St Sophia Cathedral, Kyiv’s oldest standing church. Dating back to the 11th century, it was built to celebrate Prince Yaroslav’s victory over tribal raiders. The prince’s tomb is on the ground floor. The cathedral’s wedding-cake bell tower – a later baroque addition – is one of the capital’s most famous sights, now dusted with snow. Nice shot here of Russian and Ukrainian ice skaters training in Beijing. Caption contest? Boris Johnson has arrived in Ukraine. He is going to have a catch up with the president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, and then they will hold a joint press conference later on. Don’t tell Johnson, but the Italian prime minister, Mario Draghi, spoke to Putin today. “Prime Minister Draghi underlined the importance of working for a de-escalation of tensions in light of the serious consequences that a worsening of the crisis would have,” his office said. Johnson was hoping for a call on Tuesday. Emmanuel Macron of France has also spoken to Putin in the past few days – twice, in fact, as a reader points out. Italy’s defence ministry has confirmed the presence of six Russian warships in the Mediterranean Sea but said Moscow was not showing “escalatory behaviour”. “The fleet is transiting through international waters and it is not violating the countries’ territorial sovereignty,’’ reads an official note from the ministry. “Nato had been following the path of the naval group since it set out in mid-January from the ports of Severomorsk (North Fleet) and Baltijsk (Baltic Fleet).” Defence chiefs of staff said “Nato is continuing to monitor the flotilla,’’ adding that neither “Nato forces nor the Russian naval formation have shown escalatory behaviour or intentions”. The warships entered the Mediterranean Sea on Monday and might be heading towards the Black Sea in the next few days, according to media reports in Italy. According to the Italian newspaper la Repubblica, the vessels are carrying 60 tanks and over 1,500 soldiers. And here is a picture of Putin and Orbán at a very socially-distanced table. Our Moscow correspondent, Andrew Roth, reports on the Putin/Orbán meeting today: Journalists from the Kremlin pool have said that Putin is likely to break his silence on negotiations with the United States and Nato over his demands for what he calls “security guarantees”. Those comments will likely come in a press conference scheduled to follow the bilateral meeting. In their opening remarks, Putin said he planned to brief Orbán on the negotiations, which have included a Russian proposal for a new bilateral treaty that would roll back Nato and require a confirmation that Ukraine would not join the alliance. The United States and Nato have both sent written responses, which the Kremlin has said did not address Russia’s core concerns. “I believe it is very important that you and I exchange views on the current security levels,” Putin told Orbán. “As you know, we submitted our proposals to the United States regarding the respective written obligations and I will be pleased to tell you how the process has been developing.” Putin also said he wanted to discuss joint efforts to combat Covid-19 by expanding production of Russia’s Sputnik vaccine and on energy cooperation. The two leaders were seated across from each other at a very long table. The curious seating arrangement appears to be the Kremlin’s latest innovation to protect Putin from coronavirus (he has said he was vaccinated and received a booster shot). Most Russian officials must quarantine for two weeks before meeting with Putin. In remarks delivered in Russian, Orbán told Putin that “it’s true we are going through difficult times but 2021 was the most successful year if we talk about the relations between our countries”. He called “security” – meaning the potential for conflict – over Ukraine, “the most urgent issue”. “I would like to assure you that no leader from the European Union would want a war,” he said. “We always call for finding a political solution.” A reader has just emailed me to note that the £88m the UK is due to provide to Ukraine to “support stable governance and energy independence” is interesting. “I think you have forgotten to add that meanwhile, there is neither stable governance nor energy independence in the UK currently,” the reader writes. By the way, Putin’s spokesman won’t confirm if the Johnson call has been rescheduled or not. So this drama might continue a little longer. On ‘phonegate’: Boris Johnson’s spokesman says the prime minister’s call with Putin has now been rescheduled to Wednesday afternoon. I think the Russian leader has made his point. Poland’s prime minister has promised to provide Ukraine with gas and arms supplies, including tens of thousands of artillery shells and light mortars. Weapons will also include powerful man-portable air-defence systems, also known as Manpads, which can take down low-flying aircraft such as helicopters. “Our part of Europe does not experience earthquakes or volcano eruptions. So what, if living close to a neighbour like Russia we have the feeling of living at the foot of a volcano,” said Mateusz Morawiecki (who has clearly done some media training). Speaking in Kyiv, he said Germany should abandon the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline, as it gives Russia leverage over Europe. “Through launching this pipeline, Berlin is loading Putin’s pistol, which he can then use to blackmail the whole of Europe,” he said. Here’s an explainer of Nord Stream 2: Johnson has boarded his flight to Ukraine, as you’ll see from the picture above. Ukraine’s prime minister, Denys Shmyhal, has said that Britain, Ukraine and Poland – whose PM Mateusz Morawiecki is also in Kyiv – are considering a trilateral pact to strengthen regional security. “I hope that in the near future we will be able to officially launch a new regional format of cooperation – Ukraine-Poland-UK. In the context of ongoing Russian aggression, we should sign a trilateral document on cooperation to strengthen regional security,” Shmyhal said. It’s not clear if London and Warsaw have already agreed to this, and if it will be announced today. The British prime minister will fly to Kyiv today as part of a western effort to show support for the former Soviet state as Russia amasses forces on its borders. Keen to place the UK at the forefront of a diplomatic push, Boris Johnson was due to have stern words with Russia’s leader, Vladimir Putin, on Monday. But that call has now become an embarrassment for Johnson. His team attempted to delay the call to today as Johnson was in parliament on Monday fighting for his political life – apologising for a scandal over boozy lockdown parties at 10 Downing Street. Meanwhile, his foreign secretary, Liz Truss, who announced what she said was robust sanction legislation on Monday to pressure Moscow will not make the Ukraine trip with her boss – Truss tested positive for Covid on Monday. Johnson will meet Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelensky, and is expected to pledge £88m of new funding to “support stable governance and energy independence”. Here’s more on the schedule for today: Putin will meet Hungarian leader Viktor Orbán in Moscow. Russian foreign minister Sergei Lavrov will speak by phone with his US counterpart, Antony Blinken. Ukraine’s foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, will hold a press conference this afternoon. Boris Johnson and Volodymyr Zelensky will hold a joint press conference this evening. Feel free to send me anything you think is worth putting on the blog to this email: oliver.holmes [at] theguardian.comIs the longest-running political dynasty on Europe’s far right finally running out of road? After her defeat by Emmanuel Macron in the presidential run-off of 2017, Marine Le Pen decided to double down on attempts to detoxify the Front National (FN) movement founded by her father, Jean-Marie, in 1972. The party’s name was changed to the more innocuous-sounding Rassemblement National (National Rally) and its hostility to the European Union and the euro was toned down. During the current election campaign, Ms Le Pen has focused on blue-collar issues and economic nationalism. Having tempered the xenophobic rhetoric and culture-warrior persona, last month she said that she had “definitively broken with provocations” that were “the sins of our political family”. It is generally accepted that this strategy – and this election campaign – represent Ms Le Pen’s last throw of the dice. So far, her numbers are not coming up. In a disastrous beginning to the year, she has endured a number of high-profile defections to the camp of her more extreme rival on the far right, Éric Zemmour. Most damagingly of all, her charismatic niece Marion Maréchal, a former FN MP, last week signalled both her sympathy for Mr Zemmour’s old-school approach and her desire to return to the political stage after a five-year break. Ms Maréchal is far more socially conservative than her aunt, whom she has reportedly not spoken to for some time. In an extraordinary television interview, Ms Le Pen seemed on the point of tears as she described her intervention as “brutal” and “violent”. As the Libération newspaper put it, referencing the most famous family soap opera of them all, welcome to “Dallas on the extreme right”. Internal bust-ups in the extended Le Pen family have traditionally been of gothic intensity. In 2015, Ms Le Pen was accused of political parricide when she suspended her father from the party that he founded over antisemitic remarks, and stripped him of its honorary presidency. They have since made up. But this bout of family warfare may have more far-reaching consequences. It seems increasingly likely that the curveball candidacy of Mr Zemmour – a pundit provocateur – has as its primary aim the political demise of the Le Pen dynasty. This, he calculates, might allow a unified right to emerge at the election after this one, ending a split going back to the emergence of the FN as a force in the 1980s. Combining extreme social conservatism and Islamophobia with free-market economics, this rebranded movement would be free of toxic association with the Le Pens and – the logic goes – more appealing to the traditionalist right. Ms Maréchal, who has dropped Le Pen from her name, clearly sees the potential; if successful, such a project could break the cordon sanitaire that has kept the far right at bay for 40 years. In a three-way battle on the right to finish second to Mr Macron in April’s first round, Ms Le Pen is more or less tied in the polls with Valérie Pécresse, the centre-right candidate for Les Républicains. Mr Zemmour is a little further behind. But as this week’s drama has illustrated, his ability to damage and drain momentum from Ms Le Pen may be growing. In the context of polls that suggest a country drifting steadily to the right, potentially terminal trouble for the Le Pens is of course welcome. But what comes next may be more extreme and still more insidious in its reach.“Those in and around the Kremlin will have nowhere to hide,” the foreign secretary, Liz Truss, told the Commons on Monday, promising new legislation to impose sanctions on those with links to the Russian government should it invade Ukraine. It would be applicable to any company (and its owners) with ties to the Russian state and of economic significance to it – extending well beyond the existing sanctions regime, which covers only those linked to the destabilisation of Ukraine. The Kremlin says that it does not want war, but with more than 100,000 troops near the borders of Ukraine, and more arriving in Belarus, fear is growing of a major land offensive or – as Kyiv suspects – longer-term destabilisation and a continuing hybrid assault using cyber-attacks, sabotage and other means. While diplomacy continues, there is no sign of progress. Vladimir Putin says that Russia’s proposals have been ignored. The US succeeded in forcing a UN security council debate, with Moscow responding by warning that Ukraine may “destroy itself” if it undermines existing peace agreements. On Tuesday, Boris Johnson flew to Kyiv to show support, Monday’s attempt to play international statesman having been hobbled when he had to cancel a phone call with the Russian president to address MPs about the Sue Gray report. Standing next to the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, he warned that a Russian invasion would be a disaster. These matters could hardly be more serious. Yet Ms Truss’s ringing declaration that the UK would get tough on Russian money earned laughter from MPs. “Londongrad” is notorious as a destination and conduit for the assets of the super-rich around Mr Putin, to the frustration of the US and others. The Center for American Progress warned last week that “uprooting Kremlin-linked oligarchs will be a challenge, given the close ties between Russian money and the United Kingdom’s ruling Conservative party, the press, and its real estate and financial industry”. Writing in the Guardian, the Scottish first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, warned that government inaction on Russian wealth had contributed to Mr Putin’s sense of impunity. Even after the Salisbury poisoning, when the rhetoric sharpened, little changed in reality. There is increasing anger, including among Conservatives, that there is still no sign of the economic crime bill, which would include long-promised measures such as reform of Companies House, a register of properties held by overseas citizens and a public register of beneficial ownership in the British overseas territories. All these are necessary and desirable, and not only with regard to Russia. Legislation, however, is not enough. Unexplained wealth orders have proved much harder to use than had been hoped. It is unclear how widely or well new anti-corruption regulations will be used when there seems to be so little interest in a clean-up at senior political levels. Still less is it clear that targeting Russian money will help protect Ukraine. The optimistic take is that it at least gives those around Mr Putin an incentive to encourage moderation. But London is not the only destination for Russian cash, however convenient and attractive, and Mr Putin is unlikely to feel bound by the priorities of oligarchs who have prospered richly from his reign. The real reason to crack down on tainted money from Moscow and elsewhere is because it is the right thing to do – and should have been done long ago.Two ancient warrior helmets, metal fragments believed to have come from weapons, and the remains of a temple have been discovered at Velia, an archaeological site in southern Italy that was once a powerful Greek colony. Experts believe the helmets, which were found in good condition, and metal fragments date to the sixth-century BC Battle of Alalia, when a Greek force of Phocaean ships clinched victory over the Etruscans and their Carthaginian allies in a naval battle off the coast of Corsica. One of the helmets is thought to have been taken from the enemies. The excavations at Velia, which is near Paestum, the vast archaeological park of ancient Greek ruins in the southern Campania region, also yielded the remains of walls of a temple and vases with the Greek inscription “sacred”. The relics were discovered on what would have been the acropolis, or upper part, of the ancient Greek city. Massimo Osanna, the director general of Italian museums, said the site probably contained artefacts of offerings made to Athena, the ancient Greek goddess of wisdom, after the Battle of Alalia. After the battle, the Greek colonists set sail for southern Italy, where they bought a piece of land and founded Velia. Velia formed part of Magna Graecia, which referred to the southern Italian coastal areas colonised by the Greeks. Velia was the birthplace of the distinguished Greek philosopher, Parmenides. Osanna, who previously directed Pompeii archaeological park, said the discoveries “shed fresh light on the history of the powerful Greek colony”, while Dario Franceschini, the culture minister, said the finds highlighted the importance of “continuing to invest in research”. Franceschini last week named Tiziana D’Angelo the new director of Paestum and Velia archaeological park. Aged 38, D’Angelo is among the youngest directors of a leading Italian cultural site. She takes over the role from Gabriel Zuchtriegel, who now manages Pompeii. • This article was amended on 2 February 2022 to give the correct age for Tiziana D’Angelo.Covid vaccination rates show wide gaps in coverage between children of different ethnic backgrounds, social class and regions of England, according to figures published by the Office for National Statistics. While the national average shows that just 52.5% of children aged between 12 and 15 received at least one dose of a Covid vaccine, rates among black children and those of Gypsy or Roma heritage are still far below the national average. Shamez Ladhani, consultant paediatrician at the UK Health Security Agency and the study’s chief investigator, said: “With Covid-19 case rates currently high across school-age groups, it’s vital that we monitor and evaluate measures that help reduce transmission. We need families and students to continue to take part in the programme.” According to the ONS data, by mid-January 75% of children of Chinese heritage had received a vaccination, followed by nearly 66% of children of Indian heritage and 59% from white British backgrounds. But of those of Pakistani background just 34% had received a vaccination, followed by 27% of those of black African heritage, and only 12% of Gypsy, Roma and black Caribbean children. There were also substantial regional differences, with London having the lowest rates of vaccination for the 12-15 age group and the 16-17 age group, followed by the north-west of England. Raghib Ali, a senior clinical research associate at the University of Cambridge who has worked on Covid vaccine hesitancy for the government’s race disparity unit, said that the rates mirrored those of vaccine hesitancy among adults, and suggested that the high rates of natural infection experienced by children – especially in large cities such as London – may have led many families to think there was no need for a vaccination. Ali said parents needed to be assured that adding a vaccine on top of natural infection provided an even greater level of protection for their children. “The key thing is to provide parents and older children with information so that they can make informed choice, so they know what the benefit of the vaccine is likely to be. “It’s important that we are honest about that, that the vaccine doesn’t reduce transmission as much as we would like but it’s probably going to reduce the risk of long Covid and hospitalisation and death,” Ali said. “That’s one area where we, as doctors, healthcare workers and the government, should make sure that everyone has access to the facts and comprehensive information, and that would probably help to increase uptake.” Another reason for the low uptake could have been the recent rapid spread of Covid among schoolchildren, causing many to need to wait 28 days after infection before receiving a dose of the vaccine. A study published week found that more than 90% of children aged 12 to 15 had Covid antibodies. The ONS figures showed vaccination rates declined substantially according to areas of deprivation. While just over 70% of those from the wealthiest 10% had received a vaccine, the proportion fell by three to five percentage points for each decile. By the 10% in most deprived areas, just 36% had at least one jab. Just 36% of those aged 12-15 who received free school meals had been vaccinated, compared with 59% of those not receiving free school meals. Stephen Morgan, Labour’s shadow education minister, said ministers had failed to tackle the inequalities that were affecting children’s vaccination rates. “The government must redouble its efforts to drive up vaccination rates, including delivering targeted communications campaigns and school exclusion zones to prevent anti-vaxxers spreading dangerous disinformation,” Morgan said.Hannah Lowe, a former London teacher, has won the £30,000 Costa book of the year for The Kids, a book of sonnets drawing on her experiences teaching in an inner-city sixth form. After what judges called “a long and passionate discussion”, Lowe’s poetry collection beat the bookies’ favourite, Claire Fuller’s novel Unsettled Ground, to the Costa award for the year’s “most enjoyable” book. The prize pits the winners of five categories – first novel, novel, biography, poetry and children’s book – against each other, with Lowe also emerging ahead of Caleb Azumah Nelson’s debut novel Open Water, John Preston’s biography of Robert Maxwell, Fall, and Manjeet Mann’s young adult verse novel The Crossing. Judges said The Kids was “a book to fall in love with”. “It’s joyous, it’s warm and it’s completely universal,” said chair of judges, the BBC News journalist and broadcaster Reeta Chakrabarti. “It’s crafted and skilful but also accessible. Words from the judges were ‘insightful’, ‘empathetic’, ‘generous’, ‘funny’, ‘compassionate’, ‘uplifting’.” Speaking at Tuesday night’s awards ceremony, Lowe said she was feeling “joy, squared” at winning the Costa book of the year award. “The book is very much a love song to young people and to the kids that I taught, who taught me so much,” she said. “It’s also a book about my teachers, and again, my deep appreciation and thanks to everyone that’s taught me in my formal and informal education.” Lowe also thanked “my little boy, Rory, who is learning about the world and teaching me every day, and is the absolute heart of this book”. Chakrabarti said it took judges “several hours” to come to their decision. “It was a vigorous debate, it was passionate, people felt really strongly. But the centre of gravity in the room was with the winner,” she said. “We were looking for the most enjoyable book, the most accessible book, the book that you would most want to pass on to other people. And the winner was, for all of us, fresh and immediate, it spoke very directly to everybody. It has a universality to it – in a simple way, because everybody’s been to school.” Some people, Chakrabarti, said “find poetry a little bit intimidating. They think, ‘Gosh, I’m not necessarily going to get on with it.’” But Lowe’s collection “is so direct that actually you feel that you’re being talked to by somebody. And it spans so much, in a very concentrated way. So it’s about everything, it’s about love and grief. It’s about the present and the past. It’s about teaching and being taught. Motherhood, parents, singledom – there’s so much in it. And it’s very witty and very funny at times as well, and in that sense really uplifting.” Lowe’s sonnets move from the decade she spent teaching in a London sixth form in the 2000s, to her own coming of age in the 1980s and 1990s. A collection of fictionalised portraits of the students she taught, it also sees Lowe write about her son, growing up in London today. “Boredom hangs like a low cloud in the classroom. / Each page we read is a step up a mountain / in gluey boots,” Lowe writes, in The Art of Teaching II. “Even the clock-face is pained / and yes, I’m sure now, ticking slower. If gloom / has a sound, it’s the voice of Lerow reading / Frankenstein aloud.” In Try, Try, Try Again, Lowe writes about failing exams, and of how “you rip the notice // open, your keen heart pumping, and find a D / or damn, an E”. In Sonnet for the A Level English Literature and Language Poetry Syllabus, she explores “all summer term reading poems – / down in the mud / of words, wanting / the kids to hear what I heard – / breaking the poems apart, slapping / their parts to the board – ”. The poet, who is also a lecturer at Brunel University, London, was interviewed by current students at City and Islington College, where she previously taught, after winning the poetry award last month. “I began sketching these poems about five years ago after I’d left the sixth form and had a period of reflection where I started to think about what I’d learnt in my time as a teacher, not least from the students I was teaching,” she told them. “I realised I’d learnt so much from the young people that I taught about personal things, and public and political issues to do with feelings of belonging, a sense of Britishness or not, social class and gender; and I started to think about how they had impacted my own sense of identity.” According to the Costa poetry judges, who selected it as winner of that award, The Kids “buzzes with life while re-energising the sonnet that Shakespeare would recognise”. Lowe, who was born in Ilford to an English mother and Jamaican-Chinese father, was shortlisted for the Forward prizes for her first collection, Chick, in 2013. The Kids, her third, was also shortlisted for the 2021 TS Eliot prize for poetry. It marks the second win in five years for publisher Bloodaxe Books, which also took the top Costa prize in 2017 for Helen Dunmore’s posthumous collection Inside the Wave. The book of the year award has been won 13 times by a novel, five times by a first novel, eight times by a biography, nine times by a collection of poetry and twice by a children’s book, with last year’s prize going to Monique Roffey’s novel The Mermaid of Black Conch.“Somehow it seemed as though the farm had grown richer without making the animals themselves any richer.” So apparently it’s all fine now. European football’s winter window has closed. Premier League spending levels have returned to the upward curve of endless growth. The football locomotive powered entirely by self-replenishing gravy continues to rattle along the tracks at harum-scarum speed, still belching out fat hot greasy plumes of smoke and disgorging its load in the old familiar stops. And like George Orwell’s farm, with its strict rules on exactly who gets the apples and the milk, an industry that always grows richer without ever feeling richer is happy to promote the idea that chaotic expense is evidence of life, vigour and stable future prospects. Certainly this is the in-house view. “The Premier League continues to lead the way globally, retaining its status as the world’s biggest domestic football league,” read a statement by the league’s accountants Deloitte. And they are undoubtedly correct. But leading us where exactly? There are two notable things about the last month’s business. First, around half of the league’s total £300m outlay was spent by the bottom five clubs in the Premier League, money disbursed out of fear rather than hope, at a time when falling out of the top tier can have disastrous consequence. And second the headline deals have tended to involve football’s version of toxic human assets, transfers driven by the urge to save money as much as spend it. This is a new breed of elite player: out there circling the globe like radioactive waste ships, passed from port to port, turned toxic by their own contracts of employment. Philippe Coutinho moved early, with Aston Villa agreeing to pay over half of a reduced version of his vertiginous salary. Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang’s Arsenal pension plan has been offloaded to Barcelona in return for some zingy tweets, an unveiling and some distracting goals over the next few months. Dele Alli has left Spurs in return for a staged payment down the line, another talented, ailing footballer reduced to a kind of human debt bond to be passed from ledger to ledger. As the Premier League gong has continued to clang the talk has been of a market pumped and jazzed and throbbing. Never mind that eight months ago Europe’s elite clubs were engaged in a violently ham-fisted attempt to tear down the existing structures simply to protect their own insane financial model. The wheels are rolling again. We’re back baby: we’re back. Does this really feel like a healthy way to go? Take for example the fascinating tale of Aaron Ramsey, perhaps the most successfully monetised club career in elite football history. Initial reports had Ramsey on £400,000 a week at Juventus. Numbers from inside the club have suggested the actual basic wage is considerably less (close your eyes and choose a number: Juve are under investigation over alleged massaging of player values). Ramsey is not to blame for any of this. He didn’t create this absurd scenario. He is a supremely talented footballer. But however you slice it here is a player who has won one major trophy, who has only ever been a part of disappointing club teams, who continues to be rewarded for this beyond any sensible human scale. And who is, by some insane chain of logic, being paid almost twice as much as Aberdeen’s annual wage bill – subsidised by Juventus – to help Rangers win the Scottish league. There is a direct line to be drawn here. Juventus were one of the instigators of the Super League breakaway, a club so indebted the only reasonable course was to tear apart European football’s basic sporting integrity. If you were outraged by that, if you went into the streets to protest against the theft of the people’s game, then it should be hard to see shoots of hope in a transfer window splurge that is essentially more fuel, more travel down the same path. And perhaps it is also time to question the unsustainable nature of players’ salaries. This is not a fashionable view. There is a tendency to over-venerate footballers. Talent, wealth and celebrity are persuasive things. The standard line is we should not begrudge players their vast fortunes, that it is a short and unstable career, that we must remain subservient to the sanctity of the market. But the market here is not a noble, smooth, high-functioning thing, a paean to pure human talent. Football’s market is distorted by greed, corruption and the whims of nation-state PR machines. For every superheated transfer there will be a corresponding mini-industry of leaks and dividends for those who profit personally from keeping the market in that state. How are football’s future market prospects serviced by the Glazer family removing millions in personal payments while clubs lower down the levels are menaced with collapse, participation and grassroots left to wither, the base of this elite-tier product neglected? This is not money sourced from some magical gushing tap. Every penny comes from the pockets of supporters, people who buy tickets and TV subs, and who, like the players, also have their own short, perilous careers to support, alongside a relentlessly flogged attachment to their own wastrel clubs. What to do about any of this? Resistance to the idea of an independent regulator has focused on the suggestion any restraints on constant outlay might “kill the golden goose”. Whereas of course English football is already doing this. The goose here is the wider game, which is in the process of being profitably strangled. There have been crowing comparisons in the last few days between the amounts spent at home and abroad. But what does this represent? A slackening of competition elsewhere. Decaying leagues. Managerial talent imported en masse from Germany (why make your own when you can buy it in?). Domestic setups from Europe to South America geared to serve the export market. The January window was fascinating in so many ways. Endless mouthwatering subplots have been grafted on. How angry or pleased will Antonio Conte be? How many of Newcastle’s portfolio of disconnected signings will stick to the wall? Can bespoke Ajax academy product Donny van de Beek rescue Frank Lampard’s relegation-threatened Everton, a genuinely strange combination of words straight from the new script ideas brainstorm folder? This is all great product. But let’s not pretend it has much to do with good health and financial good order.Good morning. Tensions with Russia continue to increase as Vladimir Putin has spoken out about the crisis with Ukraine for the first time this year. In Australia, the reopening of international borders has seen demand for passports soar. And scientists are working out if human urine could be “liquid gold” for parks. Fossil fuel companies gave nearly $1m in political donations to the three major parties last financial year, according to analysis from campaign group 350.org. The lion’s share of the $959,115 donated by eight oil and gas companies or their lobby groups went to the Liberal party, followed by Labor and then the Nationals. Shani Tager, the senior campaign manager at 350, called for political donations from the oil and gas sector to be banned over the risk it may influence policymaking in a way that stops action on climate change. The Australian Electoral Commission has also released its transparency register for the 2020-21 financial year. Anthony Pratt’s Pratt Holdings was the biggest political donor in the last year. Scott Morrison has been blindsided by a claim that leaked texts between a party colleague and Gladys Berejiklian included her calling the prime minister a “horrible person” who was untrustworthy. Morrison on Tuesday was confronted at the National Press Club by the Network Ten political editor, Peter van Onselen, who claimed he had been leaked text messages between “a current Liberal cabinet minister” and Berejiklian. The former NSW premier said she had “no recollection of such messages”. Vladimir Putin has accused the US of ignoring Russia’s security proposals in his first public comments on the growing crisis over Ukraine since December. Putin told journalists he was unsatisfied with the US response to Russian demands that Nato remove troops and infrastructure from eastern Europe and pledge never to accept Ukraine into the alliance. A phone call between Boris Johnson and Putin that Johnson was forced to cancel on Monday has been rescheduled for Wednesday. Johnson has dismissed claims that the UK and US are exaggerating the threat posed by Russia, saying there is “a clear and present danger”. Queensland authorities told disability homes to manage Covid cases alone when they asked for help, it has been revealed in emails obtained by Guardian Australia. The authorities abandoned their own contingency plans to protect vulnerable disability housing residents in the event of a Covid outbreak, instead telling accommodation providers to manage positive cases themselves and just “do what you reasonably can”. Australia It is now clear that you can catch Covid more than once but also that an infection boosts your protection from reinfection. So what actually happens after you get the virus? We asked the experts. Australians are waiting 60% longer than usual for their passports as demand soars after the reopening of international borders. The government has issued more than 275,000 passports since 1 November, almost triple the number compared with a year ago. A new trial is examining if human urine could be “liquid gold” for horticulturists and used as a cheap and sustainable source of fertiliser in Australia’s city parks. Researchers say tackling the picnicking public’s instinctive “yuck factor” towards “urine diversion toilets” will be part of their work. NSW is promising to build more than 1,000 charging stations for electric vehicles under a four-year plan that would create the country’s most extensive EV network. The world Downing Street has U-turned on its refusal to confirm whether it would reveal if Boris Johnson had been fined for breaching Covid rules, acknowledging there would be “significant public interest” in the issue. But it still remains unclear if No 10 will comment on whether any staff were fined for lockdown-breaking parties. A whistleblower has alleged that an executive at NSO Group offered a US-based mobile security company “bags of cash” for access to a global signalling network used to track individuals through their mobile phones, according to a complaint to the US Department of Justice. Donald Trump directed Rudy Giuliani to ask the Department of Homeland Security if it could seize voting machines in three key states, the New York Times reported, but DHS officials told Giuliani it did not have the authority to do so. Recommended reads The fights are explosive, the relationships can be toxic but Married at First Sight has the country hooked. So, how did such a divisive show take over? MAFS hasn’t always been messy. Season five was the point when MAFS changed from being a show that “genuinely explored the psychological growth and love between two people” into “the absolute unrepentant garbage fire that we know and love-hate it as today”, as the writer Clementine Ford describes it. To create his new show for the Melbourne international comedy festival, Damian Callinan raided his parents’ diaries. As well as being great material, his mum’s diaries are unsurprisingly a cherished sentimental object for Callinan. He tells us why he’d rush to save those pages in a fire, as well as the story of two other important personal belongings. Autism comprises an exponentially wide range of presentations but the discourse surrounding it doesn’t, writes Al Campbell: “Few people at the hard-end of the disability spectrum will become authors. Similarly, non-verbal, profoundly autistic people like [my son] Rupert cannot be actors; plainly, this is not a realistic expectation. So when a narrative simply cannot be told by an #ActuallyAutistic person, what then? We don’t tell it, at all? That doesn’t seem right to me.” Listen After 44 years of waiting, an Australian has won at the Australian Open after 25-year-old Ash Barty secured the singles title. But Barty wasn’t the only Australian getting attention. Thanasi Kokkinakis and Nick Kyrgios and their enthusiastic fans divided the tennis community. Today’s Full Story features Guardian Australia’s deputy sports editor, Emma Kemp, speaking about what it was like to be in the stadium watching history be made. Full Story is Guardian Australia’s daily news podcast. Subscribe for free on Apple Podcasts, Spotify or any other podcasting app. Sport Winter Olympians “need to be responsible” if they decide to speak out about controversial issues, warns the chair of the Beijing Winter Olympics Athletes’ Commission, Yang Yang, befre the Game’s opening on Friday. Human rights groups have warned there could be consequences for talking about events in Tibet, Hong Kong and Xinjiang. But Yang insisted that athletes would be free to talk in mixed zones and interviews. Media roundup Victorian police are investigating the theft of a human head from a casket at a mausoleum at the Footscray General Cemetery, reports the Herald Sun. Scott Morrison has set a goal to drive unemployment below 4%, its lowest level in almost 50 years, reports the Age. Coming up A Senate inquiry will examine Australia’s involvement in Afghanistan, and regional NSW and Victoria food workers are to strike for a new work agreement. And if you’ve read this far … Crows are being recruited to pick up discarded cigarette butts from the streets and squares of a Swedish city as part of a cost-cutting drive. Sign up If you would like to receive the Guardian Australia morning mail to your email inbox every weekday, sign up here. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com. Discover Australian Weekend Every Saturday from 6am, enjoy early access to the best journalism planned for the weekend in one elegant app, plus a curated selection of the week’s news and analysis from Australia and the world.The Metropolitan police have denied the force is plagued by a culture of misogyny after an official report revealed shocking details of officers sharing messages about hitting and raping women, as well as the deaths of black babies and the Holocaust. The officers were based mainly at the Charing Cross police station in central London, with the offending behaviour taking place between 2016 and 2018. The home secretary, Priti Patel, singled out the culture in the Met as an enduring problem, with a government source telling the Guardian: “We’re not letting them off the hook on this,” amid women’s groups concerns that is exactly what will happen. The conduct, including messages about violence against the public, amounted to bullying and harassment, the Independent Office for Police Conduct (IOPC) watchdog found. The messages were shared among a group of up to 19 officers, with the hateful and offensive remarks part of a Met culture that needed to be rooted out, the IOPC said, with fear stifling whistleblowing and officers believing bosses would not take it seriously or protect them from reprisals. The home secretary has already ordered an inquiry chaired by Dame Elish Angiolini after a Met officer used his police powers to kidnap, rape and murder Sarah Everard. Patel said: “It has been clear for some time that there are problems with the culture of the Metropolitan police, which is why last year I tasked the Angiolini inquiry and the police inspectorate with investigating these deeply concerning issues.” But the home secretary is facing legal action to force a tougher inquiry, with women’s groups and experts pointing to case after case where women suffer at the hand of the police who are supposed to protect them. The Centre for Women’s Justice wants the government inquiry to be empowered to compel evidence and to hunt out the deeper reasons, such as alleged misogyny, for repeated scandals. Dabaleena Dasgupta of the CWJ said: “It must examine the wider issues why these cases keep happening, which we believe is rooted in misogyny in the police. Charing Cross is just the latest example of this” The IOPC released extensive and shocking details of the messages shared by the Met officers via WhatsApp or Facebook . Examples of the offensive messages included: One male officer wrote to a female officer: “I would happily rape you … if I was single … if I was single I would happily chloroform you.” Another officer advocated violence: “Getting a woman into bed is like spreading butter. It can be done with a bit of effort using a credit card, but it’s quicker and easier just to use a knife.” Police officers wrote about attending a festival dressed as known sex offenders and a molested child. “Numerous messages about rape and ‘raping’ each other” were sent in two WhatsApp group and one Facebook group. One officer messaged another saying he was going to attack his partner and wrote: “Swear to got [sic] I’m going to smack her”. Another message shows an officer bragging about visiting a sex worker when he was using steroids. The Met denied misogyny was a factor and a spokesperson said: “We do not believe there is a culture of misogyny in the Met. There are a number of recommendations in the report that we will consider before formally replying to the IOPC.” A spokesperson added the Met is “an organisation of more than 44,000 people; there will be a small number with attitudes and beliefs that are not welcome in the Met; we will challenge, educate and discipline as appropriate.” The IOPC said those officers who knew about the messages had been afraid to challenge or report it, and those who did were “harassed, humiliated and excluded. Challenging sexual harassment led to additional problems. “Female officers told us they would be treated as the ‘weary female’, told it was part of police culture, that they should accept, ‘play the game or stay quiet’, or leave. We also obtained evidence that reports of sexual harassment were not dealt with sensitively within the MPS [Metropolitan police service].” Messages sent between the officers threatened those who were thinking about breaking the silence, including: “There’s a few of those grassing c***s I would like to knife.” The IOPC said the messages showed attitudes that left ethnic minority and female staff in fear and could show officers being discriminatory to their colleagues and staff. The officers also shared a series of racist messages. These included: “PWPEHCLM – People with pre-existing heart conditions lives matter. Should of offered him a KitKat and a nice lie down. Murdering cunts” and “Bring all the lefties I say, we can sing ‘cum by ya’ and embrace our multi gender/ethnic and sexual backgrounds whilst denouncing all the fascists in the MET.” There were also messages containing abuse against Muslims and disabled people. The IOPC said the behaviour was part of an offensive Met police culture, not just rogue individuals. “We believe these incidents are not isolated or simply the behaviour of a few ‘bad apples’.” The watchdog added: “The culture of bullying appears to have been accepted and not challenged. A reason for not reporting such behaviour was a lack of confidence that it would be dealt with effectively and fear of repercussions. In one case, allegations of bullying were not dealt with effectively or promptly by the supervisor who was in a relationship with the person making the allegations.” Of 14 officers investigated, two were sacked for gross misconduct. Misconduct was proven against another two, with one officer receiving a written warning, while another four faced measures to improve their performance. Bas Javid, a deputy assistant commissioner with the Met, said he was “angry and disappointed”, felt “disgust and shame” and added “It’s clear we have a lot of work to do to ensure bullying and discrimination does not exist in any part of the Met. “We recognise that there is need for real change in the Met.” The IOPC said it reviewed thousands of messages and some officers tried to defend them claiming that they were “banter”, an excuse that was not accepted. Sal Naseem of the IOPC said: “The relationship between the police and the public is critical to maintaining the principle of policing by consent. The concerns about behaviour and culture addressed in our report, if allowed to continue and go unchallenged, risked causing serious damage to that relationship.” With confidence in the Met faltering, the London mayor, Sadiq Khan, said: “What has been revealed by these investigations will only further damage public trust and confidence in the police.” Ruth Davison, the chief executive of Refuge, said: “Not only have the Metropolitan police again been found using horrific, misogynistic language, some officers appear to be bragging about committing domestic abuse themselves. “Strong action must be taken and the police must rid itself of its culture of violent misogyny.”The pizzas arrived close to 10pm and the paperwork even closer to midnight. By then Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang had been at Barcelona’s Sant Joan Despí training ground for half an hour and in the city almost all day. He had come ready to sign an 18-month contract having done everything he could to bring them all to this point, reviving the move and maybe his career too, providing an unexpected solution to the club’s desperate search for a striker. But there was still a little longer to wait. Before he could become a Barcelona player, Aubameyang had to formally become no one’s player. In the end, this wasn’t a deal between them and Arsenal but between him and Arsenal. When the documents arrived confirming his status as a free agent having waived his claim to £300,000 a week for the next 18 months plus a payoff, then and only then could he sign. They got there just in time, at the close of a tense, dramatic day: just one minute before deadline, the president Joan Laporta said. It was approaching 1am, the winter window closed, when Aubameyang flashed a thumbs-up from the walkway along the top of the building. It wasn’t official, and still wouldn’t be the following evening, but it was done. Looking up at him were reporters and TV cameras. They had been out there all day, watching people come and go, able to make out movement and faces behind the glass, meetings going on. At one point, up in the offices, someone suggested pulling blinds down, but it was a bit late for that. Besides, this wasn’t something to hide: being seen probably did them more good than harm. Getting this done, finding a solution like this in circumstances like these, was reason for satisfaction. Earlier in the evening Laporta had turned up at a gala in the city with the deal looking like it wouldn’t happen. But after a few hours, word reached him from the director of football, Mateu Alemany, that the situation was more optimistic. “Mateu tells me that it looks like we can do this,” he announced. “He’s working miracles.” The following morning, Laporta was talking about a “titanic effort”. With Barcelona’s salary limit set at €97m and their actual salary mass over €400m, allowing the club to only invest one euro for every four saved, there was a tiny margin to register players – a situation made more complex because they still had Ousmane Dembélé. “We proposed exits, an English club included, but he [Dembélé] didn’t want them,” Laporta said. “It’s difficult to understand his position.” Dembélé’s refusal to cede to what he called “blackmail” removed Barcelona’s best means to loosen the grip of the salary limit. But they have still signed Dani Alves, Ferran Torres, Adama Traoré and now Aubameyang. It has not been perfect, and at times it has felt chaotic, but given the position Barcelona had been in they are entitled to consider the window a significant success. There had been imagination and improvisation, mid-, short- and ultra-short-term planning running parallel. Some of what Barcelona ultimately did hadn’t really been planned at all, not at first. Some problems were resolved, others postponed. Others were potentially created for later or couldn’t be fixed yet. Solutions of sorts, though, had been found. Attention had turned to Aubameyang given the difficulties in closing a deal for Álvaro Morata, an idea for a backup plan forming while Barça were at the Spanish Super Cup, early discussions under way between Alemany, Aubameyang’s agent Kwaku Mensah and the Spanish agent, Eugenio Botas, with whom he is close. With the player ostracised in London, they thought perhaps there could be an opening. Xavi was keen. Arsenal welcomed the possibility of a departure for a player Mikel Arteta had frozen out, which isn’t the same as saying it would get done. According to Laporta, Barcelona have saved €159m on salaries and Philippe Coutinho’s move to Aston Villa gave them room for manoeuvre, but not much: the assumption remained that to complete any deal within La Liga’s limits, Dembélé would almost certainly have to depart. Attempts to make that happen continued to the end but failed, and when Aubameyang flew to Spain on Monday there was no deal. He did so alone and semi-officially, family in Sitges providing an excuse for the excursion – a risk Barcelona appreciated but still no guarantee. By mid-afternoon, it appeared there would not be a deal: a 5pm hospital slot to conduct a medical was missed. A six-month loan, Barcelona’s initial intention, could not be closed because of differences the clubs had over payment of the 32-year-old’s wages, which the Catalan club couldn’t afford. Arsenal, meanwhile, were reluctant to be put in a position where a problem could simply come back in the summer. An alternative was to become a free agent and leave Arsenal entirely. That was too great a risk in return for just six months, so Barcelona’s commitment had to be lengthened and structured differently. Reaching an agreement to rescind wasn’t simple, either. Optimism, like money, was in in short supply to start with, a belief growing that this just wasn’t going to happen now with time running out. But conversations continued, a lawyer called Iñigo Landa playing a key role, as did Iñaki Ibáñez, who ironically had last been at Sant Joan Despí when he negotiated the settlement for his client Ernesto Valverde, sacked in January 2020. Ibáñez is trusted by Alemany and Arteta and was called in to break the deadlock, to change the focus. Something had to give, someone had to give. It was time to let go a little. In the end everyone did, and everyone won on some level or another. Aubameyang especially: there were other options, but he personally pushed for Barcelona to be the solution, and moved further than anyone. Arsenal had made nothing, got no sale, but let go of a problem permanently and rid themselves of a total commitment not far off £25m, with the London club confirming Aubameyang’s departure via a message posted on their official Twitter account on Tuesday evening. “Thank you for everything, @Auba,” it read. At the end of the afternoon training session, Xavi emerged to ask about progress, happy to be told that they hoped this would happen. Around 8pm a deal was taking shape, pizza deliveries sustaining them as they worked. By 10pm, Aubameyang was at the hospital undergoing the medical. Actually, two deals had taken shape. An old contract terminated with one club, a new contract drawn up with another. There were also two draft versions of the latter: one if Dembélé went, one if he stayed, deals dependent upon what the regulations would allow Barcelona to spend. But a signing not dependent, not any more, on whether Dembélé departed. This would happen either way. Ultimately, there was a simple question and a simple answer, posed and resolved by the player. What’s the limit? And: that’s the salary, then. There was no other way and the bottom line was that everyone wanted this. Barcelona had taken guidance from the league, although they await final registration; this was their last signing and they could use everything left within their limit but not a cent more. Aubameyang will earn around €2.5m. That is, for the first six months. Conversations took place about a change, a new deal in the second season, when salary limits will be set again – higher than now – and at which point the club hope to have made further sales and savings. Then, if all goes well, the anticipation is that the player’s salary will increase, some of what is “lost” now made up in the back end of the deal. Xavi has a striker, the 10th forward at the club. As a free agent, he didn’t even need to be registered before the deadline, he just needed to be released. And with a minute to go until midnight, nerves frayed and the pizza finished ages ago, at last he was. No longer an Arsenal player, Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang was free to sign for FC Barcelona.Boris Johnson attended a prosecco-fuelled leaving do for a No 10 aide during the strict post-Christmas lockdown, which is now under police investigation, the Guardian has learned. Sue Gray’s investigation into lockdown parties this week revealed several events that had not previously been publicised, including a gathering on 14 January 2021 “on the departure of two No 10 private secretaries”. But the redacted report revealed no further details. Sources said the event was held in Downing Street in part as a leaving do for a senior policy adviser who is now a top civil servant working in the Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport. Prosecco is alleged to have been drunk by some staff, with Johnson understood to have given a speech thanking the official for their work and staying for around five minutes. England’s third national Covid lockdown came into force just over a week earlier, on 6 January, with a “stay at home” order banning people from leaving their home except for a handful of reasons including where it was not possible to work from home. The previous month, the prime minister had effectively cancelled Christmas for millions of people amid surging Covid cases. The revelation places Johnson at another event under investigation by Scotland Yard. He also attended a “bring your own booze” party on 20 May 2020 and a 56th birthday celebration on 19 June that year. It is not known whether he was present at two alleged Downing Street gatherings on 13 November, the day his aide Dominic Cummings quit, including one in the private flat of Boris and Carrie Johnson. No 10 did not deny reports in the Daily Telegraph that the prime minister was seen going up to the flat on the night in question, where Abba songs including The Winner Takes It All were apparently played. Sources also said another gathering identified by Gray – on 18 June 2020 in the Cabinet Office – was in honour of a No 10 official who moved to become a senior diplomat in the US. Hannah Young was Johnson’s lead official on home affairs policy and moved last year to become deputy consul general at the British Consulate General in New York. A government insider suggested the gathering was at the more serious end of the spectrum of events investigated by Gray, a senior civil servant. At the time, gatherings of two people or more indoors were prohibited, with the exception of those “reasonably necessary … for work purposes”. A Foreign Office spokesperson said: “It would not be appropriate to comment while a Metropolitan police investigation is ongoing.” No 10 declined to comment. Although Johnson initially declined to commit to publishing Gray’s full report when Scotland Yard concludes its inquiry, No 10 backtracked later that day and confirmed the prime minister would ask Gray “to update her work in light of what is found” and committed to “publish that update”. Downing Street was again forced into a U-turn on Tuesday, having initially refused to confirm whether it would reveal any fixed penalty notice that is issued to Johnson by police for breaching Covid rules. Johnson’s spokesman acknowledged the “significant public interest” in the matter, and when asked if they would say if the prime minister was fined, they said: “Hypothetically, yes.” Meanwhile, Cummings claimed on Tuesday that there were “photos of the PM at parties under investigation”, adding that he had spoken to people who said they had seen photos of parties in Johnson’s flat. He claimed that if police talked to people working in No 10 about the alleged flat party on 13 November then there would be “witnesses who say ‘we could all hear a party with Abba playing’”. Cummings went on to give a scathing assessment of the prime minister’s capacity for truthfulness. Writing on his Substack, he said: “People also underestimate the extent to which he lies to literally everybody literally all day – including to Carrie and about Carrie. “‘Lies’ isn’t even a useful word with him – he lives inside a fog of invention and ‘believes’ whatever he has to in the moment. E.g He both knows he’s lying about the parties AND thinks he did nothing wrong. This doesn’t make ‘sense’ unless you’ve watched him carefully or similar sociopaths.” Government insiders have not been told how long the police investigation could take but hope it will only be a matter of weeks given the substantial evidence gathering already done by a Cabinet Office team of around half a dozen people.Case by case, the idea that the police’s problems with women is the result of a few bad apples rather than a misogynistic culture gets harder to maintain. The revelations about the hate-filled messages among officers sent via WhatsApp and Facebook at Charing Cross station in central London are exceptionally sickening in their nature. The culture of the past that was supposed to be banished has now moved into the digital and social media sphere. New technologies, old problems. But even inside the Metropolitan police, some believe it is a wider problem. “People have to look at the tree,” one Met insider told the Guardian. “You have to look at the leadership.” In the report from the Independent Office for Police Conduct (IOPC) about Charing Cross, there are two sections that will alarm policymakers who say they want change, such as police leaders and the home secretary. The police watchdog noted the offensive messages and bullying was rooted in culture: “We believe these incidents are not isolated or simply the behaviour of a few ‘bad apples’.” Police leaders say they encourage whistleblowing, but the IOPC concluded officers did not believe their speaking up would be taken seriously, nor would they be protected from reprisals: “It is recognised that reporting a colleague comes with significant personal risk and knowledge of colleagues’ poor experiences who have done the same can prevent other victims from coming forward and embolden perpetrators to continue their behaviour.” There was one small glimmer of hope: when the IOPC and Met leadership directly appealed to officers at Charing Cross to come forward and report wrongdoing, several did. Given the confidence, the majority of officers were prepared to take a stand against those who were capable of displaying such hatred and venom to the public they serve. The exposure of the Charing Cross hate messages was discovered when the IOPC was investigating another allegation. Recent cases show problems in other forces. In January 2022 alone, a former officer in Northumbria was jailed for inappropriate contact with a woman; a Greater Manchester officer was found guilty of misconduct in public office over a relationship with a vulnerable female victim of crime; a former officer in North Yorkshire was found to have abused his position for a sexual purpose; an officer in Surrey was found to have had an inappropriate relationship with a woman; and a Thames Valley officer was charged and appeared in court over alleged inappropriate relationships with women. The renewed focus on women and policing was triggered after a serving Met officer, Wayne Couzens, kidnapped, raped and murdered Sarah Everard in March 2021. Women’s groups saw it not as an aberration, but the most clear cut example of attitudes polluting policing and the service women get. The IOPC is examining two forces, Kent and the Met, over whether they missed chances to identify Couzens as a potential threat to women before he attacked Everard. The investigations involve claims he indecently exposed himself and that police failed to track him down despite chances to do so. In Kent’s case it was six years before the attack; in the Met’s case, just days before. For police leaders trying to rebuild trust, the worst may be yet to come.Guinea-Bissau’s president, Umaro Cissoco Embaló, has said the situation in the country is “under control” following fears of an attempted coup and heavy gunfire in the capital. Gunshots erupted near the government palace in Guinea-Bissau’s capital on Tuesday afternoon, sparking fears of a coup attempt in the west African country, which has suffered repeated military takeovers. President Umaro Cissoco Embaló was holding a cabinet meeting in government offices this morning, before an attack near the building began. Footage posted on social media showed armed men with automatic rifles and rocket-propelled grenades, while other footage showed people fleeing as continuous gunfire was heard around them. The state broadcaster reported that “invaders” were holding government officials but on Tuesday evening, a statement from the president’s Facebook account said “Calm returns to Bissau!” Then in a statement broadcast live on local media on Tuesday night, the president said that security forces were able to stop a “failed attack against democracy” and that “many” security officials had died. No ministers were killed he said and arrests had already been made. On Tuesday many of the capital’s streets were deserted due to fears of the unrest. West African regional bloc Ecowas swiftly condemned what it described as an attempted coup on Tuesday afternoon. “Ecowas is following with great concern the evolution of the situation in Guinea-Bissau … where military gunfire is taking place around the government palace,” the organisation said. “Ecowas condemns this attempted coup and holds the military responsible for the safety of President Umaro Cissoco Embaló and members of his government,” it added. The comments mirror a statement released last week after a coup in Burkina Faso, another in a rising number of coups in the last 18 months in west Africa. Multiple military takeovers in Mali, as well as Guinea and Burkina Faso, have seen militaries backed by popular support depose elected leaders, fuelled by mass frustration with rising jihadist insurgency in the Sahel. Guinea-Bissau has often faced the threat of military coups since gaining independence from Portugal in 1974. The small country of just 1.5 million people has had four coups and more than a dozen attempts. The UN said secretary general António Guterres was “deeply concerned with the news of heavy fighting in Bissau”. He called for “an immediate end to the fighting and for full respect of the country’s democratic institutions”. Embaló, a former army general, was declared the winner of the 2020 election, although the results were contested by former PM Domingos Simões Pereira. Embaló then started forming a new government with support from the military while a supreme court election challenge was still pending. In October last year, the armed forces chief said members of the military had been preparing to launch a coup while the president was on a working trip to Brazil. Troops had been offering bribes to other soldiers “in order to subvert the established constitutional order”, armed forces head General Biague Na Ntam said. After independence from Portuguese colonial rule, Guinea-Bissau has grappled with successive coup attempts, civil war and corruption, and is one of the world’s poorest countries. Drug trafficking is a major challenge and in the 2000s, it became known as a transit point for cocaine between Latin America and Europe as traffickers profited from corruption and weak law enforcement.