David Hockney’s latest self-portrait, painted in Normandy, will be on view for the first time in a new exhibition of the artist’s work opening at the University of Cambridge. Hockney’s Eye: The Art and Technology of Depiction, explores the ways in which the renowned British artist sees and depicts art. It will open in March across the university’s Fitzwilliam Museum and the Heong Gallery, Downing College. Alongside the self-portrait, which was painted last November, the exhibition features a number of other works not publicly seen before in the UK. Jane Munro, a co-curator at the Fitzwilliam Museum, said the exhibition was the first “to give serious scholarly scrutiny to Hockney’s ideas as well as his art”. Through paintings, drawings, iPad paintings and video, to optical devices and innovative 3D modelling, she said the show “explores Hockney’s views about how the art of the past was created, what he learned from it and how he transformed it”. Hockney has been known to criticise both photography and linear “Renaissance” perspective for its lines receding to a single point, saying they are untrue to our real experience of the visual environment. “The world is big,” he has written. “The eye is connected to the mind … we see with memory … A photograph sees it all at once – in one click of the lens from a single point of view – but we don’t.” It was a visit to a exhibition by the draughtsman Jean-Auguste-Dominique Ingres at the National Gallery in 1999 that triggered Hockney’s interest in the use of optical tools by artists before the advent of photography in 1839. He said optical instruments “do not draw for you”, an idea that proved controversial among art historians and which featured in his 2001 book Secret Knowledge. In the Fitzwilliam Museum’s picture galleries, Hockney’s drawings, paintings and digital artworks will be displayed alongside historic works by artists including William Hogarth, Vincent van Gogh, Claude Monet, John Constable and Andy Warhol. The display at the Heong Gallery will chart Hockney’s pioneering approaches to capturing space and visual reality from the 1960s to the present day. Starting with a drawing made while at the Royal College of Art in 1959, the display will move on to his iconic American paintings of the 60s and early 70s, photo collages from the 80s, and an early digital drawing. It will culminate in a wall-length digital work featuring the artist’s recent experiments with digital photography. A selection of drawings he made using the camera lucida in 1999-2000, including Ian McKellen and Damien Hirst, will be on show in the Dutch Gallery. Hockney’s After Hobbema (Useful Knowledge) 2017, will hang alongside Meindert Hobbema’s The Avenue at Middelharnis, 1689 on loan from the National Gallery. Martin Gayford, co-curator of Hockney’s Eye and an author who has written numerous books with Hockney, said the exhibition was a “new look at the artist’s own work, seeing it as lifelong quest to find new ways to represent the world around us, pictures that are closer to human experience; simultaneously the exhibition considers art history from Hockney’s point of view, placing his pictures next to impressionist landscapes and Georgian portraits.” Luke Syson, the director of the Fitzwilliam Museum, said it was an “exhibition that we think will feel at home in a place where the arts and sciences meet on equal terms”.Here is a play that seems custom-built for a mainstage tour. It has popular hit written all over it. A vigorous debut by writer and director Eilidh Loan, it is male-centred working-class comedy in the tradition of Roddy McMillan’s The Bevellers and John Byrne’s The Slab Boys. It is funny yet bittersweet, raucous yet sentimental, angry yet celebratory. If many of its themes feel familiar, it makes for no less of a good night out. Working in Loan’s favour is the truth of her story. Had this been fiction, she would have had to tone down the litany of tragedies that befall the seven young men who form an amateur football team in 1980s Renfrew, near Paisley. The production is driven by a tremendous life force, not least because of its crisply executed choreography, but the play is stalked by death. Moorcroft is inspired by the recollections of Loan’s father, Garry, 54, a keen footballer in his youth. He is played by Martin Docherty, wiry, fly and fast-talking, as a man looking back at the squad he brought together as a Tuesday-night escape from dreary lives in Thatcher’s Britain. Loan doesn’t say where fact and fiction meet, but the parka worn on stage by Kyle Gardiner’s bright-eyed Sooty, a young victim of cancer, is the very coat treasured by a real-life friend of her father’s. We can assume the team’s trajectory from optimism to despair distils the experience of many young men struggling against the odds. Certainly, the play’s themes are real. Loan works in set-piece speeches about race, homosexuality and cancer as she considers the men’s vulnerability to mental illness. Yes, it is convenient that every off-colour remark is countered by an enlightened liberal argument, but Loan’s humanism pushes the play towards a touching portrayal of men who love each other even if they lack the language to say so. What they do have is the language to cajole, mock and make merry, a characteristic Loan captures brilliantly in a script that is as funny in execution as it is serious in purpose. Happily, this is a team effort and her excellent ensemble power home the goals. Moorcroft is at Tron, Glasgow, until 5 March.Two halves of a rare signed manuscript of lyrics by Jimi Hendrix have been pieced together 55 years after they were torn in two. The legendary guitarist was in the early stages of his career when his band, The Jimi Hendrix Experience, played the Bath Pavilion on the evening of 20 February 1967, standing in for Chuck Berry who had cancelled. Before the concert, two local girls, aged 15 and 16, made their way to the backstage door in search of an autograph. Hendrix stepped out to meet them but had no blank paper. Instead, he tore out a page from an exercise book he had to hand, ripped it in half and signed both pieces. Fellow band members Mitch Mitchell and Noel Redding also added their signatures. As the teenagers walked home after the gig they turned over the pieces of paper to find handwritten lyrics headed “51st Wedding Anniversary” with the side heading “Key of B”. Just three weeks later, 51st Anniversary was released as the B-side to Hendrix’s second top-10 UK chart hit Purple Haze. The two friends drifted apart as their lives took different directions, taking the two pieces of paper with them. However, last year one of the women approached Lancashire-based rock’n’roll memorabilia store Tracks Limited for a quote for her set of autographs. At the request of Tracks, the seller managed to track down her friend – despite limited contact over the past five decades – in Bath to find she had also kept her piece of the page intact. Both women, who wish to remain anonymous, agreed to sell their halves of the manuscript, which is now valued at a five-figure sum. Paul Wane, owner of Tracks, said: “There are extremely few Jimi Hendrix manuscripts in existence and even fewer that have been signed by Jimi and the other two members of the Experience.” Hendrix formed the Jimi Hendrix Experience in 1966. They scored hits, particularly in the UK, with a cover of All Along the Watchtower and original songs Voodoo Chile and Purple Haze. The group broke up in 1969 after Redding’s departure. Last month, it was reported that Hendrix’s estate is suing his former bandmates’ heirs after they allegedly threatened to sue for “millions of pounds” in unpaid royalties dating back decades. Hendrix died in September 1970 at the age of 27. Redding died in 2003 and Mitchell in 2008. Lawyers for the group’s rhythm section claim that “both died in relative poverty having never received their true entitlement from their works, performances and founding membership of the Jimi Hendrix Experience”. In a case filed on 18 January in Manhattan, the Hendrix estate and Sony Music, the exclusive licence-holder of Hendrix’s catalogue, requested a legal declaration stating that they owed nothing to the men’s heirs.Anti-vaxxers will be banned from “harmful and disruptive” protests outside schools and vaccination clinics after Priti Patel accepted an amendment to a bill due to be debated in parliament this week. An opposition motion to grant councils the power to take tougher action to dispel anti-vaxx campaigners was passed by peers in the House of Lords last month. On Monday, the home secretary signalled that she would not seek to strike out the amendment when the police, crime, sentencing and courts bill returns to the Commons this week. The bill is undergoing “ping-pong”, whereby changes to the proposed legislation are debated by each house until MPs and peers come to an agreement. Patel will also table her own amendment, requiring a report on the nature and prevalence of “spiking” to be produced by the government. The practice has been a particular concern of ministers in light of warnings that drink and drug spiking have reached “epidemic” levels in the UK. Recent evidence submitted to the home affairs select committee showed that up to 15% of women and 7% of men had been spiked with alcohol or drugs. An amendment by Lord Coaker, a Labour peer, requires a similar report and has already been passed, but Patel will not accept it because she says it is too narrow, in that it only covers incidents related to sexual assault. It is understood that the home secretary believes spiking can facilitate other crimes, so the new amendment – expected to be published on Monday – will open up the review behind the report to encompass other concerns about spiking. Patel urged MPs to back the bill in votes later this week. She said it was “vitally important” to help “overhaul the criminal justice system and make our streets safer”, adding: “It must be passed soon so that we can continue to cut crime, reduce violence and protect women and girls.” But Yvette Cooper, the shadow home secretary, said crime was rising, prosecutions were falling and despite numerous government U-turns still major steps were still needed “to keep communities safe”. She accused Patel of refusing to make violence against women and girls a strategic policing requirement – giving it the same prominence as tackling organised crime – and of opposing establishing specialist rape units in every police force area and minimum sentences for rape and stalking. Cooper added: “Too often under the Tories, criminals are getting away with it and victims are being let down.”Andrew Neil is to to host a new Sunday night political show on Channel 4, his first major return to broadcasting after an acrimonious departure from GB News, where he was the rightwing network’s lead presenter. It marks something of a leftwards lurch by Neil – a former BBC broadcaster known for his conservative views – to a channel whose news programme he once described as the “broadcasting arm of the Guardian”. The live 10-part series will air in May and has a working title of Sunday Politics with Andrew Neil, according to Channel 4, which said it would feature “set-piece interviews with the highest profile politicians and newsmakers”. Neil – who spoke in September about coming close to having a breakdown while at GB News and believes “it would’ve killed me to carry on” due to the technical problems at the channel – said he was “honoured and delighted” to take on the new role. He added: “Sunday night is a pivotal point in the political week – we can sweep up what’s happened in the previous week, mop up what’s been in the Sunday papers and talkshows and throw forward to the upcoming week. We’ll aim to do all of that and more.” The half-hour weekly Sunday evening programme, whose time slot is still to be announced, will be produced by ITN Productions and Channel 4 News and will also be accompanied by a weekly podcast. Neil, who is chairman and editor-in-chief of Press Holdings Media Group, the publisher of the Spectator and other titles, stepped down as the chairman and host of a primetime show on GB News last year after differences of opinion over the direction of the channel. The former BBC host and one-time Sunday Times editor had been the face of GB News before it went on air in June last year but left after presenting only eight programmes in three months. He was unhappy with technical mistakes, the loss of top staff and its political direction. Louisa Compton, Channel 4’s head of news, current affairs and specialist factual and sport, said: “Andrew’s new show will deliver big-name politicians answering the questions the public want to hear.” Ian Rumsey, the managing director of television at ITN productions, said: “If ever there was a time when Britain needed forensic questioning, brilliant political insight and to hold those in power to account, it’s now. And there’s no finer broadcaster to do that.” Neil has previously tweeted about Channel 4 News: “Not helped by holly oaks [sic] inheritance. I like it. Broadcasting arm of the Guardian. But I like its serious agenda. Plus foreign news. And I know enough to discount its biases. As do most of its educated viewers. I watch it a lot.”Asking prices for homes coming on to the market in Britain rose by a record 2.3% in February, according to the property website Rightmove. The listing site said it was the biggest monthly increase in the 20 years it has kept records and meant the average advertised cost of a home was up by £7,785, to £348,804. Over the past 12 months, asking prices have gone up by 9.5%. While the number of new property listings increased by 11% during the month, the number of people looking to buy a property rose by 16%, the website said. “This new record means that average asking prices have now risen by nearly £40,000 in the two years since the pandemic started, compared to just over £9,000 in the previous two years,” a spokesperson said. The figures show a widening gap between the number of buyers and sellers that property experts say will maintain house price inflation this year well above annual salary increases. First-time buyers are expected to lose out in the race to buy the few properties on the market. Wealthier buyers, many of whom have saved large deposits during the pandemic, are among those caught by the “fear of missing out”, which Rightmove said would continue to drive prices higher over the coming months. Tim Bannister, the firm’s director of property data, said as Covid restrictions were lifted “we now have a group of movers who are looking to return closer to major cities, or at least within comfortable commuting distance of their workplaces”. Many estate agents have reported struggling to secure asking prices during the pandemic, but the shortage of homes for sale could lead to bidding wars and the return of gazumping in hotspot areas. London property prices, which had stagnated after the Brexit vote in 2016, recorded the biggest annual jump in inquiries to estate agents of any region – up 24% year on year. The capital also had its highest annual rate of price growth in the last five years as the end of pandemic restrictions and a return to the office made London and its suburbs an attractive option again. Earlier this month, Nationwide said sale prices in January were up by 11% on the same month in the previous year, giving house price inflation in 2022 the strongest start since 2005. The building society said property transactions in 2021 were at their highest level since 2007 and about 25% higher than in 2019, before the pandemic struck. However, the low level of stock being released for sale meant the gap between the number of homes on the market and rising demand had continued to grow. A separate report by the agents Knight Frank found that the fastest growth in property values was in the home counties and on the outskirts of London where houses with outside space and good schools nearby were increasingly desirable. Tom Bill, the firm’s head of UK residential research said it was more reliable to use price per square foot as a measure of value, and while this put parts of central London at the top of the pile, many fashionable areas outside the capital were catching up. He said all wards in England and Wales with a median property price of more than £1,000 per square foot were in London. Knightsbridge and Belgravia (£2,237) and the ward next door, Brompton and Hans (£2,022), were top of the list and the only two areas in the country where the figure exceeded £2,000. However, two wards in Oxford – Summertown and Walton Manor – and three in areas to the south-west of London were the fastest risers. “The market in north Oxford has the classic drivers of great properties, shopping and schools,” said William Kirkland, the head of Knight Frank’s Oxford office. “From Summertown you can walk to some very good state and independent schools, which is why people are still choosing to come here from London.”Large parts of the UK were braced for another day of travel chaos and power cuts on Monday as Storm Franklin brought hurricane-force winds and flooding in the wake of the deadly Storm Eunice. Hundreds of families in south Manchester were urged to evacuate their homes on Sunday night, while thousands of households remained without power following the worst UK storm in decades. The Met Office said Franklin would bring gusts of up to 80mph in Northern Ireland and that England and Wales would have another day of strong winds and heavy rain. Two severe weather warnings were in place in south Manchester, meaning there is a risk to life, along with more than 300 flood warnings and alerts across England, Scotland and Wales. Evacuation centres were set up at a mosque in the Manchester suburb of Didsbury, and at a leisure centre in nearby Fallowfield, after the Environment Agency said 460 properties were at risk of flooding from the river Mersey. Police warned people in Doncaster to stay away from dangerous “fast-flowing” water in Sprotbrough after the River Don burst its banks amid stormy weather on Sunday night. South Yorkshire police said in a tweet: “We ask people to remain away from the area of Sprotbrough Falls and Sprotbrough Lock in Doncaster, after the River Don burst its banks in this location earlier this evening. “Many of the footpaths in this area are presently underwater. The water is fast-flowing and poses a risk to people attempting to wade through it. Members of the public are being asked to remain away from the area at this time for their own safety.” Train operators warned customers to “avoid travel if possible” on Monday as services are expected to be paralysed by gale-force winds and lashing rain. National Rail said anyone making essential journeys once services resume to expect “major disruption” to routes “across most of Great Britain” – including cancellations, delays and slower speeds onboard. A Met Office spokesman said an amber weather warning for strong winds was in place for Northern Ireland between midnight and 7am on Monday, likely to bring power cuts, damage to buildings, flying debris and danger to life. He added that gusts would widely reach 60-70 mph in Northern Ireland and up to 80mph on the northern coast. Storm Eunice caused what providers believe was a record national power outage over a 24-hour period on Friday, with about 1.4m homes affected. Four fatalities have been confirmed, with many more injured by flying debris or falling trees. The continuing strong winds meant that tens of thousands of people would spend a fourth day without power as engineers were on Sunday only able to reconnect a fraction of the 83,000 customers without any supply. The Energy Networks Association said approximately 28,000 customers in south-west England remained without power on Sunday evening, as well as 20,000 in the south-east and a further 19,000 in the wider south of England. About 3,000 households remain without power in south Wales. On Sunday evening, the business and energy secretary, Kwasi Kwarteng, tweeted that 1.35 million customers had been reconnected to power supplies since Friday. “55,800 customers are without power – down from 190,000 yesterday. In total, 1.35 million customers have been reconnected,” he said. “UK Power Networks (SE + E England) is receiving mutual aid from other network operators across the UK to bolster their restoration efforts.” Environment agencies have also issued hundreds of alerts for flooding across the UK. The worst of the flooding is expected in the north and west of England, large stretches of central Scotland, the Western Isles and Orkney, and along the River Severn in Wales. A Met Office spokesman said strong winds and heavy rain would probably mean disruption to the start of the working week, particularly in Northern Ireland, which looks like it will experience the worst of Franklin. He said: “It will be a fairly blustery week, but a bit more typical of what we usually see at this time of year. It will for some not be welcome, but the winds will be down a notch from what we saw last week.” The Met Office’s chief meteorologist, Andy Page, said: “Following the significant impacts of Storm Eunice on Friday, Storm Franklin will bring further high winds for many late on Sunday and into Monday, although not on the same scale as Eunice.” The SC2 waterpark in Rhyl, north Wales, has closed for repairs after high winds damaged its roof. Operator Denbighshire Leisure said: “We have no option but to close the waterpark until repairs have been undertaken.” London’s O2 arena will be closed until Friday after part of its roof was destroyed by Storm Eunice, prompting the evacuation of about 1,000 people. The 22,000-seater venue said it expected a scheduled UB40 concert to go ahead as planned on Friday.We like predictability. We function best when we know what is going to happen. The irony here is that after all this uncertainty, predictability in this phase of the pandemic in New Zealand is increasing. As the Omicron wave gathers strength, we can most likely expect a version of what happened in other countries: a steep increase in case numbers, exerting pressure on the health and social care system. New Zealand’s successful management of the primary health impacts of the pandemic may have contributed to a sense of “kiwi exceptionalism”. This may be responsible for the jolt we may feel when we realise that what has happened elsewhere might actually happen in New Zealand, when, for most of this pandemic, our experience has been very different. So, how do we negotiate this Omicron-fuelled period of predictable unpredictability? At the beginning of any crisis, there is a coming together which we can think of as a honeymoon period. But as we progress, life becomes more complex, and we realise that a return to some kind of regularity is further off and more complex than we first thought. The experience of togetherness that may have characterised the easiest stages of the pandemic has waned. Fast forward through a few waves of the pandemic, emerging variants, and ebbing and flowing of restrictions, and we arrive at a place where people’s expectations and needs about what happens next can differ from each other, sometimes greatly. Let’s consider two vaccinated groups that might represent opposite poles of a continuum of expectations and behaviour that we may see in the weeks to come. There are others, but bear with me. First, there’s the “vaccinated-and-done”: they’ve had their two shots, and had their booster dose too. They have no other health concerns in their lives or for their family or community. They are being sensible about other public health precautions but, to a large extent, their behaviour is set. They’ve done what they can to contribute to collective good outcomes, they’re still exercising good judgment, and they want to continue living as they have done during the pandemic. They feel well protected in this environment – they feel safe within this uncertainty. The other group is the “vaccinated-and-cautious”: they have similar vaccine protection, but they also have more complex health concerns. Perhaps they have personal vulnerabilities, or their family members do. They will be more cautious about engaging in society than the “vaccinated-and-done”. In their intersection of safety with uncertainty, their actual capacity for safety may be lower than others because of underlying health conditions, or living with vulnerable people. So despite being vaccinated, they will regulate their sense of safety by reducing their exposure to the virus by managing their movements in public more tightly. There is potential here for misunderstanding and damage to social cohesion. The “vaccinated-and-cautious” may see actions of the “vaccinated-and done” (or others) going about everyday life as recklessness, which adds to their feelings of being unsafe. This may drive them to increase their sense of safety through reducing their exposure to the Omicron hazard, for example, by pulling their children out of school. However, from the point of view of the “vaccinated-and-done”, they may see the reticence of the “vaccinated-and-cautious” as contributing to their sense of frustration that life isn’t like it was before. How do we solve this? In our daily lives, we understand that being considerate is the oil that greases the wheels and helps us to get through. We all bring our own personal strengths, vulnerabilities and experiences to any interaction, and that includes this pandemic. Life can be tough for everyone and we never know what another person may experience or what their vulnerabilities may be, be they invisible health concerns, or economic concerns about failing businesses exacerbated through the cascading impacts of the pandemic. So, when you can be considerate, take that option. But in order to be considerate, pause before reacting. In uncertain times, it’s easy to feel stressed, irritated and to lash out at others, and that can make a tough situation worse. Try to pause and breathe before reacting, and consider whether you need to make that comment. Finding that sweet spot to live safely in an uncertain environment is going to take a lot of invisible work for many people, especially where the government has clarified that this is now a shared responsibility and that they will be less restrictive and directive in the future. There is work to be done in building a shared agenda and action plan for what is yet to come, as well as a shared sense of just-enough-safety-for-most in a continued uncertain environment. But, as we face the Omicron wave, let’s recognise we have come this far together, and that considerate care for each other will always be the bedrock of our social cohesion and successful journey through this pandemic. Dr Sarb Johal is a clinical psychologist, strategic communications adviser, and the author of Finding Calm: Managing fear and anxiety in an uncertain worldRory McIlroy has taken aim at Phil Mickelson after the latter’s extraordinary sentiment relating to a Saudi Arabia-backed breakaway golf tour. Upon completion of his final round at the Genesis Invitational on Sunday, McIlroy branded Mickelson’s words “naive, selfish, egotistical, ignorant”. In what represented a grim Sunday for the Super Golf League plan, as fronted by Greg Norman but with backing from the Saudi Public Investment Fund, both Bryson DeChambeau and Dustin Johnson stated their commitment to the PGA Tour. It is now difficult to see how the Saudi scheme can proceed. McIlroy believes it is “dead in the water”. “Who’s left? Who’s left to go? I mean, there’s no one,” he said. “Who else have you got to fill the field? I mean, Greg Norman would have to tee it up to fill the field. Like, I mean seriously, who else is going to do it? I don’t think they could get 48 guys.” Far more striking, though, was the Northern Irishman’s attitude towards Mickelson. The 51-year-old and reigning US PGA champion had accused the PGA Tour of “obnoxious greed” even before an interview appeared where he addressed the Saudi connection directly. Mickelson admitted to using the SGL plan as attempted leverage against the PGA Tour. “They execute people over there for being gay,” Mickelson said. “Knowing all of this, why would I even consider it? Because this is a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to reshape how the PGA Tour operates.” McIlroy was distinctly unimpressed. “I don’t want to kick someone while he’s down obviously, but I thought they were naive, selfish, egotistical, ignorant,” said McIlroy of Mickelson’s comments. “A lot of words to describe that interaction he had. It was just very surprising and disappointing, sad. I’m sure he’s sitting at home sort of rethinking his position and where he goes from here.” McIlroy has a long stated commitment to golf’s existing tours, partly through a desire to distance himself from the Saudis. “I knew the way these guys have operated,” he said. “It’s all been smoke and mirrors. “They’ve created rumours and spread rumours, tried to play one guy off another and said one thing to one manager and said a different thing to another manager ... just sort of created this chaos and confusion around that group. “Everyone’s questioning everyone else’s motives so they’re just kind of playing everyone off one another. I think it’s nice now that we all can sit down and say, look, we’re all on the same page here.” Save Mickelson, whose next public utterances will be fascinating.Just after midnight last Thursday, a transiting Chinese People’s Liberation Army Navy vessel shone a military-grade laser at an Australian air force plane conducting coastal maritime surveillance. This did not happen in the South China Sea near China’s coastline, but rather in the Arafura Sea, within Australia’s exclusive economic zone off the country’s north coast. From what we can ascertain, this is the closest an attempt at military intimidation by China has gotten to our shores. The Chinese vessel has since steamed through the Torres Strait at the northern tip of Queensland accompanied by another PLA-N ship, heading towards the Coral Sea off the Great Barrier Reef. They may be intending to monitor upcoming Australian military exercises off the Queensland coast, which is a legitimate act as long as the ships stay outside Australia’s territorial waters, which stretch 12 nautical miles from the coast. The laser pointing, though, was not a legitimate or appropriate act. The Department of Defence condemned “the unprofessional and unsafe military conduct” by the Chinese ship. This was quickly followed up by the prime minister, Scott Morrison, declaring the incident an “act of intimidation” that put military lives at risk. The defence minister, Peter Dutton, labelled it an “aggressive, bullying act”. In seeking to put this in context, it’s important to understand what a laser attack is, what these lasers are used for, and how dangerous they are. We also need to consider the possible reasons China would engage in such an act. What are laser attacks? All modern warships are equipped with lasers. These are used largely to determine the firing range and designate a target immediately before discharging a weapon. This is routinely practised against dummy targets. It is considered dangerous for at least two reasons. Pointing a laser is often referred to as “painting a target” before firing live munitions, such as artillery shells, machine guns or missiles. It is widely seen as a hostile act, just short of crossing the threshold of open conflict or war. This is because laser pointing is separated from firing a missile with hostile intent by a mere split second. This can be a nerve-racking experience for those subjected to such beams. In addition, laser beams themselves are dangerous because they can cause permanent blindness if shone into someone’s eyes, as well as damage to important navigational and other related systems critical to air safety. Laser pointers were popular in schools for a while until the potential for harm was recognised. These lasers are exponentially more powerful and harmful. Why would China do this? Naval vessels operating in the contested waters of the South China Sea are frequently confronted by PLA-N, Chinese coast guard and Chinese militia vessels. And these Chinese vessels have been engaging in this kind of behaviour for some time against Australian, US and other aircraft. This kind of assertive and adversarial behaviour is not what is normally expected in uncontested waters closer to Australia – or within any nation’s exclusive economic zone. This is also not a tactic known to have been used by Australia against other nations’ naval vessels, particularly not close to or within China’s exclusive economic zone. So this seems to be an escalation. China may be seeking to send a message to Canberra that its naval patrols in the South China Sea are not welcome. The US navy also engages in these patrols – calling them freedom of navigation operations, or Fonops – as do other nations including Japan, the UK and France. China sees these Fonops as provocative, given it claims nearly the entirety of the South China Sea contained within the so-called “nine dash line”. The permanent court of arbitration at The Hague dismissed China’s maritime claims in 2016 and upheld the application of the UN convention on the law of the sea, but China wants to rewrite the rules regardless. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning How should Australia respond? There are two obvious deductions to make from the events over the past few days. First, China is ratcheting up its pressure on Australia. Second, Australian politicians remain prepared, eager even, to use heightened tensions with China to draw attention to themselves in the lead-up to the election. With the stakes rising, and an election looming, there is a need for issues like this to be handled firmly but delicately. We must avoid making undue concessions to China’s adversarial tactics, while also seeking to avoid escalation and politicisation of an issue of significant importance to the future security and stability of the region. In considering how best to manage this in the future, Australian diplomats should be looking to enlist the support of nations in the region, including the member states of Asean (the Association of South-east Asian Nations), our Quad partners (India, Japan and the US) and beyond. There is strength in solidarity. China is testing to see what limits it can reach while demonstrably avoiding crossing the threshold with an act of war. Beijing knows that openly provoking conflict will have major repercussions for the country’s reputation and image. It also doesn’t want to damage its attempts to undermine American and US-aligned security policies supportive of the court of arbitration ruling on the South China Sea. Australia’s actions have an effect on the region. Our neighbours in south-east Asia and the Pacific will be watching closely to see where the limits of our tolerance lie and how far we are willing to push back against Chinese assertiveness – without crossing the threshold of open conflict. This article was originally published in the Conversation. John Blaxland is professor of international security and intelligence studies at Australia National University and the official historian of the Australian Signals DirectorateThe French president, Emmanuel Macron, has invited Vladimir Putin and Joe Biden to attend a summit aimed at de-escalating the Ukraine crisis, and the leaders have agreed in principle, Macron’s office has announced, amid further US warnings that war is imminent. The Élysée Palace put out a statement on Sunday evening following last-minute diplomatic efforts by the French president to try to dissuade Russia from invading Ukraine. “Presidents Biden and Putin have each accepted the principle of such a summit,” the statement said. “Its content will be prepared by secretary of state Blinken and Minister [Sergei] Lavrov during their meeting on Thursday 24 February. It can only be held if Russia does not invade Ukraine.” The White House confirmed Biden’s readiness to hold a summit, but made clear it was wary about the sincerity of the offer. “President Biden accepted in principle a meeting with President Putin following that engagement, again, if an invasion hasn’t happened, the White House spokeswoman, Jen Psaki, said. “We are always ready for diplomacy. We are also ready to impose swift and severe consequences should Russia instead choose war. And currently, Russia appears to be continuing preparations for a full-scale assault on Ukraine very soon.” There was no immediate comment from the Kremlin or the office of Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskiy. Macron spoke twice to Vladimir Putin overnight, for a total of nearly three hours, consulting Joe Biden for 15 minutes in between the two calls. Amid a rising sense of urgency, the second Macron-Putin call was announced well after 2am in Moscow. The French president said he was seeking to establish a cease-fire in the east of the country, and that the two leaders had agreed to hold discussions in the hope of organising a leaders’ summit to review the future of European security arrangements. But the Kremlin account of the conversation focused on Putin’s allegations of Ukrainian escalation and shelling on the eastern front lines – claims contradicted by reports from the region. It did not respond to an offer of direct talks from Volodymyr Zelenskiy, the Ukrainian president. Moscow rescinded its undertaking to end military exercises in Belarus which were due to conclude on Sunday, and the Belarus defence ministry said the Russian troops would remain there indefinitely. Satellite images showed more and more Russian combat units advance from staging area to within a few kilometres of the Ukrainian border, in many cases concealing themselves in forests. More than 150,000 Russian troops are estimated to be deployed around Ukraine, while substantial naval forces are off its Black Sea coast. Biden had been planning to travel to Delaware for a family event on Monday, a public holiday in the US, but canceled the trip on Sunday evening following a rare Sunday meeting of the national security council. US news networks cited intelligence assessment saying that Moscow had issued attack orders to commanders on the ground. The US secretary of state, Anthony Blinken, said: “Everything we are seeing suggests that this is dead serious, that we are on the brink of an invasion.”. He added: “...Until the tanks are actually rolling, and the planes are flying, we will use every opportunity and every minute we have to see if diplomacy can still dissuade President (Vladimir) Putin from carrying this forward.” Earlier, the British prime minister, Boris Johnson, who also spoke to Macron on Sunday, warned that Russia plans to launch the biggest war in Europe since 1945 by attacking Ukraine in a “bloody and protracted conflict”. He said the west would use “all the pressure we can bring” to “make sure that this venture does not succeed”. The chink of diplomatic light came after Putin spoke on the phone with Macron, his favoured western interlocutor, on Sunday morning, and the outcome, broadly confirmed by the Kremlin, suggests Putin might be willing to step back from the brink of a full invasion of Ukraine to allow renewed diplomatic discussions. If he is not, he is instead involved in an elaborate deceit of the French. Under the plan, the French foreign minister, Jean-Yves Le Drian, will meet with his Russian counterpart, Sergei Lavrov, on Thursday to work on the possible summit at the highest level with Russia, Ukraine and allies, the Élysée said. The two leaders also agreed to resume work on a separate meeting “within the framework of the Normandy format”, meaning the participants will be Russia, Ukraine, France and Germany, Macron’s office and the Kremlin said. Putin and Macron would also work “intensively” to allow the Trilateral Contact Group – which includes Ukraine, Russia and the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe – to meet “in the next few hours” in an effort to secure a ceasefire in eastern Ukraine where government troops and pro-Russian separatists are facing each other, according to the Elysée statement. It is too early to say if Macron has pulled off a last-minute diplomatic coup, or if he will have the full support for his initiative from London. So far, most of the French president’s diplomatic moves have been coordinated with the White House. Gérard Araud, a former French diplomat, defended Macron, saying: “he is today the only western leader actively engaged in finding a peaceful way out of the current crisis. He does know that he may fail, and probably will, but he is right to try, and deserves our support and understanding.” The Élysée statement said “intense diplomatic work will take place in the coming days”, including several consultations in the French capital, adding that the two leaders also agreed on “the need to favour a diplomatic solution to the ongoing crisis and to do everything to achieve one”. An Élysée official confirmed further talks between the two leaders were scheduled, but said Putin and Macron clearly had “different interpretations” of what was happening in the Donbas region and who was to blame, with the French president arguing that pro-Russian separatists were responsible, and the Russian leader insisting it was Ukrainian forces. The Élysée official said Macron would be talking “in the next few hours” to the German chancellor, Olaf Scholz. Further calls were likely to be placed to Johnson, the Italian prime minister, Mario Draghi, and other close partners, the official said. They added that Putin had reiterated that Russia “intends to withdraw its troops” from Belarus once ongoing exercises were complete. “All this will have to be verified, and that could take some time,” the official said, noting that statements by the Belarus authorities “do not appear to match Putin’s words”. The Belarusian defence minister said Russia and Belarus were extending military drills that were due to end on Sunday, in a step that further intensifies pressure on Ukraine. The Kremlin said that in the phone call, Putin had expressed serious concern over the sharp deterioration of the situation on the line of contact in Donbas. The Russian statement added: “Taking into account the acuteness of the current state of affairs, the presidents considered it expedient to intensify the search for solutions through diplomatic means through the foreign ministries and political advisers to the leaders of the countries participating in the Normandy format. These contacts are designed to help restore the ceasefire and ensure progress in resolving the conflict around Donbas.” The Kremlin insisted Putin was not withdrawing any of his wider demands, saying he “reiterated the need for the United States and Nato to take Russian demands for security guarantees seriously and respond to them concretely and to the point”. It made no reference to Macron’s proposed leaders’ summit. The statement added that Putin blamed the escalation in Donbas on the provocations of the Ukrainian security forces, and that he complained of the continuing provision of modern weapons and ammunition to Ukraine by Nato countries, “which is pushing Kyiv towards a military solution to the so-called Donbas problem”.Ralph ‘Terry’ Gibbs believed he was “acting out of love” when he made an ill-fated dash across the Australian outback to bring his partner with dementia home, but the 80-year-old ended up with a suspended jail sentence and a two-year restraining order. Gibbs took his partner of 15 years, Carol Lisle, on 4 January from a nursing home in Mandurah – an hour south of Perth. The builder said he wanted to take her back to their Queensland home near the beach. Police found the pair in unforgiving 43C heat, deep in the harsh and remote Western Australian desert – just an hour from the Northern Territory border. After two days on the lam, the 84-year-old, wheelchair-bound Lisle was reportedly found distressed, smelling of urine, and still in the same trousers and floral top she was wearing when taken. Gibbs, who the court heard had not slept properly for days, was interrogated, arrested and placed in jail. He was charged with deprivation of liberty and endangering Lisle’s life, but on 9 February he pleaded guilty to the lesser charge of unlawful detention. This week, wearing thongs and supported by a bare wooden crutch, Gibbs hobbled into Perth magistrates court and was sentenced to seven months’ jail, suspended for 12 months. Magistrate Raelene Johnston told Gibbs that although he was motivated by love, he had put his wishes above Lisle’s needs. “I accept that you believe you were acting out of love and that you were acting out of care for your partner and that you wanted to be with her, and you believed that she wanted to be with you,” Johnston said. “But objectively your conduct was extremely dangerous, and the objective seriousness of your offending was made clear by the reactions of those people who observed you.” The court heard that witnesses at a shopping centre in Kalgoorlie, about seven hours’ drive east of Mandurah, saw Gibbs leave Lisle in the car and suggested he take his passenger to hospital. Gibbs maintained she was happy and fine on the journey. He said he had plenty of food, water, medication and 11 jerry cans of diesel to fuel his recently purchased Mazda ute. He said the pair had traversed gravel tracks and slept in the car on the edge of the road during their trip. But Johnston, in her sentencing remarks, said the escapade could have ended in tragedy. For Gibbs it did. The sad reality is that a two-year restraining order now imposed on Gibbs, who has medical issues and reduced mobility, means he may never see his lover again. “I fear that I might never see my little girl again, she is fading quickly,” he told the media outside court. ‘The whole thing was very frustrating’ The case highlights the brutal toll dementia can take on families. Dementia is the leading cause of death for women in Australia and there are an estimated 487,5000 Australians living with the disease in 2022, according to Dementia Australia. Lisle has Parkinson’s disease and has suffered dementia symptoms for the past three years, Gibbs said outside court. She was placed in the Mercy Place Mandurah aged cared facility in March last year by the State Administrative Tribunal under a guardianship ruling. “Seeing her in the care home in Perth was devastating,” Gibbs said. Gibbs is disputing the guardianship. The magistrate acknowledged that Gibbs had a right to feel frustrated by the guardianship rules but said individuals cannot go against orders by the court simply because they don’t agree with them. Gibbs said that since Lisle was taken from Queensland while he was in hospital, Covid restrictions have meant he had only been allowed into WA to visit her on four occasions. “The whole thing was very frustrating.” He said he treasured what little time the pair could spend together. “I sat there for the whole day, just holding her hand, that’s all I did. “All day every day she says, ‘please take me out of here, please take me out of here’, and when I would leave to go home she would say, ‘can I come with you?’ “She even wanted to walk to the airport.” A New Zealand native, Gibbs is the father of five children, two who still live in his birth country. His daughter Rochelle Gibbs has started a Go Fund Me page to raise money for her dad’s legal costs. ‘Love you, sweetheart’ In court, Johnston said Gibbs’ behaviour was in the “very high category of seriousness” for this type of offence, despite his love for Lisle. The magistrate labelled the crime premeditated but said there have been no long-terms effects on Lisle. She said sentencing was not an easy exercise in this case because Gibbs had acted out of love. At the time, Lisle’s disappearance sparked an extensive man hunt through remote WA before the pair were found near Warakurna, a large Aboriginal community on Ngaanyatjarra country. Lisle was taken to a nursing post in Warakurna before being airlifted by the Royal Flying Doctor Service. “As she was about to be taken to the plane she was asleep and I yelled out to her and everyone heard me say, ‘love you sweetheart’ and her eyes opened and she said, ‘love you too’,” Gibbs said. “That’s the way we were all these years.”On a brisk winter day in February 1972, the 34-year-old American diplomat, Winston Lord, arrived in Beijing with his boss, Henry Kissinger, and president Richard Nixon. Barely an hour after they checked in to their guest house, a message came: “Chairman Mao wants to see president Nixon.” The urgency from Mao resonated with the excitement from the American delegation. The establishment of bilateral relations offered great opportunities for both sides in facing a common enemy: the Soviet Union. For more than two decades since the Chinese communists took over the mainland, Beijing and Washington had had no official contact on this scale. Much to his surprise, Lord was asked to go along into the meeting with Mao as a note-taker. Secretary of state William Rogers was not asked to attend and, so as not to upset Rogers, Nixon ordered Lord to be cropped out of the official photograph released to the press. “The meeting took place in Mao’s residence, in a medium-sized room filled with books and manuscripts, like a library,” Lord recalled in an interview with the Guardian. “The atmosphere was modest, compared to the enormity of the event. “Mao [also] bantered about how he and Chiang Kai-shek were enemies,” but Mao viewed it as essentially a “family quarrel”, Lord regaled, referring to the leader of the nationalists who fled to Taiwan after the defeat in the Chinese civil war in 1949. He continued: “[Mao] said, ‘We don’t have to solve difficult problems – he didn’t say Taiwan specifically, but that’s what he was referring to – immediately.’ So basically he was saying we can postpone the Taiwan issue while we get on with areas we agree on, for example balancing the Soviet Union.” The week-long visit concluded with the signing of the Shanghai communique. On 27 February 1972, the United States “acknowledged” that “all Chinese on either side of the Taiwan Strait maintain there is but one China and that Taiwan is a part of China”. The US also reaffirmed “its interest in a peaceful settlement of the Taiwan question by the Chinese themselves”. The trip was hailed as much a diplomatic breakthrough as a TV spectacular. When he landed at Andrews air force base outside Washington after the week in China, Nixon received a hero’s welcome led by his vice-president, Spiro Agnew. Life Magazine’s Hugh Sidey recalled the murmur of a fellow journalist next to him at the airport: “My God, it’s like the arrival of the king.” Years later, the visit inspired an opera. Half a century on, this event has lost its sparkle in both capitals. In Washington, critics now question the wisdom of Nixon’s 1972 trip; many see China as an economic threat and – like Russia - a geopolitical enemy. In Beijing, there’s an increasingly louder view that the US is in its terminal decline and China’s system is ultimately superior. On 4 February, the leaders of China and Russia declared: “there are no ‘forbidden’ areas of cooperation,” in a clear message to the US. This month, as both countries mark the anniversary, Washington has been embroiled in a mind game with Moscow over whether Vladimir Putin is to launch a full-scale invasion of Ukraine. Beijing, at the same time, was keen to remind Washington of what it sees as the biggest achievement of Nixon’s trip: the Shanghai communique and the status of the island of Taiwan. Speaking at a press conference on 10 February, China’s foreign ministry spokesperson, Zhao Lijian, emphasised to his audience the phrase of “one China” – which in Beijing is called a “principle” but in Washington a “policy” – and said the document was “the political foundation for the normalisation of China-US relations and the establishment of diplomatic ties”. In January, China’s ambassador to Washington, Qin Gang, warned that the Taiwan issue was “the biggest tinderbox” between the two countries. He made it explicit that the US and China could face a military conflict “[i]f the Taiwanese authorities, emboldened by the United States, keep going down the road for independence”. Officially, the US’s position on Taiwan remains one that reflects “strategic ambiguity”. It does not endorse Beijing’s claim to sovereignty over Taipei, nor does it regard the island as an independent country. Washington, however, is committed by law to provide Taiwan with the means to defend itself. Yet as the relations have soured, some – such as the Republican senator Ted Cruz – have suggested the US should make its commitment to Taiwan more explicit. The advocacy from Taipei is becoming more proactive, too. As the world watches the fate of Ukraine, Taiwan’s foreign minister, Joseph Wu, warned that Beijing “might be thinking about a military attack against Taiwan” after the Winter Olympics. “We are not asking for war … but we won’t bow to China,” he vowed. Some see the current state of play as inevitable and reflecting a structural issue between an incumbent power and a rising power. But Washington’s rethink of its China strategy began more than two decades ago when George Bush’s defence secretary, Donald Rumsfeld, presented him with a proposal to shift the US’s global strategic priorities towards Asia – and primarily China. “Many thought that once [Donald] Trump left the White House, tensions between the US and China would have decreased,” said Zeno Leoni of King’s College London and the author of American Grand Strategy from Obama to Trump. “However, the fallout at the Anchorage summit in Alaska, the endurance of trade sanctions, and a boycott of Olympic Games not seen since the cold war confirms that problems are structural.” Leoni saw a pattern in American grand strategy that encourages other countries, including former and potential rivals – Germany, Japan, China – to act as “locomotives” of a global economy that favours US interests. “However, this strategy has led to several ‘blowbacks’ in recent decades, including the rise of China,” he said. Lord insists Nixon’s approach to China half a century ago was “a brilliant strategic move”. “What was the alternative?” he asked. “If we didn’t open up to China, we certainly wouldn’t have had … the arms control agreement that we had within months with the Soviet Union. We would not have had either China’s or the Soviets’ help as much on ending the Vietnam war. We would not have restored American credibility at home and abroad. “The thing that China would never have emerged without our help is nonsense,” Lord continued. “Given the size of the Chinese population and the talents of the Chinese people, it clearly was going up sooner or later. When they began to emerge, what was the alternative? Trying to contain China? In addition to this being dangerous, it was impossible, because other countries wouldn’t join us. It would be ineffective.” But Leoni said whether Nixon’s China visit in 1972 was mistaken or not depended on whether we wanted to take the long view in history. “That meeting led to great global economic growth and to the end of the cold war. Yet it also was a selfish move that benefited the US, and the long-term implications of the rapprochement were not thought through enough at the time.” The stakes are high, and mismanagement of the US-China relationship is “arguably the biggest short-term threat to peace”, said Robert Daly of the Woodrow Wilson Centre in Washington. For more than 30 years, Daly has been observing the evolution of the bilateral relationship from both capitals. Daly said observers tend to think of Nixon’s visit only as a big geopolitical chess game, but more significantly, that week in February 50 years ago opened the “floodgate” for people-to-people exchange. “It gave the people of both countries permission to interact.” “Before 1972, the two countries saw each other only through the lens of security. After Nixon’s visit, they began to view one another in their full humanity,” Daly said. “Sadly, we are now reverting back to seeing each other solely through a security lens.” Lord, now 84, said he did not agree with the prevailing view in Washington these days that America’s engagement with China had failed. He said the two countries were in the middle of a long strategic competition. “But we are not going to be close friends – and I hope we won’t be outright enemies for many decades to come.”There were tears, DJs, Vegemite and drag queens as families, friends and lovers reunited at Sydney airport after the resumption of all international travel to Australia. While a number of expert bodies including the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the European Council have warned against travel to Australia due to soaring Covid-19 case numbers over summer, the federal government has vowed to keep the borders open. The federal minister for trade, tourism and industry, Dan Tehan, who was at the airport on Monday morning, said it was a “great day” for Australia’s tourism industry – battered by years of shutdowns. “It’s been a party out here at Sydney airport,” Tehan said, a bright blue T-shirt emblazoned with the words “Welcome back” visible underneath his suit jacket. “To see the way people have been united – the hugs, the tears – has been wonderful. The future is looking very, very bright. “I’ll do everything possible to keep the border open.” At 6.20am, a Qantas flight from Los Angeles was the first to touch down at Sydney airport, marking the end of 704 days of restrictions on international travel. Fifty-six flights were expected to arrive in Australia on Monday, more than half of them landing in Sydney. The New South Wales premier, Dominic Perrottet, said there was a “buzz and excitement” in the air as the state rejoined the world. “It’s been a long journey, a long journey through Covid,” he said. “But having our borders open, not just here, but around our country will make a real difference in people’s lives; we’re seeing families being reunited … international students return. “Today we rejoined the world, and what a positive thing it is.” At the arrivals hall, travellers were greeted with koala and kangaroo toys, Vegemite and eucalyptus sprigs, while a DJ atop a bus played Australian hits such as Men at Work’s Down Under and Yothu Yindi’s Treaty. Friends and family clutched “welcome home” balloons and bouquets as the music played. Sam Brain arrived on Monday morning from London after two years apart from friends and family. Her school friend Emma was there to greet her with a tearful hug. Sam was planning to surprise her mother – who’d been fooled into thinking she was catching up with Emma for coffee – later that day. “It’s been an amazing experience coming back, quite overwhelming with everyone here”, she said. “And a DJ. The whole process getting here was so worrying … but I’ve made it. “My mum has no idea, she’s going to have a heart attack.” Rishm Singh arrived from Toronto in the early morning with her children and couldn’t wait to spend time with her family. “I was feeling a lot of anticipation – are we going to make it?” she said. “But we have, and I feel so grateful … the past two years were horrendous, heart-wrenching.” Sonnica was arriving from Spain to be with her Australian partner, Jay, after two-and-a-half years apart. The pair met in Spain while Jay was teaching English, and Sonnica said their relationship had survived with lots of phone calls. “We’ve kept in contact through WhatsApp – technology makes it easier,” she said. “But it’s been hard.” Yin and Chi Lam were eagerly awaiting the arrival of their daughter Michelle and her baby, due to touch down from New York after almost three years. The Sydney couple were yet to meet their granddaughter, born 13 months ago during the pandemic. “We’re so, so excited,” Yin said. “I feel very happy.” Beside them, drag queens adorned in bedazzled face masks, with sky-high heels and glittering Australian flag capes, greeted arrivals with cheers. “If you get handed Vegemite, don’t eat it by the spoon,” one told a slightly dazed-looking traveller.Nineteen journalists from Papua New Guinea’s leading television media company, EMTV, have been suspended following a walk-off protest by staff. The staff walked off the job last week in support of their head of news and current affairs, Sincha Dimara, who was suspended earlier in February for “insubordination” which according to reports consisted of running stories about the arrest of Australian businessman Jamie Pang including criticism of police and criminal procedure in the case. The walk-off meant that last Thursday no news was produced by the station, which was forced to air a rerun of Wednesday’s 6pm news bulletin. The staffing dramas centre around the coverage of Pang, who was arrested in 2021 after illegal firearms and an alleged meth lab were found in the Sanctuary Hotel Resort and Spa in Port Moresby, where Pang was group operations manager. Pang pleaded guilty to and was convicted of the firearms charges but was not charged with any drug offences, with police saying that outdated drug laws in the country left them unable to pursue further prosecution. Papua New Guinea has no laws prohibiting the production, sale or use of methamphetamine. Pang is currently held at the detention centre in Bomana. On 5 February, a memo from the interim CEO of EMTV, Lesieli Vete, was sent to the EMTV newsroom regarding Pang stories. “You are hereby directed to drop all stories from EMTV on air and online on Jamie Pang, and any other related stories concerning Jamie Pang’s gym and sporting events. “I will be working with you closely today until further notice to review EMTV’s news stories so as to ensure that we are broadcasting stories in the best interest of the public,” said the memo, which has been seen by the Guardian. Dimara, who was head of news and current affairs at the time, told the Guardian she had been asked by Vete over email to explain why EMTV was reporting on Pang and his supporters. But Dimara said she stood by the decision to cover the story, particularly in light of recent parliamentary debates of drug laws. “Jamie Pang is an Australian citizen, a businessman and a sports personality. He was charged for been in possession of firearms and ammunition ... He is been detained at Bomana and we are aware that he will be deported. If or when it happens or not is still news.” Dimara said Pang was not awaiting trial – which can limit news coverage – and she saw no reason as to why stories related to him should not run. “We are not breaking any laws and I cannot see how we will be held in contempt.” Vete later issued a statement saying the leaked memo “was taken out of context”. “At no time were EMTV’s journalists restricted nor stopped from reporting unfolding stories on the detained resident,” the statement read. It said the memo was intended to get journalists to “drop stories sympathising with Pang”. “EMTV journalists have been cautioned to be sensitive when conducting interviews and to follow reporting guidelines. The memo did not in any way restrict the journalists’ freedom of press, rather the memo was circulated to staff with the view to properly scrutinise the content of news stories before they were aired that day.” Two days after the memo regarding coverage of Pang was sent to EMTV, Dimara was suspended. A press statement released on social media by EMTV staff stated they were “dismayed at the extreme harsh treatment of our head of news” and what they alleged was “the continuous interferences from outside”. “The news team strongly believes that the stories that ran on the nightly news relating to Jamie Pang were unbiased and reported with facts and did not impede on any of the current laws, nor did it implicate anyone,” said Jack Lapauve Jr, EMTV’s deputy head of news. On Friday, journalists from EMTV were barred from entering the newsroom in their Port Moresby, Mount Hagen and Lae offices. With concerns that EMTV management may attempt to replace suspended journalists with new recruits, Gregory Moses, vice-president of PNG’s media council, made a call out to all journalists in the country not to accept job offers from EMTV and to stand united with fellow journalists from EMTV. “Respect our colleagues who are currently affected by the decisions of the management and do not join the mass recruitment done by EMTVs management,” he said. Vete did not respond to requests for comment. This is the third time in the past five years that a news manager at EMTV has been suspended. Scott Waide was reinstated after being briefly suspended in 2018 over a story that was aired during the 2018 Apec Meeting, and in 2019 Neville Choi was terminated on grounds of alleged insubordination in a move that reportedly caused outrage in the EMTV newsroom which saw Choi also reinstated.”Before the weekend, Ben Garuccio had not scored a single A-League goal in four years. His drought dated back to before Riley McGree’s scorpion kick of 2018 was nominated for a Puskás award. On Sunday night the Western United full-back broke it in scarcely conceivable fashion, with a McGree 2.0 that has gone similarly viral. The moment came when, midway through the second half of United’s 3-2 win over Western Sydney, Aleksandar Prijović caught the ball on the outside of his boot and chipped it into the box. It ended up just behind the onrushing Garuccio who, against the momentum of his run, threw his left boot up and over his body to flick the ball up and past Daniel Margush’s near post. “It was unbelievable, to be honest,” said Garuccio, who scored two goals at Aami Park. “It was spur-of-the-moment. [Prijović] got it and I saw a little gap and I just ran and he played a top ball, and I just stuck my leg up basically and I thought, ‘if I can get any sort of connection on this it will be all right.’ “It actually hit my heel nice and flush and I was like, that’s a good connection, but I couldn’t see it and I looked up and it was in the net,” he said. “The rest is history, I suppose. “It just felt like I got a good connection on it because I did one in training a couple of weeks ago and I faceplanted horribly and everyone laughed at me.” United’s coach, John Aloisi, a former Australian international, was just as shocked. “I didn’t know if he did a bicycle kick or what until I saw it back on the screen,” Aloisi said. “I just couldn’t believe it. There’s some goal. He’s probably in line for a Puskás award – goal of the year around the world – so let’s hope he gets that.” A tweet of the video by @TheRealALM garnered 50,000 views within the hour and was retweeted internationally before, in a strange twist presumably to do with copyright, it was removed. The ALM’s official broadcaster, the Ten Network, subsequently posted its own video. Garuccio himself played down the prospect of a Puskás nomination, which would emulate McGree’s. McGree’s longer-range scorpion kick for Newcastle against Melbourne City got him a 2018 nod alongside Mohamed Salah and Gareth Bale, with the award ultimately won by Salah. “I don’t really think about that stuff too much,” Garuccio said. “Obviously, it’s a nice feeling. It’s an unbelievable goal. It’s probably the best I’ll ever score in my career. So of course I’ll enjoy it. “Riley McGree’s was unbelievable. It was right-footed as well. He’s a left-footer and he did it with his right foot and it was outside the box. I still enjoyed it, I’ll take it.”A candidate endorsed by the United Australia Party told an anti-lockdown rally she wanted to say “hang Dan Andrews” but said she was “not allowed”, before continuing a chant of “jail Dan Andrews”, according to footage of the event. Clive Palmer’s party last week announced candidates for all 151 lower house seats, and attempted to boost their profile by publishing their names, photographs, and phone numbers in major Australian newspapers. One of its candidates, Rebekah Spelman, helped MC last year’s anti-lockdown rallies in Melbourne. Footage of the 13 November rally, posted online by an “alternative” news outlet, shows Spelman leading the crowd in a chant of “jail Dan Andrews”. At one point she says: “Jail Dan Andrews! I want to say hang Dan Andrews, but I know that’s not allowed.” Spelman, a former councillor with Melbourne’s Frankston city council, is now running for the UAP in the seat of Aston, in Melbourne’s eastern suburbs. Spelman referred all questions about her apparent “hang Dan Andrews” comments to the United Australia party. A spokesperson for the party did not respond to multiple emails, texts, and phone calls. The party has run a vast advertising campaign in an attempt to boost its profile and those of its lower house candidates. Guardian Australia has previously reported that the party spent $2.684m on 25 YouTube ads from late August, when former the Liberal MP Craig Kelly joined the UAP, until November, boosting the number of views on its videos into the millions. The Sydney Morning Herald and the Age reported on Monday that the party had since spent $31m, citing figures from Nielsen Ad Intel for print, digital, metropolitan television, and radio. The amount is equal to the UAP’s total ad spend during the 2019 campaign. The advertising has prompted controversy on a number of fronts. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Three out of every four UAP video ads on YouTube, which Spelman was not involved in, were pulled by Google for allegedly violating the tech giant’s advertising policies. Meanwhile its recent use of a picture of a different candidate in military uniform in advertising prompted anger from defence advocates, who said it went against longstanding conventions designed to guard against the politicisation of the Australian Defence Force. Some newspapers have also refused to publish UAP ads that they say are at odds with Covid health advice or official guidance on vaccines. Earlier this month Kelly signalled the UAP would put all sitting members of parliament last on its how-to-vote cards, which has prompted anxiety among government MPs. The Coalition benefited in the 2019 election from preference flows from the UAP. But Kelly, the former maverick Liberal and now UAP leader, says his party’s strategy could well change depending on where MPs line up in the final sitting weeks.The Liberal party’s federal preselection woes in New South Wales have worsened, with action launched in the NSW supreme court on Monday and one preselection candidate at risk of withdrawing from politics altogether. NSW state MP Melanie Gibbons has indicated she may quit politics if she’s unsuccessful in gaining preselection for the seat of Hughes, which could trigger a byelection and plunge the NSW government further into minority government. Factional organisers were again discussing a way through the legal and constitutional crisis, with plans for a NSW state executive meeting on Friday. If a solution cannot be found, the most likely result will be a federal takeover of the troubled branch. That decision will be made on 3 March. In the meantime one member of the state executive, Matthew Camenzeuli, has taken his party to court, with a hearing before the duty judge scheduled for Tuesday. Gibbons, the state MP for Holsworthy in Sydney’s south, has reportedly been approached about a number of jobs outside politics. She previously worked in the disability sector. Her resignation would trigger a byelection which would put renewed pressure on the NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, and potentially plunge the NSW government further into minority government. Gibbons declined to comment, but is understood to be frustrated with the party’s ongoing refusal to hold a branch preselection in the overlapping federal seat of Hughes. Gibbons has the backing of the prime minister, Scott Morrison, and believes she has the numbers to win. Instead NSW party powerbrokers are intending to parachute in Alex Dore, a former Young Liberal president, who lives in Manly, as part of a complex deal to share the remaining winnable federal seats among the factions. However to cement the deal, negotiators require a 90% vote of the 27- strong state executive, which has not been forthcoming. Meanwhile The Australian reported on Monday that Camenzeuli had filed documents in the supreme court of NSW seeking to challenge advice about the state executive’s imminent demise and force the party to follow the constitution which calls for rank and file preselection ballots. The summons is directed to the key office holders in the Liberal party: the immigration minister, Alex Hawke, who represents the prime minister on the NSW vetting committee for candidates; Phillip Ruddock, a former Howard government minister, who is now president of the NSW branch, and John Olsen, who is president of the national Liberal party. The NSW state director, Chris Stone, last week presented the division with legal advice suggesting federal party intervention was required to reappoint members of the state executive until the party’s postponed annual general meeting was held in March. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The division eventually agreed on Thursday to request a limited federal intervention that would see the existing state executive reappointed. But when the federal executive, led by Morrison, met on Thursday night, it instead issued a warning to the state executive to endorse three sitting MPs by 28 February or face a wider takeover. Camenzeuli is one of a group of state executive members that strongly supports the Liberal party holding branch plebiscites as specified in the constitution, under what are known as the Warringah rules. “Mr Camenzuli seeks declaratory relief confirming that the members of the State Executive will continue to hold office until the next AGM (annual general meeting) of the Division presently scheduled for 27 March 2022,” the affidavit said. Camenzeuli claims Hawke’s failure to make himself available for vetting processes was in breach of his own obligations and responsibilities to the Liberal party’s constitution. He has been widely blamed by members of state executive for holding up the NSW preselections. Hawke did not return calls. The NSW Liberal party declined to comment, citing ongoing legal matters. The Guardian understands the state and federal parties will not make substantive submissions against Camenzeuli’s interpretation of the constitution but it is unclear what Hawke will do. Meanwhile state factional organisers are desperately trying to convene a meeting of state executive for this Friday, and assemble enough support for the factional deal to ward off federal intervention. The federal executive deferred a decision on federal intervention to effectively take over the troubled NSW branch until 3 March. The escalating crisis is now threatening to derail the Liberal party’s federal campaign in NSW, with several seats yet to have an endorsed Liberal candidate. They include North Sydney, Farrer, Mitchell, Dobell, Warringah, Hughes, Bennelong and Parramatta.New Zealand prime minister Jacinda Ardern has said Covid-19 restrictions, including mandates and vaccine passes, will begin to lift once the country gets “well beyond” the Omicron outbreak’s peak. At a post-cabinet press conference on Monday, Ardern said case numbers were likely to peak in mid-to-late March, or three to six weeks away. Case numbers were expected to double every three to four days. “It’s likely then, that very soon, we will all know people who have Covid or we will potentially get it ourselves,” she said. Ardern said at an earlier stage of the pandemic, this prospect would have been “scary”, but now there are three main reasons why it is less so: the highly vaccinated population; Omicron being a mild to moderate illness due to high vaccination rates and boosters making hospitalisation 10 times less likely; and public health measures like masks, gathering limits and vaccine passes slowing down the spread to ensure everyone who needs a hospital bed can get it. “So far, that plan is working. We had 46 cases per 100,000 people compared to 367 in New South Wales, and 660 in Victoria, at the same point in the outbreak.” The country recorded 2,365 new cases of the virus in the community on Monday, 116 people in hospital and two further deaths, bringing the total number of deaths since the start of the pandemic to 55. After the Omicron wave peaks, there will probably be a rapid decline, followed by cases stabilising at a lower level, Arden said. It is then that government can consider easing public health measures, beginning with loosening restrictions on gathering sizes, and later, moving on from using vaccine passes and mandates where vulnerable people are less likely to be affected. “If we hadn’t had vaccine passes, as we managed Delta, we would have had to instead use more general restrictions across the whole population. They have always been the least bad option. But while they have been necessary, as I’ve always said, they have also been temporary.” “They will remain important in some areas though, for some time,” she said. Arden said it is difficult to set an exact date for easing mandates, but indicated the government needs to be confident New Zealand is “well beyond the peak” and that the pressure on the health system is manageable. The announcement comes as hundreds of anti-mandate protesters enter their 14th day of occupying parliament’s grounds. The protest has also operated as a vehicle for anti-vaccine sentiment, QAnon-style conspiracy theories, antisemitic views, and calls for the execution of journalists, politicians and health officials. Ardern directed a message to the protesters: “Everyone is over Covid. No one wants to live with rules or restrictions. But had we not all been willing to work together to protect one another, then we all would have been worse off as individuals, including losing people we love. “That hasn’t happened here for the most part and that is a fact worth celebrating, rather than protesting.” Restrictions will ease when doing so would not compromise the lives of thousands of people, and not because the protesters demanded it, Ardern said. “Now is not the time to dismantle our hard work and preparation, to remove our armour just as the battle begins.”Australia’s plateauing Covid-19 vaccination rates among 5-to-11-year-olds will be discussed at a round table of federal and state government representatives and public health experts next week. The round table is being convened by vaccine uptake expert Prof Julie Leask, with less than 50% of Australia’s 5-to-11-year-olds having received their first Covid-19 vaccine dose. “I’m bringing together a group of people to present data to government, and governments will also have the chance to present some of their data in a closed session to get to the bottom of these vaccination rates and to see what sort of barriers there are for parents and caregivers,” Leask, who works with the University of Sydney’s Institute of Infectious Diseases, said. “We already have gaps in coverage between Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal 5-to-11-year-olds, and we’re likely to see gaps in other demographics as well. I suggested we pull all of our data together before we jump to broader assumptions about what is going on with the 5-to-11-year-olds.” Just 0.59% of 5-11-year-olds have been double dosed, although vaccination appointments for children only became available in January. Some parents reported initially struggling to find an appointment, or that their appointment was cancelled due to supply issues. The recommended interval for most children is eight weeks. On Monday Royal Australian College of General Practitioners [RACGP] vice-president, Dr Bruce Willett, said there was a need for improved vaccine education for parents, citing a Flinders University study which found vaccine anxiety is driving parents to seek information from sources where misinformation is rife, including social media. “While we have high childhood vaccination rates in Australia, with 95% of five-year-olds having received all scheduled childhood immunisations, vaccine hesitancy remains a serious threat to our community,” Willett said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “This is a concern because we know young children mixing at childcare and socially has been a key driver of [Covid-19] infections. “And while the research shows most children have only mild symptoms, they can spread the virus to family members who are more vulnerable and at-risk of severe symptoms, like grandparents.” But Leask said it is too simplistic to say the slow uptake is due to the spread of vaccine misinformation or even complacency, a word she dislikes because it implies parents are not prioritising their child’s health. “Parents may have other pressing issues they are juggling, poor access to vaccines may be an issue, and if you’re a working single parent with a large family it can also be tricky to get to a vaccine appointment.” A small vaccine sentiment survey, conducted for the federal government in January, found 76% of parents of 5-to-11-year-olds already had, or intended to, get their child vaccinated, while 15% were unsure, and 10% said they did not plan to get their child vaccinated. Leask said this indicated that many parents yet to get their 5-to-11-year-olds vaccinated perhaps just needed a reminder, or for vaccination to be made easier and more accessible. States and territories could consider placing vaccination hubs in primary schools in future to address accessibility issues, she said, as opposed to the more temporary pop-up hubs that are already being used. “We need to think about priorities and where we put our public health efforts,” Leask said. “It may be that some states want to focus on getting boosters to older people first. But there are other ways to increase rates in children, for example sending text message reminders to parents, and bringing vaccine services into communities.” Other parents may be waiting until their child recovered from Covid before vaccinating them, she said. “While the plateauing among 5-to-11-year-olds is concerning, and we need to do something about that, to put all of these possible barriers down to misinformation does not fully represent the challenges we face with any new vaccination program. Going from zero to 50% uptake in a short period with any new vaccine is actually quite an achievement.” Guardian Australia has contacted the office of the federal health minister, Greg Hunt, for comment.This liveblog is closing now but you can continue to follow our live coverage of the Ukraine crisis on our new liveblog here. Thanks for reading. Here’s a roundup of recent developments on the Ukraine crisis. The French president, Emmanuel Macron, has invited Vladimir Putin and Joe Biden to attend a summit aimed at de-escalating the Ukraine crisis, and the leaders have agreed in principle, amid further US warnings that war is imminent. The proposal for the summit – which will proceed only if Russian does not invade Ukraine – followed a flurry of phone calls Macron made in an attempt to de-escalate tensions, including with Boris Johnson, Biden and two calls with Putin. The US administration signalled its willingness to work towards a diplomatic solution, but has reiterated its view that Russian forces have been ordered to proceed with an invasion of Ukraine. In a statement, White House press secretary Jen Psaki said “We are always ready for diplomacy. We are also ready to impose swift and severe consequences should Russia instead choose war. And currently, Russia appears to be continuing preparations for a full-scale assault on Ukraine very soon.” Meanwhile, the US claims Russian forces are “creating lists of identified Ukrainians to be killed or sent to camps” in the event of an invasion, according to a leaked letter sent by the US to the UN human rights chief, Michelle Bachelet The US administration has reportedly prepared an initial package of sanctions against Russia that includes barring US financial institutions from processing transactions for major Russian banks. Reuters is reporting the measures aim to hurt the Russian economy by cutting the “correspondent” banking relationships between targeted Russian banks and US banks that enable international payments. The sanctions will be implemented only if Russia invades, despite Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy earlier calling for sanctions to be brought in before Russia takes such action. Satellite images appear to show new deployments of Russian troops and armoured equipment to farms, forests and fields, with some sitting just 15 kilometres from the border with Ukraine. The images, which were captured on Sunday, show “a change in the pattern of the previously observed deployments”. Russian troops in Belarus numbering 30,000 were supposed to finish up military exercises on Sunday, but it was announced they would be extended as tensions continue to rumble. The Kremlin’s extension will be seen as an ominous sign in Ukraine. The US embassy in Russia told Americans in the country to “have evacuation plans” amid reports of “threats of attacks”, escalating the growing US-Russia tensions that some are already likening to a new Cold War. Russia hit back at the embassy’s alert on Sunday, which said attacks in cities like Moscow and St. Petersburg were a possibility and urged American citizens to be alert and “avoid crowds”. We’ll launch our new Ukraine liveblog shortly. Following on from the below post about new satellite imagery, Maxar have also observed “a number of new field deployments are also seen northwest of Belgorod”, about 30 kilometres from the Russian side of the border with the separatist-controlled Luhansk region in eastern Ukraine. Maxar said “much of the equipment and troops [are] positioned in or near forested areas. Other company-sized units are deployed within farm and/or industrial areas.” Satellite images appear to show new deployments of Russian troops and armoured equipment to farms, forests and fields, with some sitting just 15 kilometres from the border with Ukraine, according to US satellite imagery company Maxar. The images, captured on Sunday, of the military developments near the Russian side of the border with the separatist-controlled Luhansk region in eastern Ukraine show “a change in the pattern of the previously observed deployments” of tanks, armoured personnel carriers, artillery and support equipment that have sparked concerns of a potential Russian invasion of Ukraine in recent weeks. Maxar analysis noted that previously, deployments at or near existing military garrisons and training areas – including several large deployments at or near a military base in Soloti, Russia. However the most recent satellite imagery appears to show that most of the combat units and support equipment amassed at Soloti have departed the area. “Extensive vehicle tracks and some convoys of armored equipment are seen throughout the area,” Maxar said. Maxar said: Some equipment has also been deployed east of nearby Valuyki, Russia in a field approximately 15 kilometers north of the Ukraine border.” Experts consulted by Reuters said that while the correspondent banking tool lacks the punch of an Specially Designated Nationals (SDN) designation, which freezes a bank’s assets, they could still deal a meaningful blow by making it difficult to transact in US dollars, the global reserve currency. “Since a significant number of global trade transactions are in US dollars this is a sanction with bite, but without the more complicated and deadly sanction of being placed on the SDN list and having all assets in the US or in the hands of US persons frozen,” said Washington lawyer Kay Georgi, who specialises in international trade. The report also states that Washington plans to target individuals and companies, including top Russian financial institutions such as VTB Bank, Sberbank, VEB, and Gazprombank, by placing them on the SDN list. This effectively removes them from the US banking system, banning their trade with Americans and freezing their US assets, the sources familiar with the package who spoke to Reuters said. Reuters is reporting that the US administration has prepared an initial package of sanctions against Russia that includes barring US financial institutions from processing transactions for major Russian banks. The report, which cites three sources familiar with the US plans, said the measures aim to hurt the Russian economy by cutting the “correspondent” banking relationships between targeted Russian banks and US banks that enable international payments. While the threat of sanctions had already been floated, the plan to cut correspondent banking ties, which underpin global money flows, had not been previously reported. The sanctions would be implemented only if Russia invades Ukraine. The reports of the details of the possible financial measures come after vice president Kamala Harris reiterated that the purpose of sanctions is “deterrence” when explaining why the US would not heed Ukraine’s call to bring in sanctions before any Russian invasion. The White House and Treasury Department declined to comment. The letter states that those most likely to be targeted include “Russian and Belarusian dissidents in exile in Ukraine, journalists and anti-corruption activists, and vulnerable populations such as religious and ethnic minorities and LGBTQI+ persons”. Russian forces are ‘creating lists of identified Ukrainians to be killed or sent to camps’, according to a letter sent by the US to UN human rights chief, Michelle Bachelet, the Washington Post has reported. The letter, from the US ambassador to the UN, Sheba Crocker, warns that a Russian invasion of Ukraine would create a “human rights catastrophe” with “credible information that Russian forces will likely use lethal measures to disperse peaceful protests or otherwise counter peaceful exercises of perceived resistance from civilian populations”. The letter can be read in full here. US vice-president Kamala Harris has spent the past few days in Munich alongside secretary of state Antony Blinken and other world leaders. On Sunday she painted the Ukraine crisis in the context of the second world war, (as did UK prime minister Boris Johnson). “We’re talking about the potential for war in Europe,” said Harris. “It’s been over 70 years, and through those 70 years ... there has been peace and security.” Just 20 minutes walk from the ornate Hotel Bayerischer Hof, where world leaders gathered this weekend for the Munich security conference, lies No 12 Arcisstrasse, the shuttered brown ornamental building known as the Führerbau. On a cold grey Sunday morning, the building, now temporarily closed and in disrepair, has a forbidding air. Near the steps at the front is a small plaque with the bare inscription in German, Czech and Slovak: “In this building, on 29 September, 1938, the Munich agreement was signed, which led to the smashing of the Czechoslovak republic.” No mention is made of the signatories, including Adolf Hitler and then British prime minister Neville Chamberlain, who, fearful of a renewed European war, appeased Hitler by agreeing to cede the Sudetenland. Hitler had promised this was his last territorial claim in Europe. The empty building, its interior preserved, stands as a monument to the ability of diplomats to misread their opponent. Back in the conference hall, this history hung heavy. No speech was complete without a reference to the threat of a return to war in the heart of Europe, or to an impending refugee crisis. Read more from Patrick Wintour in Munich. Russian-backed rebels in eastern Ukraine have claimed that two civilians have been killed in shelling by the Ukrainian government forces, Reuters are reporting, citing Russian state news outlet RIA. It follows days of increased shelling in eastern Ukraine, amid the continued Russian military presence along the border the countries share and the evacuation of some residents in the separatist-controlled Donetsk and Luhansk regions to Russia. There was no confirmation from the Ukrainian government and no independent verification of the claim. RIA cited representatives of the self-proclaimed Luhansk People’s Republic as saying that the shelling occurred late on Sunday. Kyiv and the rebels, at war for the last eight years, have accused each other of increased ceasefire violations over the last few days and the use of heavy weaponry such as mortars and artillery. Russia has denied claims by the United States that it believes an invasion of Ukraine is imminent and that president Vladimir Putin could rely on “false flag” operations to justify invading. Ukraine has said it will not respond to provocation from the rebels. White house press secretary Jen Psaki has just released a statement following the announcement that Joe Biden and Vladimir Putin have agreed in principle to a summit to discuss ongoing tensions. Psaki said “we are committed to pursuing diplomacy until the moment an invasion begins”, but noted that “currently, Russia appears to be continuing preparations for a full-scale assault on Ukraine very soon”. Psaki said: Secretary Blinken and Foreign Minister Lavrov are scheduled to meet later this week in Europe, provided Russia does not proceed with military action. President Biden accepted in principle a meeting with President Putin following that engagement, again, if an invasion hasn’t happened. We are always ready for diplomacy. We are also ready to impose swift and severe consequences should Russia instead choose war.” Delving deeper into the announcement that Joe Biden and Vladimir Putin have “accepted the principle” of a summit proposed by French president Emmanuel Macron to “discuss security and strategic stability in Europe”. The statement released by Élysée Palace notes that “the substance” of the proposed summit will have to be prepared by US secretary of state Antony Blinken and Russian foreign minister Sergei Lavrov when they meet on Thursday. Both the proposed summit, as well as Blinken’s meeting with Lavrov, are conditional on Russia not invading Ukraine. The in-principle agreement to the summit was announced after Macron’s second phone call with Putin, amid his push to avoid Russia invading Ukraine. Details of the second call were announced well after 2am in Moscow. You can read more in this updated report from Julian Borger, Patrick Wintour and Jon Henley. The Elysee Palace has released a statement announcing that both Joe Biden and Vladimir Putin have agreed to the idea of a summit “to discuss security and strategic stability in Europe”. The statement follows French president Emmanuel Macron speaking on the phone to both Biden and Putin. The statement said “it can only be held at the condition that Russia does not invade Ukraine”. Here’s a round-up of Sunday’s top headlines on the Ukraine crisis. UK prime minister Boris Johnson spoke of “welcome signs” of finding a diplomatic solution on Sunday evening after a phone call with French president Emmanuel Macron, who earlier spoke to Russian president Vladimir Putin. It came as world leaders took part in a flurry of international calls on Sunday evening. Macron and Putin agreed to try to secure a ceasefire in eastern Ukraine and spoke of plans for an urgent summit on the future of Ukraine. Johnson also urged the withdrawal of Russian troops. But other developments were less optimistic. US secretary of state Antony Blinken reiterated on Sunday that Putin has made the call to invade and is moving forward. It came as CBS News reported the US has intelligence Russian troops have been given the order to invade and are preparing battle formations. US rhetoric that Putin’s mind is made up has been stronger than some European leaders in recent days. Putin blamed Ukrainian ‘provocations’ for the escalation of the current situation in the Donbas, where there has been shelling in recent days, in his call with Macron. It follows western leaders warning on Saturday at the Munich Security Conference that Russia would create false grievances and sow disinformation as a potential pretext for an invasion, while also engaging in diplomacy in a method Johnson said was intended to spread confusion for its own sake. Russian troops in Belarus numbering 30,000 were supposed to finish up military exercises on Sunday, but it was announced they would be extended as tensions continue to rumble. The Kremlin’s extension will be seen as an ominous sign in Ukraine. The US embassy in Russia told Americans in the country to “have evacuation plans” amid reports of “threats of attacks”, escalating the growing US-Russia tensions that some are already likening to a new Cold War. Russia hit back at the embassy’s alert on Sunday, which said attacks in cities like Moscow and St. Petersburg were a possibility and urged American citizens to be alert and “avoid crowds”. Russia would be “cut off from international financial markets” if it invades Ukraine, the European Commision president warned on Sunday night. Ursula von der Leyen, head of the European Union’s executive branch, told ARD public TV that Russia would face “enormous and consequential” sanctions upon an invasion but that the window to diplomacy is “still open”. The Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy, however, called for sanctions on Russia now and not after a possible invasion of Ukraine. But so far western leaders have rejected his calls, with Ursula von der Leyen saying sanctions would only follow a potential invasion. Hundreds of people rallied in cities such as Warsaw, Poland and Madrid, Spain to express solidarity with Ukraine and criticise Russia. It comes after fears the Russian aggression might not stop at Ukraine and could extend to areas, like Poland, formerly in Soviet Russia’s sphere of influence. On Sunday, the UK foreign secretary Liz Truss said she believes Putin “will not stop at Ukraine”, arguing that he is looking to piece the Soviet Union back together. That’s all from me, Jem Bartholomew. I’ll be back soon, now over to my colleague Elias Visontay. Bye for now. Brilliant dispatch here from The Guardian just over the Russian border from eastern Ukraine, where civilians have been arriving. The first stop for Ella Fyodorova after she fled her home in eastern Ukraine was a windblown tent camp just across the Russian border, part of a mass evacuation effort that observers fear may become the pretext for Russia to launch a formal intervention in Ukraine. “I wanted to stay, but my husband came home, and said: ‘Get your things together, we’re going,’” she said as she wrestled her two-year-old son into a blue snowsuit to walk to the public toilets nearby. The recent escalation in fighting had not touched her home city of Starobesheve, she said, but warnings from the Russian-backed separatist government of an imminent attack by Ukraine had driven many families to gather their children and flee. Her husband, who dropped her at the border, had to turn back. Now she sat in the dim light of a medical tent alongside other mothers holding their children, all waiting for the next bus to take them further into Russia. Many left carrying just the basics: clothing, medicine, some food. “I don’t know where we’re going,” she said. “I don’t know anything. Tomorrow we need to start searching for a place to live...” Read the full dispatch here. Russia would be “cut off from international financial markets” if it invades Ukraine, the European Commision president warned on Sunday night. Ursula von der Leyen, head of the European Union’s executive branch, told ARD public TV that Russia would face “enormous and consequential” sanctions upon an invasion but that the window to diplomacy is “still open”. “Russia would in principle be cut off from the international financial markets,” Von der Leyen said, with sanctions imposed on “all goods we make that Russia urgently needs to modernise and diversify its economy, where we are globally dominant and they have no replacement”. “The move to sanctions is so enormous and consequential that we know we must always give Russia a chance to return to diplomacy and the negotiating table,” she added. “This window is still open.” But the European Commision president defied demands from Ukraine president Volodymyr Zelenskiy to sanction Russia ahead of a potential invasion for its aggression. She said potential sanctions would follow an invasion. Reuters is reporting that a blast was heard early on Monday in the centre of the city of Donetsk, which is held by Russian-backed separatists in eastern Ukraine, a Reuters witness said. The origin of the blast was unclear. US president Joe Biden spoke with French president Emmanuel Macron on Sunday, the White House said, amid western fears that Russia is planning to invade Ukraine. Biden and Macron discussed the “ongoing diplomacy and deterrence efforts,” the White House said. The call came after Macron’s calls with Russian president Vladimir Putin, Ukraine president Volodymyr Zelenskiy and UK prime minister Boris Johnson. Johnson hailed “welcome signs” that diplomacy could still bear fruit on Sunday evening – referring to Putin’s engagement with Macron – and appeared to buck Biden’s rhetoric, which in recent days has said Putin has already made the call to invade. Russia hit back at the US embassy in Russia’s advice that Americans in the country should “have evacuation plans” amid media reports of “threats of attacks,” Reuters reports. Russia’s foreign ministry spokeswoman, Maria Zakharova, questioned if the United States had passed on the information about possible attacks to Russia. “And if not, how is one to understand all of this?” Zakharova said, according to Reuters. Earlier on Sunday, a security alert posted on the embassy’s website read: “According to media sources, there have been threats of attacks against shopping centers, railway and metro stations, and other public gathering places in major urban areas, including Moscow and St. Petersburg as well as in areas of heightened tension along the Russian border with Ukraine.” It also advised Americans to “avoid crowds,” “review your personal security plans” and “have evacuation plans that do not rely on US government assistance.” UK prime minister Boris Johnson and French president Emmanuel Macron agreed during a phone call on Sunday that the next week will be “crucial for diplomacy” as the west looks to avert war between Russia and Ukraine. “The prime minister spoke to French president Macron tonight about the situation in Ukraine. They updated one another on their respective diplomatic efforts, including president Macron’s call with president Putin today,” a Downing Street spokeswoman said, according to PA. “The prime minister noted that president Putin’s commitments to president Macron were a welcome sign that he might still be willing to engage in finding a diplomatic solution. The prime minister stressed that Ukraine’s voice must be central in any discussions. Johnson’s speech at Saturday’s Munich Security Conference warned an invasion of Ukraine would “echo around the world” but said he still held out hope for a diplomatic resolution, marking a departure from recent US rhetoric which appears convinced Putin has decided to invade. “The leaders agreed on the need for both Russia and Ukraine to meet their commitments under the Minsk Agreements in full. They also underscored the need for President Putin to step back from his current threats and withdraw troops from Ukraine’s border. “The prime minister and president Macron agreed next week would be crucial for diplomacy and resolved to stay in close contact.” Meanwhile, US president Joe Biden also spoke to Macron. More to follow. The US embassy in Russia has warned Americans in the country “avoid crowds” and “have evacuation plans” to leave Russia, citing media reports of “threats of attacks.” The advice marks a further deterioration of US-Russia relations in what some observers are already calling a new Cold War. A security alert posted on the embassy’s website on Sunday read: “According to media sources, there have been threats of attacks against shopping centers, railway and metro stations, and other public gathering places in major urban areas, including Moscow and St. Petersburg as well as in areas of heightened tension along the Russian border with Ukraine.” The US embassy alert continues below. “Actions to Take: “Monitor local and international media for updates. “Avoid crowds. “Notify friends and family of your safety. “Be aware of your surroundings. “Stay alert in locations frequented by tourists/Westerners. “Review your personal security plans. “Carry proper identification, including a US passport with a current Russian visa. “Have evacuation plans that do not rely on US government assistance.” Canada’s foreign minister said she is postponing a trip to France amid rising tensions in Ukraine. “Due to rising tensions in Ukraine, I have made the decision to postpone my trip to France and to immediately fly back home to Canada,” Mélanie Joly said on Twitter. She added: “We will be relentless in our pursuit of a diplomatic solution. There is still time for Russia to choose the path of de-escalation and dialogue.” It comes after Joly on Thursday said Canada has prepared a “vast array” of strong sanctions targeting Russian “people and entities”. In an interview with the National Post, Joly said sanctions would be imposed on “day one” of a Ukrainian invasion. Canada is a founding member of Nato. Unity was a central message of speeches from western leaders, including US vice-president Kamala Harris, at Saturday’s Munich Security Conference. (Joly also attended.) Harris warned Russian president Vladimir Putin not to underestimate the west’s strength. Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy, however, asked for sanctions before a potential invasion, questioning the wisdom of waiting until after Ukraine is attacked. The US on Sunday resisted those calls. Hundreds of people demonstrated in Madrid, Spain against Russian aggression and in solidarity with Ukraine on Sunday, marking another international rally expressing disgust at Russian president Vladimir Putin’s actions. Newswire AFP reports the details from Madrid: Around 500 people, many of them Ukrainians, rallied in central Madrid on Sunday against the threat of a Russian invasion of Ukraine. Participants waved blue and yellow Ukranian flags or wore them draped over their backs in the Plaza de Espana square. “Stop Putin and “Say yes to Ukraine”, were among the signs held up at the demonstration. “We are all worried, we are fearful because don’t know what will happen tomorrow,” Ruslan Sendzyuk, a Ukrainian living in Madrid, told AFPTV at the protest. The West accuses Russian president Vladimir Putin of massing tens of thousands of troops around Ukraine’s borders in recent weeks in preparation for an invasion. Russia has denied such plans and has in turn accused Ukraine of breaching international agreements. Moscow has asked for the withdrawal of Western forces that have been deployed in eastern Europe, including in Poland, following the end of the Cold War. What exactly does Putin want in Ukraine? Here’s The Guardian’s helpful explainer video, with Moscow correspondent Andrew Roth, asking what Russia’s president is seeking from aggression against Ukraine. The US on Sunday refused to impose sanctions on Russia before a widely anticipated Russian invasion of Ukraine, Reuters reports, despite mounting criticism from Kyiv. It comes after Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy questioned the wisdom of sanctioning Russia only after it invades, which he implied would be too late and come after destruction inflicted upon Ukraine, at the Munich Security Conference on Saturday. Reuters reports: “The purpose of the sanctions in the first instance is to try to deter Russia from going to war. As soon as you trigger them that deterrence is gone,” Secretary of State Antony Blinken told CNN’s “State of the Union” show. Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskiy and a growing chorus of critics argue that if the United States and its allies are so certain Putin plans to invade, they should apply sanctions now. “You tell me 100% that there will be war in a few days’ time. What are you waiting for?” a frustrated Zelenskiy asked the audience at the Munich Security Conference on Saturday, repeating an earlier call on the West to impose sanctions on Russia now instead of later. “We will not need your sanctions after there is a bombardment, or after our state is shot at, or if we have no more borders, we do not have an economy, or parts of our state is occupied,” Zelenskiy said. US president Joe Biden’s secretary of state, Antony Blinken, said on Sunday the US national security council would meet to review the latest intelligence on Ukraine and “check plans”. Blinken toured the TV political shows to press home the Biden administration’s message that the US remains convinced that Russia is poised to invade Ukraine. “As president Biden said, everything we are seeing tells us that the decision we believe president Putin has made to invade is moving forward,” he told CBS’s Face the Nation. Pressed to give details of why the US continues to believe an invasion is imminent despite repeated Russian denials, Blinken pointed to what he called “provocations” and “false flag operations” that could be used by Putin to justify overrunning its neighbour. Russian-backed separatists have increased shelling in east Ukraine in the past few days, and Blinken said that could be used as a pretext. “Now we have the news just this morning that the ‘exercises’ Russia was engaged with in Belarus, with 30,000 forces, which were supposed to end this weekend will now continue because of tensions in eastern Ukraine – tensions created by Russia.” Blinken’s interviews came amid a swirl of diplomatic activity that offered little clarity about what lies ahead. As the top US diplomat was warning that Russia was moving ahead with invasion plans, Vladimir Putin and the French president, Emmanuel Macron, were agreeing to push for a ceasefire in eastern Ukraine. Amid a swirl of claim and counter-claim, CBS reported that according to US intelligence actual orders had been given to Russian troops amassed close to the Ukraine border to proceed with an invasion. Read Ed Pilkington’s full story from New York here: The US has intelligence Russian troops have been granted the go ahead to invade Ukraine, CBS News is reporting, with commmanders making “specific plans” for battlefield manoeuvers. That’s according to David Martin, CBS News national security correspondent, who told TV show Face The Nation about the intel. “The [US] intelligence says that Russian troops have actually received orders now to proceed with the invasion,” Martin said. “So not only are they moving up closer and closer to the border and to these attack positions, the commanders on the ground are making specific plans for how they would manoeuver in their sector of the battlefield. They’re doing everything that American commanders would do once they got the order to proceed.” CBS News’ reporting could not immediately be independently verified by The Guardian. Its report can be viewed here. Russia’s ambassador in Washington rejected Western assertions that Moscow was planning an invasion into Ukraine. “Russia is not trying to take away the territory of other countries” the Russian State News Agency Ria-Novosti cited ambassador Anatoly Antonov as saying on Sunday. “There are no such plans [to invade Ukraine],” Antonov said. Antonov also stated that Moscow considered the Donbas region “as part of Ukraine.” The Russian ambassador added that his country was ready to continue diplomatic efforts to resolve the current tensions and denied the current Russian troop build-up posed a danger to Ukraine “Russian troops are on sovereign Russian territory. We do not threaten anyone.” US president Joe Biden said on Friday that, based on the latest American intelligence, he was now “convinced” Russian president Vladimir Putin has decided to invade Ukraine. Biden’s vice-president Kamala Harris has called on Russia “to demonstrate that it is serious” about finding a diplomatic solution to the crisis as Western allies worry Moscow was creating a pretext to invade Ukraine. In the interview, Antonov further defended the presence of Russian troops in Belarus, saying it did not contradict international law. Earlier in the day, Belarus’s defence minister, said Russian soldiers would stay in the country after large-scale joint drills were completed on Sunday, a decision that will further fuel fears Moscow is planning an imminent invasion of Ukraine. The Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) will hold an extraordinary meeting on Monday to find ways to de-escalate the situation in Ukraine, the Polish chairmanship of the European security body said. “The meeting has been called for Monday,” deputy foreign minister Pawel Jablonski told PAP on Sunday, following a request from Kyiv amid a sharp escalation in the conflict in eastern Ukraine. AFP reports from Warsaw: OSCE monitors have reported hundreds of artillery and mortar attacks in recent days, in a conflict that has rumbled since 2014 and claimed more than 14,000 lives. The ceasefire violations come as the United States accuses Russia of planning to invade Ukraine after a troop build-up of some 150,000 troops on its ex-Soviet neighbour’s borders. Russia has denied any such plans. Ukraine had requested the OSCE meeting to discuss the “rapidly deteriorating security situation on the ground”, according to a tweet from Poland’s OSCE representative Adam Halacinski. “Its aim is to discuss everything that has happened in recent hours and what steps the OSCE should take in this situation in order above all to bring about a de-escalation of tension,” Jablonski said. “We are using all available tools that are possible to use in order to avoid an armed conflict.” On the ground, here’s video footage showing Ukrainian officials, soldiers and international journalists running away from what appears to be shelling on Saturday as they visited eastern Ukraine’s conflict zone. It comes after shelling in recent days of Ukrainian territory in the east of the country, some of which Ukrainian military officials say targeted civilians. Hundreds of people demonstrated in Warsaw, Poland on Sunday against Russian aggression towards Ukraine. It comes after on Saturday the Lithuanian foreign minister Gabrielius Landsbergis called for stronger military defence of the Baltic states and Poland, amid fears Russian aggression may not stop at Ukraine. Newswire AFP reports from Warsaw: Participants waved Ukrainian, Polish and EU flags as well as the standard used by the Belarusian opposition. “We Are With Ukraine,” read one placard held up at the demonstration. Another said: “Hands Off Ukraine.” “Putin on trial!” the crowd chanted. Organisers said in a statement that the protest was “to express our opposition to yet another possible Russian aggression against Ukraine”. This is Jem Bartholomew in London taking charge of the Ukraine crisis blog from here. Do get in touch via email or Twitter with tips and thoughts. Russian president Vladimir Putin told French president Emmanuel Macron Russian troops would leave Belarus after completion of its military exercises, Reuters reports, citing a French official. Western countries will no doubt attach little value to that assurance, given that Russian troops were expected to leave today, until it was announced otherwise. Reuters also says that the two leaders disagreed in their phone call today over who was responsible for tensions in eastern Ukraine, citing a French presidential adviser. Macron put blame on the Russian separatists and Putin on Ukraine, the French official said. Vladimir Putin and Emmanuel Macron have agreed to try to secure a ceasefire in the Donbas, in eastern Ukraine, and to put together an urgent summit at the highest level on the future of Ukraine, the Élysée Palace said in a statement. The two leaders spoke on the phone for 105 minutes, and the outcome, broadly confirmed by the Kremlin, suggests Russia might be willing to step back from the brink of a full invasion of Ukraine to allow renewed diplomatic discussions. The French foreign minister, Jean Yves Le Drian, will meet with his Russian counterpart, Sergei Lavrov, in the coming days to work on a possible summit at the highest level with Russia, Ukraine and allies. The Kremlin suggested the meeting would be held in the Normandy format, meaning the participants will be Russia, Ukraine, France and Germany. It is too early to say if Macron has pulled off a last-minute diplomatic coup, or if he has the full support for his initiative from Washington and London. So far, most of his moves have been coordinated with the White House. It was also decided that a meeting of the trilateral contact group would be held “in the next few hours” in order to “obtain a commitment from all the stakeholders” to ceasefire on the line of contact. The purpose of the leaders’ summit if the conditions are met, would be to define a new order of peace and security in Europe,” the French presidency said. The Kremlin said Putin had expressed serious concern over the sharp deterioration of the situation on the line of contact in the Donbas. The statement added: Taking into account the acuteness of the current state of affairs, the presidents considered it expedient to intensify the search for solutions through diplomatic means through the foreign ministries and political advisers to the leaders of the countries participating in the Normandy format. These contacts are designed to help restore the ceasefire and ensure progress in resolving the conflict around Donbas. The Kremlin insisted Putin was not withdrawing any of his wider demands saying Putin “reiterated the need for the United States and Nato to take Russian demands for security guarantees seriously and respond to them concretely and to the point”. The statement added that the escalation in the Donbas was blamed by Putin on the provocations of the Ukrainian security forces, and he complained of the supplying by the Nato countries of Ukraine of modern weapons and ammunition, “which is pushing Kiev towards a military solution to the so-called Donbas problem”. The exiled Belarus opposition leader Svetlana Tikhanovskaya said today that the presence of Russian troops for extended military drills endangered her country’s sovereignty. From AFP: “The presence of Russian troops on our territory violates our constitution, international law, endangers the security of each Belarusian and the entire region,” her office said in a statement. Her comments came after Belarus said its massive military drills with Russia that had been due to conclude Sunday would continue, citing military activity around its borders and in Ukraine. The exercises have heightened fears in the west that Russia is preparing an attack on its ex-Soviet neighbour after massing tens of thousands of troops around Ukraine’s borders. “We demand the immediate withdrawal of Russian troops from our territory,” Tikhanovskaya said in the statement, adding that her team would seek to have the deployment raised within the UN security council. Belarus strongman Alexander Lukashenko has become an increasingly close ally of Russian leader Vladimir Putin. This bond grew stronger after Moscow threw its political weight behind Minsk during large anti-government protests in 2020. Tikhanovskaya said in her statement that Lukashenko was paying the price for that support with Belarusian “sovereignty” and “now we are seeing the consequences”. The opposition believe Tikhanovskaya was the true winner of elections in 2020 that sparked the protests and a crackdown that forced the political newcomer into exile in neighbouring EU-member state Lithuania. Here’s some more from the Putin-Macron call: The secretary of state, Antony Blinken, has told CBS News that the national security council will meet later today to review the latest intelligence on Ukraine and “check plans”. Blinken is doing the rounds of the TV political shows this morning to press home the Biden administration’s message that the US remains convinced that Russia is poised to invade Ukraine. As President Biden said, everything we are seeing tells us that the decision we believe President Putin has made to invade is moving forward. Pressed to give details of why the US continues to believe an invasion is imminent despite repeated Russian denials, Blinken pointed to what he called “provocations” by separatist forces and “false flag operations” that could be used by Putin to justify overrunning its neighbour. Now we have the news just this morning that the ‘exercises’ Russia was engaged with in Belarus, with 30,000 forces, which were supposed to end this weekend will now continue because of tensions in eastern Ukraine – tensions created by Russia. Blinken has just returned from Munich where he accompanied Kamala Harris to a security conference on the Ukraine crisis. He is scheduled to meet the Russian foreign minister, Sergey Lavrov, in Europe next week, but has stipulated that the encounter will be cancelled in the case of an invasion. On Saturday, the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, was sharply critical of allied leaders for waiting to impose sanctions until after any bombardment had begun. He accused world leaders of “appeasement”. Asked by CBS News to respond to the criticism, Blinken said: We have put together in great detail the massive consequences that will befall Russia if it engages in this aggression. The purpose of that is to deter the aggression, and once you trigger the sanctions you lose the deterrence. The French president’s office has released its own version of the call with Putin, Reuters reports: French President Emmanuel Macron and Russian counterpart Vladimir Putin agreed in a call today on the need to find a diplomatic solution to the Ukraine crisis, Macron’s office said on Sunday. The two countries’ foreign ministers will meet in the coming days to that effect and will work on a possible summit at the highest level with Russia, Ukraine and allies to establish a new security order in Europe, the Elysee palace said. Russian President Vladimir Putin blamed Ukrainian ‘provocations’ for the escalation of the current situation in the Donbas in a call with French President Emmanuel Macron today “The Russian president noted that the reason for the escalation is the provocations by the Ukrainian security force,” according to a Kremlin readout of the call, which also said however that the two leaders “believe it is important to intensify efforts to find solutions through diplomatic means”. The Kremlin also said Putin told Macron that Nato countries continue “to pump Ukraine with modern weapons“ which “pushes Kyiv to solve the so-called military problem.” “In the end, civilians in the Donbas are suffering, and have to then have to be evacuated to Russia to protect them the from growing violence,” the Kremlin readout said, referring to the recent mass-scale evacuation of citizens from the Donbas to Russia that the west has called a manufactured war scare aimed at creating a pretext for an invasion into Ukraine. The Kremlin statement further stated that Putin repeated Moscow’s demands that US and Nato must take Russia’s security demands “seriously.” The Associated Press has filed this write-up of comments by the US vice-president in Germany today: The US vice-president, Kamala Harris, wrapped up a weekend of outreach to European allies with a push to bolster the west’s resolve in confronting Moscow with crippling sanctions as increasingly dire signs suggest Russia’s Vladimir Putin plans to order an invasion of Ukraine. In a burst of diplomacy at the annual Munich security conference, Harris tried to make the case to American allies that rapidly escalating tensions on the Ukraine-Russian border meant European security was under “direct threat” and there should be unified support for economic penalties if the Kremlin invades its neighbour. “We’re talking about the potential for war in Europe. I mean, let’s really take a moment to understand the significance of what we’re talking about,” Harris told reporters before her return to Washington. Europe, she said, might be at its most perilous moment since the end of the second world war. “It’s been over 70 years, and through those 70 years … there has been peace and security,” she said. “We are talking about the real possibility of war in Europe.” During a series of choreographed meetings and a major address at the security conference, Harris told global leaders they were at a “defining” and “decisive” moment for the world. Harris met with President Volodymyr Zelenskiy of Ukraine, European Commission president Ursula von der Leyen, Nato secretary general Jens Stoltenberg, the leaders of the three Baltic nations, German chancellor Olaf Scholz and Greek prime minister Kyriakos Mitsotakis. Biden sent Harris to Germany with straightforward marching orders to amplify his concern that a Russian invasion was highly likely and make clear to European allies that they must be ready to impose the toughest sanctions Moscow has ever seen. Harris told reporters that an invasion – and subsequent sanctions on Russia – would likely have costs for Americans, as well. “When America stands for principles, and all of the things that we hold dear, it requires sometimes for us to put ourselves out there in a way that maybe we will incur some cost,” Harris said. “In this situation, that may relate to energy costs.” The Ukrainian military has today closed a key checkpoint leading to the separatist region of Donbas after it came under repeated shelling, Reuters reports. Ukraine’s president Volodymyr Zelenskiy has called for an immediate ceasefire in the eastern part of the country, where clashes between pro-Russian separatists and Ukrainian forces intensified in recent days, Reuters reports: Zelenskiy also said Ukraine supports peace talks within the Trilateral Contact Group, where Ukraine participates along with Russia and the Organization for Security and Co-Operation in Europe (OSCE). “We stand for intensifying the peace process. We support the immediate convening of the TCG and the immediate introduction of a regime of silence,” Zelenskiy said on Twitter. Here is a summary of the latest developments: Joint military exercises by Russia and Belarus close to the Belarusian border with Ukraine have been extended “due to military activity near the borders and escalation in the Donbas”. The exercises were supposed to end today and the Russians to withdraw. The extension will be seen as an ominous sign in Ukraine. British prime minister Boris Johnson has said evidence suggests Russia is planning “the biggest war in Europe since 1945”. In an interview with the BBC from Munich’s security conference, Johnson said the US president, Joe Biden, had told Western leaders that intelligence suggested Russian forces intend to launch an invasion that will encircle Ukrainian capital, Kyiv. The Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy has called for sanctions on Russia now and not after a possible invasion of Ukraine. His comments were later echoed by Ukraine’s foreign minister. Russian-backed separatists in the Donbas have claimed that Ukrainian forces have killed two civilians. It marks the first time in the recent flare-up that the pro-Russian separatists have accused Ukraine of killing civilians on its territory and comes as as Kyiv and the West warn Moscow was creating a pretext for an invasion. Vladimir Putin’s spokesperson, Dmitry Peskov, has warned that the situation in the Donbas is such that “warned that any “any spark, any unplanned incident or any minor planned provocation can lead to irreparable consequences”. He also said today that there was no “point for Russia attacking anyone” urging western partners to “come to reason”. The US vice president, Kamala Harris, has said: “We believe that Putin has made his decision. Period.” Harris’s comments, echoing those of President Biden, came after she was asked in Munich whether the US has intelligence that Putin has decided to invade. Poland, which currently holds the chairmanship of the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE), said today it would convene an extraordinary session of the group’s permanent council on Ukraine (via Reuters). Ukraine requested the session to take place tomorrow, according to a letter posted on Twitter by Adam Halacinskie, Poland’s permanent representative to the OSCE. Ukraine’s foreign minister Dmytro Kuleba said today it was time for the west to implement at least part of the sanctions it has prepared against Russia. From Reuters: Russia has to be stopped right now. We see how events are unfolding,” Kuleba said. Kuleba’s statement came soon after Russia and Belarus announced an extension of military drills near Ukrainian borders, with western leaders warning of an imminent Russian invasion while clashes intensify in eastern Ukraine. “It’s time to act. I’m officially saying that there are all the grounds to implement at least a part of sanctions prepared against Russia, now,” Kuleba said at a televised briefing from a security conference in Munich Evacuees from pro-Russian proxy states in eastern Ukraine are being moved further into Russia, the Guardian’s Moscow correspondent reports. The Times and Sunday Times correspondent reports mixed feelings in Donetsk about the current situation. A small anti-war protest in Moscow was swiftly shut down today. Vladimir Putin’s spokesperson, Dmitry Peskov, said today that there was no “point for Russia attacking anyone” urging western partners to “come to reason”. “We urge you to ask yourself the question: what is the point of Russia attacking anyone?,” Peskov said in a television interview aired on the state-run Russia-1 broadcaster. The longtime spokesman of Putin also criticised the west for “not being very good in history”, claiming Russia has never invaded another country. “We remind you that Russia has never attacked anyone throughout its history. And Russia, which has survived so many wars, is the last country in Europe that wants to speak at all, even pronounce the word ‘war’”. Asked about the situation in the Donbas, Peskov warned that any “any spark, any unplanned incident or any minor planned provocation can lead to irreparable consequences”. The attempts at diplomacy continue ... Elliot Higgins, founder of investigative journalism website, Bellingcat, has posted a Twitter thread entitled: “Anatomy of a Russian separatist false flag.” The Dutch foreign ministry said today that the country’s embassy in Ukraine is moving away from the capital Kyiv to the western city of Lviv as fears mount that Russia is preparing to invade its western neighbour. “Due to security reasons, we have decided today to move the activities of the embassy to Lviv,” the Dutch ministry of foreign affairs said in a statement published on its website. Britain and the US earlier announced they were relocating their Ukraine embassy operations from Kyiv to Lviv. Dutch people who are still in the country have also been urged to leave “as soon as possible.” The Dutch flagship carrier KLM was the first airline to suspend flights to Ukraine. Details have emerged of the Ukrainian army captain killed on Saturday in heavy shelling on the Donbas frontline. Speaking at the Munich security conference on Saturday, Ukraine’s president Volodymyr Zelenskiy paid tribute to 34-year-old Anton Sidorov, whom he described as a patriot and veteran intelligence officer. “He died as a result of artillery fire, which is prohibited by the Minsk agreements,” Zelenskiy said. Video shows Sidorov – a talented musician – singing at an army gala event. He composed his songs in Russian, including the song Sleep, my brothers, which was performed at the show. “Your song has simply torn the hearts of many Ukrainians during all these years of war,” Anatoliy Stirlitz, a blogger and army officer, posted on Telegram. Sidorov was hit in the head by shrapnel at 7am on Saturday near the village of Myronivske, in the Donetsk region. His injuries were described as “incompatible with life”. He was one of two Ukrainian soldiers killed yesterday, with four injured. A father of three, he came from the city of Novograd-Volynsky. The US vice president has been speaking in Germany about the threat of war. Instead of Russia withdrawing troops from Belarus, as originally scheduled, they will apparently be working on new joint military drills with their Belarusian counterparts. Nato has estimated that there are 30,000 Russian troops in Belarus. A week today, the Belarusian dictator, Alexander Lukashenko, a firm ally in Putin’s Ukraine policy, is due to hold a constitutional referendum, widely dismissed as illegitimate by western countries, that analysts say is meant to pave the way for him to step back from the presidency at some point but retain overall control. The Washington Post’s Mary Illuyshina says that the announcement of continued joint military exercises by Russia and Belarus, close to the Belarusian border with Ukraine, comes just days after the Belarusian foreign minister said otherwise. Joint military exercises by Russia and Belarus close to the Belarusian border with Ukraine were due to end today but the Belarusian defense ministry has announced that they will continue. They have been seen as a significant element in the Kremlin’s menacing posture towards its neighbour. Russian-backed separatists in the Donbas have claimed that Ukrainian forces have killed two civilians, as Kyiv and the west say Moscow was creating a pretext for an invasion. It marks the first time in the recent flare-up that the pro-Russian separatists have accused Ukraine of killing civilians on its territory. “As a result of aggression by the Kyiv militants, two civilians were killed and five houses were destroyed,” the Luhansk People’s Republic militia said in a statement posted on its Telegram channel. The statement added that the two civilians were killed in the rebel-held town of Pionerskaya, close to the Russian border. Shortly after the statement was published, Russia announced it was opening a criminal investigation into the alleged death of the two Donbas civilians. Kyiv and its western partners have repeatedly said in recent weeks that they believe Moscow could use a staged incident in the two Russian-controlled separatist regions as justification for an invasion. Russia and the rebels have on their part accused Kyiv of planning an assault to retake the Donbas regions, claims flatly denied by Ukraine and rejected by the West. On Saturday, Russia’s State Duma speaker Vyacheslav Volodin reiterated that Moscow was ready to “defend” Russians and compatriots living in the two proxy states if their lives are in danger. Russia has issued over 700,000 passports to residents of eastern Ukraine since separatists took hold of the territory there in 2014. The US president, Joe Biden, said earlier Russia was involved in “disinformation” in Ukraine and said that claims in the Russian media that Ukraine was planning a major attack “defies basic logic” of what a country would do with over 150,000 troops arrayed at its borders. The Guardian’s Andrew Roth has been visiting accommodation housing people evacuated from Moscow-backed statelets in eastern Ukraine on Friday evening, after an order by the leaders of the pro-Russian proxy states. They are not all being welcomed with open arms, according to one report. The assessments of US and British spies on Ukraine cannot be trusted given the faulty intelligence in the run-up to the US-led invasion of Iraq, Russia’s first deputy permanent representative to the United Nations said today. Dmitry Polyanskiy told Sky (via Reuters): We don’t trust the US and British intelligence, they let us down, the whole world, on many occasions [it is] enough to remember weapons of mass destruction in Iraq. Polyanskiy said no one should try to tell Russia where it held military exercises on Russian territory. James Cleverly, Britain’s minister for Europe, has said a Russian invasion of Ukraine now seems “far more likely than unlikely”. He told Sky News (via Reuters): Unfortunately, at the moment, an attack, an invasion seems far more likely than unlikely but we will continue to work to try and avert that. Everything that we see indicates that invasion is very, very, highly likely and very, very imminent. As western leaders continue to accuse Moscow of spreading misinformation as pretext for a possible invasion, the deputy of the Russian Duma has accused Ukraine of planning an imminent attack against Donbas, the region of eastern Ukraine where the Kremlin has armed and funded an insurgency since 2014, a Middle East Eye reporter says. Hello, this is Haroon Siddique taking over the blog. The French president, Emmanuel Macron, will speak to Vladimir Putin over the phone today as attempts continue to avert a Russian invasion of Ukraine. A Russian report also suggests Macron may fly to Moscow imminently. Russian media has confirmed the deaths of two Ukrainian soldiers in the government-held part of Donetsk on Saturday, claiming the servicemen were part of a “sabotage group” planning “terrorist attacks” against gas pipelines and electrical substations in the region. The claim comes as western leaders continue to accuse Moscow and Russian-backed rebels of spreading misinformation as pretext for a possible invasion. Russian state news agency RIA Novosti cited a statement from the ministry of state security of the self-proclaimed Donetsk People’s Republic. “On February 19, 2022, during the implementation of operational information, special forces of the Ministry of State Security of the Donetsk People’s Republic in the city of Donetsk blocked an enemy sabotage and terrorist group that planned to blow up electrical substations, gas pipelines and filter stations on the territory of the republic,” the statement reportedly read. It was during an attempt to detain the servicemen when two special forces soldiers received gunshot wounds, the ministry alleged. Ukraine’s national guard says it is continuing to ensure security in eastern Ukraine. “Everything is under control in Donetsk and Luhansk regions,” the force said in a tweet early on Sunday morning while cautioning residents to only follow official information sources. Ukraine has suspended operations at one of the seven checkpoints to territory in the eastern Donbas region controlled by Russia-backed separatists, due to heavy shelling, Reuters reports. Separatists on Saturday fired three times on the Schastya checkpoint using mortars and heavy anti-tank grenade launchers, as ceasefire violations by separatists along the frontline increased to 136 from 66 on Friday, the military said on its Facebook page. Considering “the escalation of the situation... and the inability to guarantee the safety of the civilian population” using the checkpoint, the command was suspending its use from 8am on Sunday “for the period of the threat,” the military said. Incidents of shelling across the line dividing Ukrainian government forces and Russian-backed separatists increased sharply last week, in what the Ukrainian government called a provocation. However, Kyiv’s western allies say Russia is preparing to invade Ukraine and are concerned that the escalation might be used as a pretext. The UK’s foreign secretary, Liz Truss, said she believes Putin “will not stop at Ukraine”, arguing that he is looking to piece the Soviet Union back together. Truss earlier told a security conference in Munich to get ready for war. This is the most dangerous moment for European security since the 1940s. We need to prepare for the worst-case scenario. Russia has shown they aren’t serious about diplomacy.” Truss, speaking to the Mail On Sunday, said the west needed to stop Moscow in its tracks or Putin would look to “turn the clock back to the mid 1990s or even before then” by possibly annexing the Baltic states – such as Estonia and Latvia – and the western Balkans, which includes Serbia and Albania. British intelligence chiefs say they agree with reports from the White House, warning that Russian president Putin has already issued a “go” order with plans to seize control of Ukraine having already begun, a UK newspaper reports. According to the Sunday Times, four senior figures in government confirmed they expected a multi-pronged Russian assault to begin any day, possibly culminating in a “lightning war” against the capital, Kyiv. One told the publication: “Our intelligence is consistent with the Americans’. Putin has a plan and it is under way.” The sources said they expect false flag operations and skirmishes with Ukrainian troops in the eastern Donbas region will be followed by an attack by separatist forces before Russian troops “take a bite out of Ukraine” or launch a “full-scale invasion”. A security source said: “I would expect a massive opening salvo to try to remove the government in Kyiv. The Russians have positioned cruise missiles to take out the capital.” Another senior adviser said: “There is a recognition that we might be dealing with a lightning war but also lots of different scenarios playing out at once or in sequence.” These include “the big assault on Kyiv”. The Ukrainian defence ministry says it recorded 122 violations by Russian forces on Saturday, including 108 involving weapons prohibited by the Minsk agreements. It says two soldiers were killed. According to a statement issued late on Saturday, the ministry said artillery was fired from settlements, landing near residential buildings. “By doing so, the enemy is trying to force units of the armed forces of Ukraine to open fire in response, in order to further accuse Ukrainian defenders of shelling civilians,” the statement reads. According to the ministry, two Ukrainian servicemen died from injuries sustained from the shelling, while another four servicemen were injured and are currently receiving treatment. The force added it would not open fire on civilian infrastructure and would continue to adhere to the norms of international humanitarian law. The Donetsk and Luhansk regions have been at the centre of hostilities in recent days, though the area has been fraught with conflict since 2014 with skirmishes persisting between Russian-backed rebels who seek autonomy and Ukrainians. The two territories are run by separatist governments widely seen as Russian proxy states inside Ukraine. In case you missed this statement from the EU council released late last night, the body commended Ukraine’s “posture of restraint” in the face of “continued provocations and efforts at destabilisation”. Josep Borrell, high representative on behalf of the EU, said: The EU urges Russia to de-escalate by a substantial withdrawal of military forces from the proximity of Ukraine’s borders. Borrell said the escalation is now “compounded by the increase in ceasefire violations” in eastern Ukraine in recent days and condemned the use of heavy weaponry and shelling of civilian areas, which “constitute a clear violation of the Minsk agreements and international humanitarian law”. We commend Ukraine’s posture of restraint in the face of continued provocations and efforts at destabilisation. The EU is extremely concerned that staged events, as noted recently, could be used as a pretext for possible military escalation. Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskiy made an emphatic statement to the west from Munich’s security conference, saying that sanctions on Russia should be made public before and not after a possible invasion of Ukraine occurs. The security architecture of our world is brittle, it is obsolete ... Action is needed. This is not about war in Ukraine, this is about war in Europe.” In a recent interview with CNN’s Christiane Amanpour, the president said: Even the question of just making it public, preventably, just a list of sanctions for them, for us and to know what will happen if they start the war, even that question does not have the support. We don’t need your sanctions after the bombardment will happen and after our country will be fired at or after we will have no borders, or after we will have no economy or part of our countries will be occupied... why would we need those sanctions then?” British prime minister Boris Johnson has said evidence suggests Russia is planning “the biggest war in Europe since 1945” in an interview with the BBC from Munich’s security conference. The prime minister said US President Joe Biden had told Western leaders that intelligence suggested Russian forces intend to launch an invasion that will encircle Ukrainian capital, Kyiv. According to Johnson, Russian troops were not just planning on entering Ukraine from the east, via Donbas, but down from Belarus and the area surrounding Kyiv. All the signs are that the plan has already in some senses begun. People need to understand the sheer cost in human life that could entail. I’m afraid to say that the plan we are seeing is for something that could be really the biggest war in Europe since 1945 just in terms of sheer scale.” People need to not only consider the potential loss of life of Ukrainians, but also of “young Russians”, Johnson added. Welcome to our live coverage of the Ukraine crisis. I’m Samantha Lock and I’ll be bringing you all the latest developments. Tensions continued to mount overnight after world leaders met at the Munich security conference, calling upon Russia to consider diplomacy and withdraw troops from Ukraine’s borders. Here are the key events you may have missed overnight. Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskiy called for sanctions on Russia to be made public before and not after a possible invasion of Ukraine occurs. Zelenskiy continued to assert Ukraine will not respond to any provocations from Russia. The European council called upon Russia to de-escalate and withdraw military forces, while commending Ukraine’s “posture of restraint in the face of continued provocations and efforts at destabilisation”. Josep Borrell, high representative on behalf of the EU, said there are “no grounds for allegations” coming from the Russian-backed Donetsk and Luhansk regions of a possible Ukrainian attack. Explosions were heard overnight in the centre of the separatist-controlled city of Donetsk in eastern Ukraine, according to multiple reports. US state department spokesperson Ned Price says more evidence of Russian disinformation is being used for false-flag operations aimed at discrediting the Ukrainian government. US President Joe Biden’s confidence about Russian military action came from US intel about an order given to Russian subordinates to proceed with a full-scale attack, according to senior administration officials as per the Washington Post. British foreign minister Liz Truss told Munich security conference on Saturday that Ukraine could face the “worst-case scenario” of a Russian invasion as soon as next week, and Europe faced one of its most perilous security situations since the early 20th century. Speaking in Munich, Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy called on Vladimir Putin to meet with him to find a resolution to the conflict. “I don’t know what the president of the Russian Federation wants, so I am proposing a meeting,” he said. Nato relocated staff from Ukraine’s capital, Kyiv, to Lviv and Brussels, according to multiple reports. Joe Biden will convene the national security council on Sunday to discuss the evolving situation in Ukraine, the White House announced. A joint statement from the foreign ministers of the G7 nations urged diplomacy but warned it would “judge Russia by its deeds”.The unruly chorus of common starlings (Sturnus vulgaris) fills the fields to the east of Otley, sending the sounds of chattering, chirping, tweeting and trilling across a radius of at least half a mile. I immediately feel my spirits perk up at the sound of this jostling collective conversation, a ball of bright white noise in an otherwise muted February landscape. I get closer and see hundreds of dark silhouettes festooning the bare branches of a tall ash tree. Starlings are sometimes the subject of a certain petty prejudice; perhaps there is something uncomfortably insectoid in the way they teem and swarm, in their collective intelligence. Even their oily, iridescent plumage – which looks black at a distance but up-close shimmers green and purple like a puddle of petrol – has a hint of beetle armour about it. This group intellect is what enables starlings to produce their famous strobing, morphing murmurations, and while I don’t see this happen today, I do get a hint of the hive mind in action. I walk towards the tree, but clearly get a bit too close, and the entire flock instantly muzzles itself, like the saloon falling silent in a western. A few moments of silence, the swarm sizes me up, and the cacophony gradually starts up again. I’m not very threatening, it seems, but the speed of their massed decision-making seems to border on the telepathic. Starling numbers plummeted a staggering 87% between 1967 and 2015, and are still in freefall. The rise of industrial agriculture is thought to be one of the possible causes, but the lightly managed fields around here probably still provide the birds with a rich larder of invertebrate food. This is just one example of the biodiversity value of this swathe of open country, and Leeds city council is to be commended for listening to local voices and deciding to rethink its initial plans for a massive, poorly considered housing development in these fields. This is good news, at least for now. Any new plans must accommodate all the animal occupants of this landscape, not just the human ones. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryAustralia’s coronavirus vaccine rollout began in late February 2021. Here we bring together the latest figures to track the progress of the rollout and Covid vaccination schedule. The data shows the total doses given in Australia, people vaccinated in Australian states and the percentage of the population who have received one dose or are double dose fully vaccinated, as well as graphs showing daily new Covid-19 cases in Australia, deaths per day and cumulative coronavirus cases by state and territory. Vaccine rollout: national and state progress One of the biggest logistical exercises in Australia’s history, the delivery of coronavirus vaccines to more than 20 million people was slow to start due to supply issues and concerns around the AstraZeneca vaccine. The government was initially hoping to have 4 million people vaccinated by March 2021 and the entire country inoculated by October. Since then, goals, targets and “horizons” have come and gone. However, in December 2021 the country had vaccinated 90% of the population aged 16 and over, and begun the rollout of boosters. Here, you can see the how the booster rollout is progressing and when we might reach various thresholds. The trendline is based on the boosters administered, then taking the most recent interval between second and booster doses, and adding this to the date of the second dose. This is obviously a very simple estimate of the time it might take, and will change as the vaccination rate increases or decrease. It also shows the current “lag time” for boosters, that is the time interval between when the equivalent number of second and booster doses were administered – this essentially tracks the delay between second and third doses, which ideally would be as close to four months as possible if the majority of people were getting their shots as soon as they’re eligible. Here you can see current vaccination levels and when each state and territory hit targets, using the same method as above: Here are the current vaccination rates for each state and territory by various age ranges, as well as the booster vaccination rate: The next chart shows the speed of vaccinations in the past 30 days for each state and territory, versus the national rate. It is showing the number of new vaccination doses administered per day, adjusted for population differences to be a rate per 1,000 people. Then, it has been smoothed using a rolling 7-day average due to differences in reporting on weekends and data catch-ups in the national reporting. This chart does not currently include boosters, but they will be added shortly: Vaccine rollout: maps of vaccination rate by area The federal government releases weekly data for vaccination rates by statistical area 3 (SA3) regions. This map shows the current first and second-dose vaccination rates for each region, as well as the weekly increase in the percentage of fully vaccinated people. The data for first and second doses is capped at 95%. You can use the dropdown menu to switch between showing the vaccination rate for each area, and the percentage change in vaccination rate for each area: Here, you can see the same information in a table, which can be sorted by region name, state or the change in vaccination percentage: Vaccine rollout: Indigenous vaccination statistics Guardian Australia has been tracking the vaccination statistics for Indigenous Australians since August 2021. While Indigenous Covid vaccination rates have risen rapidly, there remains a large gap between First Nations people and overall vaccination rates in almost every state and territory. These charts have switched to using Indigenous population data sourced from the Australian Immunisation Register instead of ABS population estimates. This means the percentages for some states have changed significantly, such as in Victoria. Here, you can see national figures for the Indigenous vaccination rate over time compared with the overall vaccination rate, and the difference between the two: This chart shows the latest rollout gap for each state and territory, with data updated weekly: Vaccine rollout: vaccine production and distribution Some of the reason for the differing vaccination rates is due to access and use. The following two charts show the vaccine distribution and estimated usage by states, territories, and primary care (run by the commonwealth). This data is updated weekly. Vaccine dose usage is estimated by the commonwealth government, based on the total doses administered and allows for a small amount of wastage. Vaccine rollout: international comparison In the following two charts you can see how Australia’s vaccine rollout compares with other countries, in terms of doses administered per 100 people. This first chart adjusts for the fact that countries started administering vaccines on different dates. It shows how Australia compares to select countries at equivalent points in their vaccine rollouts. Here you can see how those same countries are doing across their entire vaccine rollout, on a doses administered per 100 people basis. Some are already more than halfway to vaccinating their populations. Not all countries publish data on fully vaccinated people - those who have received two doses. Here you can see how Australia compares to OECD countries on the percentage of the population that are fully vaccinated. Where can I get vaccinated? The majority of Australians aged 18 and over are now eligible for a Covid vaccination if they are willing to consider the AstraZeneca vaccine, and provided they do not have a history of some specific health conditions. In addition to the government’s official eligibility checker, which lists some clinics near your location which might have vaccination appointments available, there are a number of other helpful resources that can help you to find somewhere that has appointments open. You can find our page listing these resources here. Latest Australia Covid numbers and statistics Due to the issues with testing accessibility and the change in testing criteria, case numbers from mid-December onwards should be considered an underestimate at best. For the moment, it may be better to track the progress of the outbreak via hospitalisation statistics rather than case numbers. Here, you can see the number of patients in hospital nationwide, along with occupancy thresholds based on the federal government’s ‘common operating picture’ document. Here, you can see the number of new deaths reported per day by the states and territories: Updates 19 January 2021: Changed vaccine stats table to new metrics Temporarily removed the national cases chart Removed cumulative cases chart Updated text Added hospitalisation chart Updates 29 November 2021 Updated maps to use SA3 areas Added 90% 16+ targets to bubble chart Updates 15 October 2021 Updated main rollout target chart to use the first dose + lag time projection method Fixed an issue with scrolling in the Guardian app Removed the doses per 100 people by jurisdiction line chart as it’s less useful with so many doses being administered via GP and other clinics Updates 17 September 2021 Updates to how Indigenous vaccination statistics are presented, now using the 12+ population for both Indigenous and non-Indigenous We have changed the way we’re projecting second-dose targets, as outlined in the text above. We have temporarily removed the chart with state-by-state target progress and will replace it shortly with a new chart that uses the new method Updates 11 September 2021 Production and distribution section is back Removed hospitalisation percentage chart, this will be replaced shortly with a new chart that doesn’t use active cases Fixed the cases trend line to stop using the latest day which usually has incomplete data Updates 6 September 2021 Removed production and distribution section Added vaccination maps and tables for each area Re-added the table of rollout projections Updates 29 August 2021 Added Indigenous vaccination statistics Added ‘Where can I get vaccinated’ section, replacing ‘When can I get vaccinated’ Updates, 9 August 2021 Retired the “gap tracking” version of the rollout chart, and replaced it with a new chart that tracks progress towards the government’s latest goals of 70% and 80% of the 16+ population Changed the summary box to remove the percentage of the population who have only received a single dose, and added the percentage of the 16+ population who are fully vaccinated to allow both international comparisons and progress towards the government’s targets to be clearer Removed the government’s projections of future vaccine availability as they’re not realistic Added a new chart showing the speed of vaccination by state and territories Due to the unprecedented and ongoing nature of the coronavirus outbreak, this article is being regularly updated to ensure that it reflects the current situation at the date of publication. Any significant corrections made to this or previous versions of the article will be footnoted in line with Guardian editorial policy.Due to the difference in reporting times between states, territories and the federal government, it can be difficult to get a current picture of how many confirmed cases of coronavirus there are in Australia, where cases are increasing or decreasing, and the overall trend for each state and territory. Here, we’ve brought together all the figures in one place for Australia as a whole, as well as more information on the states with current Omicron outbreaks. You can use the table of contents to jump to a specific section: National statistics: cases, deaths and hospitalisation Here you can see a summary of the overall situation, including the current status of the Covid vaccine booster rollout. For more information about vaccinations, you can check out our dedicated vaccine rollout page. This chart shows the number of Covid cases announced daily, for all of Australia. Unlike some of the other charts on this page it does not distinguish between cases reported from rapid antigen tests (RAT) and cases reported from PCR tests, and does not backdate RAT case numbers. Due to the change in testing criteria on 5 January 2022, and difficulties in testing access in mid-December, case numbers should be considered to be an underestimate of the actual number. This chart shows the number of people with Covid in hospital for all of Australia, as well as a threshold showing 15% of the hospital capacity, as set by the Australian government’s common operating picture document: Here you can see the number of people who have died each day due to Covid, and the trend in deaths over time: This map shows the number of cases in each local government area, adjusted for population. Not all states and territories are currently releasing or even publishing Covid case data by local government area. More jurisdictions will be added to the map if this changes. NSW Covid outbreak and trend in Sydney LGA cases This chart shows the number of reported cases in NSW, split by testing type. Numbers for PCR-confirmed cases since the testing criteria changeover are likely to be more reliable than the rapid antigen test (RAT)-derived numbers, as RAT tests remain difficult to obtain in NSW. All numbers from mid-December onwards should be considered to be an underestimate of actual case numbers due to difficulties in accessing testing and the testing criteria change: Here, you can see the number of hospitalisations in NSW versus hospital capacity thresholds set by the federal government: Cases are not distributed around the state equally. This map shows where cases are growing or declining around NSW, and the number of recent cases. You can toggle between showing just Sydney, or the entire state, and switch between circles sized by the number of recent cases, or shading the LGA areas by the trend in cases: If you want to see the trend in more detail at the LGA level, you can use the charts here. Use the button to rescale the chart and compare trajectories between LGAs. Victoria Covid outbreak and trend in Melbourne LGA cases This chart shows the number of reported cases in Victoria, split by testing type. Numbers for PCR-confirmed cases since the testing criteria changeover are likely to be more reliable than the rapid antigen test (RAT)-derived numbers, as RAT tests remain difficult to obtain in Victoria. All numbers from mid-December onwards should be considered to be an underestimate of actual case numbers due to difficulties in accessing testing and the testing criteria change: Here, you can see the number of hospitalisations in Victoria versus hospital capacity thresholds set by the federal government: This map shows where cases are growing around Victoria, with circles coloured to show if cases are increasing or decreasing in the area, and sized by the total number of recent cases in that area: You can see the trend in more detail at the LGA level with the following chart series. Use the button to rescale the chart and compare trajectories between LGAs. Queensland Covid outbreak This chart shows the number of reported cases in Queensland, split by testing type. Numbers for PCR-confirmed cases since the testing criteria changeover are likely to be more reliable than the rapid antigen test-derived numbers, as RAT tests remain difficult to obtain in Queensland. All numbers January onwards should be considered to be an underestimate of actual case numbers due to the testing criteria change: Here, you can see the number of hospitalisations in Queensland versus hospital capacity thresholds set by the federal government: South Australia Covid outbreak This chart shows daily reported cases in South Australia. There is no data available to distinguish cases from PCR testing or RAT testing: Here, you can see the number of hospitalisations in South Australia versus hospital capacity thresholds set by the federal government: Tasmania Covid outbreak This chart shows daily reported cases in Tasmania. Cases by testing type will be added shortly: Here, you can see the number of hospitalisations in Tasmania versus hospital capacity thresholds set by the federal government: ACT Covid outbreak This chart shows daily reported cases in the ACT. Cases by testing type will be added shortly: Here, you can see the number of hospitalisations in the ACT versus hospital capacity thresholds set by the federal government: Northern Territory Covid outbreak This chart shows daily reported cases in the NT. Cases by testing type will be added when available: Notes and changes 31 January 2022 - added national map showing cases per 1,000, and NSW and VIC case charts no longer backdate RAT testing numbers as they have stopped releasing this information Due to the unprecedented and ongoing nature of the coronavirus outbreak, this article is being regularly updated to ensure that it reflects the current situation at the date of publication. Any significant corrections made to this or previous versions of the article will continue to be footnoted in line with Guardian editorial policy.Charlie Brooker is sitting at a desk, a big cardboard box in the background, miscellany spilling out of bookshelves. “What you can’t see,” he says, since we’re on Zoom, “is all the shit all over my desk. I’m shambolic.” He got his first gig doing a comic strip when he was 15, for 80 quid a week; he dropped out of Westminster University as the only dissertation he wanted to write was on video games, and scrambled into a career in journalism – “there was no planning, I wasn’t somebody who was out hustling” – via working in a shop and writing video game reviews. He shifted, via Screenwipe, Gameswipe, Newswipe and Weekly Wipe, into screenwriting, and achieved astonishing success with the anthology series Black Mirror. His production company with Annabel Jones, Broke and Bones, has just been bought by Netflix for an unspecified sum; the rumour is that it’s so enormous that, well, I had to get out a calculator to work out what “nine figures” over five years means ($100,000,000). I just can’t wrap my head around why he still has Billy bookcases from Ikea. He treats this question respectfully, as is his nature. There’s a very deep courtesy under all the swearing. “Check your Ikea catalogue. They’re not Billy. They’re Kallax.” Isn’t it ironic, I ask later, that he started a company called Broke and Bones which he then sold for all the money in the world? “It’s not like they go, ‘Here’s a pile of money for you,’” he explains. “It’s more like, ‘that’s an investment for you to make things.’ Also, I’m so clueless on the business side of things. Probably, if you look at the paperwork, I’m going to get paid in rice.” His first project since signing the new Netflix deal is Cat Burglar, a quirky idea and not at all what you’d expect. At heart, it’s a love letter to animators Tex Avery and Chuck Jones and the golden age of cartoon making, Wile E Coyote and all that. “Not only are the visuals and the sound extremely evocative, extremely true to time,” he says, “the visual gags, the pace and the anarchy – those hold up today. You get hit by a broom, you smash into a door or your skin falls off, or whatever. They tend to be quite physical and brutal. They’re not really about dialogue.” So, a cat is trying to break into a museum for a priceless artwork and a dopey dog is trying to stop him; except there’s a twist. Every few minutes, questions will flash up that you have to answer with your remote, “almost like a pub trivia quiz machine”, he says. It might be “Words you’d associate with the 90s”, or “Which film won the Oscar?” Getting them right or wrong affects the outcome so, “you’re controlling the luck of the character, rather than the decisions they’re making, if that makes any sense.” It takes about 15 minutes to get to the end but you can cycle through hundreds of possible permutations. “It’s a curious experiment,” he says, dispassionately, “and I can’t quite work out how it will be received. It’s not aimed at children, although the idea was it’s not necessarily massively off-putting to children.” You’ll never hear him do a hard sell, even about a show he’s actively selling. He has a lab-boffin, it-might-work-it-might-not tone, an experimenter at the frontiers of telly – is it a game, is it a show, would it work better on a console? Brooker has been interested in interactivity for ages (if there’s a message to the viewer in Cat Burglar, he says, it’s: “You do your bit, mate. Don’t just sit there”). His first foray was Black Mirror: Bandersnatch, in 2018, also for Netflix. This was where he discovered that he could work with the platform, without it sticking its oar in. “That was their first big, interactive drama. It was an expensive proposition, risky, difficult, they wrote loads of code to make it work … looking back, why didn’t they want something like a Bond movie? This was very niche: it’s about someone writing a game in his head, on a Spectrum. The biggest set piece was him walking in to WH Smith in 1984. It would have been easy for Netflix to say: ‘Could you set this in America, make it a Tandy computer and make it more like War Games starring Matthew Broderick? Can it be a bit more glamorous?’ There was none of that.” Bandersnatch is incredibly atmospheric, haunting, even. “From a technical point of view, I was satisfied,” Brooker says, again, quite dispassionately. But originally he wanted it to be like an escape room, with a puzzle at the centre which the viewer would solve by repeatedly failing, each failure delivering another digit in a phone number. “The problem was, and this is a damning indictment of humankind, people couldn’t remember a five-digit number for more than five seconds. So we had to take that out. Which basically meant that you weren’t quite sure when it had finished.” He takes gaming incredibly seriously, still plays massive, 55-hour games, hates the word “gamer” (“It’s infantilising, isn’t it? You wouldn’t call yourself a ‘filmer’”), and is “always just bewildered by the skill and intelligence that’s gone into a game”. The underpinning philosophy of gaming seems to have permeated his approach to life: try everything, failure is at least half the point, and maybe the most interesting half. It’s a cute paradox that this attitude has begat a huge amount of success, that he tends to shrug off. “I have a strange attitude to success,” he says. “It’s like going to an award ceremony. If you don’t win, it’s a bit of a waste of an evening. If you win it’s nice, but it’s also sort of meaningless.” He’s like an inverted Samuel Beckett. Ever tried? Ever succeeded? No matter. Try again. Succeed again. Succeed better. Before he was Mr Interactive, Charlie Brooker was Mr Dystopia, creating disturbing, prescient vistas of the very near future. What if the prime minister had to have sex with a pig, live on air? What if anxious modern parenting turned into 24-hour hyper-surveillance? Even Nathan Barley, his 2005 comedy co-written with Chris Morris, came eerily to pass. That eponymous, portfolio-careered hipster could have been written yesterday. “That makes me sound like a wrestler,” Brooker says, not without satisfaction. “A really mean, horrible wrestler. Here he comes, in the blue corner: Mr Dystopia.” It’s not so much that he predicted things, and then they happened, he says. Rather, Black Mirror plots were “extrapolations of whatever was already happening”. The pig plot was inspired by Gordon Brown’s Gillian Duffy moment, when he called a Labour voter a bigoted woman and “had to go and apologise, and it became this bizarre circus of calamity. I was just watching it thinking, ‘No one’s in charge here.’” Brooker is 50. Growing up near Reading in the 70s and 80s, he had – in common with the lot of us – a powerful terror of nuclear apocalypse, coupled with the more idiosyncratic phobia of vomiting, which he has to this day. He drolly describes the way these fears combined in his childhood mind. “The thing that terrified me more than anything else was that if you survived the blast you got radiation sickness. Oh no! There’s a bomb that would give me a bad tummy? I wasn’t really thinking about the big picture.” In that context, he remembers taking comfort from shows such as Spitting Image, thinking that if the adults are joking about it, it’ll probably be OK. “Then, on 2016 Screen Wipe, we had some jokes about Trump, who had just been elected and started casually talking about a nuclear bomb. I was in that position as the adult, being funny and reassuring. But I was shitting myself.” Rumbling, amorphous anxieties continue to plague him, but always laced with this sense of the absurd that keeps him, well, more than sane, happy. “In the UK, because I’ve been known for writing acerbic columns and comedies, people know that I’m not taking myself that seriously. Then I get to the US and they think I’m the king of dystopia. But still in my head, it’s all the same stuff. Comedy, horror and sci-fi are such close bedfellows.” He’s sick of one thing, though: the jokes should have stayed on the screen, or the page; they should never have migrated to politics. “It is bizarre that we’ve got Keith Lemon running the country. We’ve got a character, a shit comedy character, running the country. And we let that happen. Our generation let that happen. They are us! They’re our peers. Fucking hell.” An interactive drama, in which you can rid politics of ludicrous, empty characters: that I would watch (or play) for ever. Cat Burglar is on Netflix from 22 February.When Joanna Scanlan arrives, she is hidden beneath a yellow raincoat, glasses steamed up, blown through the door as if the gathering storm outside has washed her ashore. “I am so sorry for dragging you out here,” she says, laughing slightly hysterically, as she sheds the layers. Scanlan is filming in rural Wales – she, her husband and their dog are renting a cottage nearby – and this cafe, also in the middle of nowhere, was her suggestion. Even the women who work in the cafe were surprised to be called in. We are the only customers, but there are pots of tea and welsh cakes, and Scanlan is great company, so all is well. She grew up in Wales, so this job – filming The Light in the Hall, a psychological thriller, for which she has had to learn some Welsh – is something of a homecoming. Being here is also a detachment from London, and everything that goes with her job outside of being on set or stage – the bit, you sense, she could take or leave. And so she’s a bit distanced from the buzz around her Bafta nomination for best actress for her role in the extraordinary film After Love. “When you sit here in Tywi Valley, just learning your lines for tomorrow, it’s hard to take that in,” she says. “I feel very long in the tooth to be coming to this sort of prominence.” Scanlan, who is 60, came to acting relatively late and her roles have largely been in comedy – she was the brilliantly awful civil servant Terri Coverley in The Thick of It, the bolshie DI Viv Deering in No Offence and Ma Larkin in The Larkins, ITV’s recent remake of The Darling Buds of May. Getting On, the comedy she wrote with her co-leads Vicki Pepperdine and Jo Brand, is still the funniest and most painful portrayal of the NHS. Although Scanlan has had smaller roles in films, to have her work recognised as the lead in a weighty film feels like a shift. The Baftas – “all that kind of cliched sort of Hollywood glamour” – doesn’t, says Scanlan, “feel like me at all. I feel like I’m just a working character actor. It’s lovely, of course, but it’s hard to place yourself inside that.” It feels, she says, “surprising”. It won’t be a surprise to anyone who has seen Scanlan’s quietly devastating performance in After Love (the Guardian’s critic, Peter Bradshaw, called it “the best of her career so far”). The film has also picked up other nominations, including for its writer and director Aleem Khan, and has been winning awards on the festival circuit. Scanlan has a healthy attitude to the general absurdity of prizes – “you can’t quite put the model of sport on to the arts, this sort of runners and riders … it’s not a sport, because it’s about how it hits the heart, and the senses, and that is subjective” – but if the renewed focus on the film means than more people see it, then great. Scanlan’s comedy career seems accidental, even if, alongside Getting On, she and Pepperdine wrote another comedy, Puppy Love, set in the world of dog training. Drama has always been her love. “I don’t want to diss comedy,” she laughs. “I’ve spent my career working in it and I don’t want anyone to think that I don’t appreciate it. But I guess what I like in comedy is when it is really truthful – and that’s not so far from drama.” For all that she’s warm, generous with her laughter and expressive – her face is beautiful and luminous, hands shooting up to emphasise a point – she is also thoughtful, and takes her work seriously. “I feel like I’m a serious person,” she says. “People laugh at me, but it’s always when I’m doing something that I didn’t intend to be funny. The more earnest I seem to be, the more people laugh at me. I’m not very light. I wish I was; I wish I could just relax.” In After Love, Scanlan plays Mary who, in the midst of grief after her husband’s sudden death, discovers he has a second, secret family. Khan’s skill, making his first feature film, is in packing so much big stuff into a film with a tiny cast, and an almost entirely domestic setting – it covers love, grief, faith (Mary is a Muslim convert), identity, betrayal, class, motherhood. Ahmed, Mary’s husband, was a ferry captain and they appeared to have a happy life on the Kent coast – but when she goes through his things, after he dies, she discovers evidence of another woman, Genevieve (played by Nathalie Richard), who lives across the Channel in France. If Ahmed is not who Mary thinks he was – not committed to her, not committed to his faith – then, who, now, is she? Certainty crumbles, like her visions of the white cliffs of Dover collapsing into the sea. Mary manages to inveigle her way into Genevieve’s life in a way that exposes the other woman’s prejudices around class, size and devout Muslim women. But Mary also betrays Genevieve’s trust. “She finds out she’s not as nice a person as she thought she was,” says Scanlan. “Confronting who you actually are, compared with who you want to think of yourself as being, that horrible tension inside her, that was quite tricky to negotiate.” She found the shoot, though short, very intense: “That state of betrayal, grief, misery.” She would plead, she says, half-smiling, with the producer, begging him to sack her. “And he would say, ‘I would sack you, it’s just that it does seem to be working.’” She does seem prone to moments of self-doubt: on the TV series she is filming, in which she plays a grieving mother, she found learning Welsh too hard and was about to pull out. Her husband – an accountant – sensibly talked her down, pointing out that the thing about acting she cared most about was stretching herself. Khan has said that he was interested in bringing a character to the screen who is not often portrayed: “An older woman of a certain size, who wears the headscarf – we never get to see the full interior spectrum of a character like this on screen.” The story is fictional but Mary is inspired by Khan’s own mother, a white English convert to Islam, who Scanlan spent time with. “He adores his mum and she’s so worthy of that adoration – she’s a really special person. To him, she was this brilliantly rich, fully 4D person, and he wanted to put that on the screen.” Khan is not attached, she says, to received ideas about “what is cinema and what isn’t cinema”, and the idea of glamour and allure that goes along with it, although, she adds, Genevieve – blond, elegant, French – “does represent some of those qualities”. But still, Genevieve is a middle-aged woman who is allowed to be seen as sexy. Scanlan agrees: “To me, that doesn’t seem abnormal, because I’m old. It doesn’t seem abnormal to be sexual, because we still are,” she laughs. “But you forget that culture as a whole puts brackets around older women’s sexuality – and says that ‘this is surprising or aberrant’.” Scanlan grew up in north Wales, where her parents ran a hotel. She had discovered acting at school and went to the University of Cambridge – not her first choice, she says, but she was rejected from everywhere else – because of its drama opportunities In 1980, she was one of her college’s first intake of women. What was that like? “It was,” she says, pausing while she searches for the word, “frankly, an ordeal. I had a few feminist teachers when I was at school who were really influential on me. The feeling [then] was about storming the parapets and getting into environments that we had previously been excluded from.” So she liked the thought of joining a pioneering group. “The reality was really different, and that was partly because I had been at a girls’ boarding school and did not know anything very much about how to deal with male culture.” Men, she says, “would do things like come into the bar, stand on the table, pull down their flies, and piss into a beer glass that was on your table”. There was sexual harassment, and once a man climbed in through Scanlan’s bedroom window – she found him asleep on the floor. It felt, she says, unsafe. For almost the whole of her first year, she hid away. “I just stayed in my room, smoking, drinking, and avoiding everything, avoiding people completely.” She didn’t want to be visible, or attract attention from men. “I remember thinking Andrea Dworkin dungarees suddenly seemed like a great idea in that environment,” she says. And it meant she didn’t put herself forward for drama auditions until nearly the end of that first year, in which she describes herself as being “almost in shock. I’m not sure everyone had my experience, but I was just very unprepared.” She had been sheltered and naive. “It took me until doing therapy in my 30s to actually understand and learn that …” She pauses. “You have to fight for yourself. It, perhaps, is a slight exaggeration, but that no one else is going to be the person who makes sure everything’s OK.” Scanlan did join Footlights, the university’s comedy theatre club, but soon left it for a more serious drama club. “Don’t think I’m not aware of the levels of privilege we’re talking about here,” she glaughs. That choice of drama over comedy at that moment proved fairly momentous in terms of her career, which is to say that it stalled it. She spent the rest of her 20s trying to get acting work and getting constantly rejected. In the meantime, she volunteered with community theatre projects, then went to the then Leicester Polytechnic to teach drama, until she had a breakdown. She went back to live with her parents, not able to do much except walk their dog when she felt up to it. “Because I had chronic fatigue syndrome, I had no energy. And that was mental energy, physical energy, emotional energy. It was like a complete battery drain. I remember being able to mark the distinction between the effort required to sit up as opposed to lie down.” It was her GP who, realising just how much acting meant toher, suggested she try to make a return to it. Even if she never made it, by conventional standards of success, she realised she would still be happier doing it. She started working as an administrator for Arts Council England, while writing her own scripts, and was 34 when she got her first professional job, on the TV drama Peak Practice. She says she doesn’t look at other actors and feel envious: I had asked, jokingly, if there was a sense of relief when Olivia Colman didn’t also get nominated for a Bafta. Scanlan laughs, then says: “I thought her performance in The Lost Daughter was almost the best performance I’ve ever seen her give.” But, there are roles she wished she could have played as a younger actor: “I think theatre is probably where I missed out, and by the time I came back into it, when I started again in my mid- to late-30s, I hadn’t developed relationships with theatre directors, and I never really cracked it.” But, she says, even when she was 12, she was playing 40-year-olds. “I never had that ingenue quality, so maybe it’s a regretful dream that really is a fantasy.” Had she fit a more conventional image, “I would have played more drama than comedy, probably.” Instead, she says a few times, smiling, she brings her “dumpy real shtick”. Scanlan seems to have very little vanity, particularly in her work. In After Love, especially, her face is raw and close up; there is one moment when she stands in the mirror in her underwear and surveys her body, grabbing her flesh. “The age on the face, and rolls of fat and stretch marks, that’s telling the story about this woman’s experience,” she says. “I do think that our lives are in our bodies, our experiences, and therefore, whatever that is, I try not to be judgmental about it myself. We get sold this idea that you’re totally unacceptable if you don’t fit a certain number of female role models – if you’re not slim enough, if you haven’t had your lips done or whatever. And, then, my experience constantly contradicts that, because when I see somebody, I’m not seeing what’s on the outside. Maybe for a fleeting few seconds, but very quickly, something else is happening that’s speaking so much louder than how they look.” She knows, she says, “the narratives around beauty and lovability are all around size in our society. It’s not that I’ve tried for it not to define me, because I haven’t, but I’ve had to hope that something else of me has spoken more.” She remembers going to a group therapy session once, where all the other women were conventionally beautiful. “Every one of them spoke about how disempowered they felt, and I suddenly realised, if you get things because people think you’re beautiful, then what you think is: ‘They don’t like me for who I really am.’ That must be a very painful place to be.” She is, though, operating within a notoriously sexist, sizeist industry. “I am, but you’ve got to buck the trend sometimes. I just think there is an appetite – forgive the pun – to look at a wider range of experiences. People are watching this film, they’re finding a story that they can relate to. The normative hasn’t prevailed in this case.” It’s real, she says, “it’s what other people are. People struggle with their weight, people struggle with their frailties. I’m lucky enough to be in an era where stories are told about people who are ordinary.” Is she confident that there are enough of those roles? “No. But I honestly will take what I’m given.” She laughs. “If it doesn’t come, it doesn’t come. I can’t control it.” It seems unlikely, of course, that Scanlan won’t be in high demand – how gratifying, after everything, to have a career that is racing along – but there is a self-reliance to her. If roles don’t go her way, she’ll write something (she has a production company with Pepperdine), or work in community theatre or dance, or make videos with her phone. “It’s more of a real compulsion to be creative, and a huge part of me,” she says. “That’s why those years when I was not acting or writing, that’s why they were agony, and why my life just didn’t work.” The Bafta film awards are on 13 March 2022; After Love is available to stream now • This article was amended on 22 February 2022. Scanlan starred in Getting On, not Moving On as a previous subheading stated.Everyone in the UK should be legally entitled to equal access to nature, wildlife campaigners will tell the government. Communities and NGOS would have the ability to take local authorities to court if they failed to provide healthy green space, under plans set out by more than 60 nature, planning, health and equality organisations. They argue that despite the fact there is strong evidence that accessible, nature-rich spaces boost our physical and mental wellbeing, and reduce mortality, one in three people in England cannot access nature near their home. Visits to urban parks and other green spaces nearly doubled in the decade before the pandemic, from 1.2bn in 2009-10 to 2.1bn in 2018-19. The poorest communities fare worse, as they are twice as likely to live in a neighbourhood without nature-rich spaces. The coalition, which includes Greenpeace, Wildlife and Countryside Link, Institute for Public Policy Research, and The Wildlife Trusts, adds that access to nature should be included in any plans to “level up”. Research by Wildlife and Countryside Link, which on Monday launches a petition to urge the government to put this into law, found that 80% of the British public support a legal right to local nature and 85% say it should be a priority for all new housing developments to include accessible natural spaces. Dr Richard Benwell, the CEO of Wildlife and Countryside Link, told the Guardian that Michael Gove, secretary of state for levelling up, housing and communities, as good as ignored nature in his white paper. He said: “There were some references to nature, you had to turn to page 212 or something like that, but people’s environmental rights were not included in the headline announcements. “It was notable that the six ‘capitals’ included in the paper didn’t include natural capital, which it clearly should have done.” Campaigners added that many natural spaces are under threat of development, with 11% of urban green space lost in the past 15 years. Local authorities could improve access to nature by having better transport links to green spaces, improving substandard and neglected patches of natural land, and creating new parks. Campaigners add that improving the quality of local natural spaces is also vital to help meet government targets to protect 30% of land for nature by 2030 and halt the decline in species by 2030. Craig Bennett, the chief executive of The Wildlife Trusts, said: “Having access to wild places and wildlife shouldn’t be a privilege, but a part of everyday life. We know how much people treasure time spent in nature near where they live, but for many communities this simply isn’t possible. The most deprived areas have nine times less green space than the wealthiest – and poorer areas are where people’s health is the worst. “Our towns and cities have a huge role to play in nature’s recovery. We need to create and join up habitats, enabling species to recover and benefiting people too. It is critical that nature is at the heart of all planning and development, for wildlife, communities, and climate.” TV stars including Deborah Meaden from Dragons’ Den and the Springwatch presenter Gillian Burke have backed the bid. Meaden said: “It’s increasingly clear that there are huge inequalities in the amount of green spaces and access to nature that people can enjoy close to home. I’ve always felt passionately that having nature close to the places where people live, work and visit is critical for our mental and physical health. “Despite 80% of Brits wanting a ‘legal right to local nature’, it is not yet set out in law, which means that building developments do not have to take this into account. This needs to change.”Millions of patients in England face dangerously long waits for mental health care unless ministers urgently draw up a recovery plan to tackle a “second pandemic” of depression, anxiety, psychosis and eating disorders, NHS leaders and doctors have warned. The Covid crisis has sparked a dramatic rise in the numbers of people experiencing mental health problems, with 1.6 million waiting for specialised treatment and another 8 million who cannot get on the waiting list but would benefit from support, the heads of the NHS Confederation and the Royal College of Psychiatrists have told the Guardian. In some parts of the country, specialist mental health services are so overwhelmed they are “bouncing back” even the most serious cases of patients at risk of suicide, self-harm and starvation to the GPs that referred them, prompting warnings from doctors that some patients will likely die as a result. Sajid Javid, the health secretary, who has acknowledged that national levels of depression have almost doubled since the start of the pandemic, is facing pressure to rapidly develop a “comprehensive plan” to respond to the soaring demand for mental health care in England. The call follows the publication of the long-awaited NHS elective recovery plan this month, which finally set out how the backlog of people needing planned surgical procedures is to be addressed. “We are moving towards a new phase of needing to ‘live with’ coronavirus but for a worrying number of people, the virus is leaving a growing legacy of poor mental health that services are not equipped to deal with adequately at present,” said Matthew Taylor, the chief executive of the NHS Confederation, which represents the whole of the healthcare system in England. “With projections showing that 10 million people in England, including 1.5 million children and teenagers, will need new or additional support for their mental health over the next three to five years it is no wonder that health leaders have dubbed this the second pandemic. A national crisis of this scale deserves targeted and sustained attention from the government in the same way we have seen with the elective care backlog.” The NHS Confederation is calling for an expansion of NHS estates for specialist mental health care, and a major recruitment drive, as part of a recovery plan. One in 10 consultant psychiatrist posts are unfilled. Dr Adrian James, the president of the Royal College of Psychiatrists, said: “We urgently need a fully funded mental health recovery plan, backed by a long-term workforce plan, to ensure everyone with a mental illness can get the help they need when they need it. “Millions of children, young people and adults are seeking help from mental health services that are overstretched and under-resourced. The situation is critical. The government cannot afford to neglect mental health recovery any longer.” Health leaders also believe a key element of a recovery plan should include a focus on providing early support for children and young people with mental health problems. There has been a 72% increase in children and teenagers referred for urgent support for eating disorders in one year, and a 52% rise in emergency referrals for under-18s to crisis care since the start of the pandemic. “The impact of the pandemic on young people’s mental health cannot be overstated,” said Olly Parker, the head of external affairs at the charity YoungMinds. One family doctor in Hertfordshire, Dr David Turner, said he was so concerned about the situation that he had chosen to speak out publicly for the first time in his 25-year career. “I and many other GPs feel the issue has become critical and it is only a matter of time before a child dies,” he told the Guardian. Turner said access to child and adolescent mental health services (CAMHS) was “never great pre-Covid” but was now “appalling”. The double whammy of a spike in demand and underinvestment in CAMHS was putting patients at risk, he added. One particularly “dangerous” new trend, Turner said, was CAMHS “bouncing back” patients with serious mental health disorders to GPs who had referred them for specialist treatment. It means GPs are being relied upon to carry out weekly weight checks and blood tests, and monitor vital organs of patients with anorexia nervosa, some of whom are at risk of self-harm, suicide or starvation. “We have no specific training in this specialised area,” he said. Dr Phil Moore, a GP and chair of the NHS Confederation’s mental health, learning disability and autism system group, said he was concerned that the mounting backlog of care could see patients “deteriorating to the point of crisis”. “No clinician wants to see this happen,” he added. “This was a problem before Covid but things are a lot worse now.” The Department of Health and Social Care has been approached for comment. In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org.Dr David Turner is a GP in Hertfordshire “A particularly serious problem has arisen with the provision of mental healthcare for children and adolescents over the last 18 months. This is the first time in my 25-year career as a doctor I have felt the need to speak out publicly. I and many other GPs feel the issue has become critical and it is only a matter of time before a child dies. “Provision of mental healthcare by child and adolescent mental health service (CAMHS) was never great pre-Covid. Since the pandemic it has become appalling. There are two main reasons for this: underinvestment in mental health services for decades and a spike in demand. “There was always a long wait for CAMHS services, but over the last year or so a more worrying trend has occurred: the specific problem is CAMHS ‘bouncing back’ patients referred to them for primary care to manage. Patients with serious mental health disorders such as anorexia nervosa are being referred to CAMHS, but they say because they are too busy they would like the GP to continue to monitor the patient. This is both unacceptable and dangerous. “In my practice we are now monitoring several seriously mentally ill teenagers, including some with anorexia nervosa, who CAMHS say they are simply unable to see due to workload pressures. They are at increased risk of self-harm and suicide, and the very nature of self-starvation leads to a multitude of physical health problems, the most serious of which can lead to death. “This condition needs careful monitoring with weekly blood-pressure and weight checks and blood tests to monitor the function of vital organs, such as the liver and kidneys. In addition, patients will need regular heart recordings (ECG) to monitor for signs of heart failure or abnormal heart rhythms. Anorexia is not a trivial illness. “CAMHS are now routinely expecting GPs to monitor teenagers with anorexia nervosa weekly and undertake all these checks. We have no specific training in this specialised area of child psychiatry. We are also suffering from an enormous increase in our workload since the easing of Covid restrictions and are struggling to do this complex work in addition to our usual duties. “However, most GPs feel that if we do not do our best to help these children, they will get no treatment at all for many months while they wait to see a practitioner in CAMHS. We also have adolescent patients who have not attended school for many months while awaiting treatment for severe anxiety and depression. This has knock-on effects on their families. In some cases, it has meant a parent giving up work to stay at home to look after them. “There is no doubt many hundreds of teenagers around the country are suffering due to a deficiency in mental health services tailored to their needs and, sadly, some will die. This situation could be turned around quickly with a rapid investment of cash and resources. As we have seen during the Covid pandemic, when there is a political will and money we are capable of providing top-class healthcare in this country. We now need to do this for our young people.” As told to Andrew GregoryAmerica’s immigration courts are struggling to function at the most basic level, with courts that are already woefully understaffed and judges often undertrained now overwhelmed by a growing backlog of more than 1.6m cases, industry leaders have warned. The system is so damaged that judges, scholars and attorneys all share concerns about whether immigrants due in court will even receive notice before their hearings so they know to show up and aren’t ordered deported in absentia – an urgent concern made worse by volatile immigration policies at the US-Mexico border. “It’s very worrisome. The fundamental requirement for a full and fair hearing is notice of your hearing and the ability to attend your hearing,” Mimi Tsankov, president of the National Association of Immigration Judges (NAIJ), said. “I see incredible efforts being made by the staff – the bare-bones staff in some courts – to try to support these very, very heavy dockets,” she told the Guardian in an exclusive interview in her union leadership capacity. “But it’s extremely challenging for all of us to meet the demands.” The US immigration court system has been imperiled by dysfunction for decades. Now it’s in crisis after serious setbacks under Donald Trump, and Joe Biden is struggling to right the ship. On the line are millions of futures. Undocumented immigrants who fear being split from their American children and spouses, people facing persecution and death in their countries of origin, or those being sent to countries they haven’t seen in decades are all fighting for fair play and often literally their lives in courts ill-equipped to do them justice. “Let’s make it absolutely clear: due process is suffering,” said Muzaffar Chishti, a senior fellow at the Migration Policy Institute. “There’s just no way around that.” Chishti said he sees all the hallmarks of a strong administrative law system suffering in the nation’s immigration courts, which are housed under the Department of Justice in the executive branch of the federal government, not within the judicial branch. “It is a system in crisis,” he said. After Trump made hardline anti-immigration policies pivotal to his 2016 presidential campaign, he flooded courts with judges more inclined to order deportations, Reuters reported. His administration hired so many new immigration judges so hastily that the American Bar Association warned of “under-qualified or potentially biased judges”, many of whom had no immigration experience. And as officials such as then-attorney general Jeff Sessions made sweeping proclamations that “the vast majority of asylum claims are not valid”, judges simultaneously confronted performance metrics demanding they each race through at least 700 cases a year. Yet in the roughly 70 US immigration courts across the country, judges are deciding complex cases with potentially lethal consequences. People ranging from asylum seekers forced to wait in Mexico to unaccompanied children crossing the border on foot, to longtime undocumented residents with families stateside end up appearing in court, often without attorneys to help them parse the country’s byzantine laws. In a process smacking of a zip code lottery, one judge in New York may grant nearly 95% of asylum petitions while colleagues in Atlanta almost universally deny similar requests, creating a patchwork of standards. Such inconsistency drives a high appeal rate and clogs the system, experts say. In addition, judges under the Trump administration lost much of their power to press pause on low-priority proceedings so that they could focus on more urgent cases. Amid these bureaucratic logjams, the case backlog has ballooned out of control nationwide in a matter of years, from just over 516,000 cases in fiscal year 2016 to more than 1.6m today, according to data collected by Syracuse University’s Transactional Records Access Clearinghouse (Trac). “Quarterly growth in the number of pending immigration court cases between October and December 2021 is the largest on record,” according to Trac. Under Trump, “no progress was made”, said Jeremy McKinney, president-elect of the American Immigration Lawyers Association. “As a matter of fact, there was significant and historic backtracking,” McKinney said, adding: “All the efforts of the prior administration did was create more litigation.” Now, Tsankov urgently wants to confront the government with the problems, including the courts’ chronic, severe staffing shortages, which can create serious obstacles to fair adjudications. But amid a bitter, years-long campaign to decertify the NAIJ, the current administration under Biden is not meeting or even communicating with Tsankov’s union, she said. “If the judges don’t have the staff to send out the hearing notices and to ensure that the cases are ready for proceeding, the mission of the agency isn’t really going to be successfully fulfilled,” Tsankov said. Neither the courts’ crisis nor widespread frustration over the immigration system writ large are news to the Biden administration. Kamala Harris last year acknowledged in an ABC interview that the US immigration system overall is “deeply broken”. But while the administration has ended many Trump immigration policies, some of the most inequitable remain, such as forcing migrants to wait in Mexico while their cases are processed in the US legal system and summarily expelling many with no access to court. Advocates were also befuddled by the Biden administration’s early appointments to the immigration courts, who were overwhelmingly former prosecutors, immigration enforcement officials and military personnel, according to the Brennan Center for Justice. And while Biden ran on a platform to double the courts’ staffing and otherwise ease judges’ burden, critics say case numbers aren’t dropping as quickly as they should. In fact, the backlog grew by roughly 180,000 cases between fiscal years 2021 and 2022. “When you’re running a court and you know that due process requires that parties have access to their hearings and that they’re aware of when their hearings are going to occur, just hiring more judges will not fix the problem,” Tsankov said. Judges require legal assistants, judicial law clerks, interpreters and front-window staff – support roles that are critically under-filled in cities as geographically diverse as Philadelphia, Salt Lake City and Memphis, Tsankov said. At one New York immigration court, for example, Tsankov said they were staffed at only about 30%. Raw migration numbers – US Customs and Border Protection logged an all time record of 1.73m encounters with migrants at the US-Mexico border in fiscal year 2021, for example – don’t tell the whole story. Apart from policy changes, the demographics of those encountered at the border have evolved from men searching for work, who had little access to court, to those seeking asylum, who often go in front of a judge. And immigration enforcement became more closely linked with the criminal justice system in recent decades so that, for example, immigrants stopped for a traffic offense wound up fighting deportation. These factors helped spin the immigration court case backlog out of control. The result is bare-bones court teams scrambling to keep the system running, risking judges losing track of a case’s legal landscape over time and staff failing to update contact details for hearing notices. This despite the fact that people can be ordered deported if they don’t show up for court. It all adds up to courts “suffering from a lack of acceptability, affecting the integrity of the whole system”, Chishti said, adding: “People don’t have faith in it.”This week offers early risers a chance to see the silver moon next to the deep-red star Antares. The chart shows the view looking south from London at 0500 GMT on the morning of 24 February. The moon will be low in the sky with an altitude of just 12 degrees; Antares will be even lower, so find the clearest southern horizon that you can. With 46.8% of its visible surface illuminated, the moon will be more or less at its last quarter phase, about to become a waning crescent. Viewing Antares is usually associated with summer months in the northern hemisphere, when it appears to twinkle in the evening sky. However, in the stiller winter air, the twinkling decreases and Antares can take on a strikingly beautiful appearance. Its name derives from its colour and is Greek for “rival of Mars”, known in Greek as Ares. It is a huge red supergiant star. If it were magically to replace the sun, it would engulf everything to out beyond Mars. The conjunction occurs much higher in the eastern sky from the southern hemisphere. In addition, from Sydney, Australia, on 27 February, the moon will appear close to Venus and Mars in the early hours of the morning.When Facebook removed dozens of groups dedicated to Canada’s anti-government “Freedom Convoy” protests earlier this month, it didn’t do so because of extremism or conspiracies rife within the protests. It was because the groups were being run by scam artists. Networks of spammers and profiteers, some based as far afield as Vietnam or Romania, had set up the groups using fake or hacked Facebook accounts in an attempt to make money off of the political turmoil. That foreign networks of social media scammers had seized on a divisive political issue may feel like somewhat of a throwback. Before investigations into Russian troll factories’ operations during the US presidential election and culture war conflicts over content moderation, one of the biggest challenges facing social media platforms was profiteers pushing fake news articles and spam for easy money. Hundreds of websites mimicking US news outlets promoted their content on social media, reaping ad revenue from the traffic they generated. Platforms like Facebook have cracked down on such “inauthentic activity” since 2016, but the global misinformation industry remains. In recent years, these for-profit disinformation networks have seized on the popularity of conspiracy movements and far-right groups online, creating content aimed at anti-vaccine protesters and QAnon followers. “It can be an extremely lucrative industry for people in other parts of the world to very closely monitor US and Canadian political climates, then capitalize on moment-to-moment trends,” Emerson Brooking, a senior fellow at the Digital Forensic Research Lab of the Atlantic Council, told the Guardian. “If you’re out for money, and measure success not by sowing discord in a country but by maximizing ad revenue, there’s still a lot of benefit to these operations.” Disinformation for profit It is hard to know the exact scale of the for-profit misinformation industry, researchers say, since it functions as part of an underground economy and comes in various forms. In addition to content mills and ad revenue schemes, there are private firms across the globe that are hired to create fake engagement or promote political propaganda. In 2021 alone, Facebook said it removed 52 coordinated influence networks across 32 countries that attempted to direct or corrupt the public debate for strategic goals, according to a company report on inauthentic behavior. In addition, small networks can have an outsized impact if they effectively use online groups to mass organize and fundraise. In the case of the Freedom Convoy accounts, many of the largest Facebook groups involved appeared to be run by fake accounts or content mills hailing from numerous countries. Facebook took down the groups this month, but not before supporters of the convoy raised over $7m in crowdfunding and generated mass mainstream attention. (GoFundMe later disabled the campaign). A Bangladeshi digital marketing firm ran two of Facebook’s largest anti-vaccine trucker groups, according to Grid News, which had more than 170,000 members combined before the platform removed them. The hacked Facebook account of a Missouri woman set up a network of several other pro-demonstration groups, collectively gaining more than 340,000 members in weeks. Other groups promoting American spinoffs of the Canadian protests were from Facebook accounts and networks based in Vietnam, Romania and other nations, Facebook officials told NBC News. Recent research has shed light on how some of these for-profit misinformation operations work. A series of case studies from the Institute for Strategic Dialogue, a London-based think tank, detailed what it takes to run a money-making online news scam. One example was a cobbled-together website called The U.S. Military News. The headlines on The US Military News look much like those you might find on any number of far-right media outlets, with titles like “Trump Wrecks Pence In Awesome Statement” and articles praising the Canadian trucker protests. A shop on the site markets Trump-related merchandise including free American flags and Trump 2024 “Revenge Tour” commemorative coins. There are repeated pleas for donations all over the front page and attached to every article. But despite the name and wall-to-wall American branding, the site has no connection to the US military, or the United States for that matter. Its domain is registered in Vietnam, and it’s unclear if it employs any writers or if the products it advertises even exist. The articles themselves consist solely of stock footage videos, with an automated voice reading plagiarized content. A number of the articles and headlines posted on sites linked to the network veer into outright QAnon conspiracy content, featuring falsehoods about military tribunals and Biden officials being sentenced to death. One site’s front page prominently features a range of anti-vaccine and pro-Trump conspiracy content, while also promoting an Amazon affiliate link to Trump’s Art of the Deal book. The Guardian contacted the email address that the US Military News is registered under, but did not receive a reply. The US Military News is just one of a number of sites that appear linked to the same Vietnam-based network, according to ISD. In another of ISD’s reports, researcher Elise Thomas found a network of dozens of Facebook groups and pages – which also appear to be linked to a small group of people in Vietnam – that shared plagiarized pro-Trump content aimed at conservative social media users. Taking articles from far-right conspiracy sites like the Gateway Pundit, the network created Facebook groups with names like “Conservative Voices” and built up large numbers of followers – sometimes in the tens of thousands of users. Although for-profit misinformation networks often monetize their audiences through running ads on their websites, the network ISD found appeared to be building up their Facebook group members in order to resell the groups themselves. “This was the original threat that platforms were worried about,” Brooking said. “It wasn’t disinformation, you would characterize it as sort of ad fraud or ad farming.” The original ‘fake news’ In many cases, including ISD’s case studies, there isn’t vast amounts of money being made from inauthentic Facebook groups and conspiracy sites. But to many of the operators based in countries with low per capita income relative to the US, making a few hundred dollars a month from pushing conspiratorial content means significant gain. One of the more lucrative sites linked to Vietnam that ISD analyzed brought in around $1800 each month through advertising alone – about 10 times the monthly per capita income in the country. These scams have strong echoes of the surge in online commercial misinformation in 2016. Many of the people behind posts with false claims such as “Pope Francis Endorses Donald Trump” also came from outside the US, often from a single small town in North Macedonia called Veles, which was responsible for over 140 imitation news websites. These original “fake news” websites capitalized on salacious headlines and social media algorithms that promoted posts with high engagement regardless of their content, leading creators to choose contentious political issues involving race, religion and culture war flashpoints to drive the most attention to their sites and social media accounts. Although the strategies to evade content moderators have evolved, that playbook of monetizing conspiracies and misinformation appears to have stayed largely the same. “This is what the misinformation threat looked like before we were even talking about state actions,” Brooking said. “It’s interesting that this sort of older threat is now back in center stage.”Labour has urged the government to “come clean” on bus funding as operators prepare to slash services, with a critical moment for decisions over routes approaching on Wednesday. Almost one in three services are at risk, the industry and local authorities have warned, with the Treasury refusing to confirm if it will continue grant funding to support operators whose bus revenues have yet to recover to pre-pandemic levels. The financial lifeline will otherwise expire on 5 April, meaning many operators – who normally must give six weeks’ notice to close a route – will decide this week which services remain viable. Labour’s shadow transport secretary, Louise Haigh, said the situation could prove “devastating for the millions who depend on buses”, and called on the government to avert a looming crisis. In a letter to the transport secretary, Grant Shapps, Haigh said routes could be axed just as passenger numbers begin to recover, “locking in declining services for years to come”. She said Shapps should “come clean on wider long-term funding cuts” for the Bus Back Better strategy announced last year by Boris Johnson, which included £3bn to transform buses. The improvement fund has been reduced to just over £1.2bn, with the government counting emergency support grants to the industry as part of the total figure. Authorities around the country have warned of cuts. Greater Manchester councillors said on Friday evening, after talks with local operators, that they expected to see a widescale reduction in bus frequencies and about 30 routes withdrawn. They warned communities would be cut off, with a “very significant impact on our economic recovery”. The Confederation of Passenger Transport, which represents operators, said the situation was urgent: “There’s no still clarity on funding from the Treasury, and up to 30% of services face being cut.” The Campaign for Better Transport said hundreds of routes were in danger of disappearing for good. Its chief executive, Paul Tuohy, said: “The government can’t ignore the situation any longer, it must extend its recovery funding or face the economic, social and environmental impacts.” Buses are at particular risk in city regions with fixed public transport costs, such as Manchester’s Metrolink, and in Tyne and Wear where funding for the Metro rail service is required. Tyne and Wear’s transport authority has estimated 10% to 17% of its bus network will be taken out. The West Midlands has also warned that services are at risk, and the Conservative mayor of the region, Andy Street, joined with other metro mayors to appeal for continued funding. Regions were encouraged by the government last year to draw up detailed plans for transformational improvement schemes, under the strategy set out by Johnson, but reduced funding means many are set to lose out. A Department for Transport spokesperson said: “We have provided over £1.7bn to keep bus services running across the country throughout the pandemic, and are working closely with operators and local transport authorities to protect services after April.” The spokesperson said the government had committed to investing £3bn into bus services by 2025, “including £1.2bn to improve fares, services and infrastructure, and a further £525m for zero-emission buses”. Bus services in London are under pressure after Transport for London and the government failed to agree a new funding settlement, with a short-term Covid deal expiring last Friday night. The DfT said talks were ongoing and services would not be affected immediately. The spokesperson said: “We have repeatedly shown our commitment to supporting London’s transport network throughout the pandemic, providing over £4.5bn in emergency funding.”Advertisements authorised by the treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, have appeared on WeChat despite Coalition politicians calling for a boycott of the social media platform. The ads, which attack Anthony Albanese and celebrate Chinese New Year, were posted on WeChat by the Chinese-Australian website Australian Financial News (AFN), along with articles in which the treasurer delivers a personalised Chinese New Year message and a feature about his ambition to be prime minister. Guardian Australia understands the ads are funded by the Liberal party and were intended to be posted to WeChat in addition to AFN, although Frydenberg does not have an account on the platform. In January it was revealed Scott Morrison had lost control of his WeChat account, prompting accusations of foreign interference, despite WeChat’s owner, Chinese tech giant Tencent, insisting there was no evidence of any hacking or third-party intrusion. The Liberal MP James Paterson, who is chair of the parliamentary joint committee on intelligence and security, and independent researcher Alex Joske had urged politicians to ditch the platform in response. “I am calling on all Australian politicians to voluntarily boycott WeChat,” Paterson told the Daily Telegraph, in an editorial complaining that Albanese is still sharing updates with his WeChat followers. “We cannot allow a foreign authoritarian government to interfere in our democracy and set the terms of public debate in Australia.” Chinese-Australian Liberal MP Gladys Liu said she would be supporting the boycott because of “serious concerns of political interference”. On 1 February AFN, a Chinese-language business daily published in Sydney, posted a Chinese New Year greeting from Frydenberg, which concluded with a banner ad authorised by the treasurer. On 16 February, AFN posted a feature drawing information about Frydenberg from multiple sources, including the treasurer’s frank admission on ABC Radio that he had “made no secret” he would put his hand up for the leadership at the right time. The article ended with a Chinese-language version of an attack ad against Albanese, claiming he has supported taxes on carbon emissions, mining, congestion, superannuation, income, housing, retirees, family businesses and inheritance. A spokesperson for Frydenberg said: “The treasurer does not have an active WeChat account.” “These are banner advertisements with the Australian Financial News which demonstrate Anthony Albanese’s record of supporting higher taxes on Australians,” he told Guardian Australia. “There is no payment for articles.” Guardian Australia contacted AFN for comment. On 11 February, the defence minister, Peter Dutton, cited “writing within some of the Chinese newspapers in Australia” as an example of Chinese influence on the Labor party – part of the Morrison government’s campaign to claim Labor is soft on national security. At Senate estimates on 14 February, the home affairs department secretary, Michael Pezzullo, said the takeover of Morrison’s WeChat account “appeared to be a terms and conditions matter”. “I couldn’t rule out [foreign interference] completely,” he said. “Sometimes things can be manipulated in a way that is opaque and nefarious. It would be ill advised to rule it out.” Pezzullo said the department doesn’t give advice to MPs and senators about whether they should use particular platforms, explaining it’s a matter of “free political communication” for them to decide.Starstruck 10pm, BBC Three It’s New Year’s Eve and Tom is throwing a star-studded party – the kind where, when Jessie says she works in a cinema, the other guests assume she means in the film industry. Tom’s incredibly drunk and unbearable brother is also there and, inevitably, causes problems. Hollie Richardson Rise of the Nazis: Dictators at War 9pm, BBC Two This three-part series continues to drill down into the psychology of the dictators involved in the second world war. Tonight, the horrors of the eastern front are assessed via the feverish minds of Hitler and Stalin. By 1942, Hitler had appointed himself commander-in-chief. Meanwhile, Stalin was preoccupied with the popularity of General Georgy Zhukov. Phil Harrison Jobfished 9pm, BBC Three Did working from home during the pandemic enable a great job scam? In this gripping documentary, Catrin Nye speaks to the work-hungry people who claim they were recruited by a flashy ad agency, only to find out months later that it wasn’t what it claimed to be – and that its co-founder didn’t exist. HR Couples Therapy 10pm, BBC Two An elusive, frustrating session with Dr Orna Guralnik, full of relationships in which the couple concerned can’t identify the exact issue that is causing them problems. It’s still compelling, however, especially when Orna steps in and makes a firm intervention, as she does with Elaine, a woman who feels her husband doesn’t prioritise her needs. Jack Seale Moors Murders: The Witness 9pm, Channel 4 Is there anything more to be said about two of history’s most notorious serial killers? The makers of this three-part documentary about Ian Brady and Myra Hindley think so, offering analysis of previously unseen prison letters that began after Hindley’s brother-in-law, David Smith, reported the pair to the police the morning after they murdered Edward Evans. Tonally, it is often uncomfortable to watch. HR Euphoria 10.05pm, Sky Atlantic It’s nice when Euphoria remembers that it’s a show about school. Tonight, it’s a term-time staple: the school play. Lexi has taken time-honoured advice and written what she knows, but how will her classmates react? It’s an ambitious, exhilarating hour – with a show-stopping musical number – and a lovely turn in the spotlight for the often-overlooked Lexi. Henry Wong Film choice The Neon Bible (Terence Davies, 1995), 2.05am, Film4 A rare chance to see one of Terence Davies’s less celebrated films – but any of his films would be worthy of your time. He turns his poetic, image-led focus on to the lives of children in 1940s America with an adaptation of the novel by John Kennedy Toole. It follows David (Jacob Tierney), whose harsh life in rural Georgia – the Bible belt, where religion wields constrictive power – is brightened by his Aunt Mae. Gena Rowlands is vibrant as the has-been singer with a rebellious streak. Simon WardellTop story: What is the Suisse secrets leak and why are we publishing it? Hello, Warren Murray here to open the week in news. A massive leak from one of the world’s biggest private banks, Credit Suisse, has exposed the hidden wealth of clients involved in torture, drug trafficking, money laundering, corruption and other serious crimes. Details of accounts linked to 30,000 Credit Suisse clients all over the world are contained in the leak, which unmasks the beneficiaries of more than 100bn Swiss francs (£80bn)* held in one of Switzerland’s best-known financial institutions. The leak points to widespread failures of due diligence by Credit Suisse, despite repeated pledges over decades to weed out dubious clients and illicit funds. The Guardian is part of a consortium of media outlets given exclusive access to the data. We can reveal how Credit Suisse repeatedly either opened or maintained bank accounts for a panoramic array of high-risk clients across the world. They include a human trafficker in the Philippines, a Hong Kong stock exchange boss jailed for bribery, a billionaire who ordered the murder of his Lebanese pop star girlfriend, and executives who looted Venezuela’s state oil company, as well as corrupt politicians from Egypt to Ukraine. One Vatican-owned account in the data was used to spend €350m (£290m) in an allegedly fraudulent investment in London property that is at the centre of an ongoing criminal trial of several defendants, including a cardinal. The huge trove of banking data was leaked by an anonymous whistleblower to the German newspaper Süddeutsche Zeitung. Credit Suisse said that Switzerland’s strict banking secrecy laws prevented it from commenting on claims relating to individual clients. “Credit Suisse strongly rejects the allegations and inferences about the bank’s purported business practices,” the bank said in a statement, arguing that the matters uncovered by reporters are based on “selective information taken out of context, resulting in tendentious interpretations of the bank’s business conduct”. The bank also said the allegations were largely historical, in some instances dating back to a time when “laws, practices and expectations of financial institutions were very different from where they are now”. While some accounts in the data were open as far back as the 1940s, more than two-thirds were opened since 2000. Many of those were still open well into the past decade, and a portion remain open today. Credit Suisse response to Suisse secrets disclosures available here. * Currency conversions are based on historical rates. * * * Biden, Putin may meet – Joe Biden and Vladimir Putin have agreed in principle to attend a summit aimed at de-escalating the Ukraine crisis, France’s presidency has announced. It follows weekend diplomatic efforts by Emmanuel Macron to avert a Russian invasion. The Élysée Palace said the summit “can only be held if Russia does not invade Ukraine”. The White House said Biden had accepted in principle, although “currently Russia appears to be continuing preparations for a full-scale assault on Ukraine very soon”. Biden convened a rare Sunday meeting of his national security council. Moscow has rescinded its undertaking to end military exercises in Belarus which were due to conclude on Sunday. The Belarus defence ministry said Russian troops would stay indefinitely. We are of course live-blogging all the developments. * * * End of Covid restrictions – Cabinet will meet today to rubber-stamp the lifting of all remaining Covid restrictions in England. Changes are expected to include ending the legal requirement to isolate if you have Covid; ending universal free PCR and lateral flow tests; ending the national contact tracing service; and ending twice-weekly tests for schoolchildren. Boris Johnson told the BBC that coronavirus “remains a dangerous disease” for vulnerable and unvaccinated people, but it was time “to see our country really getting back on its feet”. Separately, Priti Patel has agreed to ban anti-vaxxers from “harmful and disruptive” protests outside schools and vaccination clinics. Buckingham Palace said the Queen, 95, had experienced “mild cold-like symptoms” after testing positive for Covid but was due to continue with light duties this week. And Australia has finally reopened its international borders. * * * SBTV founder dies – Jamal Edwards, who set up the media platform SBTV, which helped catapult grime and new artists like Ed Sheeran, Dave and Jessie J to global fame, died on Sunday morning aged 31. Edwards said he started SBTV “on a £20 phone” while he was still at school and grew it into a leading online youth broadcaster. Edwards was born in Luton in 1990 and grew up in Acton, west London. He received a BTec diploma in media moving image from Ealing College and worked at retail chain Topman to financially support himself while developing SBTV. A director, author, DJ, entrepreneur and designer, he was awarded an MBE in 2014 – when he was 24 – for his work in music. He was an ambassador for the Prince of Wales’s charity, the Prince’s Trust, and undertook extensive philanthropic work, including in mental health and the funding of youth centres. * * * Ottawa freed of convoy – Canadian police have fenced off the Ottawa city centre after evicting the “Freedom Convoy” led by truck drivers opposed to a vaccine mandate. Seventy-six vehicles had been towed, police said on Sunday, and with the end of the three-week occupation came 191 arrests and the prospect of more. Demonstrators had used hundreds of trucks and vehicles to block the city centre since 28 January. On the weekend police used pepper spray and stun grenades to clear most of the area in front of Canada’s federal parliament. Protesters who were filmed by police and had left the city would be held to account, said Ottawa’s interim police chief, Steve Bell. “We will actively look to identify you and follow up with financial sanctions and criminal charges.” Canada’s parliament is due on Monday to vote on whether to keep in force emergency powers invoked by the prime minister, Justin Trudeau. * * * House prices spiral up – First-time buyers are expected to lose out again in the race to buy the few properties on the market. Asking prices for homes newly listed in Britain rose by a record 2.3% in February, according to the property website Rightmove. The site said it was the biggest monthly increase in the 20 years it has kept records – the average advertised cost of a home was up by £7,785, to £348,804. The number of new property listings increased by 11% during the month, but the number of people looking to buy a property rose by 16%. Rightmove’s figures say average asking prices have risen by nearly £40,000 in the two years since the pandemic started, compared with £9,000 in the previous two years. Today in Focus podcast: Credit Suisse, a bank for dictators, drug lords and criminals A leak of data from Credit Suisse has shown how it provided services to known criminals and fraudsters for decades. It’s the latest huge scandal to hit the Swiss bank, say investigative reporters Kalyeena Makortoff and David Pegg. Lunchtime read: ‘It’s a curious experiment’ As Charlie Brooker releases the latest fruits of his new megabucks deal with Netflix – an interactive cartoon about a cat – the Black Mirror creator discusses gaming, nuclear war and why his generation has wrecked the UK. Sport Rory McIlroy has taken aim at Phil Mickelson after the latter’s extraordinary sentiment relating to a Saudi Arabia-backed breakaway golf tour. Upon completion of his final round at the Genesis Invitational on Sunday, McIlroy branded Mickelson’s words “naive, selfish, egotistical, ignorant”. The Manchester United manager, Ralf Rangnick, condemned the unsavoury scenes that led to Anthony Elanga being struck by a coin from the Leeds United stand during a fiery contest at Elland Road on Sunday, with the hosts investigating the incident. Dreaming is for free, as someone round these parts once said, and Daniel Podence’s second-half winner means Wolves are now two points behind fifth place in the Premier League with two games in hand and both Arsenal and West Ham, the two teams immediately above them, to play away this coming week. The former England midfielder Jack Wilshere has joined Danish club Aarhus. There may have been some raised eyebrows at the Lionesses’ unusual starting XI to play Spain but a gutsy and focused performance against a team laden with Barcelona’s Champions League winners earned a 0-0 draw and demonstrated there is serious depth to England’s squad looking ahead to the European Championship this summer. If there is one man England’s rugby team are keen to see back fit and singing the anthems at Twickenham, it is Manu Tuilagi. Business Asian shares have mostly been lower after a retreat on Wall Street. Tokyo, Seoul, Hong Kong and Shanghai declined while Sydney advanced. At time of writing, futures trading suggests the FTSE will open higher while the pound is worth $1.362 and €1.198. The papers The Guardian’s joint Credit Suisse investigation is promoted heavily on page one today. Also on the front: “Last-ditch talks as fears of Ukraine war intensify”. The Queen’s Covid diagnosis is on the front too, and in the conservative press it’s big news that ties in well with the clamoured-for end of England’s coronavirus restrictions. “Queen’s Covid example to us all”, says the Daily Mail. The Telegraph has “Queen vows to carry on working with Covid”. “Queen catches Covid in castle outbreak”, says the Express. The Mirror has “Queen gets Covid but she carries on” and the Metro’s headline is similar: “One keeps calm and carries on”. The Sun puts a foot wrong with “HRH to WFH” – the correct royal style is HM, for Her Majesty. The Times leads with “PM’s ‘pride’ as all restrictions lifted” while the Queen’s diagnosis is an inset panel to that story. In the i they have “Queen still at work with Covid”. The situation on the Ukraine-Russia border is also on fronts of course, and it is the lead in the Financial Times: “Belarus says Russian troops will stay as west seeks Ukraine talks”. Sign up The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekendThe Kurdish transgender woman Doski Azad shot dead by her brother last month had been living in hiding from her family after repeated death threats, friends have said. According to friends, Azad had had to move home regularly after several death threats by male members of her family. Three weeks ago, her body was found dumped in a ditch outside of the city of Duhok, in the Iraqi autonomous Kurdistan region. Her hands had been tied and she had been shot twice. Police have issued an arrest warrant for her brother, who is believed to have travelled from his home in Germany to carry out the killing. A talented makeup artist, the 23-year-old had supported herself since her family turned its back on her when she was a young teenager. She went to brides’ homes to prepare them for their weddings and built a reputation that earned her a job at a salon in Duhok. “She was such a nice person, and everyone loved her so much,” said a close friend, who spoke on condition of anonymity. “She lived alone because when she went to her family home, they said to Doski, ‘Get out’,” the friend said. “They said, ‘When we see you alone, we will kill you’.” According to the Duhok police, Azad was killed by one of her brothers in what was described as an “honour killing”. Police were called to the village of Mangesh, 12 miles (20km) north of Duhok, according to Iraqi-Kurdish news site Rudaw, by another of Azad’s brothers. The killer had allegedly already returned to Germany. “Our investigation so far suggests that Doski Azad was killed by her brother at a location just outside the city before he managed to flee the crime scene,” Duhok police spokesperson, Hemin Suleiman, said. Azad’s friend said attempts had been made on her life before. “When I called her [a while ago] she didn’t answer me, and later I said, ‘Doski, where you have been?’ And she said, ‘My brother came to kill me and I went to the police.’” Another Kurdish transgender woman was murdered last year by family members, Rudaw reported. Yeksani, a Kurdish rights group, said: “Hate crime against LGBT+ community in the Kurdistan region is on the rise.” The group’s director Zhiar Ali said Azad was one of a few openly transgender women in Kurdistan. “This level of freedom in Kurdistan comes at a risk, and we witnessed this in Doski’s case,” Ali said. “Living openly as an LGBT+ person is deeply stigmatised. “Honour killings are very prevalent. We have hundreds of nameless graves, they are marked with numbers. The victims are so disrespected that, not only are they blamed, but they disrespect them even when they are dead.” Ali was critical of the Kurdish media’s coverage of Azad’s death, some of which used derogatory language. “It was a completely irresponsible and disastrous reporting by the Kurdish media,” Ali said, primarily about the Kurdish-language coverage. Rasha Younes, a researcher at Human Rights Watch, said the murder signalled the “climate of impunity” afforded to perpetrators of anti-LGBTQ+ violence, empowered under Iraq’s penal code to cause harm under the pretext of “honour”. “This has a chilling effect on LGBT Iraqis, for whom the law does not offer protection, rendering any ‘suspicion’ of homosexuality or gender variance a cause for potential violence, which not only results in the death of LGBT people but makes their lives unliveable,” she said. Kurdish activist Amed Sherwan said most hate crimes were not reported. “It is very tragic that someone must pay such a price for being herself. It makes me very sad,” he said. The US, French and German consulates in Erbil condemned the murder on Twitter, as did the UN assistance mission for Iraq and the Canadian mission to Iraq. The Kurdistan regional government did not respond to a Guardian request for comment. • In the US, the domestic violence hotline is 1-800-799-SAFE (7233). In the UK, call the national domestic abuse helpline on 0808 2000 247, or visit Women’s Aid. In Australia, the national family violence counselling service is on 1800 737 732. Other international helplines may be found via www.befrienders.orgThe remote Cowal peninsula, extending into the Firth of Clyde, is not the sort of place you’d expect to find artisan coffee roasters, outdoor infinity pools and modern outdoor sculpture. Take it from me: my mum was born here, in the faded Victorian resort of Dunoon. Outside shinty circles – those familiar with the local hockey-like game - “the secret coast” is little known, even in Scotland. But a spotlight shone briefly on the village of Tighnabruaich last November, when artist David Blair’s vaulting 20-metre-long, six-metre-high Ark of Argyll – designed to raise awareness of the climate emergency – was visited by delegates to COP26. I’d heard about other new ventures breathing life into Cowal, so turned away from the Scotland of queueing campervans on Loch Lomond and went to investigate, with my 10-year-old daughter in tow. The bumpy, often improbably scenic, often single-track A8003 leads to Tighnabruaich, pronounced “tee-na-broo-ich”. Until the road arrived in the 1960s, waterways once sailed by Viking warriors and Celtic kings were the best way of getting here. In Tighnabruaich’s golden age, its Victorian pier buzzed with thrashing paddle steamers bringing Glaswegians “doon the watter”, in the days before cheap flights diverted them to the Spanish costas. “We may be just two hours from Glasgow, but it’s like another world,” beams Eve Macfarlane, who set up Tighnabruaich’s Argyll Coffee Roasters in 2018. The more I see, the more I agree: Cowal is a world of gnarly hills cloaked in ancient Atlantic oak woodland, and lent a cinematic drama by narrow waters on both sides: the sinewy Kyles of Bute to the south, and Loch Fyne to the north. As we wander Tighnabruaich, I spot kids playing shinty by the waterside stadium, despite the temperature being just a touch above freezing. The local shinty team, Kyles Athletic, has lifted the Camanachd Cup more times than any other team outside the twin Highland villages of Newtownmore and Kingussie – and is the most southerly team to have won it. That youngsters are interested is a positive sign for a village that – like much of rural Scotland – has struggled to retain younger blood. And the more I look, the more green shoots I see sprouting everywhere. Tighnabruaich Gallery is run by a couple who fled Glasgow a decade ago to raise their young family here, with work from the burgeoning local artist community on the wider Cowal peninsula featuring prominently. And that idea of community crops up wherever I go. Daughter and I are among the first guests at The Hollies in the village. The man behind the transformation of this ghostly, long-shut hotel into a glorious self-catering hideaway (sleeping 18) is East Kilbride-born Graeme McFall. “The house had been empty for 15 years – everyone in the village was really supportive to see something done to it,” says McFall, who is in the midst of planning songwriting retreats here. “We were worried about getting tradesmen in the area, but we found a community of excellent craftsmen in Cowal who really bought in to what we were doing.” New life has also been breathed into the Victorian Royal an Lochan hotel nearby. Home to the popular Shinty Bar, it’s now once again the place to savour ultra-local, ultra-fresh scallops and langoustines while gazing out over the Kyles of Bute. People come by seaplane over from Glasgow for lunch. Quality local produce lies behind the renaissance in other parts of Cowal, too. In the “suburbs”, at Carry Farm, I’m made as welcome as if I’d just arrived with whisky at a ceilidh that has run dry. It’s a working farm with a sailing school attached – and owner Fiona McPhail has just opened the Hayshed Gallery to showcase local ceramics and her textile creations, made with wool from the farm’s Hebridean sheep. “Cowal is a creative place,” says Fiona, pointing at the aquarium-clear waters of the Kyles. “It feels remote, but it inspires people to think, to be creative in their everyday lives and in their art. There is a sense of us small independent producers working together, sharing our passion for Cowal.” Next door to the gallery, coffees at Argyll Coffee Roasters are accompanied by produce from Cowal’s Northern Lights Cakery. And Carry Farm is also home to independent Argyll Botany Company, run by Fiona Mcguigan, who transforms plants from Cowal into raw, natural skincare products in a bijou workshop. My next stop is Kilfinan Community Forest – a 1,300-acre oasis on land once lost to industrial forestry, which stretches up the hillside from Tighnabruaich. The village community bought and manages the land and ploughs revenue back into recreational facilities, jobs and affordable housing. A small hydroelectric scheme keeps the operation green and it has links with the Northwoods Rewilding Network, which encourages rewilding throughout Scotland. A network of trails ramble over the hillside: by the Allt Mor burn, we find artwork created by the local schoolchildren, bird and squirrel boxes and a wildlife pond. Pushing on over to Cowal’s western shores, I find more regeneration. The waterfront Oystercatcher restaurant at Otter Ferry has just been revamped; Inver, further north in Strachur, has been hailed by Michelin for its “sustainable gastronomy”. I eat at Portavadie, a former industrial complex converted into a modern marina, with plush apartments and an infinity pool. Over hazelnut-crusted halibut from the island of Gigha, tourism director Iain Jurgensen tells me: “We want to put something back into the community and help the community thrive, so we train up young people and try to give them a reason to make a life on Cowal.” Cowal is a life-affirming place. Just a few miles down the road I park at the Bothy cafe at Kilbride Farm for a boggy half-hour yomp south to Ostel Bay, which isn’t accessible by car. It’s worth the effort: a crescent-shape sandy beach unfurls in front of me, with the Isle of Arran’s brooding peaks just across the water. There’s a tempting longer walk from Portavadie. The newly expanded Loch Lomond and Cowal Way now runs for 57 miles from Loch Fyne to Loch Lomond across a swathe of Cowal. I’ll save that for my return trip. My last stop back in Tighnabruaich is at that Ark, standing sentinel over the Kyles of Bute. Artist David Blair says he fashioned it to “raise awareness of the scale and urgency of the climate and ecological emergency”. I lead my daughter inside this wooden skeleton and she asks, “Did they cut trees down to build the ark?”. I tell her they did, but only because the larch trees were suffering from fungal disease and couldn’t be saved. In Cowal nature is not something to be abused or trampled upon, but very much for the community to live with and thrive alongside. Accommodation was provided by The Hollies (sleeps 18 from £2,250 for two nights). Secret Coast Hampers provided a hamper of local produce. More information from wildaboutargyll.co.uk • This article was amended on 21 February 2022. An earlier version was incorrect to say that Kyles Athletic is the only side outside the twin Highland villages of Newtownmore and Kingussie to have won the Camanachd Cup.The NSW government has begun issuing flood plain harvesting licences in NSW despite objections from the upper house – a move that has been labelled “an act of bastardry” and “bad faith” by key crossbenchers. Despite strong indications the regulations underpinning the licences could be disallowed for a third time by the Legislative Council, the state’s water minister, Kevin Anderson, is understood to have begun issuing the licences. Industry sources confirmed that some irrigators in the Gwydir and Border Rivers catchments received decisions on their flood plain harvesting licences this morning. The minister refused to comment. The licensing regime for flood plain harvesting was disallowed twice last year by the upper house with Labor, the Greens and crossbenchers joining forces. A parliamentary committee report also called for further scientific work to establish the extent and impact of flood plain harvesting, which involves capturing floods moving across plains using dams, levees and channels. Environmental scientists have warned over-licensing could have long-term catastrophic impacts on the ability to achieve improvements in the Murray-Darling Basin. But the government has used the parliamentary Christmas break to run down the clock on the 28-day disallowance period after its third attempt to establish the licensing regime which was introduced on 15 December. On Friday, the Perrottet government took a further step, publishing a proclamation that the Water Management Act extended to flood plain harvesting licences in the northern basin – a necessary precursor to issuing the licences. Tuesday will be the first opportunity for the upper house to consider a disallowance motion. “This is an incredible show of bad faith from the new water minister,” the chair of the parliamentary committee, Greens MP Cate Faehrmann, said. “The government has had every opportunity to work with the crossbench and opposition to address the concerns of the community. Instead, they’re choosing to rush through flood plain harvesting licences in the dead of the night, bugger the consequences. “The committee handed down recommendations that would see flood plain harvesting regulated in a way that is lawful and sustainable. The water minister needs to be using this report as a basis for restoring balance in the Murray-Darling Basin, not the pleas of a handful of wealthy irrigators in the north who have been dictating this state’s water policy in their own interests for far too long.” Independent MP Justin Field declared the preemptive move “an act of political bastardry and extraordinary bad faith”. “I’m also extremely concerned it could leave the taxpayer on the hook for future compensation if future governments have to wind back those licences to ensure downstream communities and the environment get their fair share,” Field said. An upper house committee report found that flood plain harvesting has grown dramatically in the past 20 years. It has been blamed by the Wentworth Group of Concerned Scientists for some of the 20% reduction in flows in the Murray-Darling, along with climate change. The former NSW water minister, Melinda Pavey, reintroduced the regulations that will create the new licences just before Christmas, arguing she had now included more safeguards. Irrigators in north-west NSW, predominantly cotton growers, support the new licences even though some will need to cut their take of flood waters. They argue that the government’s failure to issue licences has left them in a legal limbo, particularly during recent periods of heavy rain, when farmers have been capturing water in dams for future use. The chief executive of the NSW Irrigators’ Council, Claire Miller, said it was time for the licensing to proceed. “All stakeholders agree flood plain harvesting should be reduced, licensed and measured. The reform also means irrigators will be charged for using this water for the first time,” she said. “It is unfathomable why anyone would want to further delay the regulation, licensing and metering of flood plain harvesting and allow the current free-for-all to continue. We need to put the environment ahead of politics. Labor’s spokesperson on water, Rose Jackson, said the party was still considering its position on the latest effort to license flood plain harvesting. “We know the water is being taken. We want to see it licensed so there are regulated volumes, monitoring and enforcement, but it has to be included within the cap on extractions and be sustainable,” Jackson said.Do your research Find out what the market is like for the product or service you are offering. How many other people are offering the same, or similar? Do they seem to be busy? How much do they charge? Some particularly profitable hobbies include making quality bespoke goods such as jewellery, wall hangings, buying and reselling vintage fashion, or services such as music or language tutoring and gardening. Think, too, about where you see these services advertised. Etsy, for example, is a great place to sell crafts but sites such as Fiverr and TaskRabbit are better for selling skills, such as home improvement or writing services. Make sure you are clear on any regular costs incurred by selling your services or products on these platforms. Etsy charges 15p for each listing and asks for a 5% fee when you sell. If you make a sale directly through its offsite advertising, it charges a 15% fee. It is free to set up on TaskRabbit – it adds a standard service fee on to your client’s invoice, as well as any VAT. Fiverr, meanwhile, takes 20% of every transaction and charges your clients a service fee. Does the cost justify the profits you stand to make – or would it be easier to sell via social media, on sites such as Facebook Marketplace? Don’t sign up to anything that costs money until you’ve considered your options. The last thing you want is another bill that adds to your monthly expenses rather than helping alleviate them. Value your time and effort Deciding on the perfect price point is key to the success of your side project. You want to charge a figure that is competitive, will satisfy your customer, and bring in the money you need to make a profit. To do this, consider your costs for making a single item or providing a service. How much will raw materials, posting and packaging, travel expenses and more, add up to? Can you lower these costs by buying some items in bulk – or exploiting supplier discounts? If you are selling something you make, consider, too, how long it takes and your level of experience. If, for example, it requires days of work to make a single piece, the price should reflect that. Consider what the price you are thinking of charging converts to as an hourly rate, and decide if that is reasonable. If you are providing a service, this will be more straightforward – and easier to compare with the market. If in doubt go over, rather than under. It is far easier to reduce the price than it is to increase it. Have a marketing strategy Think about who your typical customer is likely to be and where they might look for a product or service you are selling. Are they social media users or using search engines such as Google to locate what they need quickly? Do they live locally, or are they spread across the country? It can make sense to do your marketing and sales in one place. For example, if you set up a storefront on Instagram or Facebook you can grow your audience on the same platform via hashtags and content. These are free to set up and launch. If you want to upgrade for greater reach and management options when you become more established, there are a number of pricing plans via software companies such as Ecwid that allow you to do so from £19 a month. Alternatively, you can set up your own website for free via sites such as Wix.com and use social media tools purely for marketing purposes. Take advantage of classic PR and marketing opportunities by offering comment to journalists looking for information about your products or areas of expertise, sending samples, or guest blogging for sites that target the type of audience you are trying to reach. Local free magazines and forums are a good place to get your name known. Be realistic about time Dr Nikki Ramskill turned her hobby of blogging about personal finances into a small coaching business, the Female Money Doctor, which she runs alongside her main job as a GP. She charges £1,050 for a bundle of six money coaching sessions, as well as providing free resources and low-cost planning advice to those who need it via her website. “Stay organised,” she says. “Dedicate a time to work on your project, and do a little towards it every day, even if it is just posting a listing on Etsy. Be gentle with yourself and realistic about how much you can achieve around your main job.” She also recommends keeping marketing and admin tasks small – and not letting perfect be the enemy of good. “Master a handful of things first,” she says. “No one is amazing at social media straight away, it evolves as time goes on and you adapt. It doesn’t have to be perfect either. Don’t spend hours choosing a colour for your logo, for example. You can always adapt it further down the line.” Stay on top of tax Set up an account for your hobby to separate your earnings from your personal finances, and consider using digital tools to stay on top of your taxes. Any side business earning upwards of £1,000 a year must be declared to HM Revenue and Customs, and you need to complete a tax return at the end of January each year or face penalties and fines. Enzo Ottens is a co-founder of the fintech app Earnr, which allows you to track how much income tax you owe as you earn before you earn £3,000. “One of the main things we try to warn people about beforehand is to think about whether to set up a limited company,” he says. “Mainly because of the additional admin that comes with that – the balance sheets, the statement of accounts – and the hundreds you will end up paying an accountant to manage it. We recommend setting up as a sole trader first. “We also see a lot of our customers register with HMCR too early – even before they’ve made £1,000 in sales. And then they have to do a tax return even though they may not yet have made those sales.” Other products aimed at those running small businesses include NatWest’s Mettle account, which allows you to create and send invoices on the go and prepare your accounts for taxes, and the SumUp app, which creates payment links you can send to customers and clients. Both are free to set up.When Frank Farrell’s retirement day came in 2018 – after 35 years of teaching – everyone thought he “would be straight down the pub to celebrate”. Instead, he stayed sober and prepared his materials: the next day he began his new career as a magician. He was 60, and he didn’t yet feel like a magician, but that weekend Mr Farrell the English teacher gave way to Magic Frank. Under this stage name, he performed 10 shows at a Harry Potter convention in Manchester. Farrell had been dabbling in magic since his 30s, but the scale of these gigs – he was paid nearly £2,000 – struck him as “a mark of respect” and validation. “I started to consider myself a magician, not someone who does a bit of magic on the side.” A mentalist who specialises in card tricks, Farrell performs “parlour shows” at weddings, birthdays or Women’s Institute gatherings. The audience’s gaze is so intense, he feels his hands burn. Applause breaks from this “sense of wonder … Someone has seen something that logic tells them cannot happen, but which they’ve just seen happen,” he says. “Usually people start laughing. It makes me laugh as well. It feels good.” As a child, Farrell loved magic. The son of Irish immigrants – his father worked in building foundations, his mother as a home help – he grew up in Romford, Essex. Occasionally he trekked to the joke shop on Tottenham Court Road in London to splurge his pocket money on a stink bomb or two, or a device to vanish a ha’penny. “But it fizzled out because there was nothing to nurture it,” he says. “I didn’t know that there’s thousands of books on magic.” Instead, he got into acting. “I think you can see a theme here,” he says, sounding every inch the English teacher. “A need for an audience.” He reprised the magic in his 30s after he and his wife, Sheila, returned from a trip to India. Sheila had impressed some children with an illusion in which she seemed to pass a thread through her neck. Farrell thought: “When I get home I’ll learn some. It’s a useful thing if there’s children around.” He bought a magic book, practised tricks, even found a magic club in Manchester. He and Sheila had two boys, who were mostly unimpressed by the tricks as children. Farrell never worked his magic at school, except as an activity during enrichment week, when pupils had a chance to learn something different to their normal lessons. In some ways, maybe teaching was another parlour show, though. Farrell’s style was “a bit offbeat … I played music. I tried to bring comedy into the classroom.” He put on voices, loved wordplay, and for minor misdemeanours asked students to apologise to his pot plants. At his final summer fair, some of the students wore masks with his face on. Teaching, like magic, is transformative – albeit “a much slower process of transformation”, he says. “With magic you get immediate feedback if it works well. In teaching, that moment might never come. Even if you have had that effect, you might not know.” At first it was a shock to live life without a timetable. But Farrell now rehearses for an hour a day, has up to nine bookings in a month, and spends the rest of the time pitching, handling enquiries and deepening his art. He has finally shaken off any sense of being an impostor. “I can genuinely call myself a magician, because people are paying me to do it.” Clearly, he says, needing validation is a bit of a theme, but he is unsure why and doesn’t like to “navel gaze”. Maybe it “came from having a very ordinary background”, but adds: “Don’t we all want to feel special?” The ability to transform and to create wonder are important to Farrell, and I ask what, in himself, has caused him the greatest wonder? “I find the process of becoming older quite amazing,” he answers. “I have discovered that I am far more self-confident, more relaxed … I am living exactly the type of life I want to live.” When people ask about his retirement he likes to reply: “I’ve always been happy but never been happier.” Tell us: has your life taken a new direction after the age of 60?It is now 13 years since Harry Parker stepped on an improvised explosive device in Afghanistan, creating a blast that would result in the loss of both legs. Alongside the physical pain of the subsequent weeks, months and years, he also had to cope with a profound change in his sense of self. He compares the experience to that of Gregor Samsa, the subject of Franz Kafka’s The Metamorphosis – “the strangeness of not being who you used to be, turned into something that sets you apart from those around you”. Equipped with two hi-tech prosthetic limbs, Parker can now walk holding hands with his wife and carry his children on his shoulders. From the outside, it would be easy to conclude that he has adapted extraordinarily well to the event – and he says that “being an amputee feels normal”. But he still considers himself to be a different person – a “new body with a new identity” who is “12% machine”. It is this transformation that forms the emotional and intellectual heart of Parker’s fascinating new book, Hybrid Humans, which examines the cutting edge of medical technology and the implications of these developments for our identities. The term “hybrid human” is personal: it sits more comfortably than other potential descriptions for his experience, Parker says – compared with “disabled” at the one extreme or “cyborg” at the other. The term may have the ring of futurism for many readers, but hybrid humans have been around since antiquity. Just consider Tabaketenmut, the daughter of an Egyptian priest who lived about 3,000 years ago. She seems to have lost her big toe to gangrene, which would have been a huge impediment to walking. (The big toe carries 40% of our body weight as we propel ourselves forward.) To solve this problem, she was equipped with an articulated prosthesis, made from wood and leather, with holes that could have laced the artificial toe to the foot. Ancient Romans, meanwhile, created prosthetic limbs from bronze and wood. Parker’s writing is elegant and often lyrical. He is particularly eloquent when describing the psychology of hybridity – how the mind melds with the machine. The brain, we hear, can quickly enlarge its body map to encompass a tool, creating the sense that it is a physical part of us. It is the reason that drivers duck when their car passes under a low barrier – in some sense, we have become the vehicle. Even an object such as a smartphone can become an extension of our mind – as we come to rely on it for memory storage and communication. This neural flexibility is common to all human beings. “We are set up for plug and play,” Parker says. But the emotional connection between an amputee such as Parker and the prostheses they wear is necessarily much more profound than most people’s experiences of technology. His legs may not be made of flesh, but they are critical for his humanity. “When I am without them, I feel less alive,” he writes. Awe-inspiring innovations have made Parker’s current life possible. His right knee, for example, is controlled by a microprocessor, with sophisticated sensors that can gauge the forces on the leg and guide its movements. It is, he says, like having another brain within his limb. And Parker gives us a taste of even more astonishing developments from the technological frontier, describing technologies such as exoskeletons – fitted over the body – that could allow people who are paralysed to walk again, and robotic skin, fitted with sensors, that could restore a sense of touch to people with spinal cord injuries. Such successes are often overhyped by the media, but Parker avoids this trap. Newspapers and websites may breathlessly celebrate the use of bionic eyes that can allow people with visual impairments to see again, for instance, but Parker points out that the resolution is very low. At best, someone using these devices can make out a few shapes that may help with navigation. And there are risks. Bionic eyes use metal electrodes implanted in the brain to communicate their signals. The electrical discharge can damage neural tissue, rendering them less effective over time. Scientists may find solutions to these problems – such as electrodes coated with stem cells that may sprout roots into the living tissue – but progress is made of small steps rather than giant leaps. Unlike many technology writers, Parker also recognises the social inequalities that are inherent in these innovations. Organisations such as the NHS cannot invest in the most up-to-date prostheses, meaning that the latest technology must be bought with private riches. For some, the necessary funds may come through insurance or compensation – but if you are born poor, with a congenital disorder, you may never make use of any of these technological developments within your lifetime. (My mother, an amputee, is still using the same basic design of prosthetic leg that she was given more than four decades ago.) Parker points out that it is often the very people who are most likely to suffer disability who are the least able to afford the best treatment – which, of course, makes it harder to find a way out of the poverty trap. His scepticism is particularly welcome when he meets some transhumanists, the followers of a philosophical movement that advocates the use of technology to overcome the limitations of our evolved brains and bodies. Among their many plans, they suggest that we all be fitted with brain implants that could give us instant access to vast stores of knowledge or link us up to other brains to create telepathic communication. Some transhumanists even hope that technology will allow us to beat death – by, for example, uploading our consciousness to an artificial intelligence, so that we are no longer reliant on our ageing and fragile wetware. For now, these are far-fetched dreams, and it’s not just the practical challenges of creating this technology that bothers Parker; the goals themselves seem undesirable. “I can’t imagine the pain, anxiety and frustrations of being a sentient being uploaded to a hard drive – what it would be like never again to feel rain on my face, or the visceral feeling of my family when we all bundle together on the sofa for a hug.” And doesn’t the possibility of death add meaning to our lives that would be lost with technological immortality? As someone who has lived as a “hybrid” for more than a decade, Parker never forgets the realities of everyday life, which encompass both pain and beauty. This may be a tour of the scientific avant garde, but the focus is always on the human heart and mind. David Robson is a science writer and author of The Expectation Effect: How Your Mindset Can Transform Your Life (Canongate) • Hybrid Humans: Dispatches from the Frontiers of Man and Machine by Harry Parker is published by Profile Books and Wellcome Collection (£14.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyWordle has exploded. Since launching in October, the word game has become a viral success thanks to users (including me) falling in love with the simple but frustrating task of guessing a five-letter word in six attempts. Like most puzzles, Wordle can be solved alone. But the game brings out the braggers and those braggers can offer up a treasure trove of data. Mathematicians have looked at players’ results to better understand the game and the way we play it. Professor Barry Smyth, the digital chair of computer science at University College Dublin, analyzed more than 3m tweets from 800,000 Wordle players who had “won” the game (meaning that they guessed the word in six tries or fewer). The tweets show people getting better over time – on average, they manage to solve the game in fewer rounds the more they play. The tweets also show the probability of guessing the correct letter (yellow), guessing the correct letter in the correct place (green) or just getting it plain wrong (grey). No surprise, the chances of guessing the correct word get higher with each subsequent round, but the data shows the importance of letter placement. The second letter of the word is easiest to guess (72% of the time, it has been guessed correctly in the fifth round), the third letter is the next easiest (65%), followed by the last letter (52%). First and fourth letters are most likely to trip you up. And if you want to up your strategy, Smyth also discovered the best start words (scroll all the way to the bottom if you would like a spoiler – it’s not adieu!). Unsurprisingly, a computer program does much better than a bunch of tweeting human Wordle players. Xan Gregg, a data visualization software developer, did a deep analysis to find the hardest Wordle words. It turns out, almost every single word could be solved by the computer in five guesses or less – just three words required all six guesses (mummy, shush and yummy). By feeding a computer program 3,622 words, Gregg also found an optimal start word (also mentioned in the spoilers below – it’s different from the best word based on Wordle players’ success!). Like all data, both of these analyses miss something. Neither of them manage to capture quitting. A computer can just keep going and going with the guesswork, and Smyth only analysed people who had tweeted their results after winning the game. That’s a shame – I’m curious which five-letter word is most likely to leave us feeling defeated (“aroma” brought me close to tears). Smyth found that in over 95% of games where the word “tales” was used as a start word, the player was successful (and they were successful fast, 83% of them succeeded within four rounds). Another highly effective strategy was to combine two start words – to use “cones” followed by “trial”. Instead of looking at successful games played by humans, Xan Gregg found the best start word by allowing a computer to try out 3,622 start words. The word “crate” resulted in the computer winning in the fewest number of rounds.There are two lines of attack in the current culture wars. The first is slow, steady and discreet, marching by stealth through Britain’s institutions. The second is a brazen, loud artillery attack armed with cliches and buzzwords that are fired out across the media. The recent speech from the Conservative party chair, Oliver Dowden, to the Heritage Foundation in Washington is an example of the latter. It was a word salad into which he lazily and dispassionately (repeating this stuff really must get very boring) tossed a target list of vague and intangible concepts such as “cancel culture”, “woke psychodrama”, “obsessing over pronouns” and attempts to “decolonise mathematics”. If the purpose of this kind of quick-fire attack is recruitment, then the slower, more covert attacks are for annexation. An example of the latter also came about recently, in the form of new guidance by the Department for Education on political impartiality in England’s classrooms. The document singled out topics such as empire, racism and the climate crisis as “political issues” that should be treated with care, moving the parameters of what teachers and students perceive as “neutral” and what is “ideological” another inch to the right. This side of the culture wars takes its time to cover ground by influencing education and culture. Those advancing this line of attack in government often act behind closed doors, so that by the time their goals are made public it’s too late to challenge them. Last month, the government announced that BBC funding from the licence fee would be frozen for the next two years, raised concerns about the BBC’s “impartiality and groupthink”, and suggested that its public funding model could face abolishment (although it later softened its stance). So opaque was the process that Richard Sharp, the chair of the BBC, said the broadcaster was blindsided by the decision being announced not to those concerned at the BBC itself, but via briefings to the Sunday papers. He told BBC Radio 4 that he “hadn’t anticipated learning what I learned over the weekend” as discussions had been ongoing with the government and were, as far as he knew, inconclusive. But discussions had been concluded elsewhere. At the end of 2020, a 10-person panel was appointed to help decide the BBC’s future and funding model. It was not set up under Cabinet Office guidelines, met only in secret, and freedom of information requests for a record of the proceedings were refused. Loud and quiet goes the pattern of culture war advance, like the children’s song: “loud and quiet, fast and slow.” Of recent wins, the expropriation and ubiquitisation of the word “woke” has been the quickest. Most people don’t actually know what “woke” means. But, to quote Will Ferrell in Blades of Glory explaining the nonsensical lyrics to a song: “Nobody knows what it means but it’s provocative. It gets the people going.” All that matters is that people pick up on its implications and intimations. Different permutations of “wokeness” have always been useful, leveraged by the right to portray any social change as a matter of exuberant and unhinged vandalism to the status quo. This is not a new tactic (little in the culture wars is): wokeness is the new “loony left” or “PC gone mad”, a swapping of terms to portray the left as an absurdity and threat which has been around since at least the 1950s. What is frustrating is that for a tactic that has been used for so long, progressive politicians still do not seem to have understood that the only way to beat the charge is to own it. To say when confronted with an issue presented as a matter of wokeness: “What do you mean by woke?” To expose and mock the term for its threadbareness, or to question its very pejorative use. I’ll take anything really at this point, as long as it is delivered with authenticity and swagger. Imagine hearing a politician say something like: “If by ‘woke’ you mean ending racism and inequality, reforming our curriculums so that they are factual and representative both of historical truth and how Britain is changing, and striving for a world where your chances in life are determined as little as possible by your birth, then sign me up.” I would think I was hallucinating. The signal the left sends by letting the term be claimed by the right is so powerful that Labour politicians are now in the bizarre position of denying the existence of the culture wars but being simultaneously afraid of being called woke. In an interview with the Telegraph earlier this year, Labour’s shadow culture secretary, Lucy Powell, showed how cornered and defeated progressives can be by letting the term “woke” go uncontested, while being entirely pinned down by its assaults. She said there is a lot of “false division” created by the right on matters such as statues that she would not indulge as culture secretary. She then fell right into the biggest false division of all. “I wouldn’t say I’m woke. I’m not woke, but I’m not anti-woke either,” she said, like Schrödinger’s cat. “I’m just kind of fairly ordinary. I will absolutely sort of cry my eyes out at Strictly Come Dancing where a deaf woman wins it and a same-sex couple are the runners-up. I think that was a fantastic kind of illustration of where woke and anti-woke meet.” Don’t laugh – “woke and anti-woke” is actually a good summary of Labour’s response when it comes to the culture wars. It’s risk avoidance. What it really means is that the party is taking the moral high ground on the basis that it cares only about tangible issues that impact people’s lives in a strict economic sense, but is otherwise, to put it bluntly, frit. To engage in clear, studied defendable positions on hot button issues such as racism and colonialism that influence school policy, the media, and cultural institutions risks them being smoked out in the open about things that, through Labour’s appeasement in the culture wars, may well be poll kryptonite and tabloid ammunition. What helps this state of acquiescence is that there are lulls, missteps and retreats in the culture wars, inviting speculation that it’s all a distraction or “running out of steam”, an artefact of an ebullient post-Brexit Conservative party. And yes, sometimes it is a distraction, sometimes these issues do go away for a while. But the potential for new momentum is always there, ready to be accelerated further by a media that loves a good war, whatever the speed. Just look at the vigour with which newspapers ran front pages on the education secretary, Nadhim Zahawi’s, latest guidelines and Dowden’s Washington speech, amping them up to claim that Black Lives Matter’s “biased” views are to be avoided (the Times), that students are being “indoctrinated” (the Daily Mail), and that Dowden’s words must be translated into “action” (the Telegraph). You don’t have to have a sophisticated grasp of what “woke” means to absorb the message being sent here: if you don’t vote for the Conservative party again and again, bad things are going to happen. With a zombie prime minister and a Brexit wrung of populist opportunities, culture wars campaigning will likely intensify in the lead-up to the local elections in May – and the next general election. There will be a lot of “Mr Dowden goes to Washington” silliness about woke maths, but there will also be a lot of gravely serious, opinion-forming, institution-changing propaganda and policy that we on the left cannot simply pretend we are rising above. In fact we are just hiding, hoping and praying that these moves won’t be crucial to refreshing the chances of a desperate government out of ideas. That sounds pretty risky to me. Nesrine Malik is a Guardian columnistA bronze statue of 19th-century Belgian king Léopold II in the centre of Brussels could be melted down and turned into a monument to the millions who died during his brutal rule of the Belgian Congo and other victims of colonialism, an expert group has suggested. The group of historians, architects and other specialists, commissioned by the Brussels regional government, also suggests a second option for the Léopold II bronze: creating an open-air statue park to house the equestrian work, along with other controversial monuments to figures of the colonial past. The two scenarios were proposed in a 256-page report on the “decolonisation” of public space in the Belgian capital, which was commissioned by Brussels after Black Lives Matter protests swept across the city in 2020. The Léopold II equestrian statue, close to the Royal Palace, became a flashpoint for protesters during what became the largest demonstrations against racism in Brussels that participants could remember. Brussels has scores of monuments and streets named after the men who built Belgium’s empire in the late 19th century “scramble for Africa”. King Léopold II ran the Congo as his personal fiefdom from 1885 to 1908, when millions of people died of brutal treatment, hunger and disease. The Belgian state took over the Congo from 1908 until 1960, gaining colonies in modern-day Rwanda and Burundi from Germany after the first world war. Belgium’s colonial legacy, including violence against African populations, the theft of natural resources and anti-black racism are “established historical facts that are not always recognised and fully acknowledged by Belgium,” states the report. The group does not recommend tearing down all statutes, but proposes a case-by-case approach on what to do with them. Some monuments could be removed to museums or a statue park; others could be renamed or put in context with information plaques. “A decolonised public space is not a space in which all colonial traces have been effaced,” stated the report, “but free of material elements that promote then and now the asymmetric relation between the former white ‘civiliser’ and the former colonised black person, perpetuating a racist ideology and inequalities”. The Parc du Cinquantenaire, a monumental green space built to celebrate the 50th anniversary of the Belgian state, financed by wealth pouring in from Congolese rubber, should be redeveloped, the expert group suggested. A monument in the park to the “Belgian pioneers” of the colonies should be renamed “monument to the deconstruction of Belgian colonial propaganda”, they suggested. The expert group also proposed a memorial to the victims of colonisation, as well as a museum or documentation centre where people can learn about Belgium’s imperial past. It warns against changing names by public vote, however, highlighting the furore when the Léopold II tunnel in Brussels was renamed after the late Belgian singer Annie Cordy in 2021. The singer, who died in 2020, came top of a public vote on renaming the tunnel, but the choice was controversial. Some criticised her old hit Hot Chocolate for its crude racial stereotypes, although her family strongly denied she had racist intentions. Others deplored the decision to name the tunnel in bilingual Brussels, after a singer far better known among Francophone Belgians than Dutch speakers. While fans said the decision to give an “ugly, dirty” tunnel her name was an “insult to her memory”. Pascal Smet, the minister in charge of urban planning for the Brussels capital region, said the group had taken a nuanced approach in addressing colonial monuments. “The easiest thing would be to get rid of all the statues, but they didn’t choose that,” he said. “Of course we all know for the individuals that are living in our city today, nobody is responsible for the colonisation, so there is no question of culpability, but it’s a question of a collective responsibility,” he said. “I think it very important, especially in the times that we are living now … not be stuck in history, but to understand history.” Many Brussels residents did not realise the significance of some colonial-era monuments and street names, he said. He had been unaware that the large thoroughfare, rue Général Jacques, had a link with the Congo. The street commemorates Jules Jacques, who organised punitive expeditions against Congolese workers who resisted Belgian-imposed rubber collection, but was later celebrated as a national hero during the first world war. Smet, who signs the permits to erect and dismantle monuments, hopes to publish an action plan by September, with the first decisions on individual monuments taken at the end of the year. A memorial to the victims of colonisation could be funded by the Belgian public sector and companies that profited from empire, he suggested. It was clear “something has to be done” with the Léopold II statue in central Brussels, but further debate was needed, he said. Belgium’s federal government, the owner of the central Brussels Léopold II bronze, would take the final decision, while choices on street names fall largely to local authorities in Brussels’ 19 communes. Smet promised the report would not languish. “This is not going to be a report that we have and say ‘ahh that’s interesting’ and then we put it on the shelf. This is going to be a report that has to be followed up.”The first single I ever bought Never Gonna Let You Go (the Kelly G mix) by Tina Moore, when I was at school. Everything about mid-90s garage seemed like the epitome of British glamour, full of giant golden-hooped earrings and wacky Moschino print trousers. The song that is my karaoke go-to As a kid, I used to be in a Spice Girls tribute act and would do Wannabe at birthday parties. It was all about girl power and friendship. I’ve still no idea what zig-a-zig-ah means, and that’s absurdly fantastic. The song I inexplicably know every lyric to I’ve always been a schmaltzy dreamer and would listen to whole albums to escape rainy afternoons. My mum and dad loved Barry White, so I thought his velvet tones were the peak of sophistication. I liked how Just the Way You Are says there’s someone out there who doesn’t want you to change. The last song I streamed While making a series on classical music for Scala Radio I was introduced to a Max Richter score that samples Dinah Washington. It completely blew me away. I’ve been playing a lot of Dinah to help me through the grey days. The best song to play at a party Shy Guy by Diana King will make anyone who knows what’s good for them do the boogie. The song that I secretly like, but tell everyone I hate Mambo No 5 (A Little Bit of … ) by Lou Bega is ridiculous but so catchy. It reminds me of the dodgems at the fair when I was 14. The song I can no longer listen to Most EDM gives me anxiety. Any dubstep/EDM crossover, such as Bonfire by Knife Party, makes me want to cry. It reminds me of hosting the weekend breakfast show on Radio 1 at some ungodly hour, trapped inside a vortex of noise. The best song to have sex to Turn Your Lights Down Low by Bob Marley and the Wailers featuring Lauryn Hill. Need I say more? The song I wish I’d written Appletree by Erykah Badu is full of simple folkloric wisdom. “If you don’t wanna be down with me, you don’t wanna pick from my apple tree.” It gives you power to say it’s OK if not everyone likes you. The song I can’t help singing Essence by WizKid featuring Tems has been the soundtrack to my whirlwind of road trips recently. I like to sing along very loudly! The song I want played at my funeral As a mixed-race child born in the mid-80s, I’m always grateful for the multiculturalism instilled in me. Shine by Aswad is a mantra to my life. Gemma Cairney is mentoring Brit School students through Mastercard x #ShoutOut as part of the Brit awards.Mike Cannon-Brookes has rejected a suggestion by Scott Morrison that a plan to shut AGL Energy’s coal power plants early would push up electricity bills, with the tech billionaire arguing fossil fuel generators are increasingly unreliable and new solar and wind lowers prices for consumers. Morrison on Monday responded to a proposed joint takeover of AGL by Cannon-Brookes and the Canadian asset management giant Brookfield. The prime minister said the government wanted coal plants to run until the end of their scheduled operating life and he was “very committed to sweating those assets” to ensure a reliable electricity supply at affordable prices. Two Liberal moderates, however, have warmly welcomed the bid for AGL, with backbencher Jason Falinksi stating “this is a real positive”. AGL rejected the initial bid by Brookfield and Cannon-Brookes’s Grok Ventures to buy the company for about $8bn, shut its coal plants by 2030, and build or contract for about eight gigawatts of new renewable energy and storage to replace it. But the consortium immediately pledged to continue to work on a takeover plan in shareholders’ interests. Asked about Morrison’s comments, Cannon-Brookes said the existing listed closure dates for Australia’s coal plants were not realistic, did not reflect “the economic life of those assets” and the consortium would spend up to $20bn on top of the sale price to replace AGL’s coal fleet “at a much lower price and a much higher reliability”. “Let’s face it – those coal plants aren’t exactly winning awards for reliability,” Cannon-Brookes, the co-creator of the software company Atlassian and one of Australia’s richest people, told Guardian Australia. “We’re trying to do this to provide lower power prices to the customers of AGL that increasingly want clean power as well because they have their own decarbonisation goals.” Cannon-Brookes said Australians were enjoying the lowest power prices in eight years, as the government had consistently pointed out, due to a significant increase of renewable energy into the power grid. He said his consortium was doing what the Morrison government had demanded when it called on the private market to replace coal plants before they closed so the commonwealth did not have to intervene further in the electricity market. “The private market is stepping up and providing that replacement capacity exactly as asked, and on an earlier schedule, which will result in lower power prices for all of those customers,” he said. “I assume he [Morrison] will be very happy with that.” Morrison’s dismissal of the proposal was backed more forcefully by the deputy prime minister, Barnaby Joyce, who said “affordable, deliverable, 24/7, no-questions-asked power” was essential to making Australia “strong”. Joyce contended on Monday that wind and solar energy did not meet those criteria. Joyce said if there was a problem down the line associated with replacing coal-fired power generation with renewable generation, Cannon-Brookes would not have to deal with it. “Poor people will pay for that problem,” he said. Cannon-Brooks said the takeover plan could create 10,000 construction jobs and would eliminate all emissions from Australia’s biggest corporate polluter by 2035. AGL is responsible for more than 8% of the national carbon footprint. Asked what role he would play if the bid was successful, Cannon-Brookes said he was currently focused on “trying to explain to shareholders why we believe this is the best option” and to show to everyone involved there were “alternate paths to this transformation”. He said he “deeply believed” decarbonisation was Australia’s greatest economic opportunity. “I’m happy to help in any which way. Obviously, my wife [Annie] and I and my family office have put a significant amount of capital into this, and this is not a philanthropic exercise. We believe that the economics stack up here and we can use our capital, which we’re very fortunate to have, in a catalytic way to help trigger and create that change,” he said. Two Liberal moderates warmly welcomed the bid for AGL. Falinksi said on Monday: “I think this is the market working.” “The bid has been rejected so [the consortium] will have to revise their numbers. But what Mike Cannon-Brookes is saying makes sense. He can deliver electricity for lower prices using renewables than using legacy coal assets,” the Mackellar MP said. “As long as he can make the numbers stack up around dispatchable power and reliability, which – with the cost of battery power declining and with pumped hydro coming online – then he can probably do that. This makes sense and he’s probably getting the assets on the cheap, so well done.” Fellow New South Wales moderate Andrew Bragg said the bid suggested investors now had the right policy signals to drive the energy transition. “The energy transition is going to be very expensive and it will be heavily reliant on foreign capital, which is why sending the right signals to foreign capital is important,” the senator said. “I think [the proposal] is good. It is good to see foreign and domestic capital seeking to propel the transition”. AGL recently brought forward the nominated closure date for two of its coal plants, Bayswater in NSW and Loy Yang A in Victoria, to no later than 2033 and 2045 respectively. The closure of its Liddell coal generator, also in NSW, had already been accelerated to next year. In a statement to the Australian Stock Exchange, AGL said it had rejected the unsolicited preliminary offer of $7.50 a share, which offered a 4.7% premium on Friday’s closing price of $7.16. Including AGL’s debt, the offer was in the range of $8bn. AGL said it was not in the best interest of shareholders. The consortium partners argued it was as it would avoid a “potentially value destructive” demerger under which AGL proposes to break off its coal plants into a separate entity to be called Accel Energy. It said the offer represented about a 20% premium on the company’s three-month volume-weighted average price of $6.28 a share. The owners of Australia’s coal-fired generators are under increasing pressure, both economic due to the rise of cheap solar energy in the national grid, and from activist shareholders to act in line with the Paris climate agreement. On Thursday, Origin Energy gave notice that the country’s biggest coal-fired power plant, Eraring, could shut seven years earlier than scheduled – in 2025 rather than 2032. AGL’s share price finished Monday up 10.6% to $7.92. It had earlier topped $8 for the first time since mid-July.Today’s puzzle concerns contestants in a fictitious game show trying to win £1m. It was also once given to a different sort of contestant competing for a different sort of prize: candidates applying to study joint philosophy degrees at Oxford university. The teenagers were hoping to study PPE (politics, philosophy and economics), Maths and Philosophy, and Computer Science and Philosophy. They were set the puzzle in their admissions interviews, as part of a back-and-forth discussion in which the interviewer may have given hints and asked probing questions. The interviewer was focussed on how the candidates went about solving the puzzle as much as the solutions they gave. It’s a really interesting puzzle, and – as we will see - relates to fundamental issues in logic and computer science. The game show You are a contestant on a game show with a £1m prize. A second contestant is in another room. The game is cooperative, so either you both win, or you both lose. You have never met the other contestant before, but you can assume they are just as logical as you are. The game begins with round 1, then proceeds with rounds 2, 3, and so on, for as many rounds as need be. On each round, each contestant has two choices: EITHER To tell the host: “I end the game” and announce a colour (any colour, of the contestant’s choice.) OR To send a message (of any length) to the other contestant. If you both choose to send a message, the messages are sent simultaneously, crossing in transit. To win the game you must both end the game on the same round, announcing the same colours. If only one of you ends the game, or you both end it announcing different colours, you lose. Round 1 is about to begin. What do you do? Clearly, you don’t end the game on round 1. That’s a self-evidently bad strategy. If you end the game, you would have to announce a colour, let’s say red. To win the £1m, the other contestant must also decide to end on the first round (unlikely) and also announce red (also unlikely). Don’t do it. The best strategy will involve some kind of dialogue between you and the other contestant. Let’s briefly consider a simpler variation of the puzzle, which will help us understand what the main puzzle is asking you to do. In this variation, the set-up is exactly the same, except that in each round only one contestant sends a message. In round 1 you send a message, in round 2 the other contestant sends you a message, and you continue alternating between the two of you. In this ‘alternating’ version, a simple strategy presents itself. Your round 1 message could be: “I will declare red on round 2; if you also do we will win.” Or, if you are more cautious, you may say: “let’s declare red in round 3, please confirm in round 2”. Remember, the other contestant wants to cooperate, and so will follow your lead. You will both win the £1m by round 3. This strategy, however, does not work in the original puzzle, when both of you must send messages simultaneously. Imagine your round 1 message is “let’s declare red in round 3, please confirm in round 2”. The other contestant is just as smart and logical as you, so they may have had the same idea, but with another colour! Let’s say their message is: “let’s declare blue in round 3, please confirm in round 2.” Where does that leave you both? Who confirms what colour in round 2? The crux of this puzzle is to understand that whatever message you send the other contestant, they may simultaneously send you exactly the same message but concerning a different colour. You must find a strategy that breaks this impasse. When this puzzle was used in Oxford admissions interviews, the contestant was not expected to come up with a perfect answer straight away. For a start, there is no clear-cut, “best message” to ask in round 1, since the effectiveness of any message will depend on the message you receive, and there is no way that you can know that in advance. Rather, the puzzle led to an open-ended discussion of the issues involved. There may be no “best initial message” but certain strategies are vastly better than others. The tutor may also have introduced these two variations: The collision variation: The contestants have three choices each round. Either they can end the game and announce a colour, or they can send a message, as in the standard version, or they can do nothing. If both players send a message, the messages collide and are not delivered. In this case, each player gets an error message saying the message was not delivered. What do you do? The pigeon variation: Only one contestant sends a message per round (like the simplified version mentioned above). You start in round 1, the other contestant sends in round 2, and you continue alternating between you. Although this time, you are a long distance from each other and the messages are sent via carrier pigeon, which means you can never be sure that the messages arrive. What do you do? These variations also begin to explain what the puzzle has got to do with computer science: they are analogies of the problems that arise when computers talk to each other. I’ll be back at 5pm UK with solutions to all three variations of the puzzle, and a discussion PLEASE NO SPOILERS Discuss your favourite game shows. Or suggest new game show-based logic puzzles. UPDATE: The solutions can be read here. Thanks to Joel David Hamkins, who wrote today’s puzzles. He is the O’Hara Professor of Philosophy and Mathematics at the University of Notre Dame, and until last December was Professor of Logic and the Sir Peter Strawson Fellow in Philosophy at University College, Oxford, where he conducted many admissions interviews. I rephrased the puzzle to make it more suitable for a newspaper column. I set a puzzle here every two weeks on a Monday. I’m always on the look-out for great puzzles. If you would like to suggest one, email me. I’m the author of several books of puzzles, most recently the Language Lover’s Puzzle Book. I also give school talks about maths and puzzles (online and in person). If your school is interested please get in touch. On Thursday 21 April I’ll be giving a puzzles workshop for Guardian Masterclasses. You can sign up here.Q Seven years’ ago – aged 60 – we downsized and bought a small flat by the Cornish seaside for £135,000 in cash. We have found we are too far from our grandchildren and want to move to a town near Bristol. We have no savings and very little income apart from two state pensions. We can’t decide whether to sell our Cornish flat and buy a park home or small flat in the town. The alternative might be to rent out the flat in order to fund the rent on something up there. Or there’s the risky route of renting this flat out as a holiday let all summer and coming back for the winter. JW A I can’t tell you whether the last option you mention is possible. I would need a local holiday-let expert to tell me first, whether your flat is the kind of place which would be solidly booked from the beginning of the season to its end and second, whether in its current state it is suitable as a holiday let. If the answer to both questions is a “no” then I suspect you can rule out option three. If the answers are “yes” but “no”, you need to think about how you are going to pay for the improvements necessary to make the flat a going concern. Without savings, this could be tricky. I’m also not sure that this option meets the brief of wanting to see more of your grandchildren as you wouldn’t get to see them over winter when you are back in Cornwall, but maybe I’ve missed something. As to option two, it is also only an option if the rental income (after tax) on the Cornish flat is enough to cover the rent charged on a property you would be happy with in the Bristol area. I suspect that it won’t be. On a happier note – but depending a lot on what you can sell your Cornish flat for – you should be able to find something to buy in the town you are interested in. If you limit yourself to properties only available to the over 60s, £129,950 buys you a one-bed flat on the high street; £165,000 gets you a two-bed flat which “enjoys a south-facing aspect and a pleasant open view to the front”; while stretching to £255,000 means you could have a one-bedroom flat close to amenities and handy for buses to Bristol and the surrounding area. To sum up, I think you need to ask local experts to give you actual figures to enable you to come to a decision that is right for you. • Want expert help finding your new mortgage? Use our new online tool to search thousands of deals from more than 80 lenders with the Guardian Mortgage Service, powered by L&amp;C.I live in rural Derbyshire and have been trying to get broadband installed since July last year. Since placing the order, I have received every excuse in the book from BT as to why my installation cannot go ahead. My near neighbour has a broadband service, but it appears that there is a problem with the pole in the road and it must be replaced. I took another call yesterday to learn that BT has just delayed installation by a further six weeks to March. That will be almost nine months since I placed the order – if it goes ahead. I have a very poor mobile signal which makes doing any work at home very difficult. The irony is, I have been promised £5.04p a day compensation for BT not connecting me, plus £25 each time it failed to attend. So far, I estimate it owes me over £800, a huge waste of money, which will no doubt end up being paid by other customers. NM, Derbyshire BT was one of the first firms to sign up to the Ofcom compensation scheme in 2019, which was launched to introduce financial disincentives to broadband firms for failing to connect customers. However, it clearly hasn’t worked in your case – £800 is an awful lot of compensation, but then it has been a very long wait. I asked both BT, your supplier, and Openreach, which manages the network on all the telecoms providers’ behalf, for an explanation, and Openreach has now got its act together. It blamed the delays on the fact that the work wasn’t properly flagged internally as a priority. “We’re extremely sorry for the time it’s taken to connect NM’s broadband. Such a lengthy delay is inexcusable but extremely rare. “We’re carrying out a detailed investigation to learn from this and prevent it happening again. In the meantime, we’ve replaced the pole and his broadband service has been connected,” it says. BT, the firm with which you have the contract, and the one responsible for paying the compensation (presumably reclaimed from Openreach) says: “We’re sorry for the delay. We’ve been working closely with Openreach to get him connected and have been keeping [NM] regularly updated. His broadband has been installed and we’ve provided compensation to make up for the delay.” You are just happy to be finally connected. We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at consumer.champions@theguardian.com or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Please include a daytime phone number. Submission and publication of all letters is subject to our terms and conditionsJanet Hock is a former dentistry professor who lives in Indianapolis. She is also an avid scuba diver, with a long love of the ocean. “We plod around on Earth, but there’s this whole other world that teems with life – or used to,” she says. So when Hock, 77, updated her will in 2020, she added that she wanted to become part of a coral reef when she died. The unusual request means her cremated remains will be mixed into a perforated concrete dome, known as a reef ball. She will then become part of an artificial reef, having a second life on the seabed. “You’re providing structure for fish to swim through and a place for plants to grow,” says Hock. “My first impression was that they’re really ugly. Then I thought: ‘Oh, it would be so nice to be down there, with little orange fish darting through the holes in my ball.’” The service is provided by Eternal Reefs, a Florida-based charity that says it offers a “way to give back after life by replenishing the dwindling natural reef systems”. It places reef balls made of pH-neutral concrete, along with human ashes, in regulated areas of the seabed around the US. Family and friends are given the GPS coordinates of where their loved one’s “grave” is located. The charity says it has seen the number of requests triple during the pandemic, mostly from people who love the sea – and the notion that in death they can help regenerate marine life. A desire to return to the ocean goes back millennia, with evidence of sea burial in ancient Egypt and Rome. In the South Pacific, bodies would be placed in canoes and pushed out to sea, while scattering ashes in the ocean has long been widely practised in Asia. And tales of fallen Viking heroes’ boats set ablaze have persisted in popular culture. Today, the idea of an ocean burial chimes with a search for eco-friendly alternatives to traditional burial and cremation. While the reef model still requires cremation, the idea is that the structures will help restore marine habitats by mimicking some characteristics of a coral reef. Most of the world’s reefs are at risk – from ocean warming and acidification, pollution and overfishing – according to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Reefs are essential to protect shorelines and maintain marine ecosystems, as well as providing work for local communities and even helping scientists to produce new medicines. Eternal Reefs works with the Reef Ball Foundation and Reef Innovations, which constructs the balls. At more than a metre high and two metres wide and weighing 250kg-1,800kg (550lb-4,000lb), the balls have a rough surface that allows marine plants and animals such as corals and algae to grow on them. The organisation has so far sunk close to 3,000 memorial reefs across about 25 sites, from Texas to New Jersey. Murray Roberts, professor of marine biology at Edinburgh University’s school of geosciences, thinks it is a good idea. “Corals and all sorts of animals grow better on structure,” he says. “I can’t see an obvious downside.” Roberts says incorporating human ashes into artificial reefs could help shield them from destruction, as well as highlighting the damage we do to the ocean. “When you have artificial reefs that contain human remains, imagine the consternation there would be if that area was trawled up,” he says. Dr Ken Collins, of Southampton University’s National Oceanography Centre, agrees. “It is a designated bit of seabed which remains undisturbed,” he says. Collins, whose specialism is artificial reefs, sees no problem with marine concrete and is involved in a UK memorial reef himself. “Any impact disappears within days,” he says. Eternal Reefs says the money people such as Hock pay for reef balls – which cost between $3,000 and $7,500 (£2,200-£5,500) – helps fund more artificial reefs. “We consider ourselves to be reef-builders. [That’s] what our goal is,” says George Frankel, chief executive of Eternal Reefs. “And we’re using memorialisation as the tool.” It is not the only such project in the ocean: the company behind the Neptune Memorial Reef, in Florida, says it “creates life after life” in the ocean and also provides memorials made of concrete and cremated remains, which cost from $1,295, to generate funding. “Building a reef costs money – lots of it,” says Jim Hutslar, its operations director. Hutslar says the artificial reef is home to 56 species of fish, as well as crabs, sea urchins, sponges and coral. When complete, it will comprise 250,000 memorials covering more than 6.5 hectares (16 acres), making it one of the world’s largest human-made reefs. The idea has also been adopted in Dorset, as part of a scheme to attract divers to the county. Two local divers, Marcus Darler and Sean Webb, gained permission from the Crown Estate (the monarchy owns the UK seabed) to obtain a square-kilometre site off the coast of Weymouth and Portland for a reef to help regenerate the local lobster population, as well as act as a dive site. “To help with funding, we came up with the idea of Solace Reefs,” Darler says. With Collins’ support, they created perforated domes out of crushed Portland limestone and human ashes. Since 2014, they have deposited 16. After diving around the site, a marine biologist reported: “There was a real diversity of invertebrates covering the stones […] it has become a new ecosystem.” Both Frankel and Hutslar say many people are interested in replicating the model. “I get calls on a regular basis,” Frankel says. “The problem is they all think it’s a get-rich-quick scheme.” Still, he says there’s “no question in my mind that it will be mainstream”. Not everyone is convinced, however. The model still involves cremation, which, on average, releases 400kg of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere for each body. “If people want to seriously make a difference, then don’t choose cremation,” says Rosie Inman-Cook, manager of the Natural Death Centre charity. “Cremation is a disaster.” The artificial reefs also use concrete, the manufacture of which is responsible for up to 8% of global CO2 emissions. Concrete has a huge environmental cost, says Michael Steinke, a marine biologist at Essex University, “so from that point of view it might not be the best idea, if you’re really environmentally minded.” Inman-Cook is wary of what she calls “gimmicky” burial products and services. Environmental concerns have led to quirky innovations, from “living coffins” made from mushroom fibre, to egg-shaped “seed” urns, which grow a tree on your remains. “It’s tinkering at the edges,” she says, arguing that such ideas are a distraction from more fundamental changes needed. Inman-Cook says natural burial is best for the environment. Hock says she was also sceptical about some of the new ideas for burial, but was impressed by the marine life living on some of the new reefs and felt it would be less difficult for her family than tending to a grave. “The video I watched showed how quickly these peculiar-looking balls were repopulated with fish, so the concept seemed to work,” she says. “It appeals to me – the thought of regrowing something that’s been destroyed.”That is where we will leave the live blog for today. Thanks for following along. Here’s some of what you might have missed today: All Sydney trains were cancelled due to industrial action, leaving thousands of commuters stranded across the network. The NSW state government and the Rail, Tram and Bus Union spent the day contending who was responsible for the shutdown. International borders completely reopened for the first time in two years, sparking emotional scenes amid reunions. AGL Energy rejected a takeover bid by tech billionaire Mike Cannon-Brookes and Canadian asset management giant Brookfield, saying the preliminary offer “materially undervalues the company”. A magnitude 5.2 earthquake hit New Zealand’s south island. The PM made an $86m forestry announcement in Tasmania which will supply grants to new timber plantations. NSW recorded 4,916 new Covid cases and seven deaths, Victoria recorded 5,611 new cases and three deaths, Queensland recorded 4,114 new cases and six deaths, the ACT reported 458 new cases and one death, WA reported 224 new cases, SA reported 1,217 new cases, the NT reported 627 new cases and Tasmania reported 569 new cases. Thanks for reading. Queensland Police have arrested Graham Potter, one of Australia’s most wanted men, after more than a decade on the run. Potter has been wanted since he failed to appear at Melbourne magistrates court in February 2010 on charges of conspiracy to murder. Police said they were acting on information they received, and found Potter at a home in the Tablelands: Acting on information received, Tablelands detectives, uniformed police and the Cairns dog squad attended an Ascham Street residence at approximately 8:45am where the 64-year-old was located and taken into custody. Detectives from Victoria Police will now travel to Queensland to see Potter’s extradition. A significant number of searches and public appeals have been conducted over the past 12 years in an effort to locate Potter. Potter is expected to appear before Mareeba magistrates court tomorrow. Reserve Bank governor Philip Lowe has warned there will be a “shock” to home buyers with big mortgages when rates are lifted. Lowe was at a G20 Meeting of central bank governors over the weekend, and said that heavily indebted households posed an economic risk. Rising interest rates on higher debt with higher asset prices – you can see the fault lines here. We know from previous experience that when countries are on different paths in terms of interest rates, stresses do emerge in the global financial system. I think it’s quite possible, in fact probable, there will be stress points over the next couple of years. We can’t be sure where the next shock will come from, but we can be sure there will be another shock. Matthew Longland, Sydney Trains chief executive, held a press conference earlier, and outlined that they believed the protected action the unions had proposed going into the weekend would have prevented a number of train crews working. He added that meant there was “no way that we would be able to put those trains into service safely and reliably”. He said they are “absolutely focused” on resolving the situation before tomorrow, saying they would “work into the evenings if required”. The safety concerns were not about operational safety. What we were concerned about was customer safety. Running two-and-a-half thousand services across the network each day, without an agreed roster for train crew, would mean that we would risk trains being stranded across the network, and customers being stranded across the network. That was too great a risk. Alex Claassens, the RTBU NSW secretary, was on the ABC earlier, and indicated that trains may not resume tomorrow, while adding that the union still doesn’t know what safety issues caused the shutdown. Claassens said it was still not clear what safety concerns the state government and Sydney Trains actually had that sparked the halt of the train system. So far, we haven’t been able to get to the bottom of what that safety issue is. Because we actually take that sort of allegation seriously. Any allegation we are unsafe, we take that to heart, we don’t accept that, we have always acted with safety in mind and any sort of noise they’re making around safety, well, tell us what it is and we’ll do something about it. Claassens said the union was disappointed and hurt the decision was made. He said this afternoon at the Fair Work Commission, the “other side” requested extensions, and he said they “weren’t ready yet”: They were supposed to be in there at 9am. The decision was made to have us all back there at 9am, we were all back there at 9am, but they weren’t ready yet. At various times during the day, they’ve asked for adjournments, they’ve asked for extensions, and I just got a message saying the commission won’t hear anything until Wednesday. So, everybody has been asking what is the safety issue? Why aren’t we utilising these train crews and everybody out here ready to run these trains, but all we get out of management is ‘oh, it’s too difficult, it’s too unsafe’. But we don’t actually know what it is that is so unsafe. The Australian Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC) wants Woodside Petroleum to explain an omission in its financial reports that meant the company did not detail how much extra it would cost to decommission oil rigs and other infrastructure. The fossil fuel company announced an extra $239m to cover future decommissioning costs on oil rigs, pipelines and other onshore and offshore rigs in its last report filed for the year ending 31 December 2021. But this information was absent in the company’s report for 31 December 20202, an oversight that the corporate regulator said in a statement that it had raised with Woodside. “Restoration obligations for companies in the offshore oil and gas sector can be significant and ASIC encourages directors of other industry participants to reassess the reasonableness of their financial reporting obligations and the adequacy of disclosures,” the statement said. The development comes after the Australasian Centre for Corporate Responsibility (ACCR) filed shareholder resolutions with Woodside and oil giant Santos, to force them to disclose decommissioning costs. A study supported by the federal government in 2021 found decommissioning costs on oil rigs and other infrastructure would cost more than $62b dollars (USD$45b) over the next 50 years. The CEO of the Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Andrew McKellar, has welcomed the reopening of Australia’s international borders, saying the tourism industry is “ready to roar back to life.” In a statement, McKellar said the reopening was a “lifeline” to the industry, adding that the border reopening meant “fortress Australia at last comes to an end.” Australia’s tourism industry is ready to roar back to life. Today, fortress Australia at last comes to an end. This is the moment tourism business, devastated by international border closures, have been waiting 23 long months for. The international reopening is a lifeline for our 300,000 tourism businesses and the 700,000-strong workforce that they employ. Prior to the pandemic, the economic benefit realised by inbound tourism was extensive, contributing up to $45bn in export income every year. Australia has had one of the longest and harshest border closures anywhere in the world, while disparate Covid-19 restrictions have differed across the country. Australia has a huge task ahead of it to repair its international reputation. In the same statement, the Chamber’s tourism Tourism executive chair, John Hart, echoed earlier calls that it would take until 2024 for tourism operators to return to pre-Covid levels: Businesses that are primarily reliant on international tourist arrivals have been crippled by the international border closures for almost two years. As such, targeted financial support for those businesses hit hardest will help them stay afloat until their operations can resume. Some of the surreal sights that greeted commuters today: So earlier today, amid the discussions of the train stoppage, we also had the reopening of Australia’s international borders. But Sydney Airport chief executive officer Geoff Culbert had earlier declared the tourism industry won’t completely recover until 2024. Speaking to Sky News, Culbert said international arrivals were still only at 15% of pre-pandemic levels: International [arrivals] is still only at 15 per cent of pre-Covid levels, but we’ll have 5,000 passengers come through today. That’s less than 100 passengers a day – so we’re having a good day today. The Australian Manufacturing Workers’ Union has released a statement on today’s rail shutdown in NSW, claiming the decision to suspend the rail network was “designed to have commuters turn on workers”. This shutdown is just the latest obstacle to securing a fair enterprise agreement. Union members would never put commuter safety at risk when taking industrial action. The only people impacted would be Sydney Trains management. Sydney Trains and Transport for NSW must stop the attacks on workers and return to the bargaining table. The AMWU NSW and ACT state secretary Cory Wright said the lockout had reflected that Sydney Trains “never intended to negotiate with workers in good faith”: The government has shown it will disrupt the lives of NSW residents simply to try and damage the reputation of transport workers and their unions. Good afternoon, just a quick thanks to Cait Kelly for expertly navigating the morning’s news. Mostafa Rachwani with you this afternoon, with much still going on. I am going to hand you over to my colleague Mostafa Rachwani who will take you through the evening. Labor has formally written to the government to request an urgent briefing on Thursday’s laser incident involving the Chinese military. Labor’s defence spokesperson, Brendan O’Connor, said in a letter to the defence minister, Peter Dutton, today: I am writing to request a briefing for Labor on the recent incident where a laser was detected emanating from a People’s Liberation Army – Navy vessel illuminating an ADF aircraft. This is an extremely disturbing incident and therefore request from the Defence Department and the ADF a briefing for the Shadow Foreign Minister [Penny Wong] and I as a matter of urgency. Labor has joined with the government in condemning the incident. The Liberal party’s federal preselection woes in New South Wales have worsened, with action launched in the NSW supreme court on Monday and one preselection candidate at risk of withdrawing from politics altogether. NSW state MP Melanie Gibbons has indicated she may quit politics if she’s unsuccessful in gaining preselection for the seat of Hughes, which could trigger a byelection and plunge the NSW government further into minority government. There has been a 5.2 magnitude earthquake in New Zealand. Recorded just after 3pm local time, the earthquake was 36km south-west of Blenheim, on the south island. More to come. Australia’s plateauing Covid-19 vaccination rates among 5 to 11-year-olds will be discussed at a round table of federal and state government representatives and public health experts on Friday. The round table is being convened by vaccine uptake expert Prof Julie Leask, with less than 50% of Australia’s 5 to 11-year-olds having received their first Covid-19 vaccine dose. A candidate endorsed by the United Australia Party told an anti-lockdown rally she wanted to say “hang Dan Andrews” but said she was “not allowed”, before continuing a chant of “jail Dan Andrews”, according to footage of the event. Clive Palmer’s party last week announced candidates for all 151 lower house seats, and attempted to boost their profile by publishing their names, photographs, and phone numbers in major Australian newspapers. There were tears, DJs, Vegemite and drag queens as families, friends and lovers reunited at Sydney airport after the resumption of all international travel to Australia. From AAP: High-tech police drones will be deployed in Cairns and Townsville as part of a new 12-month trial, but a “line-of-sight” rule will limit their capability for situations like car chases. Equipped with tracking and thermal imaging cameras, the drones will be useful in disaster response, siege situations and to help find lost people, remote pilot Sergeant Mark Gamer says. While they have a range of about 5km, pilots are only permitted to fly them to visual line of sight - meaning they must be visible at all times. “Even though the drone can only be used within visual line of sight, the zoom beyond that is quite incredible,” Gamer said on Monday. “We don’t use drones for car chases, drones are used for static type jobs like sieges ... [and] intelligence operations.” Nineteen journalists from Papua New Guinea’s leading television media company, EMTV, have been suspended following a walk-off protest by staff. The staff walked off the job last week in support of their head of news and current affairs, Sincha Dimara, who was suspended earlier in February for “insubordination” which according to reports consisted of running stories about the arrest of Australian businessman Jamie Pang including criticism of police and criminal procedure in the case. Secretary of the Australian Council of Trade Unions Sally McManus has posted this on Twitter in response to the PM’s (incorrect) comments today that train workers are striking and a Labor government will mean more strikes. New South Wales opposition leader Chris Minns urged the government to work with the union to resume train services. He said: Let’s be clear - the only people who didn’t turn up to work today is the NSW government. The NSW government needs to sit down and work this out. Perrottet shut down the rail network. He needs to work to open it back up. From AAP: The Northern Territory has reported 627 new Covid-19 infections, with the region set to welcome the return of international tourists. NT Health officials said 123 people remained in hospital with Covid-19, including three in intensive care. There are 6,106 active infections. A Qantas flight from London was due to touch down in Darwin on Monday morning following the opening of Australia’s international borders. The tourism minister, Natasha Fyles, said the Territory’s management of the pandemic had put it in a strong position to welcome the return of international visitors. “This will be an economic shot in the arm for tourism businesses who have been doing it incredibly tough over the past two years,” she said. From AAP: AGL Energy has rejected the first salvo in a multi-billion dollar takeover play by a consortium led by the tech billionaire, Mike Cannon-Brookes, to fast-track Australia’s exit from coal-fired power. The consortium on Monday said it intends to spend A$20bn to transform AGL’s generation fleet consistent with a target to limit global warming to 1.5 degrees. “The consortium remains optimistic that an agreement can be reached with the AGL board,” the group told AAP on Monday. “If successful, this will be one of the biggest decarbonisation projects in the world today and show Australia is capable of globally significant projects,” said Cannon-Brookes, who made his fortune through software company Atlassian. “It will create over 10,000 Australian jobs and ensure customers don’t bear the brunt of higher power prices – a likely scenario if the proposed demerger happens.” Jo Haylen is the shadow minister for transport in NSW – she tweeted this just before: The Victorian government has unveiled a $200m stimulus package in a bid to revitalise the state’s hospitality and tourism sectors. The package includes $10m for the Melbourne Money voucher scheme to entice people to dine in the CBD, $30m on regional tourism vouchers, $30m for entertainment vouchers and $60m in ventilation vouchers to help small businesses become more Covid-safe. More than $34m of Jobs Victoria funding will also help 1,500 workers find placements across the hospitality, warehousing, logistics, tourism and food processing sectors. The tourism minister, Martin Pakula, said: We think this is the best way to target support. We think what businesses need is customers back, money in the hands of customers so that they can spend and enjoy bringing our city back to life. Western Australia has reported 224 new cases of Covid overnight, with 213 of them locally acquired. Confused about the Chinese laser situation? Here is a really good rundown from the Conversation. The last time I hugged my mum was early on a July morning in 2019 as I put her in a taxi outside my house in Canterbury, Kent. I should have been driving her to Heathrow myself. I’d picked her up at 6am when she’d arrived from Australia, but I was feeling fractious after five weeks together in my cramped terrace house, writes Kate Guest. Some more from earlier, when the NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, fronted the media at Sydney Airport alongside the minister for tourism, Stuart Ayres. The long anticipated celebration of international travel resuming has been soured by ongoing transport disputes. Perrottet said he would be meeting with the union later this morning. On the transport minister, David Elliot’s, comments earlier this morning comparing the actions of the union to terrorism, Perrottet said he was “clearly frustrated, as we all are”: We’ve been working through these issues for a period of time just like we always do and their approach is incredibly poor, so I can completely appreciate how frustrated the transport minister is. The ACT has recorded one Covid death, a man in his 80s. It is unclear if he was vaccinated. There were 458 new cases recorded, 37 are in hospital and of those, one is in ICU. Perrott says it’s a strike, but train drivers say they turned up to work as rostered to start their shifts – which is not very strike-like. Perrottet: I’ll do whatever it takes to ensure this doesn’t happen again but the unions are responsible and they need to be called out for it. Perrottet said it was a coordinated attack: I’m incredibly disappointed. I feel the anger of everybody across our city. Make no mistake - this is a coordinated attack by the Labor party and the Union movement. What we saw this morning, based on the actions of the Union, was absolutely disgraceful. It should be condemned. The tit-for-tat over if train workers did go on strike has continued with Dominic Perrottet addressing media a little earlier in Sydney. This is what he had to say: Yes, they did go on strike. The decision was made by Sydney Trains because of the lack of agreement based on the fact the unions and negotiations that have been occurring in good faith ... on Saturday, when a decision was reached, the unions took a different approach. It was called back on Sunday and they [the unions] didn’t even turn up ... we will continue to negotiate in good faith. Anglicare Australia has released a federal election wish list – with five ideas for political candidates to pick up. Executive director Kasy Chambers said: After an unprecedented two years, the nation faces major challenges. Record numbers of Australians cannot afford a home. People out of work are struggling to make ends meet. And the climate crisis looms large as we face more extreme weather. That’s why so many people are hungry for ideas. They want leadership with vision and empathy – leadership for everyone. Within months, Australians will vote in one of the most important elections we have ever faced. Our hope is that parties and candidates will sign up to our ideas – and work with us to turn them into action. In Five Ideas Australia Needs Now, Anglicare Australia is calling for: A basic income A jobs guarantee A community climate fund A home for every Australian Governing for all: a people’s inquiry into Covid-19. The Communist party of Australia has distanced itself from ALP leader Anthony Albanese after the Tele published this story: The RTBU is asking the PM to apologise after falsely saying the trains stopped this morning because of striking workers: Here are the latest coronavirus numbers from around Australia today, as the country records at least 17 deaths from Covid-19: ACT Deaths: 1 Cases: 458 In hospital: 37 (with one person in ICU) NSW Deaths: 7 Cases: 4,916 In hospital: 1,288 (with 74 people in ICU) NT Deaths: 0 Cases: 627 In hospital: 123 (with 3 people in ICU) Queensland Deaths: 6 Cases: 4,114 In hospital: 401 (with 34 people in ICU) South Australia Deaths: 0 Cases: 1,217 In hospital: 190 (with 13 people in ICU) Tasmania Deaths: 0 Cases: 569 In hospital: 10 (with 2 people in ICU) Victoria Deaths: 3 Cases: 5,611 In hospital: 361 (with 49 people in ICU) Western Australia Deaths: 0 Cases: 224 (213 locally acquired) AGL Energy’s shares have jumped on the ASX after the company resumed trading after a weekend bid for the company by billionaire Mike Cannon-Brookes and Canadian asset manager Brookfield. In early trading, the stock was up about 8.7%, or 62 cents, to $7.78. That’s above the $7.50 a share unsolicited offer lobbed by the consortium for the country’s largest electricity generator and also biggest source of greenhouse gas emissions. AGL this morning rejected the bid as “materially” undervaluing the company, given it offered a premium of under 5% of Friday’s ASX close. Tasmania has reported 569 new Covid cases and no deaths in the last 24 hours. Ten people are in hospital; of those two are in ICU. Lastly, the PM is asked about the Queen having Covid: This is very upsetting and I’m sure particularly for her majesty and her family, at 95, getting Covid is more of a concern than, other age groups. We wish for a full recovery and there are few more resilient people than her majesty. Scott Morrison says Tourism Australia has kicked off its $40m campaign: Look around us. This is the best tourism product in the world. It’s the best tourism experience in the world. This is what they waited for, we are opening and we were set build again with the aviation links being restored, with the support being provided to work with the tourism and travel operators around the world to bring tourists back to Australia. It will recover and my hope is that will recover strongly and soon but we shouldn’t overestimate the challenge we have had because everyone else will be competing with us and we’ll be right out there competing against them. The PM has jumped in to attack the ALP: If you can’t have control of your budget, if you manage your finances carefully, that puts pressure on inflation, drives inflation up, meaning you’ll see interest rates rise as well. The Reserve Bank set interest rates and the pressure on interest rates to rise is only going to increase over the next few years. The pressure on inflation is only going to increase and what Australia can’t afford is a Labor Party that doesn’t know how to manage money. Josh Frydenberg jumps in on a question about why the federal government ignored a request from the Tasmanian government to help out financially: Premier Gutwein did write to me and also the NSW government asked us for further economic support but we took a decision that the economy is recovering strongly and we have to draw the line. The PM says strikes are what people can expect from a Labor government: If people want to hand the country to unions under a Labor government led by the most leftwing Labor leader in 50 years since Gough Whitlam – and that’s probably being a bit unkind to Gough Whitlam, you might have to go back further – this is what they can expect. We cannot stand up to that sort of intimidation by unions. The PM has been asked about the situation with Sydney trains. He incorrectly has labelled the industrial a strike: They are shutting down the city with a massive big strike and the international gateway for the international tourists to Australia and the union movement set up a big welcome by shutting down the trains and causing gridlock in the city. Joel Fitzgibbon, the Labor member, said today Sydneysiders would be sympathetic this. I don’t think so. Scott Morrison has now been asked about the situation in Europe: We are working very closely with our partners right across the region in Europe and more broadly, that involves the actions we will take and sanctions, should Russia follow through on their threats of violence and intimidation on Ukraine. He has used it to pivot back to the Chinese naval vessel using a laser on an ADF aircraft: You would have seen reports of a Chinese naval vessel using a laser to target Australian defence force surveillance aircraft. This is completely unacceptable and so we have demanded there be an investigation on the behaviour of what occurred on the vessel, it was dangerous, it was reckless and it was unprofessional for what should be a sophisticated navy. We expect China to provide answers on those matters and we’re going through the appropriate channels to achieve that. The PM is asked if he still backs Bridget Archer even though she crossed the floor. Of course. There is a difference between the Liberal and Labor party and my dear Victorian colleague could speak more to this about the Labor party in Victoria that I can but, in our party, we don’t throw people up because we don’t always agree on everything. That’s the nature of the Liberal party, it’s called Liberal for a reason. In Victoria at the moment, the Victorian Labor party is looking to run out of town, ran out of the party someone who is blowing the whistle on alleged corruption in that state. What’s the Labor party’s response? To throw out a female member of parliament, run them out of the Labor party because they are standing up on an issue that’s incredibly important. Josh Frydenberg is also asked about the bid: I wouldn’t pre-empt any decisions out of that because we aren’t yet at a point where the bid has been accepted by the shareholders. The key point is that Australia is investing heavily in renewables and we have a plan of net-zero by 2050. A key issue for Australians together with lower emissions is the affordability of power and across the rest of the world we have the energy prices go up. The PM has been asked about the attempted AGL takeover by Mike Cannon-Brookes: Let me be clear about something, we need to ensure that our coal-fired generation of electricity runs to its life. Because if it doesn’t, electricity prices go up. They don’t go down. If our government is very committed to … to ensure that businesses can get access to the electricity and energy they need to have. Affordable prices are key to people in jobs. What is essential is that we get the balance right with our energy policy, for the opponents in the election, the Labor party, have election targets which are not forecast to be achieved when it comes to current policy settings. Josh Frydenberg says the unemployment rate is 4.2% nationally and 3.8% in Tasmania – the lowest rate in 13 years: And we are heading to the lowest unemployment rate in some 50 years. That is an enormous achievement. Josh Frydenberg is speaking now: The Morrison government has stood by the people of Tasmania every step of the way through this pandemic. More than $3.5bn has been provided to the people of Tasmania. And, as our economy strongly recovers, it is easy to forget what the conditions were like back in early 2020. When we announced jobkeeper, that provided $1.4bn to the people of Tasmania, including more than 70,000 workers across the state. The cash flow boost provided another $700m to the people of Tasmania. Morrison is announcing $86m to help the forestry industry: The forestry industry has taken, like the tourism industry, quite a hit. We already invested $80m to help, whether it was the saw millers or the plantation owners or others trying to get back up on their feet. And now we are investing $86m, that is 150m trees, new plantings, they will help us achieve our goal of ensuring that we have a sustainable forestry industry, not just here in Tasmania but all around the country. He is starting by talking about Josef Chromy, who owns one of the largest vineyards in the state: Josef came to this country, fleeing Czechoslovakia, and he escaped with two other young men and was the only one who got through. He came to this country like so many have, and he has established something magnificent here in Tasmania. He is an incredible Australian story, who is an Australian hero. And I asked him a little while ago, as we were walking through the bowling area, and I said, ‘Did you ever think it would get as big as this?’ He said, ‘I thought I would just have a butcher shop.’ And look at all of this. Just shows what is so possible in this country. The PM is speaking now from Tasmania. Queensland has recorded six deaths of people with Covid-19, with 401 people in hospital. Of those 34 are in ICU. There are 4,114 new cases. The six deaths were people between the ages of 60 and 80. Only one was fully vaccinated and four had had two doses of vaccine. Australian health authorities are warning parents to stop feeding their babies three brands of formula as they may be contaminated with dangerous bacteria. Both Victorian and New South Wales health authorities issued alerts on Sunday night, after EleCare, Similac and Alimentum instant formulas were recalled. Via AAP: The federal government is providing an additional $678m to seal another 1,000km of the Outback Way, a series of roads and dirt tracks that pass through Queensland, the Northern Territory and Western Australia. Prime minister Scott Morrison said the government was committed to sealing the entire 2,720 kilometres of the Outback Way, cutting travel times for freight and tourists while giving residents along the route the supplies they need. He said the upgrades would support 2,197 jobs and deliver an important economic boost across Australia’s centre: Investing in infrastructure right across Australia will keep our economy strong and growing while ensuring Australians, regardless of where they live, have jobs. Our investment locks in a pipeline of works that will drive investment in regional Australia and boost economies from Winton in Queensland to Laverton in Western Australia. Election seasons invariably bring an uptick in leaders popping up for commercial radio interviews. Anthony Albanese turned up on NovaFM 96.9 with Fitzy and Wippa this morning and sketched out his pitch to voters as follows: Australians will say themselves, ‘OK, is this as good as it gets, or can we do better?’ And we’ve been busy trying to hold the government to account, but also putting forward some positive ideas for free Tafe and extra uni places and dealing with climate change. When the host suggested “free welding”, Albanese jumped in with this sick burn: If you want a guy to shampoo your hair and weld without a mask on and all that, then play a ukulele – kind of – then Scott is your guy. Albanese said people just wanted Morrison “to do his job – and his job was to order enough vaccines, his job was to order rapid antigen tests, his job was to plan; the crisis in aged care is there right now”. The Royal Australian College of General Practitioners says new research finding that expectant parents are encountering misinformation about childhood vaccines on social media and small inner circles is deeply concerning. The Flinders University study found vaccine anxiety is driving parents to seek information from sources where misinformation is rife, including social media. RACGP vice-president Dr Bruce Willett said the research highlighted the need for improved vaccine education for parents: While we have high childhood vaccination rates in Australia, with 95% of five-year-olds having received all scheduled childhood immunisations, vaccine hesitancy remains a serious threat to our community. Before the pandemic, we were seeing horrifying outbreaks of measles. It was in isolated pockets, but we really shouldn’t be seeing this disease in our country because we have readily available vaccines. Since then, the pandemic has led to the proliferation and rapid spread of vaccine misinformation in our community. This research should be a wake-up call – it shows the urgent need for improved education that’s appropriately targeted to parents and those who are pregnant from all cultural and linguistic backgrounds. Can you survive in the Australian wilderness alone? Australian campers, survivalists and reality TV fans are all in for a treat, with SBS announcing the launch of an Australian version of Alone, the international hit that sees contestants compete to survive the longest in remote locations: While we are on the trains: NSW transport minister David Elliott has used some (quite frankly ridiculous) language this morning – likening the situation to terrorism. Elliott said the government wasn’t to blame, and that the union had failed to turn up to an industrial conciliation meeting last night. He told 2GB: I think we’re going to have a large standoff right now because they cannot use Sydney’s transport system for some sort of terrorist-like activity. The action is the latest chapter in a long-running dispute between the government and the union over safety guarantees, hygiene and privatisation concerns. Not sure why this needs to be pointed out but the fact that no trains are running in Sydney right now is not the same as a terrorist attack. – with AAP Unions and workers are stressing over social media that they are not on strike – they do in fact want to work. From AAP: Defence Minister Peter Dutton says it is difficult to see how Russian President Vladimir Putin hasn’t given troops the order to invade Ukraine given the military buildup on the border. Speaking after reports from US intelligence and warnings from British prime minister Boris Johnson the conflict would be the biggest war in Europe since 1945, Mr Dutton said invasion seemed inevitable. “Troops continue to build up, the presence of the ships in the Black Sea, the cyber attacks, the false flag activity, it’s all pointing in one direction sadly,” he told the Nine Network on Monday. “We just don’t want to see women and children as the victims of another war, but it seems that is the path that Vladimir Putin is set on embarking.” Mr Dutton said any conflict would have a knock-on effect for the world and while there are hopes of an 11th-hour reprieve, “There is no sign of one yet.” A few people on social media were reporting a massive surcharge on Uber because Sydney trains have stopped This is so good – a group of drag queens are at Sydney airport welcoming international arrivals: NSW has reported seven deaths of people with Covid-19 in the last 24 hours; 1,288 people are in hospital, of those 74 are in ICU. Victoria has recorded three deaths of people with Covid-19 in the last 24 hours; 361 people are in hospital and of those 49 are in ICU and 11 are on a ventilator. We had a few lines from Rail, Tram and Bus Union NSW secretary Alex Claassens on the blog earlier. My colleague Tamsin Rose has the full press conference here: Claassens insisted the action was not a strike and workers were ready to go. We are not on strike. All the people sitting in the meal rooms, all across the network are ready to work at a minute’s notice. The union has been tense in negotiations with the government over a new enterprise agreement. Our members have got a right to negotiate a fair enterprise agreement. It’s not about money. It’s always been about safety issues, about protections against privatisation. It’s also about protections for the commuters, to make sure we maintain a safe and clean network. NSW employee relations minister Damien Tudehope told the ABC semantic disagreements about it being a strike or not wouldn’t make today any easier for commuters. We will continue to negotiate with the union with a view to trying to reach some sort of resolution. We want the trains running. We want people back at work. We’ve got international flights arriving in Sydney and people are arriving to union-inspired chaos. Scott Morrison also wished the Queen a “speedy recovery” after she tested positive to Covid. He told 2GB: There are few people more resilient than her majesty. And we wish her all the best as she works her way through this. Scott Morrison has hit back at “all the narks, you know, in the bubble [who] want to have a crack at me” after he lifted his welding face shield during a photo opportunity in the Northern Territory on Saturday. The prime minister, in a radio interview this morning, suggested that he was “showcasing the great work of our apprentices and small businesses”. The footage gained attention on social media, with some pointing out the lifting of the face shield was dangerous. The president of the Australian Council of Trade Unions, Sally McManus, asked: “What do the tradies of Australia think of this?” The 2GB host Ben Fordham raised it during an interview with Morrison this morning: We’ve seen some footage of you over the weekend, having a crack at welding, prime minister; we’ve seen you playing the ukulele. We’ve seen you washing hair in women’s hair salons and now you’ve had a go at welding in the Northern Territory. Apparently, you’re supposed to have the face shield down when you’re welding. Did you know that? Morrison: Well, of course I did. This was a pretty tricky little device I was trying to use I hadn’t used that one before. But Ben what I like to do, and it doesn’t matter whether I’m at a welding shop, or whether I’m in a hairdressers, I like to learn and understand what our trainees and apprentices are doing. Morrison went on to spruik the number of trade apprentices in training. So if people want to have a chip at me, because I’m not a good welder. Well, that’s not my day job. Or I’m not a good hairdresser. And you know, I think it’s sort of a bit passing strange, you know that they’ll – they never used to say anything about me doing things on welding or you know, those things that people think are more blokey jobs, but I go and do what young female apprentices are learning to do at a hairdressing salon, and they have a crack at me. I think they’re fantastic. I think all of our apprentices are fantastic. They’re hard jobs. And you’ve got a lot to learn, as I showed everybody, I’ve got a lot to learn if I wanted to do those jobs. I just think our apprentices and the small businesses that are giving them a go are fantastic. And if all the narks, you know, in the bubble want to have a crack at me, well, they can. But what I’m doing is showcasing the great work of our apprentices and small businesses. At Sydney airport the minister for tourism, Dan Tehan was asked whether government rhetoric on China would prevent Chinese tourists from returning to Australia. He says “obviously we have some challenges with the Chinese government” but Australia has a strong Chinese community. “It will pick up when the government gets rid of its zero Covid policy,” he says, assuring he would be doing “everything possible” to keep the border open. “We will continue to stand for Australia’s national interest with the Chinese government when we need to.” Tehan was also asked about Scott Morrison’s scare campaign of the past week suggesting that the opposition leader is the preferred candidate of the Chinese government. “If you want to stand as prime minister in this country you’ve got to withstand the character test,” he replies. “You’ve got to be consistent with the policy approach that you take … don’t say one thing to one audience and another thing to another.” AGL Energy has rejected a takeover bid by tech billionaire Mike Cannon-Brookes and Canadian asset management giant Brookfield, saying the preliminary offer “materially undervalues the company”. Brookfield and Cannon-Brookes’ Grok Ventures made the extraordinary offer to take over Australia’s most polluting company on Saturday, with a goal to shut its coal power plants earlier than planned. The unsolicited offer was for Brookfield and Grok Ventures to acquire AGL’s power generation and energy retail divisions, which include coal, gas and renewable energy generation assets. In a statement to the Australian Stock Exchange, AGL confirmed the offer was to acquire the company for $7.50 a share, which it said represented a 4.7% premium to its closing value on Friday. Cannon-Brookes and Brookfield are expected to speak about the offer today. Good morning folks. Now that the federal parliament has risen until budget week at the end of March, politics will be in full campaign mode. Over the weekend, Labor unveiled a $200m roads package in the Northern Territory. The long-serving Labor MP Warren Snowdon, who holds the territory seat of Lingiari is retiring from public life, and Labor will want to hold his seat. This morning Scott Morrison is in Tasmania, armed with an $86m forestry announcement. Obviously, there are a couple of Liberal-held marginal seats in Tasmania that Labor is targeting in this contest. Through the program to be flagged on Monday, the government is proposing to supply grants (to be matched by the states and territories and industry) to support new timber plantations. The government envisages the commonwealth will fund 40% of the contribution with participating states and territories providing the rest. The funding will be available for plantations of new soft or hardwood in existing regional forestry hub areas. There have been timber shortages during the pandemic, and the government says global demand for timber is expected to quadruple by the middle of the century. Claassens: As we all know, there’s a range of things that we have been asking for. It’s not about money. It’s always been about safety issues, about protections against privatisation. It’s also been about protections for the commuters, to make sure we maintain a safe and clean network. Rail, Tram and Bus Union secretary Alex Claassens is giving a press conference in Sydney now. This is not a strike. As people will remember, we have been trying to negotiate since the expiry of the previous one in May last year. We have been taken various forms of protected industrial action since September. And as everybody will remember, we’ve actually only been on strike on two occasions during this current round of industrial action. An eight-hour overnight stoppage and a four-hour stoppage which we took. Other than that, we’ve continued to put on a range of bans and limitations, which makes life difficult for management – we get that. But, you know, at the end of the day, our members have got a right to negotiate a fair enterprise agreement. All Sydney trains have been cancelled due to industrial action, leaving thousands of commuters stranded across the network on Monday morning. Workers have been warned to brace for a “very difficult” day by Sydney Trains chief executive Matt Longland. “We’re urging customers to obviously avoid travel today or to use the transport journey planner to look for alternative options, such as buses, ferries and light rail if possible,” Longland told 2GB. Services will be disrupted across the city including routes connecting Sydney to the Blue Mountains, the south coast and Newcastle and commuters are being told to allow for extra travel time. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, condemned the action, accusing the union of making it hard or impossible for some essential workers this morning. “There are people this morning who are going to have an overpriced Uber or they’re going to be not able to get to work,” he told 2GB. “This is not how you treat your fellow citizens. “I feel for all of those Sydneysiders today who are affected by the strike.” Extra buses will be added to the network today, transport for NSW secretary Rob Sharp confirmed early on Monday morning. “We are doing everything possible to minimise the impact to commuters and sincerely apologise to everyone inconvenienced by this industrial action,” Sharp said. Services were cancelled around midnight last night after negotiations between the Rail, Tram and Bus Union and Transport for NSW broke down overnight, following dozens of meetings between the groups. The parties appeared before the Fair Work Commission twice over the weekend before the state government decided it would be impossible to safely operate services due to planned union action. “We appeared before the Fair Work Commission twice over the weekend, including at 8pm last night, seeking a stop to this industrial action by the RBTU,” Sharp said. “These actions will impact hundreds of thousands of commuters and come at a time when people just want to get back to work, back to school and back to university – it’s not what our community needs at this time.” RTBU NSW Secretary Alex Claassens said the planned action – which would see workers only perform the actions they were set without any changes – would have only impacted management, not commuters. “Workers will be taking protected industrial action, but only transport management will notice the impact, not commuters,” Claassens said in a statement. “If commuters see any impact to their services, it won’t be because of workers’ actions, but because the NSW government is spitting the dummy and trying to make a point. “There’s no strike – workers are simply performing the shifts we’re set without any changes.” The groups will be back before the Fair Work Commission later today. The minister for trade tourism and industry, Dan Tehan, is speaking now from Sydney international airport. He says today is a “great day” for the nation’s tourism industry, hit by two years of border closures. “The future is looking very, very bright,” he said. “To see the way people have been united, the hugs, the tears, has been wonderful. “It’s been a party out here at Sydney airport.” Sydney airport is a hive of activity this morning with the border fully opened to international travellers for the first time in three years. Some 56 flights are expected to touch down in Australia today, more than half in Sydney – where arrivals are being greeted with koala and kangaroo toys, Vegemite and eucalyptus sprigs. Sam Brain has just arrived from London after two years away from her friends and family. Her school friend, Emma, was there to greet her with a tearful hug. Sam is planning to surprise her mother later on today – who doesn’t know she’s made the visit. “It’s been an amazing experience coming back, quite overwhelming with everyone here”, she says. “And a DJ. The whole process getting here was so worrying … but I’ve made it. “My mum has to idea, she’s going to have a heart attack.” Rishm Singh arrived from Toronto this morning with her children, and couldn’t wait to spend long-awaited time with her family. “I was feeling a lot of anticipation – are we going to make it?” she said. “But we have, and I feel so grateful … the past two years were horrendous, heart wrenching.” Prime minister Scott Morrison says the government is using diplomatic channels to call for an investigation into the lasering of an Australian military aircraft by a Chinese warship. Morrison said China needed to explain how such a dangerous act could be undertaken by “what is supposed to be a professional defence force”. “This is a dangerous and reckless act and worse, it can be seen as an act of intimidation and bullying,” he told Sydney radio 2GB on Monday. The aircraft was in Australia’s exclusive economic zone in the Arafura Sea off the country’s Top End. “Could you imagine if that had been an Australian frigate up in the Taiwan Strait and they were pointing lasers at Chinese surveillance aircraft?” the prime minister said. “Could you imagine the reaction to that in Beijing?” The action came after a week of Labor and the Coalition arguing over national security, with the PM hoping to paint Labor as soft on China to win votes. My colleague Caitlin Cassidy is at the airport this morning. This is the scene greeting international arrivals. Good morning everyone, this is Cait Kelly. We have a lot happening this morning, so let’s get into it. The first international tourists in two years have touched down at Sydney international airport this morning, greeted by jubilant well-wishers waving Tim Tams, jars of Vegemite and stuffed koalas. Federal tourism minister Dan Tehan was there to welcome the first arrivals, who all need to be at least double vaccinated to enter. “What wonderful, wonderful news for our tourism industry and the 660,000 people employed in it,” Tehan told the Nine Network. Meanwhile, thousands of NSW commuters have been left stranded after all Sydney train services were cancelled due to industrial action. Sydney Trains CEO Matt Longland says commuters are in for “a very difficult” morning and urged people to avoid trains. The Italian ambassador to Australia, Francesca Tardioli, 56, has died after falling from a balcony in her hometown in Foligno in the Umbria region. The incident is being investigated by the police in Italy. And power company AGL Energy is the target of an $8bn takeover bid from Australian tech billionaire Mike Cannon-Brookes and Canadian investment firm Brookfield. The offer promises to get AGL out of coal in just a decade. – With Australian Associated PressThe American national anthem may tout the country as the “land of the free”, but the legitimacy of that statement is becoming increasingly stretched in 2022, as conservatives have launched a concerted campaign to prevent ideas and books from being presented to schoolchildren. Republicans in several states have launched efforts to ban books pertaining to race and LGBTQ+ issues from classrooms, while some legislatures are pushing to introduce laws which would ban teachers from discussing homosexuality. Other states have already banned discussion of the modern-day impact of historic racism in the US. It is a situation that has no parallel in America’s recent history. And in an interview with the Guardian, Suzanne Nossel, CEO of PEN America, a non-profit organization that works to protect freedom of expression in the US, said the efforts to censor education, in particular, fit in with a wider attempt by conservatives to influence society. “There have been battles and debates that have bubbled up from time to time but the ferocity of this wave of both the education gag orders affecting curricular and book bans is unprecedented,” Nossel said. “We’re in this pitched moment of historically unprecedented polarization in our country and there is a very potent and intense struggle under way about what the future of our society looks like,” Nossel said. There are few signs that US polarization will decrease any time soon. Democrats and Republican politicians are deeply divided over issues around education, social care, women’s rights and the pandemic recovery, while only a fifth of Republicans believe Joe Biden was legitimately elected, despite a lack of evidence of widespread election fraud. In January an NBC News poll found that 70% of Americans believe the country has become so polarized it can no longer solve major issues facing the country. “Our population is changing. We’re becoming an increasingly pluralistic society, along so many different dimensions and there’s this fierce backlash trying to kind of yank it in the other direction, with the notion that we’re somehow restoring some great path that’s been lost. “We see that in efforts to curtail voting rights across the country and to empower legislatures to overrule the will of an increasingly diverse population that go to the polls.” That crusade is increasingly bleeding into education. In the last year, PEN America counted 155 bills introduced in 38 states that would censor what teachers can say or teach in classrooms. In 2022 there has been a “steep rise” in the introduction of what PEN America calls “gag orders”, the organization said. In Florida a “Don’t Say Gay” bill, which would ban discussion of sexuality and gender identity in schools, was passed by the state senate’s education committee on 8 February, and has been endorsed by Ron DeSantis, Florida’s governor. The bill, which must pass the full Florida senate and the house before becoming law, would allow parents to file lawsuits against school boards if they believe policies violate the law. A bill introduced in the Kansas house on 9 February would change the state’s obscenity law, making it a class B misdemeanor for a teacher to use any material which depicts “homosexuality” in a classroom, while looming legislation in Arizona would allow parents to sue teachers and school districts for perceived violations of parental rights. In schools, these laws serve to “hobble our educators, and intimidate them in a chilling way”, Nossel said. “It puts librarians, teachers, principals in a position of having to fear that if they put forward certain ideas, or even if a student puts forward certain ideas, and it gets taken up as a classroom discussion, that they may be subject to discipline or punishment or fines.” While classroom censorship has become an eagerly embraced hobbyhorse for conservatives, there is little evidence that a majority of parents are demanding more censorship in the classroom or demanding more influence over what their children can read, or be taught. A CNN poll in early February found that only 12% of Americans believed parents “should have the most sway over which library books are on the shelves and how American history is taught”. “I think it’s a manufactured issue, to be honest. There aren’t a lot of parents who are rifling through their child’s backpack in horror to discover, you know, a copy of Art Spiegelman’s Maus,” Nossel said. “I think there are some activists who have realized that by pointing out, whether it’s profanity or controversial ideas in some of these books, they can activate a sense of frustration that parents do have about a range of issues.” Those issues include the debate about wearing masks in schools, and mixed emotions about the length of pandemic-era school closures. But censorship has also been pushed by conservative groups linked to deep-pocketed rightwing donors. Groups like Moms for Liberty and Parents Defending Education have been instrumental in book banning attempts in the US, often presenting themselves as small, “grassroots” efforts, while in reality they have links to prominent, wealthy Republicans. Existing tensions, Nossel said, have “been used to fuel this ideological debate over books and to fire it up”. “We used to talk about a pocketbook issue here in the United States, an issue that affects people’s pocketbooks. “This is an issue that affects the backpack. It affects something that’s in the home, that’s very personal and close to home. And so, I think the organizers and the activists feel like they’ve been able to strike a nerve with this, even though the backdrop of parental concern over what’s being read and taught in schools is relatively low.’ There may be no recent parallel for the scale of the conservative crackdown. Nossel, whose book Dare to Speak: Defending Free Speech for All, serves as a guide to protecting and promoting free speech, said the clearest similarity to the potential prosecution of teachers is from almost 100 years ago, in the Scopes trial, involving the Tennessee science teacher John Scopes. In 1925 Scopes was accused of violating Tennessee’s recently passed Butler Act, which made it illegal to teach the theory of evolution in public schools. He was found guilty and fined $100, although the verdict was later overturned. After the trial Mississippi passed a similar law, and in the same year Texas banned evolution theory from school textbooks. More recent parallels can be found in the policing of books and ideas in the Soviet Union, and Russia introduced a “gay propaganda” law in 2013 which in effect made it illegal to equate straight and gay relationships. China has long banned the book Tombstone, Yang Jishen’s recounting of the Great Chinese Famine, which casts a negative light on the country’s communist rulers. Nossel said it would be going too far to directly equate the situation in the US to those countries – “We’re a democracy here, and that’s extremely important,” she said – but she warned there is an “echo in the tactics”. “Those situations, obviously, were far, far more severe. But I think we have to be on guard,” Nossel said. “A lot of us have been surprised about what we’ve witnessed in this country over the last several years. So we can’t be too sanguine about this just being sort of a phase, and a passing trend.”Towards the end of last week, as a certain high-profile Sky Sports pundit insisted it was “no big deal” that he had not returned to Sunderland to resume a management career that has been on the backburner for over a decade, one of his former international teammates took charge of his first senior game. A big story in his native Ireland, it flew largely under the radar elsewhere. Eight years after he drew the curtain on his career in English football, Damien Duff might have questioned the wisdom of his decision to take on the manager’s role at the League of Ireland side Shelbourne as he strode down the “wrong” side of a touchline he patrolled with such distinction as a player for Blackburn Rovers, Chelsea, Newcastle United and Fulham. In surroundings that could scarcely have been less glamorous, he began his new life as a gaffer on a filthy Friday night in the Dublin suburb of Drumcondra, where Tolka Park was taking a pounding from the wind and rain. For Duff, this maiden foray into management constituted an extremely big deal, the 42-year-old having openly admitted he was terrified by the prospect of taking over a famous old Dublin club that has in recent years fallen upon hard times. “Am I scared? Absolutely,” he’d told reporters at his unveiling in early November. “Do I feel uncomfortable? Absolutely. Going into the Shels first‑team role, is it going to be easy? No. Is it going to be comfortable? No. But it is going to give me 24/7 focus which is what I need. When I have an idle mind, like most people, it is not good for you.” A two-time Premier League champion who represented his country 100 times in a playing career bookended by spells at Shelbourne’s great Dublin rivals Shamrock Rovers, Duff had been keeping his mind ticking over since retirement in a variety of coaching roles. There were stints working behind the scenes at Celtic and the Republic of Ireland, as well as jobs whipping into shape underage sides at Rovers and his current club Shels. Not literally whipping, although he found himself in a minor spot of bother some years ago when some of the parents of his charges at Rovers took exception to the gruelling nature of a training regime which subjected their children to 6.30am starts and double sessions up to five times a week. “I get slaughtered, but that’s a dinosaur mentality,” Duff said when the issue was raised during an appearance as a pundit on RTE. “You have to train five times a week.” More pertinently, the kids didn’t mind. While Duff’s pedigree as a player should go a long way towards convincing his adult charges, many of them part-timers supplementing their incomes with second jobs, to buy into the kind of work ethic that might make even a taskmaster as notorious as Marcelo Bielsa blanche, the club they represent will be unable to afford the kind of back room personnel and recovery aids all English Premier League clubs take for granted. Only a few days ago, Duff revealed his managerial duties have stretched to finding accommodation and part-time work for his many new recruits, while taking others to hospital in his car for scans. “I haven’t had one day where it’s been a clear easy ride,” he said more than three months after taking the job. “There’s always been some shit to deal with. More often than not, more than one piece of shit.” A household name working in a league where most players and managers habitually go unrecognised by the wider public outside their own front doors, Duff is working on an extremely tight budget at a club that was once a powerhouse of Irish football but has spent much of the past decade yo-yoing in and out of the League of Ireland’s top flight. On a two-year contract, his immediate priority is keeping them in the Irish Premier League, even if he has already conceded “Shels will lose an awful lot of games” this season. Their first reverse, a 3-0 defeat at home to St Patrick’s Athletic in front of a capacity 4,100 crowd, is already on the board. A deep thinker and perfectionist who demands the highest possible standards from his players on and off the pitch, Duff originally turned down the Shels job, because at the time he was offered it he was enjoying life on holiday with his family in the south of France and the thought of all the hassle it might entail simply did not appeal. Given a couple of days to mull over his decision, he soon changed his mind. Despite being financially secure after a playing career in which he earned tens of millions, he felt compelled to demonstrate the courage of convictions – the importance of bravery and stepping out of one’s comfort zone – he was preaching to his own two children and the under-17s he was coaching at Shelbourne each day. “I am bottom of the tree,” he told reporters. “I am not the best manager in the league. I have an awful lot to prove. In my first session with the Shelbourne first team I will probably be using bits from José Mourinho from 20 years ago. I will never change. I am still energetic, emotional. The players will soon learn that I never try being anything I am not.” While learning the gospel of José from 20 years ago is likely to be more beneficial to Shelbourne’s players than any teachings the Portuguese has espoused in recent years, Duff has insisted that “if there’s a bottle out of place, I’m not going to say I’ve had enough of Shelbourne Football Club”. This suggests he might also have absorbed a nugget or two regarding the kind of managerial missteps he ought not to take from his former international skipper Roy Keane.A figure sits alone on stage, dressed in comfy jumper and trousers, one leg crossed over the other. He slowly moves his hands and turns his head. But this sole performer in Uncanny Valley, by theatre company Rimini Protokoll, is not human. It is a lifelike animatronic model of the German writer Thomas Melle. The show’s director, Stefan Kaegi, had seen animatronics used in museums, where he found there was not sufficient time for what he calls the “empathy mechanism” to kick in. But he wondered what would happen if the robot became a performer, “someone with whom we start to identify”. His idea was to create a monologue for a robot that looked as human as possible – not perfect but average and fragile. Evi Bauer, who worked on the robot’s design, suggested that the best way to make something irregular and flawed was to find a human subject and make a copy. The question was who? Melle had recently published The World at My Back, a philosophical exploration of his bipolar disorder that Kaegi had found intriguing. Melle, in turn, liked the idea of being made into a robot. The costume department at the Munich Kammerspiele theatre company took a silicone cast of Melle’s head – a particularly claustrophobic process documented in the production – and then there were, says Kaegi, some “spooky moments” for Melle meeting his robotic doppelganger. The result is undeniably disconcerting. Even though its inner workings are visible through a gap in the back of the robot’s head, its movements are delicate and somehow tender. Science fiction often shows us technology taking over but Kaegi needed to programme the robotic Melle’s every movement: “I wasn’t working with an artificial intelligence. I was working with a very dumb machine.” But then, he says, all of theatre is an exercise in programming, from lighting to sound. People, too, are largely preprogrammed in the ways we behave, including our routines and our small talk. The show asks how free we really are: “How dependent have we become not only on technical devices, but on algorithms that help us to take decisions?” The word “robot” was introduced into the English language by a play: RUR (Rossum’s Universal Robots), a 1920 drama by the Czech writer Karel Čapek. And in the 100 years since, they have become a staple of film and television. From Star Trek: The Next Generation to Battlestar Galactica, Ex-Machina to The Terminator, robots in popular culture are usually there, Kaegi observes, to play on our fears of technology taking control or as a way of exploring our own humanity. Despite – or, perhaps, because – of their un-humanness, performance makers have explored robots’ theatrical potential in numerous ways. The Serbian choreographer Dragana Bulut’s Future Fortune has dancers interacting with a humanoid robot, and the Japanese director Oriza Hirata’s Robot Theatre Project uses robot performers alongside human actors, juxtaposing superficially cute if affectless robots with expressive human bodies. Last year, to mark the centenary of RUR, a team of Czech scientists and dramaturgs created a new play written by computer. (The result featured lots of repetitive dialogue and a preoccupation with sex.) But plays that feature robots are thinner on the ground. Spillikin, by Pipeline theatre, explored the relationship between a woman with Alzheimer’s and her robot carer; Interference, a trio of speculative plays presented by the National Theatre of Scotland in 2019, also featured a story about an android carer. Tim Foley’s Electric Rosary, which opens at Manchester’s Royal Exchange in April, is set in a convent whose nuns welcome a robotic sister into their order. The idea for the play came to Foley on a visit to a monastery with his father, where he saw the ageing monks using quad bikes. He imagined a scenario where the nuns bring a robot in to do the cooking and cleaning but it “starts to get something out of it”. This robot is designed to learn by example so Foley explores not just the behaviour of other characters but “the agency and humanity that robots are developing themselves”. Like Kaegi, Foley is interested in patterns and programming. One of his inspirations was a book on mathematical sequences and the loops that underpin things. It could be argued, he says, that the saying of the rosary is a similar kind of loop. One of the reasons that robots don’t feature as often on stage as on screen, Foley suggests, is a practical one. Without access to CGI, you have to either create a robot – as in Spillikin – or have an actor play one. Each presents different challenges. For Electric Rosary, they opted for the latter approach. There won’t be any attempt to make the performer look like a robot with masks. Instead, Foley says, “it’s through speech and movement that she’ll show her artificial manner. But as time passes and she adapts to requirements, she’ll begin mimicking what it is to be human and then potentially mastering it”. Foley’s robot is ultimately a dramatic catalyst – a way of exploring the nature of faith. “If the idea is we’re constructed by a higher power,” asks Foley, “are we then a form of artificial intelligence? If we’re made in the image of God and a robot is made in ours, is there a hierarchy here? Or will we be equal in the eyes of God?” Uncanny Valley is at Battersea Arts Centre, London, 22 to 26 February; Electric Rosary is at Royal Exchange, Manchester, 23 April to 14 May.The Australian defence force has confirmed an “increase in the use of lasers by some vessels” but regards the latest incident involving a Chinese warship as “more serious”, officials have revealed. Experts said the shining of a laser at an Australian surveillance aircraft by a People’s Liberation Army Navy (PLAN) warship last week represented an escalation from a previous incident in the South China Sea in 2019 when Australian helicopter pilots were forced to land as a precaution. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, said on Monday that “all the countries in our region” deserved an explanation from the Chinese government over activity he branded as “dangerous, unprofessional and reckless for a professional navy”. Labor also condemned the incident, after the ADF disclosed that a PLAN warship had used a laser to illuminate an Australian P-8A Poseidon surveillance aircraft on Thursday. The Australian aircraft had been tracking two PLAN vessels that were sailing east through the Arafura Sea, north of Australia. When asked by Guardian Australia to detail previous incidents, a Defence spokesperson said assets operating across the Indo-Pacific region “have observed an increase in the use of lasers by some vessels”. “The increasing prevalence of the inappropriate use of lasers is concerning as it poses a potential safety risk to all those operating in the region,” the spokesperson said. “Defence deems this incident to be more serious than previous incidents.” Senior Australian diplomatic staff in Beijing have raised the latest incident with China’s ministries of foreign affairs and national defence, the spokesperson said. Defence and Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade officials have also raised it with the Chinese embassy in Canberra. Dr Euan Graham, a maritime security expert at the International Institute for Strategic Studies in Singapore, said the Australian government’s response indicated that “this act has crossed a red line in terms of what Australia considers normal or acceptable and it’s decided to name and shame accordingly”. It was “an extremely serious incident” that risked “injury or worse”, Graham said. In 2019, Graham was one of several academics who travelled on HMAS Canberra from Vietnam to Singapore in the South China Sea, when helicopter pilots reported having lasers pointed at them. The Australian vessel was being tailed by Chinese warships – something that is “standard procedure” when foreign navies pass through areas that Beijing claims within the South China Sea – but there was no suggestion in that case that the lasers were shone by the Chinese military. Graham asked at the time whether it was “the sort of coordinated harassment more suggestive of China’s maritime militia”. Thursday’s incident was “obviously a step up” because it involved a military-grade laser and was clearly from a Chinese naval vessel, Graham said. That was why the Australian defence department had issued such a “robust response”. If pilots were “dazzled”, that could affect their ability to safely land the aircraft but Graham said the more serious possibility was the use of the laser could be a precursor to firing a weapon. China’s Global Times newspaper cited an unnamed “analyst close to the PLA” as saying almost all modern warships “are equipped with laser rangefinders, which are a type of measurement tool used to tell distances between objects”. “They are also used for civilian purposes and are of little danger, the anonymous analyst said, noting that the Australian military knowingly hyped this with the aim of throwing mud at China,” the article said. Foreign ministry spokesman Wang Wenbin told reporters at a regular briefing in Beijing that “the Chinese vessel sailing in the high seas complies with relevant international law and international practice and is fully legitimate and legal”. “We urge the Australian side to respect Chinese vessels legitimate rights in accordance with international law in relevant seas and stop maliciously spreading disinformation in regards to China,” Wang said. Graham said the Chinese vessels were legally entitled to pass through the Arafura Sea and Australia was also legally able to monitor those ships but the use of the laser “puts the Chinese navy in a very bad light”. He said the likely motivation was “to create a distraction that would interrupt the Australian attempt to conduct its surveillance operations” and “make life difficult for the Australian pilots and to ward them off”. Prof John Blaxland, an expert in international security and intelligence studies at the Australian National University also described the incident as an apparent “escalation”, as laser pointing could be “separated from firing a missile with hostile intent by a mere split second”. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Morrison told a Tasmanian radio station: “Could you imagine if that had been an Australian frigate going through the Taiwan Strait that pointed a laser at a Chinese surveillance aircraft, or indeed a British ship or a Japanese ship or an American, US ship, could you imagine what the reaction would be?” Labor urged the government to convey a strong bipartisan message of condemnation to Beijing and sought an “urgent” briefing. The incident comes amid heated debate about national security in the lead up to election due by May. In 2018, the US Department of Defense said two US airmen had suffered “minor” injuries as a result of the use of what the Pentagon believed were Chinese-deployed lasers in Djibouti. Additional reporting Reuters1) Spurs show the way to beat City There is a blueprint for how to beat Pep Guardiola’s ball-hoggers and it is publicly available: Crystal Palace employed it in October’s 2-0 win at the Etihad Stadium and Tottenham did the same on Saturday: adopt a low block, stay patient while possession is maintained by the blue shirts and when the moment arrives, pounce by racing in behind the sluggish centre-backs. For Palace, Wilfried Zaha’s pace terrorised City; for Spurs it was Harry Kane and Son Heung-min. Why don’t more teams try this? Perhaps because executing lightning counter-attacks in the one or two opportunities allowed by City’s supreme passing machine is tough. But in an era of attack coaches, forensic video analysis, speedy forwards and training-ground drills there should be no excuse for more teams not attempting to exploit the glaring vulnerability. It may not always work, but this is currently the only realistic way to dismantle the league’s dominant side. Jamie Jackson Match report: Manchester City 2-3 Tottenham 2) Mané draws alongside Liverpool great It is often Sadio Mané’s fate to take second billing to Mohamed Salah and, even on a day when he scored one of his greatest goals and drew level with one of Liverpool’s favourite players, he was eclipsed again. Salah’s 150th goal overshadowed Mane’s 108th, but the latter meant the Senegal international had matched John Barnes’ total and in 160 fewer games. If comparisons between wingers feel inexact as the game has evolved – Barnes spent more time on the touchline, Mané loiters in the penalty area – it is worth noting that none of the younger man’s 108 are penalties. “Sadio’s goal record is definitely insane as well,” said Jürgen Klopp and while Salah should soon overhaul Michael Owen and then set off in pursuit of Kenny Dalglish, Mané could become Liverpool’s 11th highest scorer some time next season. Though, just outside the top 10, that could leave him obscured again. Richard Jolly Match report: Liverpool 3-1 Norwich 3) Eriksen is needed to revive Brentford Thomas Frank has been clear in marking next Saturday’s match against Newcastle as the day when Christian Eriksen, joyfully for anyone who loves football, is due to make his return to competitive action for Brentford. No pressure should be put on Eriksen to bounce straight back to his old levels; it is simply a marvel that we will be able to enjoy his talents again. But Brentford would benefit from even a fraction of his best form: they are not offering enough going forward and, until an undeserved Christian Norgaard consolation, failed to fashion a chance of note at the Emirates. Against a vastly improved Arsenal that is no disgrace, but they are noticeably short of someone who can roam between the lines and pick a pass. “Physically he is in a fine place, he looks better and better,” Frank said of Eriksen. Brentford’s season looks in need of the stimulus he could offer. Nick Ames Match report: Arsenal 2-1 Brentford 4) Concussion rears its head again at Leeds Head injuries proved something of a theme as Manchester United won at Elland Road. Mercifully, Anthony Elanga was not badly hurt after a coin hurled from the crowd struck him on the head but it rather took the shine off an otherwise wonderful match. And that coin was far from the only missile aimed at Ralf Rangnick’s players; what if one had hit someone in an eye? Earlier Robin Koch, went off looking dazed and confused after initially attempting to play on with a head injury following a collision with Scott McTominay. Marcelo Bielsa afterwards said blood from a cut forced his replacement by Junior Firpo but Koch was only taken off after he sat down, clearly unable to continue. Bielsa may be correct but, from the stands, Koch looked like someone with a potential concussion. So why weren’t the protocols followed? Louise Taylor Match report: Leeds 2-4 Manchester United 5) Warhorse Lennon still proving his worth When Aaron Lennon returned to Burnley on a free transfer following a year in Turkey with Kayserispor, it almost passed without notice. Many will have anticipated the winger rarely being seen in a starting XI. His first league start of the season came on 2 October, his second on 30 December when he impressed at Old Trafford, scoring in a 3-1 defeat to Manchester United. Since then the veteran has proved himself worthy of a regular place in Sean Dyche’s team. At Brighton the 34-year-old was a constant threat against a fearful defence who became just the second team to concede three times to Burnley. Lennon played a key pass in the buildup to the first goal and was clinical when adding an emphatic third to seal the victory. Burnley’s squad lacks depth but the reigniting of Lennon’s career has improved Dyche’s options and created a rare battle for starting berths. Will Unwin Match report: Brighton 0-3 Burnley 6) Willock delivers a reminder of his class Joe Willock provided the decisive touch to secure a point at West Ham and the midfielder’s performance suggests he can be instrumental in keeping Newcastle in the Premier League. Willock’s instinctive finish was his first goal of the season and Eddie Howe eulogised his contribution. His permanent move to St James’ Park came after a successful loan spell from Arsenal in which he scored in six of Newcastle’s final seven matches last season. Willock’s energy and athleticism caused West Ham plenty of problems on Saturday and justified the decision to keep him in the team ahead of the new signing Bruno Guimarães. The 22-year-old’s dynamism was a major outlet for Newcastle as the team extended their unbeaten league run to six games. With Kieran Trippier and Allan Saint-Maximin injured, Willock’s attacking threat will be a significant asset in the coming weeks and, in this form, he should be able to help steer the team clear of trouble. Simon Mail Match report: West Ham 1-1 Newcastle 7) Unsung Cathcart keeps Watford’s hopes alive ‘Graig Catchart’ may sound like an unlicensed video game alias but that was the name etched on to Manchester United’s honours board when Craig Cathcart was named the club’s young player of the year in 2007. With hindsight, it could be considered symbolic of the underappreciated career Cathcart has carved out for himself away from Old Trafford. Quietly excellent in Watford’s vital victory at Aston Villa on Saturday, Cathcart was consistently in the right place at the right time. His efforts ensured Ben Foster’s post-match YouTube recording was more labour-intensive than the 90 minutes that came before it. In the wider football world, Cathcart’s talents may go largely unrecognised. But not at Vicarage Road. Sam Dalling Match report: Aston Villa 0-1 Watford 8) Wretched Everton leave Calvert-Lewin stranded There was no shortage of underperformers for Everton in defeat at Southampton but the way they failed to service Dominic Calvert-Lewin will be of concern to Frank Lampard. The striker has not scored since returning from a four-month absence in January and Everton, who have not won away since August, failed to register a shot on target at St Mary’s. Calvert-Lewin is unlikely to be in the thick of the action against Manchester City on Saturday but Everton must offer some kind of thrust. “We can’t use Dominic as a battering ram,” Lampard said. “He has too much quality for that and I don’t want to play that way. It’s two-fold. Give Dominic time and make sure we give him the service and play around him as much as we can to get the benefit out of him and all the forward-end players.” Ben Fisher • Match report: Southampton 2-0 Everton 9) Tuchel thankful for London living Given the number of air miles his players clocked up last week in becoming world champions, it was no surprise that Thomas Tuchel welcomed the prospect of Chelsea’s next two fixtures being played in London after the late victory at Selhurst Park. The Carabao Cup final against Liverpool on Sunday at Wembley will be an opportunity for Tuchel to win his fourth trophy in less than 13 months at the helm but he must first face Lille in the first leg of Chelsea’s Champions League last-16 tie at Stamford Bridge on Tuesday. The French club have the advantage of an extra day’s rest having played their Ligue 1 fixture against Metz on Friday night, although Tuchel is confident his players can handle the quick turnaround. “Playing Saturday-Tuesday should not be a problem for us, we are staying in London,” he said. “Sometimes it can cause an advantage when there is a tight schedule, but this time we should arrive home quite early, catch some good sleep and be ready to fight on a good level.” Ed Aarons Match report: Crystal Palace 0-1 Chelsea 10) Tireless Podence embodies no-frills Wolves Adama Traoré was never the most productive attacker but when he was dispatched to Barcelona, the fear was that Wolves had lost a huge part of the counterattacking threat on which they so rely. Not so on the evidence of the last two games, which have seen Wolves amass six valuable points in two displays of undiluted efficiency. Key to both has been Daniel Podence, a tireless attacker whose scampering energy gives his side the perfect outlet. On Sunday, Podence often found himself the lone ranger in hopeful breaks, but time and again he showed the value of touch, pace and hardened know-how. Where Traoré might have run down a cul-de-sac, Podence drew a foul. Where Traoré might have crossed into an empty box, Podence played it simple. Traoré was one of the most exciting players in the league but Wolves are not in the business of exciting anyone. Efficiency may not be sexy, but it might just get Wolves into the Champions League. Guardian sport Match report: Wolves 2-1 LeicesterDaniel Wiles’s brutal, breviloquent debut novel opens with the first of many striking scenes that make strange and freshly terrifying a well-worn chapter in British history: the Industrial Revolution. Picture a dozen people trapped in a cage suspended on a huge iron chain, while beyond its bars, legions more scurry around a “vast sea of black land”. When eventually the cage moves, with a sound like “the cracking of fingerbones”, its momentum is downwards, deep into the belly of the Earth, where lamplit tunnels are filled with satanic bellowing, sweat and chokedamp. The year is 1872 and the setting a small Black Country village whose landscape and social fabric are being savagely refashioned by its three collieries. Among those caged miners is Michael Cash, who has taken a second job in order to send his six-year-old son to school. Having himself started work while still a boy, labour that’s left him scarred by memories too lightless to coalesce into pictures, he’s determined that this won’t be his lad’s fate. But when taking that second job loses him his first, he feels his careful plan slipping through his fingers. As a last resort, he asks a vicar to pray for him. From that moment on, his actions are determined by perceived “signs”, none greater than the gold he finds while hewing coal. It seems like the answer to all his prayers, except that his sly workmate, Cain, has plans of his own. Soon, Michael is tearing off on a quest that will take him by canal to Dudley, the burning heart of the Industrial Revolution, a place where sinister fogs swirl and the night glows red. The gold exerts a fatal hold over Michael and goads his masculine pride, but his obsession is fired by more than hardship: finding it had felt like proof of some greater meaning, something beyond the deathly toil and dreamless sleep that comprises his days, and he is a man desperate to believe, even if it means compromising everything he’s clung to until now. Wiles, who is from Walsall and the recipient of the UEA Booker prize foundation scholarship, has a keen eye for unnerving detail and the linguistic skill to do it justice. Here’s Cain, for instance, “his nose daftly small like a shirt pocket button and stabbing silver eyes that shone oddly bright”. When it comes to depicting the environmental toll of industry’s speed and greed, he conjures up a hell-scape, a land that looks “as though it had been pulled up from what was once underneath: an open wound” and contrasts sharply with images of snow-covered fields and laughing gulls. The climate crisis is already spurring a reappraisal of the Industrial Revolution, but Mercia’s Take does something else, too: it gives voice to the long-buried experience of miners like Michael, whose lives became fodder for progress, and it does so in their own accents and argot, setting Wiles’s propulsive plot to a rhythmic beat. If this occasionally results in some jarring shifts as the novel toggles between vocabularies, and if the experimental note struck by its stark ending doesn’t feel altogether necessary, given the force of the prose and storytelling that precede it, then these are very small quibbles. • Mercia’s Take by Daniel Wiles is published by Swift Press (£12.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyBen Roberts-Smith swore at a superior officer and threatened him, saying “I should smash your face in” during a drinking session at the SAS’s unofficial Afghanistan bar, The Fat Ladies’ Arms, the federal court heard on Monday. Roberts-Smith, a recipient of the Victoria Cross, is suing the Age, the Sydney Morning Herald and the Canberra Times for defamation over a series of reports he alleges are defamatory and portray him as committing war crimes, including murder, as well as acts of bullying and domestic violence. The newspapers are pleading a defence of truth. Roberts-Smith denies any wrongdoing. A serving captain – now a lieutenant colonel – in the Australian army told the federal court on Monday he had been invited to drink at the SAS bar in June 2006. When the officer overheard Roberts-Smith describing a firefight during a mission that day – “I was watching the expression on the guy’s face as the bullets came closer” – the officer said he turned to look at Roberts-Smith. “What the fuck are you doing here? I should smash your face in,” Roberts-Smith allegedly told his superior. He told the court a warrant officer in the bar responded: “Pull your fucking head in, RS,” using Roberts-Smith’s nickname. The officer, known before court as Person 69 and giving evidence for the newspapers as part of their defence, said he was “shocked” to be threatened by a comrade. “I was in shock, I had never been spoken to that way by a subordinate.” “I’ve been threatened three times by my own team in my army career. I can tell you exactly the year, who it was and what they said. Because it had a profound impact on me that my own team would threaten me.” Under cross-examination, Person 69 was questioned why he did not formally reprimand Roberts-Smith. He said he did not take subsequent action because he felt the incident had been sufficiently dealt with by the warrant officer, and there had been no further antagonism from Roberts-Smith. Bruce McClintock, acting for Roberts-Smith, put it to Person 69 he took no action against Roberts-Smith because the incident never happened. “It absolutely did,” Person 69 said. The alleged conversation was put to Roberts-Smith in the witness box last year; he denied making the comment. The court heard the alleged incident at the Fat Ladies’ Arms took place the night after Roberts-Smith and his patrol returned from a mission at Koran Ghar overlooking the Chora Pass. Roberts-Smith’s patrol had been engaged in a significant firefight, encircled on a mountaintop by Taliban fighters and only able to be extracted with significant air support. Roberts-Smith and Matthew Locke, later killed in action, were both awarded the Medal for Gallantry for their actions on the mountaintop. The trial last week heard from another SAS soldier on that mission, anonymised before the court as Person One. The court heard evidence Person One did not perform well during the mission. He had forgotten to bring oil for his machine gun, which subsequently jammed, and told the court he was abused by Roberts-Smith for endangering the patrol. On Monday, Person 69 said the day after that mission he overheard an SAS soldier – whose name he did not know, – in a barracks accommodation telling another soldier about the Koran Ghar mission. The soldier said he had not fired on a young Afghan male who was seen walking across the mountainside because the young man was a reasonable distance away and “carrying no ICOM [radio], no weapon and no webbing”. The newspapers lawyers say that soldier was understood to be Person One. Person 69 said he heard the soldier say that Roberts-Smith “started to yell and abuse me” for not firing at the man. The soldier said Roberts-Smith later returned with the late Sergeant Matt Locke and said “we’ve killed him”. Person one said he “didn’t know what to do”. “I interjected [in the conversation] at this point,” Person 69 said, “and said, ‘you should probably tell someone about that’.” The soldier who said he’d been abused said: “There’s no point.” The soldier talked about his weapons stoppage, and said Roberts-Smith abused him again on their return from the operation and that “the patrol ostracised me”. Person 69 said: “I’d never worked with the Australian SAS before and I was shocked that they weren’t a collegiate team. I’d worked with other special forces … everyone makes mistakes and I couldn’t believe a junior trooper would get abused for not (doing) the right thing rather than being supported.” Person One told the court last week Roberts-Smith had threatened him after the Koran Ghar mission, telling him: “If your performance doesn’t improve on our next patrol, you’re going to get a bullet in the back of the head.” He said he interpreted the comment as a “death threat” and “it made me fearful for my personal safety”. Under cross-examination, Person One denied Roberts-Smith’s words were a warning he was in danger of being shot by the Taliban unless his performance improved. Roberts-Smith has previously told the court the man he and Locke killed on the Koran Ghar was a Taliban spotter who was a legitimate target. In his evidence last week, Person One agreed the man could have been a legitimate target. Earlier on Monday, another soldier, who has spent more than 30 years in the defence forces including a decade in the SAS, gave evidence on behalf of the newspapers that he took Person One on to his patrol in Afghanistan after he was removed from Roberts-Smith’s patrol following the Koran Ghar mission. The senior soldier, Person 21, told the court he was tasked with assessing Person One’s performance and fitness to remain in the SAS after Person One had received some negative performance reviews. “Initially, Person One didn’t want to speak about his experience in Ben Roberts-Smith’s patrol,” Person 21 said. “Eventually he told me he was threatened and he did not feel comfortable or safe.” Person 21 said Person One later told him that “Ben Roberts-Smith told me he was going to fuck me off out of the unit”. He said Person One also said “something along the lines of … ‘he threatened to kill me’”. Person 21 said he was disturbed by a lack of camaraderie and support within Roberts-Smith’s patrol. He said he had seen Person One and other soldiers “left to fend for themselves” as they prepared for the difficult mission on Koran Ghar. Under cross-examination, Person 21 said Person One grew in confidence during operations together, and said he developed into a confident and capable soldier. In his earlier evidence before the court, Roberts-Smith denied accusations of bullying. “I’ve never bullied Person One,” he said. He told the court Person One just wasn’t a “very good soldier” who wanted to cover up his poor performance. “It’s always been the case,” he said. “After the battle in Chora I said words to the effect that I didn’t think he should be in the unit and should probably be considering moving back to the regular army.” Roberts-Smith said he never threatened Person One or swore at him. The trial before Justice Anthony Besanko continues.Companies will have to pay for testing and decide policies on self-isolation for staff, a business minister has said in advance of Boris Johnson’s formal announcement that all remaining domestic Covid restrictions in England will end. Ahead of the prime minister’s scheduled statement on the government’s long-term strategy for living with coronavirus, Paul Scully said free testing would be phased out, arguing the money spent on it could be used better elsewhere. “We don’t test for flu, we don’t test for other diseases, and if the variants continue to be as mild as Omicron then there’s a question mark as to whether people will go through that regular testing anyway,” Scully told Times Radio. “But if employers want to be paying (for) tests and continuing a testing regime within their workplace, then that will be for them to pay at that point,” he said, adding that while the impact on the virus on clinically vulnerable people was a concern, “we’re not going to be having a testing regime for the next 50 years”. Under a plan being rubber-stamped by the cabinet on Monday morning, and outlined by Johnson in a Commons statement and subsequent press conference, the legal requirement for anyone with Covid to isolate will be ditched a month earlier than planned. Free PCR and lateral flow tests for all will be axed to rein in public spending as ministers attempt to restore people’s confidence that life can return to normality. The tests will reportedly be kept for the over-80s. The national contact tracing service is expected to be wound down and schoolchildren will no longer be told to get tested twice a week. In a separate interview with Sky News, Scully said it would be down to individuals and employers to decide over self-isolating. “I would say that it’s like any illness, frankly, any transmissible illness that you would say stay at home,” he said. Asked what staff could do if forced to work when ill with Covid, Scully said: “This is why we need to make sure that we’ve got really good guidance for employers. “But as I say, there will come a time when the pandemic moves to more of an endemic approach to Covid, in the same way that flu and other viruses are treated, and that’s what we’ve got to get back to.” Saying people should not “work and live under government diktat for a moment longer than is necessary”, Scully said the £2bn spent per month on free lateral flow tests could be better used elsewhere. “If you think what that £2bn might go towards, there’s a lot of other backlogs in the NHS, other illnesses in the NHS, that that money could otherwise go for,” he said. “So for every person that is worried about a test, there may be another person that’s worried about a cancer diagnosis, for instance.”A veteran of the hip-hop scene and internationally celebrated breakdancer, Nancy Yu – AKA Asia One – has her fair share of people contacting her looking for advice. But the message she received in 2019 from a young Afghan was a little different. Frustrated by his breakdancing crew’s inability to get visas to perform internationally, Moshtagh* was wondering if Asia could help. “He felt they were really good, but they felt, like, invisible to the world,” she says. “I liked him. He wasn’t trying to bug me or say ‘we need this right now’ … He seemed rather humble and honest.” Over the months, a friendship grew between Kabul and California, based on mutual respect and an appreciation of hip-hop culture. Moshtagh, who is in his 20s, felt he had a lot to learn from Asia, a one-time member of the Rock Steady Crew who set up the B-Boy summit, a global gathering celebrating all the elements of hip-hop: breakdancing, DJ-ing, rapping and graffiti. Only once has her belief in Moshtagh’s humility been severely challenged: when he declared, with youthful bravado, that he could be better than Tupac Shakur. “I was, like, ‘you’re out of your mind’,” Asia laughs. Last year, as the Taliban made sweeping gains across Afghanistan and even the modest freedoms enjoyed by many young people in Kabul started to feel in doubt, Moshtagh’s messages became more serious and urgent. And in the summer, as the Taliban took the capital, came the decision: the hip-hoppers, he told Asia, were leaving. It was a decision “based on complete fear”, says Asia. “You know, just that overwhelming sense of survival, that ‘if we don’t leave now, we don’t know what’s going to happen to us. And so we’re gonna risk our chance’. Because … they felt so threatened by the Taliban based on their western practices.” Now Moshtagh was asking his American mentor for different help: “He said, I feel like you guys have an obligation to help us and I was like, what do you mean?” she recalls. “And he said, well, you know, we’re all just hip-hop family. And … the more and more we spoke, the more and more I realised that much of what he was saying was true.” Ever since hip-hop first erupted in the Bronx apartment blocks of 1970s New York, its social conscience has never been far away. From the daily struggles of black America to the war on drugs to police brutality, there is little about life on the margins that hasn’t been rapped, sprayed on walls, chanted at rallies. (During the summer of 2020, it was a 1989 Public Enemy anthem that echoed at many of the protests over George Floyd’s murder. “Gotta give us what we want./ Gotta give us what we need./… We’ve gotta fight the powers that be.”) In the era of billionaire rappers and ostentatious bling, it can be easy for that activist spirit to get lost. But for Asia, who heads No Easy Props, a nonprofit running hip-hop events and classes for marginalised communities in Los Angeles, it is intrinsic to the scene and partly why she felt touched by Moshtagh. “It awoke my thought process. Here are some people that feel invisible. And hip-hop was started by a group of people that felt invisible,” she says. “To me, not being able to practise hip-hop is one thing, and not being able to live is another thing,” she says. Within days of his request for help, she started to mobilise. *** Moshtagh is a mild-mannered man in his 20s whose spoken English is heavily flavoured by hip-hop. He speaks of “homies,” of “breakers”, of “B-girls” and “B-boys”. As a teenager in Hamid Karzai’s Afghanistan, he fell for the moves he saw in videos of breakdancers from far away, and set about trying to become just like them – perhaps even better. In a country that retained a deep social conservatism long after the Taliban were toppled in 2001, it was not an easy path. “People didn’t accept hip-hop,” says Moshtagh. “They were just thinking that this has music: ‘it’s haram, you can’t do it, it’s illegal. What is this western culture that you guys are promoting?’ But we were just thinking we are modern people; young people need to look for modern things, and we love to do this.” Despite disapproval and threats, he and his friends made progress. “We changed people in 10 years but everything fell apart,” he says. “That building that we built, actually, it’s destroyed. There’s nothing for us to do in Afghanistan any more.” On 18 August, three days after the Taliban overthrew Ashraf Ghani’s government, Moshtagh left Afghanistan, along with some of his “homies”. They have been in a neighbouring country ever since, trying to remain hopeful butconstantly worrying about the future. “Actually, we don’t care about ourselves that much,” says Moshtagh, via Zoom, his five-year-old sister bobbing up and down in the background. “We’re just thinking about our family members. We don’t want them to be in a hard situation because of us, because of what we were doing. It’s all on our shoulders.” According to Menno van Gorp, a Dutch breakdancer with more than 100,000 Instagram followers who has been in touch with him for years, Moshtagh “is a guy that carries a lot of responsibility for the people around him … He’s the one that keeps the wheel spinning.” Alongside Moshtagh, there are 19 in the group, including two children and six women. A mixture of breakdancers, rap artists, parkourists and family members, they feel there is no place for them in Afghanistan today. “I’m sure they [the Taliban] would not accept it. There’s no space [for it],” he says. Some of the group have openly criticised the Taliban. Adding to the group’s fear is their ethnic background: all but three are Hazara, the most discriminated against minority group in the country. For one of the dancers there is the additional complication of being a woman. Before leaving Kabul, Haleema* had been hoping to compete in the 2024 Olympics – the first to have breakdancing as an official sport. When she first saw videos of people doing it she thought it must be “a kind of Photoshop” but she trained hard, and received threats to her life for doing so. But she knew she could not continue under the Taliban: the group have made their opposition to female sport clear, and breaking has the additional stigma of also being a form of dance. So inextricably connected is Haleema’s life to hip-hop, she, too, decided to leave. She insists it was not a difficult decision. “I am very young,” she says. “At my age, there is no impossible.” Van Gorp says that for years, amid chronic national instability, hip-hop gave Moshtagh and the others sanctuary. “Breaking was the thing that kept them sane,” he says. “Like, they call it ‘hip-hope’ instead of hip-hop.” Even now, in limbo, unable to go out, Haleema still dreams of competing in the Olympics. “I am just trying to find a way to get out, and to train,” she says. “I’ve got hope for the future because of the people that are helping us.” *** By last autumn, Asia One had built up a small but dedicated team for the #SaveAfghanHiphoppers mission. “Hip-hop culture is about giving back, so let’s help our community members in need,” reads the campaign website. They raised nearly $14,000 (£10,000) to cover the group’s basic needs such as food, clothing and shelter, as well as initial legal costs. But time is ticking on, and the costs are likely to mount, so the campaign is keen for people to donate. Nearly six months after they fled, the group is still hoping to be granted passage to a country that will give them asylum. For now, the hip-hoppers, many without passports, remain in hiding lest they are arrested and deported back to Afghanistan. “If we raise $50,000, we can get them out of there,” says Asia. “We think it’s actually very possible.” The mission’s lawyer, Jaclyn Fortini Laing, is working to find a country willing to take the hip-hoppers. The US and the UK, both key to Afghanistan’s recent history and global hip-hop culture, have proved dead ends. That’s a shame for the group and the countries in question, says Fortini Laing. “The ideals that [the hip-hoppers] stand for – freedom of speech, women’s rights – are the ideals that make them a target for the Taliban but would make them an asset to any other country that was willing to take them in,” she says. “Failure,” she says, “is not an option.” Equally determined for the mission to succeed is Michael Holman, a pioneer of hip-hop’s first wave who has gone on to have an eclectic career as a Broadway producer, film-maker and musician. When Asia rang around to see who might be willing to help the Afghans, he was one of the few who said yes. “I was like, I can’t say no,” he says. Holman, 66, is believed to be the first writer to have used the phrase “hip-hop” in print: in a 1982 interview with Universal Zulu Nation’s DJ Afrika Bambaataa for the East Village Eye, he defines “the all-inclusive tag for the rapping, breaking, graffiti, crew fashion wearing street sub-culture”. (Elsewhere in the article he rhapsodises about an evening at the Ritz where Zulu Nation “threw down” a Rolling Stones track: “Honky Tonk Woman never rocked so hard!”) Heavily involved in the early days of hip-hop when the likes of Grandmaster Flash and the Beastie Boys were emerging, Holman helped introduce the “park-jam culture” that had emerged uptown to downtown Manhattan, and then to the world. In 1981, he took Malcolm McLaren to the Bronx to see what all the fuss was about and, “blown away”, the former Sex Pistols’ manager asked him to put together a show featuring Jazzy Jay and Rock Steady Crew. Holman built an extensive archive of video footage, partly from his short-lived TV show, Graffiti Rock; films from the dawn of hip-hop that went all over the world. “[They] were horrible copies,” he says. “But those tapes were how these dancers learn how to dance around the world.” So he felt duty-bound to help. “I felt I owed them something,” he says. “I was a mentor, in a way, by spreading this culture, and they embraced it because I and other people like me made it a compelling, exciting and undeniable cultural thing. I now owed them something. I had a responsibility not only as a hip-hop pioneer and impresario but I now owed them something as an American.” *** Moshtagh has many questions for the US, widely criticised for its rushed, chaotic departure from Afghanistan. Questions, too, for the UK, which supported its 20-year mission. “Your countries came to Afghanistan to bring peace; you spent a lot of money … And now you left these people alone. Why don’t you care about them?” he asks. He doesn’t know where he will end up. Spain or Belgium appear the most likely candidates, but the process is bogged down in diplomatic negotiations. Van Gorp, in Rotterdam, is optimistic that, wherever they go, there will be a community ready-made for them. “Breaking is such a good bridge to connect with local people because it’s so open and welcoming,” he says. “It will really help them settle. So, like, wherever they will go there will be B-boys they can connect with and they will already have a small network.” Moshtagh doesn’t know if he will see Afghanistan again. He wants to be in a safe place. “It doesn’t matter [where]. This Earth is my home. Earth is for human beings,” he says. Haleema just wants the agonising uncertainty to end. “[In] real life, you’re free to do all the things that you want,” she says, simply. “I want to live free.” * Names have been changed Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:The family of a 16-year-old boy who died after the trail bike he was riding and an unmarked police car crashed in Sydney has called for an independent inquiry into the death. Police have launched a critical incident investigation into Saturday’s crash that killed Indigenous teenager Jai Wright, but his father Lachlan Wright says an independent inquiry is needed. He claimed police had told the family two different versions of what happened, and the family want to know if Jai was being pursued by police at the time of the crash. Jai, a former International Grammar School student who was undertaking an electrical apprenticeship, died on Sunday afternoon after suffering serious head injuries in the crash in Alexandria on Saturday morning. Lachlan Wright said his family deserved to know exactly what happened to their “bright and lively boy”. “We’ve been given inconsistent information by police as to what caused our child’s death,” he said outside the Royal Prince Alfred hospital on Monday. “Any parent wants to know how their little boy has died. That is why we are calling for entirely independent inquiry away from the police.” The distraught father said police initially told the family that an unmarked police car “turned in front of Jai”, causing the teen to crash. But he said police later the same day “told us that there was no pursuit and … the police car was parked and Jai lost control of his bike and ran into the police car”. Wright said the family felt “disrespected” by New South Wales police. He is calling on anyone who saw the crash, has CCTV of the incident or knows anything about what happened to come forward. New South Wales police on Monday declined to answer questions regarding the crash. In a statement, police said officers noticed two suspected stolen vehicles – one of which was a blue 2019 Sherco trail bike – around 7am on Saturday near Enmore Road and King Street in Newtown. Police allege the bike was last seen turning right into Sydney Park Road in Alexandria before it was involved in a crash with the unmarked police car at the intersection of Henderson and Mitchell roads in Alexandria at 7.35am. Jai was treated at the scene by paramedics, before being taken to the Royal Prince Alfred hospital where he died on Sunday afternoon. Police say a critical incident team from Sydney City Police Area Command is investigating the circumstances surrounding the crash, with the investigation subject to an independent review. Speaking outside the hospital alongside two of Jai’s brothers, Marli and Kaidyn, as well as Jai’s mother, Kylie, Lachlan Wright described Jai as “our loving boy”. “He finished year 10 last year and started an electrician’s apprenticeship. He’s not going to be able to finish that,” Wright said. “He just seemed to get along with everyone. No one really had a bad thing to say about him. “His little little brother would say that ‘Jai Jai’ is his favourite and he’s never gonna say it again.”A warehousing company that counts John Lewis, Marks &amp; Spencer, Morrisons and Asda among its customers has agreed a possible takeover deal worth up to £940m with a New York rival, in the latest sign of the boom in online delivery. The board of Clipper Logistics, headquartered in Leeds, unanimously recommended the possible takeover offer by New York-listed GXO Logistics of 690p a share plus shares in the Connecticut-based company worth up to 230p for each Clipper share. Clipper’s shares jumped by 14% on Monday morning to 887p, near their record high of 910p. Warehouses have become a huge growth business in the past decade, particularly during the coronavirus pandemic, as online shopping has accounted for an ever greater share of total spending. The shift to online shopping accelerated even faster during lockdowns. Clipper serves fast-growing retailers such as Boohoo, Asos and JD Sports, and in the UK supermarket deliveries also expanded rapidly. Clipper is mainly focused on clothing, with retailers outsourcing their online deliveries to the company, which manages stock and picks and packages clothes in its warehouses. It also handles clothing returns, an important and costly issue for fashion retailers. Clipper, which claimed £3.8m from the UK government under the coronavirus job retention scheme, also benefited during the pandemic from the UK government’s massive spending on personal protective equipment (PPE), in deals that drew scrutiny because of Clipper founder Steve Parkin’s donations to the Conservative party worth £730,000. Clipper said it has processed more than 1bn PPE items during the pandemic and it described its newly created PPE unit as a “development opportunity” in its annual report. Parkin, who holds 15% of the Clipper shares, has promised to vote in favour of the deal. Clipper and GXO said the deal offered a “highly attractive valuation”, with a premium of 49% compared with the day before the offer was made. However, the premium was only 18% compared with Clipper’s closing price on Friday. Shareholders may be able to mix the proportion of shares and cash that they receive if a firm offer is made and they vote in favour. Parkin started Clipper in 1992 with a single van delivering clothes for fashion retailers, according to the Yorkshire Post. Since then it has grown to 10,000 employees in 55 sites in the UK, Poland, Germany, Ireland, the Netherlands and Belgium. GXO was part of another US warehouse and trucking company, XPO Logistics, until August when it was spun out and listed separately. It was worth $9.3bn (£6.8bn) at Friday’s market close.In 2006, the artist Hayv Kahraman moved to the US, then occupying her homeland, Iraq, and began painting a woman who has been a fixture of her work ever since. With parchment-pale skin, a swoosh of raven hair, scarlet lips and strong brows, this figure recalls the characters set against unadorned backgrounds in 12th-century Baghdad’s miniature painting, while her apple-round breasts and cool, heavy-lidded gaze suggest a quattrocento nude, rendered with the clean lines of Japanese prints. It is a composite identity its maker understands well. Kahraman was 11 when she was smuggled out of Iraq during the first Gulf war. Her family settled in Sweden, where she spent her teens; she now lives in Los Angeles. “As an immigrant, I’ve always felt on the periphery of society,” she says. Watching her mother work as a translator for government agencies, Kahraman saw the demand for refugees to repeat their trauma. “It creates an economy of pain where suffering becomes a currency,” she says. “So how do we get unstuck? How do we not only survive but thrive?” In the past 15 years she has used her painted women to investigate the refugee condition from often surprising angles. The figures have become contortionists; canvases have been sliced up and rewoven into abstract patterns, in an allegory of the fragmented nature of memory, culture and trauma. A recent Covid-centric series interrogated the martial language of immunology, in which the human fortress is seen to be “invaded” or “colonised” by foreign bodies. Her latest exhibition, Gut Feelings, draws on recent research into the possibility of actively “rewiring” neural pathways through the gut microbiome. “The bacteria in our gut is responsible for regulating hormones like dopamine and serotonin that give us feelings,” she says. It is clear, though, from her work’s unsettling tone, that she sees any restorative process as complicated. Beauty is tempered by a jolt of body horror as the women in her paintings strike acrobat poses, entangled in thick, intestine-like nets, or crouch low, passing ropes of lilac guts between them. In small canvases she calls “neurobusts”, a woman’s body has been fragmented into a bust and displayed on a steel rod like a museum artefact. Sausage-like innards protrude from her mouth. Umbilical cords and blowjobs come to mind. These challenging images make us reflect on what we are taught to consider “normal”: “I was brainwashed into thinking anything Euro-American-centric is the ideal,” Kahraman says. The ambiguity that permeates Kahraman’s work goes far beyond its mix of the gorgeous and grotesque. Are these female prisoners or nest-builders, nurtured or force-fed? “It’s not about erasing the pain and entanglement,” she says. “It’s about thinking, feeling and working through it.” Body of work – recent pieces by Kahraman Entanglements With Torshi, 2021 Kahraman has found novel ways to “collaborate with microbes” in her paintings exploring the gut microbiome. The lilac in this painting comes from the Middle Eastern beetroot torshi. “Bacteria permeates the vegetables to create this fermented food,” she says. “My mum and I used to paint with it when I was a kid.” Neurobust No 1, 2021 (pictured top) Kahraman’s interest in neuroscience began with the loss of her mother. The artist discovered that one of the last books she had been reading before her death concerned “neurosculpting”, the potential for changing neural pathways that were previously considered set. “In the field of PTSD, this is massive,” she says. “It was interesting that she, an Iraqi immigrant, had chosen this book.” Beard-Gut-Brain Axis, 2021 Kahraman has begun experimenting with painting on flax, another product of bacteria permeating a plant – and what linen is made from. Linen had a strong association with Venice, “the heart of European aesthetics”, she says. “I want to dismantle that.” Entanglements No 1, 2021 The artist typically uses her own body as a model, however she doesn’t see her figures as self-portraits. “It’s not individualistic; it’s more about creating a collective of women,” she says. Hayv Kahraman: Gut Feelings is at the Mosaic Rooms, London, from 25 February until 29 May.Last September, Donald Trump released a statement through his Save America website. “It is my great honor to endorse a true warrior,” he proclaimed, “a patriot who has fought for our country, who was willing to say what few others had the courage to say, who has my Complete and Total Endorsement.” Former US presidents usually reserve their most gushing praise – replete with Capital Letters – for global allies or people they are promoting for high office. A candidate for the US Senate, perhaps, or someone vying to become governor of one of the biggest states. Trump by contrast was heaping plaudits on an individual running for an elected post that a year ago most people had never heard of, let alone cared about. He was endorsing Mark Finchem, a Republican lawmaker from Tucson, in his bid to become Arizona’s secretary of state. Until Trump’s endorsement, Finchem, like the relatively obscure position for which he is now standing, was scarcely known outside politically informed Arizona circles. Today he is a celebrity on the “Save America” circuit, one of a coterie of local politicians who have been thrown into the national spotlight by Trump as he lays the foundations for a possible ground attack on democracy in the 2024 presidential election. The role of secretary of state is critical to the smooth workings and integrity of elections in many states, Arizona included. The post holder is the chief election officer, with powers to certify election results, vet the legal status of candidates and approve infrastructure such as voting machines. In short, they are in charge of conducting and counting the vote. About three weeks after Trump lost the 2020 presidential election – and on the same day that Joe Biden’s 10,457-vote victory in Arizona was certified – Finchem hosted Rudy Giuliani at a downtown Phoenix hotel. Giuliani, then Trump’s personal lawyer, announced a new theory for why the result should be overturned: that Biden had relied on fraudulent votes from among the 5 million undocumented immigrants living in the state – a striking number given that Arizona only has a total of 7 million residents. Two weeks after that, Finchem was among 30 Republican lawmakers in Arizona who signed a joint resolution. It called on Congress to block the state’s 11 electoral college votes for Biden and instead accept “the alternate 11 electoral votes for Donald J Trump”. Finchem was present in Washington on 6 January 2021, the day that hundreds of angry Trump supporters stormed the US Capitol, resulting in the deaths of five people with 140 police officers injured. He had come to speak at a planned “Stop the Steal” rally, later cancelled, to spread the “big lie” that the election had been rigged. Communications between Finchem and the organizers of the “Stop the Steal” rally earned the lawmaker a knock on the door from the January 6 committee this week. The powerful congressional investigation into the insurrection issued a subpoena for him to appear before the panel and to hand over documents relating to the effort to subvert democracy. Finchem will have to answer to the committee for what he did in the wake of the 2020 election, or face legal consequences. But there’s a more disconcerting question thrown up by his candidacy for secretary of state: were he to win the position, would he be willing and able to overturn the result of the 2024 presidential election in Arizona, potentially paving the way for a political coup? “Someone who wants to dismantle, disrupt and completely destroy democracy is running to be our state’s top election officer,” said Reginald Bolding, the Democratic minority leader in the Arizona House who is running against Finchem in the secretary of state race. “That should terrify not just Arizona, but the entire nation.” ••• Trump has so far endorsed three secretary of state candidates in this year’s election cycle, and Finchem is arguably the most controversial of the bunch. (The other two are Jody Hice in Georgia and Kristina Karamo in Michigan.) Originally from Kalamazoo in Michigan, he spent 21 years as a public safety officer before retiring to Tucson and setting up his own small business. In 2014 he was elected to the Arizona legislature, representing Oro Valley. Even before Finchem was inaugurated as a lawmaker, he was stirring up controversy. On the campaign trail in 2014, he announced that he was “an Oath Keeper committed to the exercise of limited, constitutional governance”. The Oath Keepers are a militia group with a list of 25,000 current or past members, many from military or law enforcement backgrounds. They have been heavily implicated in the January 6 insurrection. The founder of the Oath Keepers, Stewart Rhodes, and nine co-defendants are facing trial for seditious conspiracy based on allegations that they meticulously planned an armed attack on the heart of American democracy. Finchem entered the Arizona legislature in January 2015 and soon was carving out a colourful reputation. With his bushy moustache, cowboy hat and boots, and offbeat political views, his hometown news outlet Tucson Weekly dubbed him “one of the nuttier lawmakers” in the state. Bolding, who entered the legislature at the same time as Finchem, remembers being called into his office soon after they both started. “He wanted to show me a map of how Isis and other terrorist groups were pouring over the border with Mexico to invade the United States,” Bolding told the Guardian. One of the first measures sponsored by Finchem reduced state taxes on gold coins on the basis that they were “legal tender”. He then introduced legislation that would have imposed a “code of ethics” on teachers – a “gag law” as some decried it – that would have restricted learning in class. The nine-point code was later revealed to have been cut and pasted from a campaign calling itself “Stop K-12 Indoctrination” backed by the far-right Muslim-bashing David Horowitz Freedom Center. “In essence he wanted a pledge of fealty from teachers that they wouldn’t discuss ‘anti-American’ subjects,” said Jake Dean, who has reported on Finchem for the Tucson Weekly. It was not until Trump began to fire up his supporters with his big lie about the 2020 election that Finchem truly found his political voice. The state lawmaker was a key advocate of the self-proclaimed “audit” of votes in Maricopa county carried out by Cyber Ninjas, the Florida-based company that spent six months scavenging for proof of election fraud and failed to produce any. To this day no credible evidence of major fraud in the 2020 election has been presented, yet Finchem continues to beat that drum. Last month he told a Trump rally in Florence, Arizona: “We know it, and they know it. Donald Trump won.” In his latest ruse, Finchem this month introduced a new bill, HCR2033, which seeks to decertify the 2020 election results in Arizona’s three largest counties. There is no legal mechanism for decertifying election results after the event. As the August primary election to choose the Republican and Democratic candidates for secretary of state draws closer, attention is likely to fall increasingly on Finchem’s appearance in Washington on the day of the insurrection. Allegations that he played a role in inciting the Capitol attacks led to an unsuccessful attempt to have him recalled from the legislature, as well as a motion by Arizona Democrats to have him expelled from the chamber. “The consensus in our caucus was that individuals who participated in the January 6 insurrection do not belong serving as members of the legislature,” Bolding said. Finchem has responded to claims that he helped organize the insurrection by threatening to sue. Through lawyers he has denied that he played any role in the violent assault on the Capitol building, saying that he “never directly witnessed the Capitol breach, and that he was in fact warned away from the Capitol when the breach began”. In his telling of events, he was in Washington that day to deliver to Mike Pence an “evidence book” of purported fraud in the Arizona election and to ask the then vice-president to delay certification of Biden’s victory. For Finchem, January 6 remains a “patriotic event” dedicated to the exercise of free speech; if there were any criminality it was all the responsibility of anti-fascist and Black Lives Matter activists. The Guardian reached out to Finchem to invite him to explain his presence and actions in Washington on January 6, but he did not respond. He has repeatedly insisted that he never came within 500 yards of the Capitol building. But photos and video footage captured by Getty Images and examined by the Arizona Mirror show him walking through the crowd of Trump supporters in front of the east steps of the Capitol after the insurrection was already under way. At 3.14pm on January 6, more than two hours after the outer police barrier protecting the Capitol was overcome by insurrectionists, Finchem posted a photograph on Twitter that he has since taken down. It is not known who took the photo, but it shows rioters close to the east steps of the building above the words: “What happens when the People feel they have been ignored, and Congress refuses to acknowledge rampant fraud. #stopthesteal.” ••• Finchem’s campaign to become the next secretary of state of Arizona is going well. Last year his campaign raised $660,000, Politico reported – more than three times Bolding’s haul. Bolding sees that as indicative of a fundamental problem. On the right, individuals and groups have spotted an opportunity in the secretary of state positions and are avidly targeting them; on the left there is little sign of equivalent energy or awareness. “The public in general may not understand what’s at stake here. All Democrats, all Americans, should be concerned about this and what it could do to the 2024 presidential election,” he said. Dean agrees that there is a perilous void in public knowledge. “What’s so insidious about the Trump plan is that it is focusing on state-level races where voters know very little about what the secretary of state does. That’s a danger, as it gives Finchem a realistic path in which he could win – and Finchem will do what Trump wants.”In her assured fiction debut, Sheila Armstrong combines unsettling themes with the commonplace and reveals a keen eye for detail. The author, who is originally from Sligo and now lives in Dublin, sets several of these stories in her home country. Lemons is a response to the eighth amendment campaign in 2018. A woman’s life is described in terms of her body: a home abortion is “a pulling from deep inside”, while a mastectomy is “negative space, like a scoop removed from an ice-cream tub”. With an impressive economy, Armstrong distils each passing decade into a few paragraphs. In the title story, a fisherman recounts in meticulous detail the gutting of a mackerel. Written in the second person as a series of numbered points, it builds tension through Armstrong’s deft foreshadowing: “Look your fish in the eye: they say the last thing a man sees is imprinted on his pupil. You check every catch this way for your own reflection, but there is only a dark hole of fright.” In Red Market, customers bid for a young woman’s organs. The horror is amplified because Armstrong’s country gathering feels so ordinary: the woman is trussed up and put on display “in between the diving hat and the roasting trays”. Armstrong has a talent for disrupting our expectations and her prose is sensorily rich. In Dado, a story about a hit-and-run, “the spit-hot rage of teenage girls lingers in the black ink on the cubicle doors” of a school bathroom. An old man’s grief leaves him “untethered and the days carry him along in their surf”. In Mantis, the narrator compares the “whip-crack thud” of his domestic violence to the “whip-crack claw” of a mantis shrimp. Her evocations of landscape are extraordinary and there’s a satisfying circularity to the collection. It opens with Hole and the night visitors to a field with a “fairy fort”, a ring of stones. It ends with Dome, a typical day at the beach. An image of the sea and the sky meeting memorably concludes this haunting collection. • How to Gut a Fish by Sheila Armstrong is published by Bloomsbury (£16.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyThis heartfelt, straightforwardish drama from New Zealand ends with a belting cover of Bronski Beat’s LGBTQ+ anthem Smalltown Boy: a song about a young man leaving home to find love and acceptance in the city. Rūrangi picks up a similar story a decade later, when a trans man goes back to the dairy farm where he grew up. It’s a film that thrums with warmth and gives the rest a lesson in how to get trans representation right: all the trans roles are played by trans actors (and for good measure some non-trans – or non-specific – roles too). Elz Carrad gives a likably vulnerable performance as Caz, who ran away as a teenager to Auckland, where he has made a new family in the LGBTQ+ community, transitioned, found work as a trans activist and acquired a gorgeous boyfriend. When Caz arrives back in his home town Rūrangi, all the confidence vanishes. He feels as if he has to explain himself all the time. His dad Gerald (Kirk Torrance) doesn’t recognise him, then struggles to accept him. He also can’t forgive Caz for not coming back for his mum’s funeral. (She died of a rare cancer linked to chemical fertilisers.) Since then, old-school Gerald has become an environmental activist, so, right there you know he is capable of a change of heart. One of my issues with the film is that in its hurry for happy endings all round, the relationships feel a bit underdeveloped. In flashback, awkwardly edited, we see the crisis in Caz’s Auckland life, the thing that sent him home; like the film itself, the backstory runs along conventional lines. Still, Rūrangi gets by on its sheer warmth and a lovely streak of optimism about human nature. • Rūrangi is released on 25 February in cinemas.Dear Life I can’t undo all I have done to myself, what I have let an appetite for love do to me. I have wanted all the world, its beauties and its injuries; some days, I think that is punishment enough. Often, I received more than I’d asked, which is how this works – you fish in open water ready to be wounded on what you reel in. Throwing it back was a nightmare. Throwing it back and seeing my own face as it disappeared into the dark water. Catching my tongue suddenly on metal, spitting the hook into my open palm. Dear life: I feel that hook today most keenly. Would you loosen the line – you’ll listen if I ask you, if  you are the sort of  life I think you are. The Romanian-American poet Maya C Popa published her award-winning first collection, American Faith, in 2019. This week’s poem is from her most recent chapbook Dear Life, one of the four winners of The Poetry Business international book and pamphlet competition, 2021. The title poem is placed last in an elegant and cohesively organised short collection often reflecting the poet’s interest in English/British writing and landscape. Philip Larkin is a subtle presence at times. The week’s poem, with its emphasis on emotional risk-taking, hints at an additional influence from the American confessional poets of the 1960s. Its opening series of declarations centres on “an appetite for love” and the connection between self-abandonment (to erotic or otherwise love-charged experience) and poetic energy seems earthed in the lines “I have wanted all the world, its beauties / and its injuries …” The heroic manner can almost resemble that of Sylvia Plath but, as with Larkin, Popa coolly holds her own ground. The subjugation to all-or-nothing emotion is clearly seen as deliberate, something done by the protagonist to herself, and risk-assessed. It invites punishment (for the beauties, the injuries, and the sheer wanting) and while this may amount to rather more than the poet asked for, there’s a “less-deceived” understanding that it’s “how this works”. To demonstrate precisely “how this works”, Popa takes a fishing metaphor and revives it by splitting it into passive and active elements: “you fish in open water / ready to be wounded by what you reel in.” The past-tense narrative of stanza five might have quenched the rhetorical fire, but for the repetition of “throwing it back” and the sombrely stunning moment of passivity in “seeing my own face // as it disappears into the dark water.” Rejecting the devastation requires further self-wounding. The pain of un-hooking is analysed now, beginning with the sharply tactile description in the seventh stanza of the tongue on the metal, and the spitting of the hook “into my open palm.” The palm is sensibly “open” to this, as the imagination was once rashly open to all the riskiness of “open water”. Popa is skilled at what I think of as the one-line stanza – a single line, slowing the pace, insisting that a few words are allowed concentrated resonance and nuance. The address to “Dear life” is not the start of a letter, but a gasped prayer, impelled by a particular day when “I feel that hook most keenly”. The prayer is for relaxation and reduction. Life, by “loosening the line”, can let the poet off the self-inflicted hook. This demand for less rather than more emotion separates Dear Life from Romantic and confessional antecedents without reducing the emotional charge. Elsewhere in the collection, Popa takes an oblique look at Larkin’s oblique question, “Where can we live but days?” In the current poem, she admits to the anguish of a particular day, and asks courteously, desperately, for the mercy that ought to be possible. Life, it’s hoped, will provide blessedly un-notable days where we simply live. Maya C Popa is interviewed here.Michelle, 48, a single mother of three, was stressed, vulnerable and broke. She had recently moved to a new area in Tyne and Wear after escaping an abusive relationship, and when her working hours were cut back at the beginning of the pandemic, money became tight. “It was soul-destroying,” she says. Desperate, and in need of cash for her son’s birthday, she was delighted when another mother at her child’s school offered to lend her £50. The woman said she knew what it was like to need a little extra and that she could pay her back next month. That £50 turned into thousands changing hands, in cash, over several months, with no records kept. “She made it her business to know exactly what days money went in my bank,” says Michelle (whose name has been changed). Forced to pay “double bubble” interest, (the amount of the original loan, plus the same again on top), Michelle soon found the debt spiralling out of control and loan sharks pursuing her. “I got to the point of wanting to end everything,” says Michelle. “I was suicidal and didn’t know who to go to.” The loan shark resorted to intimidation: she was sent threatening messages; people threw things at her house, left unwanted items on her doorstep and smashed the windows at night. Michelle eventually fled with her children, leaving all her possessions behind, and was placed in temporary accommodation just before Christmas last year. After seeking help from England Illegal Money Lending Team (IMLT), she has since been able to turn her life around. Her circumstances are far from unusual: two-thirds of the victims IMLT helped last year thought they were borrowing from a friend. Michelle is one of about 9 million people who have borrowed more than usual amounts since the start of the pandemic, according to the Office for National Statistics. While not every debtor falls prey to loan sharks, feelings of shame and isolation are widespread among those in severe financial difficulties. Individuals are rarely met with understanding, leading many to blame themselves. But in reality, no one is immune to debt. “I would love to think that the pandemic has made us more understanding, but I don’t think it has,” says Clare Seal, author of Five Steps to Financial Wellbeing. “There’s still a misconception that people are in debt because they are wasting money.” The Covid-19 pandemic has divided the nation’s wealth like never before. With lockdowns curtailing opportunities to splash out, British households built up their savings to the second-highest level on record at the start of the year. But millions of others have lost jobs or been furloughed, plunging them into debt, while a temporary uplift to universal credit has ended. Since March 2020, more than 11 million people have built up £25bn of arrears and debt to pay for essentials, with a smaller group of households facing severe financial distress. As Seal points out, the rise in remote working has accelerated this polarisation. “There’s a stark divide between people who were able to work from home – they have saved on travel expenses, maybe moved out to a city that is more affordable, and are now doing hybrid working long-term – and the people who have lost everything.” “Debt advisers say they have had many first-time callers,” says Laura Whateley, author of Money: A User’s Guide. “Government support has fallen away just as we’re seeing terrifying rises in energy bills, high inflation and no slow down of soaring house prices and rents … We’re only just starting to see the impact.” Seal says that the pandemic has seen a shift away from the type of credit card borrowing that landed her in £27,000 of debt. People are instead turning to buy-now-pay-later platforms, such as Klarna and Clearpay, and salary-advance schemes, which have soared in popularity over the past year. “A change in the way that people borrow isn’t necessarily bad, but these products are unregulated,” she says. Moreover, the high interest charged on some of these loans means that, for many, they are a curse instead of salvation. According to Whateley, those with “a bad credit rating are often limited to payday loans or extremely high interest lenders, which can lead you down a path of unmanageable debt”. Many buy-now-pay-later firms charge no interest, but borrowers unable to meet repayments can find themselves charged late payment fees and pursued by debt collectors. The number of people looking to borrow from friends and family has risen since the start of the pandemic, from 5.1 million in February 2020 up to 5.9 million in October 2020. In some cases, people have turned to strangers, which has helped to cultivate a cottage industry of lenders looking to make extra cash. On Reddit, DIY money-lending communities have seen a surge of activity since lockdown began in the UK. These online spaces – most notably the subreddit r/borrow – allow lenders and borrowers to connect with each other directly, and people turn to the forum as an alternative to payday loans. According to data collected on r/borrow by the Consumer Council, the average interest for UK-based requests was 130%, with the average amount borrowed totalling £148. Any registered Reddit user who meets the account criteria can request a peer-to-peer loan by posting on r/borrow, bypassing the need for any kind of credit check. One user of the subreddit is Ryan Buckley, 30, a stay-at-home dad from West Yorkshire, whose bad credit rating left him with few options during the pandemic. “Having the kids quarantined at home, away from school for more than a year, took its toll on our financial wellbeing,” he says. “We rely on the children having, at minimum, lunch at school. Money just doesn’t stretch as far these days.” Buckley first turned to the subreddit towards the end of last year for short-term emergency loans – first for £30, and then £100 – over the space of two months. He is now paying back a loan of £200 over two months, which was to help with “general shopping” over the Christmas period. Borrowers and lenders on the subreddit often share a distrust of traditional banks and lenders, preferring instead the platform’s human element. As Buckley put it: “You’re borrowing from a real person, not a company, somebody who understands situations, lends with compassion and isn’t trying to extort.” Many lenders on the subreddit claim to be motivated by a desire to help people in need, whether it’s providing loans to those looking to top up universal credit or who need help getting by on furlough payments. But Reddit can be a minefield, and it is not uncommon for a borrower to vanish before repaying a loan. While r/borrow has a reputation for being relatively well moderated, on other subreddits – such as r/loans and r/simpleloans – scamming is even more rife. Abuses by lenders include asking borrowers for unnecessary information for use in scams, including password information, and access to the borrower’s computer. In some cases, this has led to borrowers being conned out of thousands of pounds. According to the Wales IMLT, which is funded by the Financial Conduct Authority to target illegal money lenders, nearly a third of Reddit’s lenders either had no track record of lending, or were subsequently banned from Reddit due to account violations. While Reddit has offered to help some, Catherine Williams at IMLT is concerned about how people are borrowing from these online spaces. “Giving out your bank details to someone you don’t know – that’s a terrifying thing to do,” she says. “Even if they are not a loan shark, if you borrow money from an individual, you are not protected.” Although the moderators of the subreddit help to mediate disputes, provide advice and block users who do not adhere to Reddit’s terms of service, ultimately all loans are treated by Reddit as a civil matter. With regard to the proliferation of money-lending communities on the platform, Reddit says its terms of service “prohibit illegal transactions and we enforce these policies across the platform. We also regularly review subreddits for compliance with our policies. In some instances, we work directly with moderators to ensure users are warned of risks in relevant communities, and many communities impose strict rules and requirements related to user transactions on top of our content policy.” This form of quick, social-media enabled lending is not limited to Reddit. According to the IMLT, the pandemic has seen an increase in reports of illegal money lenders operating on social media platforms – among them Facebook, Craigslist, and Snapchat. Dating apps have also been used as a platform for illegal lending; Williams describes one case in which a Grindr user shared nude photos with a match, from whom they subsequently borrowed money. The person who lent the money eventually threatened to leak those photos if the borrower refused to keep paying. Likewise, on r/borrow, there have been cases of lenders soliciting nude photos as security to ensure payment. But there are safer alternatives for people unable to turn to banks or who cannot afford the high interest rates of payday lenders. Credit unions – local organisations where members pool savings to lend to other members – have proved to be a lifeline for many people during the pandemic. There are about 240 credit unions across the UK, with 1.4 million members. These institutions tend to offer more affordable and lenient repayment terms to those who may struggle to borrow elsewhere. Adam Male, chief executive officer of Kent Savers Credit Union, says that while they “can’t lend to absolutely everyone”, Kent Savers – like many other credit unions – has “a pretty low-bar to entry”. Male says Kent Savers was able to provide support to members unable to repay their loans due to the pandemic. “We’re going to work with the borrower to their advantage, rather than going to a credit department and becoming aggressive.” This is not to say credit unions are the best option for everyone. “The main downside is that rates can be significantly higher on credit union loans than the loans or credit cards you would get from conventional banks. So usually, it is cheaper to borrow elsewhere,” says Whateley. “But for those who can’t access conventional banks because they don’t have a good credit score, this could be a more affordable option than really high-cost lenders.” On top of this, credit unions are rarely able to offer the type of emergency, instant loans that can be sourced elsewhere. Their focus, according to Male, is on long-term loans and offering members a “financial education”. This might mean, for example, encouraging members to build a savings habit by depositing a small amount of money each week. “Credit unions are less in it to make a profit; a lot of the money goes back to the community,” says Seal. But, of course, there is only so much an individual can do when it comes to borrowing. “It’s much easier to look after your financial wellbeing if you have a high-level of privilege. People without privilege and without agency are absolutely reliant on government policy.” To begin to address the Covid debt crisis, Seal says that the government should immediately reintroduce the universal credit uplift and expedite the regulation of buy now, pay later. “Those two changes – one that should never have happened, and one that has been promised for a long time – would make a huge difference,” she says. Until this takes place, more and more people will fall prey to nefarious money lenders, or end up relying on unregulated corners of the internet to make ends meet. • This article was amended on 21 February 2022 to make it clear that many buy-now-pay-later platforms charge no interest, but borrowers unable to meet repayments can find themselves charged late payment fees and pursued by debt collectors.Decades after the installation of a color barrier in professional baseball, one of the nation’s top Black athletes – Jackie Robinson – stood on a Major League field for a tryout. Infield practice, batting practice, fungoes – he did it all, including some memorable shots against the wall in left field. This did not take place at the Brooklyn Dodgers’ Ebbets Field, where Robinson would integrate the majors on 15 April 1947 though. Rather, it happened two years earlier, almost to the day, at Fenway Park. On 16 April 1945, the Boston Red Sox held a tryout for three Black players – Robinson, Sam Jethroe and Marvin Williams. No job offers resulted, and the Red Sox ended up becoming the last MLB team to integrate, over a decade later. That the tryout took place at all is a testament to two determined individuals – Isadore Muchnick, a white Boston city councilor, and Wendell Smith, a Black sportswriter. A new book honors such advocates in the long battle for integration on the diamond – Before Brooklyn: The Unsung Heroes Who Helped Break Baseball’s Color Barrier by Boston-based journalist Ted Reinstein. “It struck me that while some people who were involved in that story have some degree of fame – some of them were famous like Satchel Paige and Josh Gibson – many people who were part of the story did not necessarily play baseball at all,” Reinstein says. He cites the Black press, which covered the Negro Leagues at a time when the white media largely ignored the story. And he mentions Black porters on Pullman train cars who risked their jobs to secretly bring aboard newspapers such as Smith’s Pittsburgh Courier, which found their way to Black households across the US, spreading the word about the Negro Leagues. “I began to realize that these people are not generally known at all in breaking the color barrier,” Reinstein says. In Boston, Muchnick used his knowledge of the city’s arcane Puritan-era bylaws to compel a tryout from the Red Sox – whose longtime owner, Tom Yawkey, was widely considered a racist. Team management insisted on no press coverage. When the Black players arrived in Boston, the Sox kept them waiting for nearly a week until Smith leaked news of the delay – as did white sportswriter Clif Keane. The tryout itself lasted 90 minutes. During it, Yawkey allegedly yelled a racial epithet at the players. Although Muchnick marveled at Robinson’s blasts off the Green Monster, the Sox never followed up with a job offer to him, Jethroe or Williams. Following Robinson’s debut, Jethroe did sign with another Boston MLB team at the time – the Braves. “Having grown up in Boston, I ask people in Boston if they could get past a shameful history like that,” Reinstein says of the Red Sox’ missed chance. “We’ve never fully gotten past that, never.” The author is a lifetime Robinson fan. His parents were active in the civil rights movement, took him to protests as a toddler and hosted a dinner for a Black folk singer named Jackie Washington – the first time Reinstein recalled having a Black guest in his home. Reinstein went on to become a reporter for a local TV newsmagazine show, Chronicle, and the author of several books. For his latest, he interviewed Paige’s daughters Pamela Paige O’Neal and Linda Paige Shelby, and Gibson’s great-grandson Sean Gibson, as well as experts at the Negro Leagues Baseball Museum and the National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. As the book points out, baseball was not originally segregated. In 1884, Moses Fleetwood Walker became the first Black major league player. Just three years later, however, in 1887, National Association star Adrian “Cap” Anson, who was white, objected to his Chicago White Stockings team playing an exhibition game against Newark of the International League, because Newark had two Black players – Walker and pitching ace George Stovey. Both were kept out of the game. The International League voted to ban any further contracts with Black players, and professional baseball adopted this racist policy through a gentleman’s agreement. “A gentleman’s agreement, in a sense, is a coward’s agreement,” Reinstein says. “There’s a reason why a gentleman’s agreement is done without any record – a sense that it will not make them look good … It was the case in 1887, it’s the case today. There are still gentleman’s agreements all over.” He laments that the one in baseball prevented Blacks from playing the national pastime professionally on an equal basis with whites. “It’s the most shameful moment in baseball history, the original sin,” Reinstein says, adding that since it was broken, “Baseball has certainly sought to atone.” As Reinstein found, there were many voices who called upon the majors to integrate. One of them was Mabray “Doc” Kountze, a Black journalist and author from the Boston suburb of Medford. Kountze’s advocacy included a face-to-face meeting with the owner of the Boston Braves, Bob Quinn, in 1938. “I begin and end the book with Doc Kountze,” Reinstein says. “He strikes me, in many ways, as the quintessential unsung hero in the story, essentially unknown, later relatively anonymous. He was not a celebrity, not powerful, not wealthy. He was really, really dedicated to do something to abolish segregation in baseball. By collaborating with other people, he was able to help do this. He’s the perfect example of an unsung hero.” To the west, in the Steel City, Smith not only celebrated two powerhouse Negro League teams – the Pittsburgh Crawfords and the Homestead Grays – he recommended their players as candidates for the floundering Pittsburgh Pirates. He never heard back, even though the Crawfords’ and Grays’ rosters included some of the all-time greats – such as Paige, Gibson, Judy Johnson and Oscar Charleston. The book discusses Smith’s contemporaries in Black sports journalism – including Nell Dodson Russell, who became perhaps the country’s first Black female sports editor when she was named to that position by the Baltimore Afro-American. She pointed out the disparity between Black and white ballplayers in both pay and working conditions. Black newspapers covering the Negro Leagues got a wider circulation thanks to the covert efforts of the Pullman porters. White advocates for integration included Jews such as Muchnick in Boston, and Lester Rodney in New York. The latter was so passionate about the Negro Leagues that he talked his way onto the staff of the Daily Worker, a communist newspaper that up to that point had downplayed sports. A member of both the American Communist Party and the Baseball Writers of America, Rodney once recommended numerous Black players for Dodgers manager Leo Durocher to sign. The famously acerbic skipper replied, “for a fucking Communist, you sure know your baseball.” During the second world war, Rodney took up an especially persuasive argument for integration. “In many ways, it was the one that got a lot of white people around,” Reinstein says. “He focused on the context of World War Two, the way both Black and white people were now going to war and coming home in boxes … Roosevelt asked Blacks and whites both, if necessary, to die for their country.” Doris Miller, a cook aboard the battleship USS West Virginia, showed initiative during the attack on Pearl Harbor, received the first Navy Cross awarded to a Black sailor, participated in morale-raising efforts and tragically died in the Pacific after returning to action. In Europe, the heroic 761st Tank Battalion – nicknamed the Black Panthers – participated in the Battle of the Bulge and the liberation of the concentration camps. Despite such bravery, “Blacks would come back to a country where they were still second-class citizens,” Reinstein says, adding that Rodney’s arguments “began to resonate. It was a pivotal point.” One member of the 761st was Robinson, a former multi-sport star at UCLA now serving as a lieutenant. He was respected by his white commanding officer, Colonel Paul Bates. When an injury sidelined Robinson from combat, Bates decided that he would accompany the battalion to Europe for morale purposes. Shortly before Robinson’s scheduled departure, he was traveling on a bus back to his base in Texas and was ordered to sit in the back. He refused, and was arrested, then faced a transfer and court-martial. Ultimately, he was cleared, with Bates testifying in his favor. After an honorable discharge, Robinson was playing with the Kansas City Monarchs of the Negro Leagues when Rickey came calling. “[Rickey] knew if he was going to break the color barrier, it would have to be with a player who was unimpeachable at every level,” Reinstein says. “A real sterling background that opponents would have to respect, Black or white … He found that person in Jackie Robinson, for sure.” The book quotes Countze’s reflection on the historic moment: “As sportswriters, we who ‘spoke out’ were all in it, and a part of it, and we knew the very heart of it. There probably has never been, or ever will be, such a sincerely dedicated and nationally united reform crusade again in American sports history.”Ministers will reject making misogyny a hate crime in England and Wales and urge MPs to get behind controversial legislation that has been criticised for curbing the right to protest as the government seeks to push through major changes to the criminal justice system. In a move which will set up a clash with Conservative backbenchers and opposition MPs when the police, crime, sentencing and courts bill returns to parliament next week, the home secretary, Priti Patel, will write to members on Monday saying the government will oppose a Lords amendment that would extend hate crimes to cover misogyny. The Home Office said its rejection is based on a Law Commission report, which warned that extending hate crimes to cover misogyny would prove “more harmful than helpful” to victims of violence against women and girls. The government says it is also “carefully considering” a new offence of street harassment that would criminalise the verbal abuse of women, pestering and persistent cat-calling or making lewd comments. A new Scottish standalone offence of misogyny is under discussion by an expert working group and is expected to report to ministers in Edinburgh this month. The letter comes after the government has been forced into a series of concessions on crime and violence against women and girls over the last few months. Responding to the letter, Yvette Cooper, the shadow home secretary, condemned Patel for failing to introduce new legislation to tackle hatred against women. “It is shameful that the home secretary is still refusing to make violence against women and girls a strategic policing requirement so it has the same prominence as tackling organised crime. “She is also still refusing to establish specialist rape units in every police force area or minimum sentence for rape and stalking, and shockingly is still resisting Labour’s proposals for action against landlords who pressurise tenants into sex for rent,” she said. The House of Lords inflicted a string of defeats on the bill last month, which saw the upper chamber reject controversial measures designed to combat the tactics adopted by groups including Extinction Rebellion and Insulate Britain and on a separate clause that would have imposed noise restrictions on demonstrations. Peers also voted against new powers that would give police powers to stop and search those who they suspect of taking part in illegal protests. The upper chamber can delay, though not entirely block, legislation, but its actions can often embarrass and stall government plans. The bill returns to the Commons next week for a round of parliamentary ping-pong, where legislation passes between the two houses until an agreement is reached. The Home Office said the revised version of the draft law going before the Commons will tighten a number of measures, including extending the time limit for prosecution of common assault or battery in domestic abuse cases. Officials said the “enhanced” version of the draft legislation would also include introducing “Harper’s law”, which will extend mandatory life sentences to those convicted of the unlawful manslaughter of an on-duty emergency worker. It follows a campaign by the widow of PC Andrew Harper, who was killed while responding to a quad bike theft by three teenagers in August 2019. Addressing peers’ amendment on adding misogyny as a hate crime, the Home Office cited how a Law Commission review had found that legislating to make misogyny a hate crime would prove “more harmful than helpful” to victims of violence against women and girls. Home Office officials said ministers would also “continue fighting” to bring in increase police powers for dealing with “highly disruptive protests”, a policy that has sparked “kill the bill” demonstrations across the country. Announcing her intention to write to MPs on Monday, Patel said: “There are still too many criminals getting off with inadequate sentences for appalling acts of violence and sexual offences and still people who feel unsafe walking the streets or in their own homes. “This bill is vitally important as we overhaul the criminal justice system and make our streets safer.”Harold Pinter was a perfectionist when it came to the theatre, even down to how an ice-cream seller should exit the auditorium, according to a previously unpublished letter. In 1985, the dramatist directed the West End debut of Tennessee Williams’s Sweet Bird of Youth, starring Lauren Bacall, which opened on 8 July at the Theatre Royal Haymarket. On 24 July, he wrote to Anthony Peek, the theatre’s then manager, praising the previous night’s performance: “It was in pretty good shape, I thought, and I am delighted that business is so splendid.” But he went on to air two complaints: “The usher with ice-cream in the dress circle remained standing until the house lights went down. He then marched up the steps and closed the doors, thereby causing reflection of light on to the stage. Can he leave the post earlier, do you think?” He also grumbled that the curtain had gone up 12 minutes late, “a great pity, as 98% of the audience is seated by 7.30”. Pinter, who died in 2008, was one of the greatest modern dramatists, as well as an actor and director. Awarded the Nobel prize for literature in 2005, his masterpieces include The Caretaker, The Homecoming and the screenplay for The Servant. The letter has been discovered by Thomas Edsall of leading antiquarian bookseller, the 19th Century Rare Book &amp; Photograph Shop, in Brooklyn, New York. It had been buried in a box of Peek’s miscellaneous letters and Christmas cards, which the bookseller had acquired. Stapled to Pinter’s typed, signed letter is a carbon copy of Peek’s polite reply, accepting the criticisms. Edsall told the Guardian: “The letter shows Pinter’s … attention to the most minute details relating to the staging of the play. The manager, Anthony Peek, a veteran of the West End, is undaunted by this giant of British theatre. He stands up for the theatre’s policy on the late start, but he admits that the matter of the ice-cream is indefensible, saying: ‘You are absolutely right about the usher’.” Michael Billington, Pinter’s biographer and former Guardian critic, said: “Harold was famous for being a perfectionist, particularly when it came to anything to do with rehearsal or performance. He was acutely aware and very conscious of noise and interruptions. He quite rightly wanted from an audience and everyone involved in a play absolute, 100% concentration. This is very much in keeping with his character.” The discovery comes as a leading American director, Carey Perloff, is publishing a book about her close collaborations with both Pinter and Tom Stoppard on numerous US productions of their plays over several decades. In Pinter and Stoppard: A Director’s View, published this week by Methuen Drama, Bloomsbury Publishing, she recalls that Pinter was so precise about his approach that he would point out if an actor had not paused sufficiently. She also remembers that, when her new-born baby was in a carry-cot in a theatre’s dressing-room, he did not acknowledge the child until he needed a way to convey the relationship between a father and daughter. She told the Guardian: “We were rehearsing Mountain Language, a play about a political prisoner who’s never seen his child. Peter Riegert, a wonderful actor, was playing the prisoner and he was having a hard time with the scene. He couldn’t personalise it. Finally Pinter … walked to the dressing-room, picked up the baby … and brought her into the room. “He said very calmly: ‘Peter, now this is your child and you have been prevented from ever seeing her because of your politics … It’s completely specific. Now play the scene.’ Peter stared at this baby, started to cry and then he did the scene. Pinter picked the baby up and put her back in the dressing-room … The scene was always amazing after that.”It feels like a lifetime since Theresa May and Gina Miller were called “bloody difficult women” during Britain’s brutal and laborious war over Brexit. But the legal battle between the political opponents, and its lesson on accountability, are just as relevant today, according to the cast of a new play. “With what’s happening in politics now, we realise the importance of championing protocol,” said Jessica Turner, who plays May in Bloody Difficult Women, which opens at Riverside Studios in London on Thursday. “At the time, we as a nation weren’t necessarily aware that the triggering of article 50 [the UK’s EU exit clause] could have been done through the royal prerogative or through parliament. Now we are much more aware of how important that stand was.” It was in 2016 that Miller, an anti-Brexit activist, decided to take the government to court over over its authority to implement Brexit without approval from parliament. She has said she was furious about people seeing themselves as above the law. Amara Karan, who plays the Guyanese-British business owner, said she hoped what Miller stood for was something “we can go back to … Particularly now with this conversation over public standards and the government breaking its own laws.” Miller, Karan added, “looks less of a pedantic person now. Someone has to make sure the rule of law is followed, otherwise our whole society collapses.” The play captures an episode of the Brexit story through the unfolding drama between May and Miller. The writer, Tim Walker, a journalist who has previously worked with Miller, has called it a “psychological human drama about idealism, obsession and delusion”. The themes it covers are as personal as they are political – there is much of the sexist and sometimes racist abuse and threats faced by Miller during the court case, as well as May’s ongoing struggle for the support of her party and country. Turner said it was a “huge responsibility” playing figures who are still very much in the public spotlight. “Particularly when everyone has such a strong image of a character like May.” Karan remembers following the news story at the time, and wondering why Miller was “taking on all of these causes. It seemed like a thankless job.” But since then, she’s “learned what she’s about, what her agenda is, where she grew up, the traumas she suffered” and found that she could relate to her more. “Lots of women in public have suffered all kinds of abuse and particularly women of colour,” she said. “I was scared for her, to be honest. It felt like it was this woman against the world. The language was becoming very violent and racist around Brexit. “I was really excited and struck when she actually won the high court case, and then the supreme court case, and then successfully sued Boris Johnson [In September 2019, Miller successfully challenged Johnson’s prorogation of parliament].” So what of the similarities between May and Miller? The play suggests they have more in common than meets the eye, including a stringent work ethic and a love of cricket. “I think what they have in common is being a woman in a man’s world,” Turner said. “They had to fight their corners. They’re both conviction politicians rather than career ones. Yes, May had ambitions, but she worked through the very basics of stuffing envelopes in her local party first.” In a demonstrative scene midway through the play, May and Miller address the audience. Miller says: “When a man takes a stand on something, he is seen as a maverick. But a woman doing this is considered mean.” May responds: “Women are not allowed to complain. If we do, we are whiny and hysterical.” The actors said the play was “very funny, but also a reflection of our times”. The last scene even leaps in time and is set in present day. “Accountability and the lack of it is very current,” Turner said. “So although it’s about something that’s happened in the past, and you might say that’s history, it’s actually very relevant now.” Bloody Difficult Women opens at Riverside Studios on 24 FebruaryThe transport union has accused the New South Wales government of playing politics with commuters amid claims the two parties had come to a weekend agreement which would have prevented a shutdown of the state’s train network. Sydney’s transport network was thrown into chaos on Monday after a long-running industrial dispute between the rail workers’ union and NSW government saw staff across the network “locked out” and train services ground to a halt. Late on Monday night, the transport minister, David Elliott, announced the government had backed away from the shutdown and limited train services would resume on Tuesday. But he still encouraged those “who typically rely on the rail network to find alternative travel options”. The Rail, Tram and Bus Union welcomed the decision, saying the government had “finally backed down on its outrageous rail shut down”. Services had been disrupted across the city on Monday including routes connecting Sydney to the Blue Mountains, the south coast and Newcastle. Buses were put on to replace some services but commuters were told to allow for extra travel time. Both the premier, Dominic Perrottet, and Elliott, sought to attack the union for what they labelled a last-minute union “strike” which crippled the network as universities returned and international visitors began arriving into the state. Elliott accused the Rail, Tram and Bus Union of “hijacking the city” with “terrorist-like activity” and claimed the department had taken the decision to shut the train network down due to safety concerns related to the industrial action. But the union continued to argue the government had not explained why the planned industrial action would have made the network unsafe. After hours of negotiation behind locked doors at the commission, the union’s barrister, Lucy Saunders, said the union remained unsure why the government had closed the train network. “If it’s explained, if our understanding changes, we remain willing to negotiate,” she said. Amid heated public barbs from both sides, Elliott and Perrottet claimed the union had not shown up at a conciliation meeting before the commission on Sunday night. But earlier, Saunders told the commission that assertion was wrong, saying there was “some fairly unhelpful media commentary going on [from] the government”. “Of course [the assertion that the union didn’t appear at negotiations] is not correct. I assume it’s a misunderstanding but it would be helpful if it could stop,” she said. The Guardian understands that while the union’s secretary, Alex Claassens, was not at the commission on Sunday night, barristers and other representatives from the union were there. Later on Monday, Elliott also conceded he had not been at the meeting. But union representatives stressed the action was not a strike, and that rail staff had arrived at work on Monday to find themselves locked out. Claassens said on Monday that the action would have impacted management, but not commuters. The NSW government has been locked in an industrial dispute with transport workers for months amid pay and privatisation concerns. The union has already taken a series of industrial steps, including protected stop work actions, and had planned to begin a two-week action including a series of work bans. On Saturday, the government took the step of applying to the Fair Work Commission to block the union from taking action. The two parties were in negotiations before the commission over the weekend and appeared to have come to an agreement by Saturday night. As part of the deal, the union had agreed to drop some planned industrial action including an overtime ban and to only work to a “master roster”, but would continue with a ban on “altered working”, meaning workers only perform the shifts they are set without changes. On Monday, the NSW industrial relations minister, Damien Tudehope, claimed the union “walked away” from the deal, saying the government returned to the commission on Sunday but that “no agreement could be reached”. “In those circumstances, with the work practices being put in place and the withdrawal of services in the way that they were outlined by the union, Sydney Trains took the view that we could not properly, reliably and safely operate Sydney trains,” he said. But the union said the government simply did not understand what it had agreed to. Elliot conceded on Monday there had been a “misinterpretation” of Saturday’s deal on the part of the government. “We walked away on Saturday thinking it was done and dusted, then at 8pm last night they dragged us back because they realised what they’d agreed to didn’t satisfy them so they asked the commission to return,” Claassens said. “They had no idea what they wanted, they fluffed around and wanted us to just drop the action. Obviously, we saw no reason to do that given we’d already come to an agreement. “You can imagine my surprise when they did an ‘Alan Joyce’ on us and locked us out,” – a reference to Qantas’ decision to lock out workers during an industrial dispute in 2011 which led to the Fair Work Commission ordering that union to terminate its action on the grounds it was threatening the economy. Perrottet denied comparisons to Qantas on Monday, saying the government had been advised by the department that it would not be safe to run the network under the actions to be taken by the union. “You don’t just turn a train system on in a few hours,” he said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Limited services will resume from 5am on Tuesday while negotiations with the union continue. Elliott on Monday night urged “the combined rail unions to put their political agenda aside so Sydneysiders don’t face more interruptions” and said the government would “continue to negotiate with the unions and work through their list of claims”. The union labelled the shutdown “a huge dummy spit by the NSW government supported by their federal counterparts”. “To deliberately shut down the rail network on such a big day for many people, seemingly so they can run a fear campaign about unions, is quite extraordinary,” Claassens said. “Workers will now go back to taking the protected industrial action we’d planned – action that really only transport management will notice, not commuters.” Speaking at Sydney international airport earlier on Monday, where the first tourists were arriving into the country in almost two years, Perrottet, said he was “incredibly disappointed” trains weren’t running, accusing the Labor party and unions of launching a “coordinated attack”. “The first day we have international arrivals, a day mums and dads are getting their kids to school, a day when many university students are going back to class … the unions were intent on causing chaos,” he said. “This is the unions playing games with the Labor party for political purposes at the expense of our people … you cannot treat the people of our great state in this way. This is the Labor party in bed with the union movement.” But Claassens rubbished that claim, accusing the government of “playing politics”. The Labor opposition leader, Chris Minns, called on the government to work with the union and restart trains. “Let’s be clear – the only people who didn’t turn up to work today is the NSW government,” he said. “Perrottet shut down the rail network. He needs to work to open it back up.” The prime minister, Scott Morrison, condemned the industrial action, accusing the union of making it hard or impossible for some essential workers this morning. “There are people this morning who are going to have an overpriced Uber or they’re going to be not able to get to work,” he told 2GB. “This is not how you treat your fellow citizens.”The Last Emperor of Mexico Edward Shawcross Faber, £20, pp324 In the 1860s, the French emperor Napoleon III came up with a ploy that, as the historian Edward Shawcross suggests, “was outrageous even by the standards of European imperialism”. He would invade Mexico by proxy, install a puppet emperor on the throne and thereby expand France’s dominion. Unfortunately, the titular ruler, “the hapless Habsburg archduke” Maximilian I, proved singularly ill-equipped for the task, preferring poetry and drama to the gritty business of imperialism. Shawcross’s fascinating debut is keenly attuned to the ironies and tragedies that Maximilian faced in his ill-fated task. Iron Curtain Vesna Goldsworthy Chatto &amp; Windus, £14.99, pp320 Vesna Goldsworthy’s excellent new novel is a comedy of manners that is nevertheless fraught with tension. Its protagonist, Milena, is one of the fortunate beneficiaries of Soviet largesse in the 80s and observes the privations that others endure with suitable detachment. But when she falls in love with an English poet and flees from behind the iron curtain to Britain, she discovers that she has exchanged her gilded cage for a life of terminal incompatibility. Goldsworthy captures the human perspective of life in the cold war superbly and sympathetically. Questors, Jesters and Renegades Michael Coveney Methuen Drama, £14.99, pp199 Whether you believe that amateur dramatics are “an exhibitionist’s alternative to bridge”, in the dismissive words of Kenneth Tynan, or an invaluable way of supporting communities and keeping alive neglected plays, former Observer drama critic Michael Coveney’s fascinating account of the history of am-dram is compulsively readable and extremely funny. Focusing on such leading amateur theatres as Cornwall’s Minack and Bolton’s Little theatre, which launched Ian McKellen’s career, and their practitioners, Coveney pays equal attention to the stars who emerged from such institutions and those who remained proudly non-professional. To support the Guardian and Observer order The Last Emperor of Mexico, Iron Curtain or Questors, Jesters and Renegades at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyDownright deceit, charm, wronged women determined to avenge, a raging storm … Mozart’s opera about the pathological liar and libertine could hardly seem more contemporary. When Welsh National Opera’s 2011 production was revived in 2018 – circa #MeToo – it appeared timely, but, with this latest revival, perhaps the reality is that it will always be so. Designer John Napier’s set, inspired by Auguste Rodin’s The Gates of Hell, creates the suitably tenebrous background to original director John Caird’s concept, underlining what is already the spoiler-alert of the title, Don Giovanni or The Dissolute Punished. The ironically whiter-than-white garb of the dashing don and the grey of his servant Leporello go against the setting’s general darkness, while the other costumes reflect the burnished colours of Spanish Golden Age. Yet, from the outset, Mozart and his librettist Lorenzo da Ponte’s mix of serious and the jocose has always meant that the audience is appalled and amused by turns. This is an infinitely delicate balance, so it was unfortunate that conductor Tobias Ringborg hurricaned his way through the overture, with the problem of raggedness never quite resolved for the rest of the evening. In the title role, Ukrainian Andrei Kymach, the 2019 BBC Cardiff singer of the world, is an imposing and saturnine presence on stage, though the subtler colours of his baritone were too often lost early on: it was only in the second act that he projected much more potently the air of defiant arrogance and entitlement. As Leporello, Simon Bailey’s impeccable diction allowed the comedic element of the master/servant exchanges to come over strongly. The hapless Donna Elvira was sung by Sarah Tynan, as feisty as she could be given the ambivalence of Elvira’s fluctuation between love and hate for Don Giovanni. The outstanding singing came from Marina Monzó as Donna Anna, in an elegantly expressive and technically perfectly placed performance, anger and anguish at her father the Commendatore’s murder controlled without ever losing sight of Mozartean finesse. Her Don Ottavio, Trystan Llŷr Griffiths, made the most of his big arias, apparently more fearless than the character he portrayed. Harriet Eyley’s Zerlina and James Atkinson’s Masetto were well matched. This production still feels undermined by the statue – albeit draped – of the Commendatore being on stage from curtain up and before his actual murder, denying James Platt’s stone guest the final dramatic denouement. At least, the requisite punishing flames engulfing Don Giovanni do bring the image of the gates of hell full circle. Don Giovanni is at the Wales Millennium Centre, Cardiff, 26-27 February and 17 March, then tours until 13 May.The British aviation services company John Menzies has agreed a £550m takeover deal with a Kuwaiti rival, in a move that is likely to end a price negotiation after four separate bids. The Edinburgh-based company, which offers services ranging from cargo and baggage handling to passenger check-in and plane de-icing and refuelling, told the stock market on Monday that it would unanimously recommend a deal if National Aviation Services (NAS) confirms its bid of 608p a share. Aviation services companies have been among the hardest hit during the coronavirus pandemic, as lockdown restrictions forced airlines to cut back flights for months. Outsourced services were especially vulnerable as airlines looked to cut costs as quickly as possible. The takeover would cap one of the more extraordinary corporate stories on the London Stock Exchange. Menzies was founded in 1833 in Edinburgh as a bookshop, with the eponymous founder eventually becoming the first Scottish agent of the author Charles Dickens and the magazine Punch. Newspaper distribution and a chain of newsagents and bookshops became an important part of the business and in 1948 Menzies opened its first outlet in an airport, before expanding into cargo handling in 1987. It sold its retail operation in 1998 and four years ago sold its newspaper business to focus on aviation services, shortly before the air industry suffered its greatest crisis. Menzies revealed the first two takeover approaches of 460p and 510p a share on 9 February. It described those initial unsolicited approaches as “highly opportunistic” because the valuation did not properly reflect the business’s worth before the pandemic. NAS had returned with an offer of 605p a share, which was also rejected by the Menzies board before it accepted the final 608p offer. However, Menzies shares traded short of that offer price on Monday morning, with shares gaining only 0.3% to hit 585p – although that was the highest level since September 2018. Menzies said: “NAS has confirmed to the board that the financial terms of the final proposal are final and will not be increased” unless another bidder steps in with a higher bid. Under stock market rules NAS has until 9 March to make a formal offer.During Covid lockdowns, Sharon Powell felt alone. She was caring for her father, 90, who was deteriorating from Parkinson’s disease and dementia, and looking after him had become increasingly difficult. Social life in her community in Johnson Fold, Bolton, had been Powell’s escape from the pressure at home, but when Covid restrictions were introduced “everything was just gone”. She was depressed, anxious and having panic attacks “like a washing machine on full spin”. Doctors had prescribed Powell pills for a host of ailments, mental and physical – “that much medication I’m surprised I don’t sound like a set of maracas when I walk”, she said. “But … having suffered with mental illness for the past 30 years I knew that this had got beyond where medication could help. “Medication can only do so much when you’re stuck in four walls.” That was when a nurse at her local surgery put Powell in touch with Trisha Goodwin, a social prescribing link worker at Bolton GP Federation. “Trisha mentioned about going on walks, and I was like, well, I love walking and if it’s a small group I don’t mind,” Powell said. She now credits Goodwin'’s suggestion with having helped saved her life. In response to a dramatic increase in mental health referrals around the pandemic, Bolton GP Federation and the Woodland Trust worked together to create a programme of “tranquility walks”, focusing on woodland, water and relaxation as a space to deal with anxiety. The group met at Barrow Bridge, a short walk from Powell’s home. Led by a Woodland Trust officer, they rambled through woodland on the Smithills estate, a site recently bought by the charity. It was a place Powell already knew and would visit to think. “But since doing the tranquility walks the thinking time has taken on a whole new meaning because I’m taking notice of the sounds, the smells,” she said. “The running water, because there’s a stream … and the birds’ song and the rustling of the leaves and the wind … it’s just nice to take time out. It’s lovely and it’s on my doorstep.” Vicky Entwistle, who works at the estate and led walks, said groups would stop to listen to branches and leaves swaying, or to watch dappled light through the canopy, an experience many found transformative. “It shows the importance of getting more nature to people’s doorsteps to help boost our health everyday, and the clear benefits of social prescribing with nature,” she said. Wildlife Trust is backing a petition to call on the government to enshrine in law a right to access to nature. The fortnightly Smithills tranquility walks have continued for a year now, and members of the group have formed strong bonds, Powell says. But she goes out more, when health permits it. She has become an advocate for open spaces, volunteering at Smithills – and sharing a newfound passion for mycology with her granddaughters. “I just forget everything when I’m out,” she said. “All my worries and stresses of home, stresses of family, and just lose track of time.” This article was amended on 21 February 2022, to correct the spelling of Trish Goodwin’s name.The Owl and the Nightingale may have been written 800 years ago, but its anonymous author shows that human nature nearly never changes: two rivals’ joust in the tree tops using words as lances to try to wound the other. However, proving the exception to the rule, two men from the West Yorkshire village of Marsden – poet laureate Simon Armitage and his lifelong friend, the theatre director John Tiffany – are collaborating on a performance of the medieval poem that Armitage translated last year. Armitage’s translation from the Middle English original was the fourth of the medieval poems he has rewritten for modern audiences and he suspects it will be the last. Part of the reason is that there simply isn’t anything else as much fun. The Owl and the Nightingale could hardly be a greater contrast to Tiffany’s day job directing seven productions of Harry Potter and the Cursed Child in seven cities. He co-authored the play with JK Rowling and the playwright Jack Thorne and is soon to leave for Tokyo to supervise a Japanese language production. In contrast, the Owl and the Nightingale will be performed on a bare stage at the Royal Court theatre in London and the only props will be copies of the script. Armitage will narrate and the parts of the Owl and the Nightingale will be read by Meera Syal and Maxine Peake. A day has been set aside for the rehearsal. In a testament to the skill of his actors, Tiffany was happy to temporarily leave seven Harry Potters and hundreds of cast members in the hands of others so he could work on a show with just three performers. The cantankerous Owl and the disputatious Nightingale are each convinced they are right and are impervious to persuasion. Their discussion is so reminiscent of confrontations on social media the publisher was happy to bill Armitage’s translation as a “Twitter spat”. In the world of entertainment, Armitage is a the sombre Owl and Tiffany the lighter-than-champagne-bubbles Nightingale. Tiffany is a few years younger than 58-year-old Armitage and doesn’t let him forget it. Their fathers, who died recently within six months of each other, were best friends their entire lives as well as being members of the same amateur dramatic society and brass band. Their grandmothers played whist in the village hall, bragging about the achievements of their precocious grandsons between hands. Tiffany said: “They were much more competitive than the two of us. Simon’s career took off way before mine did. There’d be newspaper articles saying he’s being considered for poet laureate and I’d be assistant director on a play in Edinburgh and I always used to say: ‘Please Grandma, I’m incredibly moved and flattered but I don’t think we are going to win this particular battle,’ but they continued which me and Simon loved. “With him being poet laureate, I was ‘look at you being all posh’. I always like to point out that we weren’t actually friends as children because I’m much younger than him. I’m not actually that much younger but I do like to point it out.” Tiffany sees the avian rivals as two divas, think Hilda Ogden and Rita Fairclough from Coronation Street. Armitage did not have to labour the parallels. He said: “I don’t think it’s a didactic piece, I haven’t translated it because it’s got a moral lesson for our age, but I definitely see reflections and echoes of our times and I don’t think they need to be amplified too far to be clear. These are two birds having a barney over 900 rhyming couplets.” He added: “The most obvious parallel or comparison is that we live in a very divided, very antagonistic time. What’s interesting to me about these two birds is that both of them absolutely believe they are right. It fully attunes to the times we are living in, in terms of people having access to ways to broadcast their opinions so readily and so feistily. “The birds have their positions and they are unshakable. The way that they go about announcing their positions is not just to talk through the strength of their argument, it’s also to undermine and attack the arguments of the other. They do that in both in rational and logical ways and in scurrilous and vulgar ways as well.” Armitage says: “Being in a room with John, watching him work with actors, having him to tell me what to do, is just a lot of fun. We are the Marsden Boys and we are the hottest ticket in town.”Key members of the Church of England’s pensions board have strong links to the fossil fuel industry, research has shown, amid concerns over the organisation’s plans to end its investments in high-carbon companies. Analysis by DeSmog, the environmental investigation group, has found three prominent members of the pensions board of the Church Commissioners, the body that looks after Church of England investments, with former or current roles in energy companies, while other major figures have indirect links. The Church of England began to cut ties to coal and other heavily polluting industries in 2015, then pledged in 2018 to divest by 2023 from high-carbon companies that were “not aligned with the goals of the Paris agreement”. But as the deadline approaches, the organisation has said it is still “engaging” with key oil and gas interests rather than cancelling all of its holdings. Chris Manktelow, of the Young Christians Climate Network, said this was not good enough. “I understand why the church wants to engage, but I don’t think the strategy of engagement is working,” he told the Guardian. “The church should be moving quickly and showing moral leadership, and is just not going fast enough. We are not happy with this response [to the calls to divest].” There are also questions over the church’s approach to oil and gas companies that claim they are on a trajectory to net zero emissions. Some fossil fuel companies – including BP, Shell and ExxonMobil – have set out strategies to reach net zero, but many experts regard these plans as flawed. ExxonMobil, for example, is only planning to reduce the emissions from its operations, rather than those that arise from burning the oil and gas it produces. However, the Church Commissioners decided recently to retain investment in ExxonMobil. Manktelow said: “We think the church should reconsider this decision.” Manktelow said he was also “surprised and concerned” by the links between senior figures in deciding the church’s investments and the fossil fuel industry. Chris Mather, the chair of the Church of England pensions board, is a former chief executive of Shell Canada, from which he retired in 2007. During his tenure, the company embarked on a massive expansion into “tar sands”, which campaigners say has laid waste to vast tracts of Canada’s wilderness. Richard Hubbard, the chair of the board’s pensions committee, worked for BP for nearly 30 years, ending as director of the oil giant’s European cross-border pension plan before retiring in 2020. David Nussbaum, on the Church of England’s ethical investment advisory group, and a former chief of the conservation group WWF, has held a directorship at Drax since 2017. Drax is formerly the UK’s biggest coal-fired power plant and still the largest source of carbon dioxide emissions, having switched its boilers to burning trees. A spokesperson for Drax told the Guardian: The forests Drax sources from are not harvested to supply biomass, they are harvested for the high value timber used in construction and furniture making. Drax uses some of the by-products left behind when forests are harvested for these other sectors, by-products such as sawdust from sawmills, wood chips, tree tops and low grade roundwood which is diseased or mis-shapen and cannot be used elsewhere. We have strict sustainability standards which ensure the biomass we use does not contribute to carbon debt or deforestation.” Others with indirect links include Alan Smith, the first church estates commissioner, a former head of risk strategy at HSBC, the bank which has financed more than $100bn (£73bn) in fossil fuels since the 2015 Paris agreement; and Dami Lalude, also a member of the ethical investment advisory group, who worked in the natural resources group at the bank Goldman Sachs, which has also provided $100bn to fossil fuel interests since 2015. Justin Welby, the archbishop of Canterbury, also has a background in the fossil fuel industry, having worked for oil companies for more than a decade before ordination. Darrell Hannah, the rector of All Saints Church, Ascot, and chair of the Christian climate change charity Operation Noah, told DeSmog he feared the decision-making bodies could be compromised. “We are deeply concerned by the Church of England national investing bodies’ ties to the fossil fuel industry, which raise significant questions around conflicts of interest,” he said. “How can the board continue to lead engagement with Shell, on behalf of Climate Action 100+ [an investor-led initiative to push big companies to do more on the climate crisis], when the chair of the pensions board is the former CEO of Shell Canada?” The Church Commissioners, the body that looks after the investments that pay Church of England pensioners, said the policy of engagement was paying off. “The Church of England’s national investing bodies have taken the view that they have more influence on high-carbon industries by being in the room rather than by disinvesting,” a spokesperson told the Guardian. “By engaging with high-carbon-emitting companies, we can address the climate crisis and bring about real world change. Our engagement is not open-ended and we are explicit in our expectation that we will disinvest from companies that are not responsive to engagement.” The spokesperson added: “It is not a surprise that we want experts from industry and finance on our governance bodies to help us make the right decisions. Our board members and their backgrounds are disclosed and readily available online. They operate to the highest ethical and responsible investing standards. They sit alongside other board members from a variety of backgrounds, including church and other third-sector experience. By calling out these individuals incorrectly suggests that the church’s decisions are somehow influenced by those associations.” The strategy was making “significant progress”, as 20 companies had agreed to “making climate-related changes to stay off our restricted list” since 2020, and a further 28 companies were excluded from its investment list on ethical grounds last year. “We want to achieve a net-zero world, not only a net-zero investment portfolio.” • This article was amended on 22 February 2022 to add a comment from Drax regarding its use of wood in boilers.“If you cook in a bad mood, the bad mood will season your food.” Now, had this been uttered by anyone else, I might have been interested in having a discussion about that statement – philosophical, scientific or silly. But irrational loathing got in the way and I wanted to kick her. We were standing in the kitchen of a mutual friend, and trying to manage plates of food, forks and glasses. I remember little about the conversation, which was between a few of us, except for this statement made to me, which she followed up by telling us that, even on the worst of days, she cooked only with love and passion. Kicking her would have been the grown-up thing to do, rather than trying to come up with a reply, which didn’t actually come to mind until the next day. But even if it had turned up, it would have been too late: she had already mingled on and was leaning against the fridge patronising someone else. In her book The Faraway Nearby, Rebecca Solnit quotes the philosopher Charles Griswold, who says, “Resentment is a storytelling passion.” Solnit observes how compelling resentment stories are. Like a camel harnessed to a rotary water pump, we go round and round, reviving feelings with every retelling; and how, each time we tell a story, it gets better, enriched with details, remembered or made up. This is absolutely the case here. Something that happened 20 years ago is more alive than ever. Especially when I am in a bad mood and cooking – a regular occurrence in everyday life. As I chop onions aggressively, or rip the bag of dried mushrooms badly, so it doesn’t open. As I rip it for the second time, so they fall out, there she is in her silk shirt the colour of my loathing, leaning against the fridge. Cook with love, she says, as I soak 20g dried mushrooms in 200ml warm water for 30 minutes. Piss off, I reply as I lift them out, chop and set aside. Of course, you don’t have to be in a bad mood to make this recipe – a bit cross, tired or grumpy is fine; quite-a-good-mood is OK, too. I would, however, avoid making it if you are feeling particularly happy. Like most stews, ragùs and braises (and resentment), this dish benefits from a rest, so the flavours can settle and deepen. It is delicious with rice or boiled potatoes. It is best of all, however, with pasta, especially long egg pasta – tagliatelle, fettuccine or pappardelle. For four, cook 450g dried or 600g fresh long pasta in well-salted water until al dente. Ladle a couple of scoops of the lentils into the bottom of a large, warm bowl. Lift the pasta on top, sprinkle over a handful of parmesan, then add a few more spoonfuls of lentils and toss well, adding a little pasta cooking water and tossing again if it seems stiff. Share between bowls and serve with more grated parmesan. Taste and tell the woman she is wrong: lentil and mushroom ragù cooked in a bad mood is the most delicious thing in the world. Tagliatelle with lentil and mushroom ragù Prep 30 min Cook 50 min Serves 4 20g dried porcini Light stock or water 1 onion, peeled and finely diced 1 stick of celery, finely diced 1 carrot, peeled and finely diced Salt and black pepper 1 bay leaf 5 tbsp olive oil 300g field or brown mushrooms, roughly chopped A few sprigs of thyme 300g small brown lentils A big glass red wine (250ml) 1 heaped tbsp tomato puree, mixed with a bit of warm water 450g dried or 600g fresh tagliatelle, fettuccine or pappardelle Parmesan, grated, to finish Soak the dried mushrooms in 200ml warm water for 30 minutes. Once soaked, lift the mushrooms out, chop and set aside. Filter the soaking liquid and add enough light stock or water to make it up to 1.2 litres. In deep saute pan or casserole set over a medium-low heat, fry the onion, celery and carrot with a pinch of salt and a bay leaf in the olive oil until soft and translucent. Add both the fresh and soaked mushrooms and the thyme and cook, stirring, for a few minutes. Add the lentils, stir, then add the wine, tomato puree and diluted porcini liquid. Bring to a boil, then turn down to a lively simmer for 40 minutes, stirring often, until the lentils are tender and the consistency rich. If at any point during the cooking the mix seems dry, add a little more wine or water. Taste and check for salt and add a few grinds of black pepper. Cook the pasta in well-salted water until al dente. Ladle a few scoops of lentils into the bottom of a warm bowl. Lift the pasta on top, sprinkle over a handful of parmesan, then add a few more spoonfuls of lentils. Toss well, adding a little pasta cooking water and tossing again if it seems stiff. Share between bowls and top with more grated parmesan. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from OcadoIn 2011, as popular revolts reverberated around the Middle East, a monarch in the midst of it all made some banking decisions. Sometime that year, as neighbouring Egypt and Syria withered in the face of momentous civil protests, King Abdullah II of Jordan opened two new accounts with Credit Suisse, the Swiss bank that had discreetly served the region’s well-heeled for decades. Abdullah, one of the world’s longest-serving current monarchs, had chosen a banker that shared his approach to secrecy, particularly surrounding his personal wealth. Over the next five years, the king was the beneficial owner of at least six accounts with Credit Suisse, while his wife, Queen Rania, had another. According to a massive trove of data leaked from the bank that names both royals as account holders, one account would later be worth a remarkable 230m Swiss francs (£180m). At home, King Abdullah had been experiencing a rocky ride. The revolts, which came to be known as the Arab spring, led to leaders being toppled in Tunisia, Egypt, Libya and Yemen, and a brutal, protracted war breaking out in Syria. Jordan, one of the region’s more efficient security states, was able to stave off a threat from a nascent opposition, through suppression of dissent and promises of better days. But in the decade since, a struggling economy, persistent levels of poverty, high unemployment, cuts to welfare and seemingly ever-present austerity measures have continued to stir resentment across the country. One particular gripe has been the juxtaposition between the apparent wealth of the king and the constant grind endured by most citizens just to get by. As the IMF agreed to bail out Jordan, on the condition that its people tighten their collective belts, the king was moving enormous amounts between his Swiss accounts. The Credit Suisse data contains details of 18,000 bank accounts leaked to Süddeutsche Zeitung by a whistleblower who said Swiss banking secrecy laws were “immoral”. The data was shared with the Guardian and 47 other media outlets as part of a global investigation called Suisse secrets. Lawyers for King Abdullah and Queen Rania said there had been no wrongdoing by the clients, and gave an account of the source of their funds, which they said were compliant with applicable tax law. King Abdullah is not required to pay taxes in Jordan, where the monarch is exempt by law. His lawyers said a large proportion of the funds in the Swiss bank derived from inheritance from his father, King Hussein, and there are no inheritance tax laws in Jordan. The revelations come at an uncomfortable time for King Abdullah and his family, surfacing six months after the monarch featured prominently in the leak of the biggest ever trove of offshore data, the Pandora papers, which revealed he had acquired a $100m luxury property portfolio stretching from Malibu in California to Belgravia in central London. Details of more offshore accounts will add to allegations that Jordan’s king of 22 years lives a life disconnected from the demanding realities faced by most of its citizens, who live by a different set of rules. After publication of the Pandora papers, Jordanian intelligence moved quickly to block online access to stories detailing the revelations about the king’s wealth. The handful of journalists who defied the ban were questioned. Some were reminded of “patriotic duties” to Jordan. Others felt intimidated into silence. The Jordanian publication that did run the revelations received a call from intelligence asking for the story to be taken down. The king’s lawyers said accusations of media repression in Jordan after the publication of the Pandora papers were “denied”. They declined to elaborate. Two years before the Pandora revelations, Jordanian security forces arrived at the home of Moayyad al-Majali detaining the lawyer then accusing him of one of the kingdom’s most serious offences. His purported offence was slandering King Abdullah, simply by asking how much land the king owned. Holding an offshore bank account is not illegal and there is no suggestion that King Abdullah has broken laws by structuring wealth offshore. Neither is there any suggestion of wrongdoing or due diligence failings by Credit Suisse. However, the revelations will raise renewed questions about the source of the fortune at Abdullah’s disposal in a country supported annually by billions of dollars in foreign aid. They will also spur questions about whether the king may have been seeking safe havens for family wealth as his country’s woes deepened. On the home front, in recent years protests about deteriorating conditions have led to ongoing political chaos, with a series of prime ministers removed from office and governments remaining weak and dependent on foreign support. Even some Jordanian tribes, which have offered bedrock support for Abdullah, and from which most of the country’s establishment figures hail, have shown their frustration at a state struggling to service its own. In March last year, the king’s hold on the country was briefly threatened when his half-brother, Prince Hamzah, whom he had ousted as heir 17 years earlier, was detained and two aides convicted of sedition after the apparent early stages of a plot against the throne were uncovered. Hamzah’s supporters have described the events as a “mutiny” that had popular support. However, Jordanian intelligence and some senior officials believe it instead stemmed from a belated push by Trump officials and the Saudi crown prince, Mohammed bin Salman, to install a monarch who would have endorsed the failed attempt to etch peace between Israel and the Palestinians, labelled the “deal of the century”. Through his lawyers, King Abdullah said only one of the Credit Suisse accounts remained open. They said they comprised personal investment companies (PICs) set up as vehicles for trust funds to provide for the royal couple’s children. They said one of the accounts held proceeds from the sale of a “large wide body aircraft”, while another smaller jet was bought. The king is known to use at least two private jets. His lawyers said “a significant percentage” of his personal wealth was used to fund royal initiatives in a personal capacity to target social and economic needs of Jordanian citizens, as well as the restoration of important mosques. They declined to say what percentage. In the Jordanian capital, Amman, anger at the king and his government has been unusually strident during recent protests against unemployment levels and a stagnant economy. At some rallies, demonstrators have hit effigies of Abdullah with shoes – considered a stark indignity across the Arab world. However, the Hashemite dynasty that Abdullah leads does not appear under serious threat, for now. Daoud Kuttab, the director general of the Amman-based Community Media Network, predicted the disclosures would anger some Jordanians, particularly unemployed youth. “The king and the government will face some protests and demonstrations but will most likely manage this as they have previous revelations – but it will be difficult.” Additional reporting by David Pegg. Credit Suisse response to Suisse secrets disclosures available here.In January 2016, Nick’s mother died. He had only been living in Bristol for six months when it happened. “It was difficult because I didn’t know many people,” he says. A week later, his girlfriend dumped him by text. “It was a really bad time. I’d relocated from my home town of Wrexham to be a theatre operations manager, but I was lonely,” he says. He decided to cheer himself up with a trip to France to watch Euro 2016, so, that summer, he travelled to Bordeaux with a friend. “We weren’t able to get tickets, but the city had set up massive fan zones with huge screens for watching the games,” he says. “We were supporting Wales in their game against Slovakia.” All around, there were promotional stands giving out free merchandise. That’s when Nick spotted Tess, a French student who was working as a host at the event. “She was giving out free footballs, and I thought she was really beautiful,” he says. Tess thought Nick was “cute”, too. “He tried to convince me to give him a football, but I couldn’t because we had a limited supply and children were prioritised.” She told him to come back at the end of the day to see if she had any left. “At that point, I stuffed one under my seat so there would be one left,” she says. When Nick returned, he asked if she’d like to go for dinner before he returned to the UK. “I said yes, but wasn’t expecting him to remember,” says Tess. Like many other supporters, he’d had a few drinks. “I had a good excuse because Wales had just won their first tournament game in 58 years,” he says. They exchanged Facebook details and agreed to meet at a traditional French restaurant the next day. “We spoke about everything, starting with typical date questions, then moving on to politics – Justin Bieber came up at one point but I can’t remember why!” says Tess. The conversation flowed easily, but there was no kiss at the end of the night. “I was a bit confused and wondered if he just wanted to talk,” she admits. The following day, they met for coffee before Nick travelled home, but there was still no kiss. “I was disappointed because I liked him and he was leaving,” says Tess. As she lived near the airport, she decided to give things one last try. “There was only one flight a day to Bristol, so I went to see if I could catch him before he got on the plane,” she says. Just as she was about to give up and go home, she spotted Nick. “I was checking in for my flight and thinking about the amazing time I’d had,” he says. “It was the first time I’d felt truly happy in months. When I saw Tess, I was blown away. It’s one of the best things that has ever happened.” They shared their first kiss at the airport and agreed to meet up again. Over the next few weeks, Nick made two more trips to Bordeaux. By September, they had agreed to give their long-distance relationship a shot. In 2017, Tess moved to London with a friend, so she and Nick were able to see each other more regularly. The following year, they began making plans to move in together. “We decided to move to Liverpool, as it’s cheaper than London, and closer to Nick’s family,” says Tess. “I was working for Pret a Manger and they were able to transfer my job.” Nick joined her, six months later, in early 2019. He now works for the Liverpool Philharmonic Hall. That year, Tess proposed on a trip to Edinburgh. “It was meant to be at the castle but the wind was so strong he wouldn’t have been able to hear me,” says Tess. “The restaurant was noisy, too, so in the end I proposed while watching TV at our B&amp;B.” Their wedding was delayed due to Covid, but they plan to marry in Bordeaux this May. “The thing I love most about Tess is her positivity,” says Nick. “She always has a great outlook on life and it’s really infectious.” Tess appreciates his respectful nature. “From the start, we could have a mature conversation about so many different things. He is so interesting and has so much knowledge. There’s nothing we can’t talk about.” Want to share your story? Tell us about yourself, your partner and how you got together by filling in the form hereHundreds of people were evacuated from their homes overnight as Storm Franklin – the UK’s third named storm in a week – brought yet more flooding and disruption. There were more than 150 flood warnings in place across the north of England, as well as severe flooding in parts of Northern Ireland. More than 400 households in south Manchester were urged to evacuate, the Environment Agency said. Storm Franklin comes just days after Storm Eunice killed at least four people in the UK and Ireland and left 1.4 million homes without power. We want to hear from people affected by the storms over the last week. Are you still without power? Have you had to evacuate? Has there been damage to your property? Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.Good morning. Vladimir Putin’s spokesperson, Dmitri Peskov, has said it is “premature” to talk about specific plans for a summit between Putin and Joe Biden, after an announcement on Sunday from the French president, Emmanuel Macron, thathis Russian and US counterparts had agreed in principle to attend talks aimed at de-escalating the Ukraine crisis. The Élysée Palace had put out a statement after last-minute diplomatic efforts by Macron to try to dissuade Russia from invading Ukraine amid further US warnings that war was imminent. The White House has confirmed Biden’s readiness to hold a summit but made clear it was wary about the sincerity of the offer. What did Peskov say? He said Putin and Biden could meet if they considered it necessary, but emphasised that it was “premature to talk about specific plans for a summit” and no concrete plans were in place. Is the threat of a Russian attack still predicted? Yes. The US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, said: “Everything we are seeing suggests that this is dead serious, that we are on the brink of an invasion.” Credit Suisse leak unmasks criminals, fraudsters and corrupt politicians A massive leak from one of the world’s biggest private banks has exposed the hidden wealth of clients involved in torture, drug trafficking, money laundering, corruption and other serious crimes. Details of accounts linked to 30,000 Credit Suisse clients are contained in the leak, which unmasks the beneficiaries of more than 100bn Swiss francs (£80bn) held in one of Switzerland’s best-known financial institutions. The leak points to widespread failures of due diligence by the bank, despite repeated pledges over decades to weed out dubious clients and illicit funds. The Guardian is part of a consortium of media outlets that has been given exclusive access to the data. My colleagues can reveal how Credit Suisse have repeatedly opened or maintained bank accounts for a panoramic array of high-risk clients across the world. What has the bank said about the revelations? “Credit Suisse strongly rejects the allegations and inferences about the bank’s purported business practices,” it said in a statement. ‘This should terrify the nation’: the Trump ally seeking to run Arizona’s elections Last September, Donald Trump released a statement through his Save America website. “It is my great honor to endorse a true warrior,” he said, “a patriot who has fought for our country, who was willing to say what few others had the courage to say, who has my Complete and Total Endorsement.” Former US presidents usually reserve their most gushing praise – replete with Capital Letters – for global allies or people they are promoting for high office, writes Ed Pilkington. A candidate for the US Senate, perhaps, or someone vying to become governor of one of the biggest states. Trump by contrast was heaping plaudits on an individual running for an elected post that a year ago most people had never heard of, let alone cared about, endorsing a bid by Mark Finchem, a Republican lawmaker from Tucson, to become Arizona’s secretary of state. Why should this be so worrying? The post holder is the chief election officer, with powers to certify election results, vet the legal status of candidates and approve infrastructure such as voting machines. In short, they are in charge of conducting and counting the vote. Meanwhile, Trump’s new social media venture, Truth Social, has launched on Apple’s App Store. Read about that here. In other news … Republicans in several states have launched efforts to ban books pertaining to race and LGBTQ+ issues from classrooms while some legislatures are pushing to introduce laws that would ban teachers from discussing homosexuality. But it’s a crackdown that few parents have asked for. US immigration courts are struggling to function at the most basic level, with judges who are already woefully understaffed and often undertrained now overwhelmed by a growing backlog of more than 1.6m cases, industry leaders have warned. The three-week occupation over Covid rules and the Trudeau government ends with 76 vehicles towed and 191 arrests. Canadian police secured the downtown core of Ottawa with fencing on Sunday, as city workers cleaned up trash and snow plows cleared streets after two days of tense standoffs. When is a classical music composition not actually classical? This is the conundrum at the heart of a heated row over the shortlisted songs for the Grammys, the annual awards that will be handed out in a few weeks’ time to recognise outstanding contributions to music. Don’t miss this: How Dr Becky Kennedy became Instagram’s favourite ‘parent whisperer’ What started as a useful tip on social media has turned the US psychologist and mum of three into a parenting phenomenon and the voice of reason for a generation of young mums and dads. In terms of translating deep ideas into social media nuggets for time-starved parents to consume in spare moments, Dr Becky Kennedy seems to have aced the market. But is it possible to come away with meaningful change from such short snippets? Climate check: the new trend for becoming ‘coral’ when you die A desire to return to the ocean goes back millennia, with evidence of sea burials in ancient Egypt and Rome. Today, the idea of an ocean burial chimes with a search for eco-friendly alternatives to traditional burial and cremation. While the reef model still requires cremation, the idea is that the structures will help restore marine habitats by mimicking some characteristics of a coral reef. But do underwater cremation memorials help people regenerate marine habitats in death or are they a “greenwashing” gimmick? Last Thing: Finnish cross-country skier suffers frozen penis at Winter Olympics The men’s 50km mass start skiing race at the Beijing Games was shortened to 30km but that did little to help Finland’s Remi Lindholm, who needed a heat pack at the end of the race to thaw out a particularly sensitive body part. Lindholm spent just under an hour and 16 minutes traversing the course in howling, freezing winds, leading to his penis becoming frozen for the second time in a cross-country skiing race, after a similar incident in Ruka, Finland last year. Sign up First Thing is delivered to thousands of inboxes every weekday. If you’re not already signed up, subscribe now. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.comCentral European countries on Ukraine’s western border are making preparations for a potential influx of millions of refugees in the event of a major Russian invasion of Ukraine. Poland in particular is bracing for various scenarios if Moscow invades Ukraine, according to its deputy interior minister, Maciej Wąsik. “We have to be prepared for a wave of up to a million people,” he told Polish radio. Poland is already home to about 2 million Ukrainians, many of whom have moved since the 2014 conflict and taken advantage of a relatively easy scheme to gain work permits. The government has said it is planning to house Ukrainian refugees in hostels, dormitories and sports facilities. Last Saturday, Krzysztof Kosiński, the mayor of Ciechanów, a town in north-central Poland, said on Twitter he had been asked by authorities to indicate “the list of accommodation facilities for refugees, the number of people it would be possible to accommodate, the costs involved and the time for adaptation of buildings with a recommendation of up to 48 hours”. It is hard to say how many Ukrainians would flee a potential conflict. Many people from the conflict zone in eastern Ukraine have already left for other parts of the country or for Russia, while others have left the country in search of better-paid work. “Because we now have visa-free travel with Europe, people who wanted to leave have already done so,” said Ukraine’s finance minister, Serhiy Marchenko, in an interview in Kyiv. “If Russia escalates and people decide to go to Europe to find a safer place, it’s likely to be a smaller portion of people,” he said. However, there are many different scenarios of how a Russian invasion may unfold, and if the warnings from US and British intelligence of a fully fledged invasion and drive to Kyiv by the Russians come to pass, it seems unlikely to be without huge casualties and displacements. “We are following the situation very closely; however, the situation remains unpredictable,” said Natalia Prokopchuk, a communications and advocacy officer for UNHCR in Europe. “In the meantime, the UN and its humanitarian partners in Ukraine hope that the ongoing tensions will not escalate and will be resolved through diplomatic and political means among all concerned parties,” she said. Other countries in eastern Europe are preparing for a potential influx of refugees if Russia attacks Ukraine. Romania’s interior minister, Lucian Bode, told TV B1 its government was considering the prospect of “hundreds of thousands of refugees in an uncontrolled influx”. “We are currently analysing how many refugee camps we can install in a relatively short time: 10, 12, 24 hours. We are analysing existing lodging capacities in border counties but we are also discussing the second stage, with neighbouring counties, and the third stage across the country,” he said. Slovakia’s interior minister, Roman Mikulec, said his government also stood ready to play a part. Rights groups have welcomed countries’ willingness to help, but some drew comparisons with the treatment of other refugees, in a part of Europe where politicians have often played on anti-refugee sentiment. After the Belarusian president, Alexander Lukashenko, organised the movement of refugees with the promise of a safe passage to Europe last year, thousands of people were caught by Polish border guards in the forests near the border and illegally and violently pushed back to Belarus. Late in January, Warsaw announced it has started building a €353m (£293m) wall along its frontier with Belarus, aimed at preventing Syrian and Iraqi asylum seekers from entering the country. A spokesperson for the Ocalenie Foundation, which supports refugees living in Poland, commended the commitment, but said it showed a double standard. “We wonder why they didn’t do any moves like that during the crisis on the border. This shows a general trend that in Poland some asylum seekers are favoured over others,” said the spokesperson. Wąsik described Ukrainians as “real refugees” in need of help and added that his government “absolutely won’t say no to helping them, in line with the Geneva conventions”. Grupa Granica, a Polish network of NGOs monitoring the situation on the border with Belarus, said in a statement: “For almost half a year the same government has violently pushed back people from many other countries trying to cross through Belarusian border. It is racist to differentiate people and their access to basic migration procedures based on the country of their origin. Why don’t they have access to the same treatment?” In the meantime, authorities in the self-declared Luhansk and Donetsk people’s republics have ordered an evacuation ostensibly to protect citizens from a planned Ukrainian attack, although there is no evidence Kyiv is planning any such thing. According to observers, the move appears designed to create a pretext to launch a Russian intervention.There’s a lot more to Amy Poehler than her role as deputy director (and future POTUS) Leslie Knope in 2009–2015’s Parks and Recreation (a character that was especially created for the Saturday Night Live comedian by the creators of the American Office). After graduating from university in 1991, Poehler joined a travelling improv group with 30 Rock’s Tina Fey, who, in 2001, went on to recruit Poehler for SNL where she performs as Hillary Clinton, Sharon Osbourne, Britney Spears, Madonna and many others. Poehler was nominated for nine Emmys, three Golden Globes and three Screen Actors Guild awards for her role in Parks and Recreation, eventually winning a Golden Globe for best actress in 2013. Poehler features in 1999’s Deuce Bigalow: Male Gigolo (as Deuce’s client with Tourette syndrome), in Tina Fey’s 2004 Mean Girls (as Rachel McAdams’ reckless mother), and provides voices for Snow White in 2007’s Shrek the Third and lead character, Joy, in Pixar’s 2015 Inside Out. Poehler also stars opposite Arrested Development’s Will Arnett as Gob’s forgotten wife and in 2007’s Blades of Glory as Arnett’s character’s sister. Poehler and Arnett married in 2003 and had two sons but divorced in 2012 (a break-up that, earlier this month, Arnett told the Guardian had left him “crying for an hour at the side of the road.”) So, erm, let’s be delicate about that, perhaps. In 2019, Poehler directed her first film, Wine Country, in which she reunites with Tiny Fey, reviewed by the Guardian as a four star “wine-soaked gem”. And anything wine-soaked sounds good to us. Now she’s back in the director’s chair with a new documentary – Lucy and Desi, the tale of I Love Lucy’s Lucille Ball and Desi Arnaz – that was very well received at this year’s Sundance film festival. So! Get BS-ing (“brainstorming” – Leslie Knope) your questions for Poehler in the comments below by midday Thursday 23 February and we’ll be back with her answers in Film&amp;Music, online and in print on Friday 11 March. As Parks and Rec’s Jean-Ralphio would say: “K to the N to the O P E, she’s the dopest little shorty in all Pawnee …” • Lucy and Desi is on Amazon Prime from 4 March.Joseph R Biden has the weight of the world on his shoulders. These words are as true of him as they have ever been of any mortal soul. Until his term ends, he will be alone with the gravest decisions that have ever confronted an American leader. Things might have gone very badly for Abraham Lincoln, but the varieties of loss and destruction now possible if the systems of order fail are great beyond imagining. The design of our government poses one human being against all our troubles, however difficult or threatening. This is only truer now that this president has to deal with an opposition committed to seeing him fail – or be perceived as failing, which for most purposes is the same thing. Our champion in the present trial-by-history is a fine old man of truly vast experience who may or may not show signs of aging which may or may not reflect on his judgment and competence. I am a few days more than a year younger than Biden, so I am sensitive to the association of age with cognitive slippage and less inclined to credit it than the generality of people seem to be. Old as I am, I remember that the press ridiculed Eisenhower for supposedly being inarticulate. No doubt Biden remembers this as well. A habit of ridicule has regularly displaced or distorted press coverage of other presidents. So he could no doubt dismiss it, if it were not so effective at undermining him, at a time when, for example, he is trying to keep the western alliance together in the face of aggressive pressure from Russia. Biden has entered office at a time of unprecedented turmoil, and yet he is judged by the press as if these were normal times and he were simply a dubious claimant to the role, dubious not because there is any doubt about his character and intentions or his remarkable range of experience, or about his win at the polls, but because he is old, and tomorrow he will be older. Of course most of his colleagues, US senators and congressmen, are in his age cohort, and the figures of brash relative youth among them seem to look for guidance to Rupert Murdoch, who is 91. Biden has to deal with the fact of succeeding Donald Trump, who is a few years younger than him but still old, cosmetics notwithstanding. The press has become accustomed to covering a man who writes his own headlines, the more bizarre the better from the point of view of clicks or circulation. Trump was and is such a rambunctious presence that any normally courteous person might seem to recede by comparison. He deals in ridicule and he is ridiculous. So he has pulled political discourse so far into the depths that the words ‘political discourse’ hardly apply. If Biden is to restore normalcy, he has to rise above all this, which will mean he is at great risk of being overshadowed by it. He must resist the impulse to defend himself by reference to his predecessor, even though he has to contend with the turmoil he created and the shambles he left behind. Facts should not be dismissed as excuses. They have a legitimate claim to acknowledgement. Biden is trying to shore up democratic government in the United States, which is threatened in ways and degrees none of his predecessors could have foreseen. He has the pandemic to deal with. The economy is robust, but inflation is rising. And there is the matter of the obstructionist Congress, many of whom are ready to oppose a policy because it would be popular and effective, many of whom are simply doing as they are told, defeating the president the people have elected. Any Democrat holding the office now would be frustrated, prevented from acting on the agenda he offered to the voters, on the basis of which they would have chosen him. An article in Time magazine that marked Biden’s first year in office is titled ‘Big Promises, Bad Outcomes’. The failed promises include to ‘Fix Democracy’. In 12 months he should have repaired our political system, which has been allowed to decline over many years and is now under direct, calculated assault from outside and inside our government. He, alone, cannot fix it. Any grownup should know this. Unreasonable expectations simply find failure where there is difficulty and a need for thought, patience and collaboration. They pass among the press for tough-mindedness. In fact they only demonstrate a failure to acknowledge the gravity of our situation. Biden’s long institutional memory, his lifetime of watching presidents come and go, might have made him aware of a recurring pattern in our politics. When an administration with a liberalizing agenda comes into power, obstructionism asserts itself, the agenda is curtailed at best, blocked at worst. So the faction called ‘conservative’ has succeeded in fixing the terms of American life into the indefinite future. Over time American identity, like American law, is established by precedent. We find out who we are by seeing what we do – within the constraints of the constitution, which is, on principle, open to interpretation. Precedent has gone very wrong. This can happen, as when the US supreme court ruled against Dred Scot. For some time our politics has given us a narrow, arid conception of what is possible, which is now thought of as ‘American’. As a nation, we don’t do much. This is consistent with a recently authoritative view that economics can and should make most of our decisions for us while government stands out of the way. This order of things has produced profound global discontent. It is so unpopular and unpopulist that it is no longer an effective rationale for obstructionism, which has fallen silent, putting aside talk of M&amp;Ms, civil war, socialism and the like, because it no longer needs a rationale. It can hope to make the Biden presidency fail simply by sitting on its hands. What the consequences of an ineffective presidency will be for the world is no concern of theirs, apparently. In post-war history it is true that Democratic administrations propose reforms, Republicans quash them, and the conclusion drawn from this is that the reforms were radical, not acceptable to the American people. Harry Truman’s Fair Deal, modeled on Roosevelt’s New Deal, would have made racial discrimination in employment illegal. The powerful opposition at the time, largely Dixiecrat, were “conservative” in the matter of discrimination and segregation, so the experience of another generation was added to the towering social cost of injustice. Truman did manage, by executive order, to make discrimination illegal in the federal government and its contractors. But America was still defined by obstruction, by discrimination. The good impulse toward justice was as ineffectual as obstruction could make it. President Truman proposed a national health system, as his Democratic successors have done. It was lost to Dixiecrat and Republican opposition, as were many worthy and forgotten reforms. President Obama finally succeeded in contriving a system of wider access to medical care that could withstand determined and continuous attack and Biden has broadened it. But a true national system of health care has assumed the character of a negative definition of America. It is preeminent among the things we don’t do. This despite the fact that it has been on the agenda of a series of Democratic presidents, who, as Democrats, enjoy the distinction of having been elected by majorities. Largely because obstruction sets the agenda for the press, it is by now fully institutionalized. Has the President failed? Can he possibly recover? The right answer is always, probably not. Are Americans disappointed? Not, of course, in the bloc that put policies that would have improved their lives and their children’s lives out of their reach. Journalistically speaking, It all rests on the shoulders of a man old enough to remember when America was defined by the Marshall Plan and the GI Bill, by generosity, reform and a positive view of the future. Marilynne Robinson is an American novelist and essayist. Her latest book is JackIn the sample clues below, the links take you to explainers from our beginners series. The setter’s name often links to an interview with him or her, in case you feel like getting to know these people better. The news in clues Every so often, there is a puzzle so topical that someone shares it with their colossal following, enticing non-solvers to try our hobby. So it was with Vlad last week … … in a, well, spirited reaction to events that prompted such clues as this one … 2d In a diary recalled work meeting one afternoon – this justifies conduct? (8) [definition: this justifies conduct?] [wordplay: backwards (“recalled”) musical abbreviation for “work” inside (“in”) synonym for “a diary”, then Roman numeral for “one” + abbreviation for “afternoon”] [OP, backwards, inside A LOG, then I + A] … for APOLOGIA. There was also this one … 6d Have confidence over investigator (female) – never good to show disloyalty (8) [definition: disloyalty] [wordplay: synonym for “have confidence” + name of an investigator &amp; slangy term for “female”, both without (“never”) abbreviation for “good”] [BET + GRAY and GAL without both Gs] for BETRAYAL. Another puzzle that caught the eye of non-solvers was from Stephen McCarthy in the New York Times. The answers included various names from sci-fi. Four adjacent down clues were ambiguous: 71d “It’s a ____!” [WRAP or TRAP] 67d Body part that precedes “band” [WAIST or WRIST] 47d Ones involved in a transaction [PAYERS or PAYEES] 55d Let out, in a way [LEASED or LEAKED] The answer crossing these – clued “The better of two major sci-fi film franchises?” – could equally validly be filled as STAR WARS or STAR TREK. Again, non-solvers have been sharing their wonderment and the good news is that this kind of ambiguity can be found in cryptics, such as Boatman’s referendum puzzle, the barred weekend challenges and beyond. Latter patter Back in the day, we are told, Echo’s daughter tried to seduce Zeus. Hera, understandably, turned her into a bird. The bird began to appear on trinkets in old erotic magic and its name came to mean a charm, a spell – and a curse. The unlucky daughter lives on in a pleasingly brief clue from Carpathian in the quiptic, the Guardian’s stepping-stone puzzle “for beginners and those in a hurry”: 12a Juliet in kiss curse (4) [definition: curse] [wordplay: letter represented by “Juliet” in Nato alphabet + IN (“in”) + letter denoting a kiss] [J + IN + X] Echo’s daughter was Iynx; when I see a JINX as an answer, I keep in mind that the setter might have decided to include every letter of the alphabet, handily considering Qs and Zs when I go on to the later clues. Carpathian was also looking for QUIZ and BANK, so it paid off. An alternate spelling of the bird, jynx, features in one of the few 26-letter pangrams, “Veldt jynx grimps waqf zho buck”. Like almost all short pangrams, what it gains in brevity it loses in needing an explanation that it is in fact a meaningful sentence, unless you understand that it means “wryneck bird from the grasslands causes the mounting of hybrid cattle buck from land given to a religious institution for charitable purposes in Islamic countries”. When the paraphrase is barely more intelligible than the pangram, I stick with the quick brown fox, but I do like the feel of one of the words, the admittedly obscure subject of our next challenge. Reader, how would you clue GRIMP? Puzzling elsewhere For the second year in a row, the January event known as the MIT Mystery Hunt has been an online affair, a side-effect being that those of us on this side of the Atlantic can get a taste. Below is an introductory video, but take a look at this one, too. Cluing competition Many thanks for your clues for DOUGLAS-HOME. The audacity award goes to Jdthndr for the “culpa” in “PM should go in disgrace with mea culpa”. Of course, I enjoyed all the clues comparing the old Old Etonian with the current old one. The runners-up are Porcia’s “Party laughs off old setter becoming PM” and Newlaplandes’s “Party damaged laughsome PM”; the winner is PugliaForever’s devious “Head of government overtaken by Labour supporters’ gaining the house”. Kludos to Puglia. Please leave entries for this fortnight’s competition – as well as your non-print finds and picks from the broadsheet cryptics – below. The latest in our collaborative playlist Healing Music Recorded in 2020-22 to Accompany a Solve or Even Listen to is from Melissa Etheridge: Clue of the fortnight It takes an exceptional clue nowadays for me to forgive an allusion to anything more than a cough or a sniffle … 11d Hawking lecture’s audience will do so upon arrival (13) [definition: hawking (ignoring the capital)] [wordplay: two words describing what an audience at a lecture does] … and this from the Times for EXPECTORATION is exceptional. Your good health! Find a collection of explainers, interviews and other helpful bits and bobs at alanconnor.com The Shipping Forecast Puzzle Book by Alan Connor, which is partly but not predominantly cryptic, can be ordered from the Guardian BookshopThousands of asylum seekers fear they could lose their Home Office hotel accommodation because some owners want to offer rooms to tourists and other travellers. One letter sent to a group of asylum seekers being accommodated by the Home Office in a hotel close to central London states: “Dear guests, we would like to kindly inform you that your accommodation with us is going to end on 31 January (2022). We advise you to get in touch with your local council for alternative accommodation.” The accommodation is managed for the Home Office by Clearsprings. Their subcontractors intervened after the eviction letter was circulated to the asylum seekers and sent a second letter stating: “Under the law (hotel owners) cannot ask you to leave the premises forcefully. Please note that if for any reason your entry card is cancelled and you cannot gain access to your apartment please call the police immediately as this will be classed as an illegal eviction.” The Joint Council for the Welfare of Immigrants is supporting asylum seekers in this accommodation who received the letter. They say they are vulnerable and include a mother with a newborn baby and a survivor of domestic violence. Minnie Rahman, the campaigns director for JCWI, said: “Nobody should have to fear they’ll be kicked out on to the streets on a cold winter’s night.” She said the number of eviction threats were increasing. “Our lawyers have been on the phone to young mums and families who’ve been terrified they were going to end up homeless, and unfortunately we know these kinds of threats are widespread. The Home Office needs to be granting people who’ve sought safety here decent, stable accommodation so they can rebuild their lives.” JCWI started a legal action against the Home Office following the threat to evict from the hotel close to central London. In its response, the Home Office confirmed that the asylum seekers were entitled to accommodation but that no suitable alternative to the hotel had yet been found. The charity Asylum Matters said it had received information that some hotel owners wanted to reopen their hotels for paying guests for this year’s summer season, now that Covid travel restrictions are being lifted, but that issues of lack of communication between hotels and asylum seekers were “rife”. The charity produced a report in December 2021 – In a Place Like a Prison – documenting asylum seekers’ bad experiences in hotels and other accommodation such as army barracks. It warned that the accommodation centres the Home Office planned to use in future to at least partially replace hotels would be akin to “large prison-like refugee camps in the UK”. The Home Office is facing record backlogs in processing asylum claims with more than 80,000 awaiting the outcome. This means that movement out of traditional asylum seeker accommodation in shared houses and flats is slower. Meanwhile, Visit Britain is predicting a significant boost in tourist visits this year. London hotels have reported a surge in tourist bookings as Covid travel restrictions ease and levels of the virus drop. The Home Office said recently that it had been spending £4.7m a day on hotel accommodation for 12,000 Afghans being resettled in the UK and 25,000 asylum seekers. A Home Office spokesperson said: “The letters were sent to a small number of people in one accommodation site in error and without approval from the Home Office. We are liaising with Clearsprings to make sure this does not happen again. “The use of hotels is only ever a short-term solution and we are working with local authorities to find appropriate long term accommodation across the United Kingdom.” Clearsprings has been approached for comment.There was a deluge in Leeds on Sunday. From the stands of Elland Road any number of objects rained down: coins, bottles, lighters, fireworks, in one instance even a golf ball. They came down at moments of maximum excitement and disappointment, of tension and frustration. Frequently, they were aimed at the players of Manchester United. The 19-year-old forward Anthony Elanga was hit by what appeared to be a coin after celebrating Manchester United’s third goal in the 70th minute. He dropped to his haunches, before being cajoled back into play by his teammates. He went on to score the decisive goal in the match and ran straight over to the corner of the ground where he had been assaulted to celebrate. Above: Manchester United’s Anthony Elanga is pictured on his knees after being struck by a missile. Right: A steward retrieves a golf ball from the pitch earlier in the match. Below: Elanga scoring the winner and celebrating at the end of the game. Photographs by Tom Jenkins. This was the odd thing about the resumption of the Roses derby. It was another prominent fixture that featured precisely the kind of behaviour no one would condone and yet pretty much everyone at the ground lent into its tribal atmosphere. It exemplified all the problems English football is experiencing regarding disorder, but anyone at Elland Road would find it hard to argue the occasion was anything other than exhilarating. Perhaps the feeling would have been different had another deluge not intervened, the rain hammering down all day in Leeds. There were no groups drinking outside the city centre bars, although police did report “a few incidents” before the game. There were no Manchester United fans walking down to the ground by the side of the A643 (to be fair there was one, Jordan, doing the Siuuu in puddles to annoy his friends and relatives who, like him, were from Leeds). Even at the stadium, the rain acted as its own security cordon to dispel any fractiousness. One hour before kick-off, on one side of Elland Road there was Billy’s bar and a crowd in the stairwell; on the other The Old Peacock and an even bigger gathering in the Covid-secure terracing. Both crowds were loud, crude and hostile to even the idea of Manchester United support. They seemed to be waiting for the away fans to arrive. But they were also not about to get soaked. There was one man, a thickset middle-aged fellow called Steve who was standing in the Peacock car park in a woollen jumper and jeans, conducting the crowd in a sing-along. Leeds fans arrive before the Premier League match at Elland Road against old rivals Manchester United. “It’s been 16 years in the making, we’ve got to show up for it,” said Steve of the event and his determination to mark it (the 16 years refers to Leeds’ absence from the top flight). Like other Leeds fans, when asked about the nature of the rivalry, he couldn’t put a finger on a moment in time, but acknowledged Manchester United’s history for taking Leeds players, from Gordon McQueen to Rio Ferdinand and Eric Cantona in between. There was a more general dissatisfaction too. “It’s the arrogance,” he said. “They just take who they like, drop £30m and that’s it.” Reg is 54 and was standing on the edge of the car park with his family eating a burger in the rain. He drew attention to the unique circumstances in which the game was taking place. “It’s louder than I’ve ever known it and I remember the 70s and the 80s,” he said of the Elland Road atmosphere. “It’s that year we missed out, there’s so much energy.” Not only had Leeds dropped out of the Premier League in 2004, they returned in 2020 when Covid forced matches behind closed doors. This season is about making up for time lost on two fronts. While the home crowds waited under awnings and sang horrible things about Manchester United’s players and support, the away fans were being smuggled into the stadium by the back door. They, too, were in assertive spirits, with this correspondent mistaken by one bus-load for a Leeds fan and given the finger by dozens of young men for more than a minute. But the two groups of fans never came into contact, just as the police had planned it. Mounted police outside Elland Road before Sunday’s match. This was the second crucial factor that meant the match bubbled up without ever quite boiling over into fighting: an enormous police presence. It wasn’t always visible, as different units were moved around the city “like chess pieces”, as one officer put it. It was largely friendly, with the kind of cheery, jocular interventions that are seen as the model for building trust and relationships with fans. On Monday, West Yorkshire police confirmed they had made nine arrests for “offences including public order, throwing of missiles and breach of banning order”. Leeds have said any home fan found to have thrown an object on to the pitch would be banned for life from the club’s fixtures. Rumours around the ground speculated at 900 officers on duty. It seemed an exaggeration but it did appear that police had been brought in from elsewhere in the country. Any questions on the extent of resources deployed were batted away, however, with the force saying: “We don’t disclose the number of officers involved in large public order operations for operational reasons.” There was no doubt though that dozens of officers played a central role in segregating fans in the ground during the raucous duration of the match and dozens more formed cordons in the surrounding streets to make sure rival supporters were kept apart afterwards. All the while, up among the murky clouds, a helicopter guided proceedings. The players clash after Elanga was fouled by Junior Firpo. Harry Maguire celebrates in front of the Leeds fans after scoring the opening goal, before a smoke bomb is let off by Manchester United supporters. Leeds fans celebrate as their side come from two goals down. The day ended with the away support driven back into town in a phalanx of buses, afforded the sort of siren-wailing security detail usually the preserve of world leaders. They were buzzed back up the road where a cordon of police blocked off the back entrance to the station and fans were smuggled inside like so many boyband members going back to their hotel. At the front of the station a stream of wailing wagons deposited officers who then proceeded to the platforms, shepherding passengers on board the TransPennine express train. “The majority of fans on both sides behaved appropriately throughout the match and there was no significant disorder,” police said. But that was not the final action As those same police left the station and went back into their vans, an officer was asked if that was it for the day. “Oh no,” he said. Where next then? “Anywhere, wherever they tell us.” A Leeds fan flanked by police after the defeat.Jeremy Paxman has invested in what is thought to be Scotland’s first organic whisky distillery, part-owned by the former prisons chief at the centre of his infamous interview with the former home secretary Michael Howard. The University Challenge presenter is one of the financial backers of Nc’nean Distillery, a “green” Scotch producer on the Morvern peninsula in the west Highlands, founded by Derek Lewis, the former director general of the Prison Service, and his daughter, Annabel Thomas. The company uses renewable energy to make whisky from organically grown barley. It is sold in bottles made from recycled glass and 99% of the waste created by the distilling process is reused by a neighbouring farm. Paxman, 71, said: “I have enjoyed a dram for more years than I care to remember. When the opportunity came along to get involved with a Scotch that is made while taking care of the environment, I was keen to get involved. How often can you say that your pleasure causes no harm to anyone else?” Lewis was sacked as director general of the Prison Service in England and Wales in 1995 by Howard, the then home secretary, after two high-profile break-outs. Later, Paxman interrogated Howard on Newsnight about whether he had threatened to overrule Lewis’s decision not to suspend the governor at one of the jails in question. Paxman notoriously asked the same question 12 times, to which Howard evaded giving a straight answer. In retirement, Lewis, 75, bought the Drimnin Estate, on which the distillery sits, on the Morvern peninsula on the west coast of Scotland. Nc’nean – an abbreviation of Neachneohain, the name of the Scots Gaelic goddess of spirits – was established there in 2017 when 39-year-old Thomas, the company’s chief executive officer, gave up her job as a management consultant in London to follow her dream of making whisky. To build the business, she raised £7.5m from an EU grant and other investors, including Paxman, who owns a 0.6% stake. A fresh round of funding in 2020 brought in a further £1.7m and handed 11% of the company to the taxpayer-backed quango Scottish Enterprise. Lewis remains on the board of directors. Paxman, a keen angler, has been outspoken about his love of the Highlands and last year accused the salmon farming industry in Scotland of putting wild stocks of the fish at risk of extinction. He has previously referred to his fondness of whisky, describing himself as “a fan and loyal supporter of the Highlands and Islands”, adding: “I do my best to support one of their main industries. It’s a sort of social service.”When Lucy Hannah decided to put together an anthology of short stories by Afghan women in 2019, it already seemed like a hugely ambitious project. Most of the authors involved had never had the opportunity to work with an editor before. One contributor submitted her story by taking photos of handwritten pages and sending them via WhatsApp. Another had previously published her work online, but not in print. “I have never come across a local publisher willing to publish a book without asking for money from the author,” she said. “And it’s impossible to find a foreign publisher who wants to read books about anything except the war.” Then Covid-19 hit in 2020, followed by the Taliban’s return to power in 2021. “It was hard work,” admits Hannah, a former BBC employee who helped to set up the BBC Writersroom. The anthology, My Pen Is the Wing of a Bird, was published this week by MacLehose Press, but many of the team involved have never met. With the 18 writers based in Afghanistan (10 have since managed to leave), an editor in Sri Lanka and translators in the UK, all communication had to be done remotely. The fact that the book has now been published is the result of a team effort that “relied on everybody trusting each other”, says Hannah. The project was run by the organisation Hannah set up to help amplify the work of marginalised writers, Untold Narratives. When working with scriptwriters in Afghanistan four years ago, Hannah spoke with some female writers who were able to get hired to work on a radio soap opera, but were finding it hard to get their prose fiction published. Wanting to help, Hannah came back to the UK to raise funds and the Write Afghanistan project was born. After two open calls for submissions across Afghanistan, with the second call focused on isolated parts of the country, Untold Narratives read approximately 300 submissions before selecting the 18 writers who would contribute to My Pen Is the Wing of a Bird. Several of the stories draw on the writers’ experience of living in the midst of violence. Zainab Akhlaqi’s Blossom, for example, draws on the real-life bombing of the Sayed ul-Shuhada high school in Kabul. The story ends on a note of defiant hope: its young narrator, Nekbakht, decides she wants to “show some spirit in the face of our struggles”, and goes back to school. Akhlaqi found a similar sense of hope knowing that her work was going to reach a global audience. “In the worst days of my country’s history, [working with Untold] gave me the hope and spirit to write,” she says. “These writers don’t have the support that those in the UK do when they’re starting out,” says Hannah. “So this is about encouraging the global gatekeepers to welcome in voices, in translation, who don’t necessarily have a local creative infrastructure to support them.” Marie Bamyani, whose story The Black Crow of Winter is about a mother struggling to provide for her family, is passionate that the voices of Afghan women get heard. “My Pen Is the Wing of a Bird is the starting point of bringing Afghan writers together and sharing their voices and stories with the world,” she says. “The world must not let this light be turned off.” • My Pen Is the Wing of a Bird is published by MacLehose Press (£12). To order a copy for £10.44 go to guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Germany will offer its population a new protein-based Covid-19 vaccine comparable to conventional flu jabs this week, in the hope of swaying a sizeable minority that remains sceptical of the novel mRNA technology used in the most commonly used vaccines. About 1.4m doses of the Nuvaxovid vaccine developed by the US biotech company Novavax are to arrive in Germany this week, the country’s health minister, Karl Lauterbach, confirmed last Friday. A further million doses are to arrive the week after, with the German government’s total order for the year 2022 amounting to 34m doses. Novavax’s product has until now been used only in Indonesia and the Philippines, but it was permitted for use in the EU last December. It is still awaiting authorisation in the US, as some concerns about the company’s production capacity persist. Unlike the novel mRNA vaccines produced by Pfizer/BioNTech and Moderna or viral vector made by AstraZeneca and Johnson &amp; Johnson, Nuvaxovid is a protein subunit vaccine. It contains a non-infectious component on the surface of the Sars-CoV-2 virus, which induces a protective immune response when the body’s immune cells come into contact with it. Novavax announced in June last year that its vaccine had proven more than 90% effective against symptomatic infections with the Alpha variant, in trials including nearly 30,000 volunteers in the US and Mexico. The company says its product is similarly effective against the Delta and Omicron variants, especially after a booster shot administered six months after the second jab. Germany’s Paul Ehrlich Institute notes that the data proving the vaccine’s efficacy against more infectious variants remains limited. Surveys in Germany suggest a considerable interest in the Novavax jab among the 19.8 million people in the country who have so far declined to take a jab against Covid-19. Out of 4,000 unvaccinated hospital workers surveyed in Berlin, 1,800 expressed an interest in the protein-based vaccine. In the northern state of Lower Saxony, the health ministry said 6,000 people had put their name on a waiting list for Nuvaxovid by early February. Some scientists question whether the new vaccine will prove a gamechanger in a country whose overall vaccination rate has been flatlining at about 75% for months. Lars Korn, a co-author of a current survey of anti-vaccine attitudes conducted by the University of Erfurt, told the public broadcaster ZDF that two-thirds of respondents would continue to completely reject any form of vaccination.A significant number of children remain in situations of “unknown and unassessed” risk, according to a report on children’s services in Solihull, triggered by the murder of six-year-old Arthur Labinjo-Hughes. The inspection report, which was published on Monday, also found the council faced longstanding problems with staffing and that after Arthur’s high-profile case, social workers were “highly reluctant to work in Solihull either on a permanent or agency basis”. Among a number of key findings, inspectors expressed concern that in a “significant minority” of cases, decisions in safeguarding were “overoptimistic” and lacked “professional curiosity”. They also found incomplete police records had left children potentially “at risk of significant harm”. The report followed a joint targeted area inspection of child protection services in Solihull that was called for by the education secretary, Nadhim Zahawi, in December. It concluded vulnerable children in the area had to “wait too long for their initial need and risk to be assessed”. In December, Arthur’s stepmother, Emma Tustin, was sentenced for at least 29 years for his murder. He was physically assaulted, poisoned with salt and forced to stand in isolation for up to 14 hours a day at her home in Solihull in the months leading up to his death in June 2020. The boy’s father, Thomas Hughes, was given 21 years for manslaughter. Social workers visited Tustin’s house two months before Arthur’s death after concerns were raised by his grandmother Joanne Hughes about bruises on his back, but they concluded there were “no safeguarding concerns”. The report into multi-agency responses to risks to children in Solihull was carried out by Ofsted, the Care Quality Commission, the Chief Inspector of Constabulary and Fire &amp; Rescue Services and the Chief Inspector of Probation for England and Wales. Joanna Barrett, head of policy at the NSPCC, said the report was “hugely concerning” and more needed to be done to prevent further tragedies. “It is absolutely crucial that safeguarding agencies in Solihull are better resourced and work together more quickly and efficiently,” she said. “However, these issues are not confined to one area and we know that this is one piece of a much bigger puzzle affecting many local authorities across the country.” The report said inspectors reviewed the records for one young child who was not linked to her father in the system, despite the father’s history of domestic abuse and drug use, and he being subject to a non-molestation order. “Consequently, a domestic abuse incident the child was exposed to, involving her father, does not appear on her record … It is not obvious that the man poses a significant risk to her,” the report said. The Local Safeguarding Children Partnership (LSCP) in Solihull had “experienced frequent changes of personnel … for a significantly long period of time”, the report said, leading to a loss of experience. The workforce was “committed and knowledgable and dedicated to meeting the needs of children” but they faced immense pressure to meet daily demands and this reduced “their ability to respond swiftly to all concerns for children”, it said. The report called for agencies in Solihull to send a written statement of action to Ofsted by 30 May. In a joint statement, the minister for children and families, Will Quince, the minister for care, Gillian Keegan, and the minister for safeguarding, Rachel Maclean, said Arthur’s death was “horrific and deeply disturbing”. “We must do everything we can to prevent any more cases like this. Each agency – police, health and children’s services – has an equal duty in this work and we are writing to all three to make clear our expectation that they participate fully in producing and delivering on a written statement of action,” they said. Steve Cullen, speaking on behalf of Solihull LSCP, said: “On behalf of the safeguarding partners I want to provide assurance that we have taken on board all of the comments from the inspectors and we committed to work together to improve the way we protect children in Solihull and to do everything we can to ensure positive outcomes for our children and young people.”This scrappy, rough-around-the-edges documentary from Norway is directed by two friends and began after one of them, Petter Aaberg, attempted to kill himself. It’s a fly-on-the-wall study of Aaberg and four other young Norwegians struggling with their mental health. It is raw and intense, and also troubling in places: Aaberg and Kvamme keep the camera rolling on these vulnerable people in moments of crisis, testing the limits of documentary ethics. One of their subjects is Monica, whose arms are horrifically scarred by self-harm. A sexual abuse survivor, she lives in a constant state of hyper-vigilance. We see her having a panic attack in the street after hearing a car backfire. Monica introduces the directors to Emma, her trans friend who is struggling with the agonisingly long wait for surgery. Another subject is heroin addict Cornelia, who is filmed injecting herself and being rushed to hospital, her umpteenth overdose. I wasn’t convinced that showing moments such as this, honest and hard-hittingly intimate as they are, take us any closer to understanding Monica, Emma or Cordelia. In fact, the person we watch most is co-director Aaberg: his story monopolises the film in a way that some viewers may find narcissistic. But his openness and vulnerability, his willingness to say exactly whatever he is feeling in the moment, is disarming. He starts a relationship with another woman, Miriam, and there’s a scene of two of them having sex which is filmed with huge sensitivity; it’s genuinely not exploitative. As the film progresses, it’s clear the relationship between the directors and their subjects has developed into friendship. Aaberg and Kvamme talk in an interview about the agreement they had with their subjects, who could pull out at any point and had approval on the final cut of the film. Is it enough? Do they cross the line? I wasn’t sure. • Young &amp; Afraid is available on 25 February on True Story. • In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at befrienders.org.Best moment Sean Ingle The women’s figure skating free programme. An extraordinary evening of ice and fire, tears and peril. The heart felt for Kamila Valieva as the tears began to roll after the pressures of an extraordinary week caught up for her, but the eyes were also drawn to her teammate Alexandra Trusova and her extraordinary reaction after her five quads were rewarded with only a silver medal. “I will never go out on the ice again,” she said. ‘Never! I hate this sport! It’s impossible! You cannot do it this way! I’m not going to the awards! Everyone has a gold medal! Only I don’t! I hate it all!” Bryan Armen Graham The American speed skater Erin Jackson, who thought her Beijing dream had ended after a fall at last month’s US trials appeared to cost her a place in the team, earned an Olympic gold (and a namecheck from Viola Davis) by winning the women’s 500m at the Ice Ribbon. In doing so, the converted inline skater became the first Black woman to win an individual gold in a Winter Olympics event. Martin Belam I gasped out loud when Nils van der Poel broke the Olympic record in the last pairing of the 5,000m men’s speed skating and snatched the gold after his great rival Patrick Roest of the Netherlands had sat watching pair after pair of skaters fail to get near his new benchmark. Van der Poel later spoke out about how “irresponsible” the IOC were to give China hosting rights. Star of the Games SI The boring answer is Eileen Gu, who won two golds and a silver in the freeski. But Trusova gets silver. The American Lindsey Jacobellis takes bronze for her two snowboard cross titles and particularly her grab at the end of the mixed event, which banished the ghosts of 2006 for ever. BAG The correct if obvious answer is Eileen Gu. The 18-year-old San Francisco-born freeskier representing her mother’s home nation of China delivered under the immense pressure of being the face of these Beijing Games. She became the first action-sports athlete to win three medals at a single Olympics – missing out on triple gold by a fraction of a point in slopestyle – while annoying a growing number of Americans along the way. Hard to imagine her not being one of the world’s top-earning athletes over the next decade. MB Quentin Fillon Maillet. Others won more golds in biathlon – Johannes Thingnes Bø I’m looking at you – but a heartbreaking fourth place in his final men’s 15km mass start event prevented the Frenchman making it an incredible six medals from six gruelling biathlon races in 14 days. He ended up with two golds and three silvers. Biggest disappointment SI The long, long, long trips to the mountains. And not being able to see Beijing at all because of the closed loop we all found ourselves in, unable to leave our guarded hotel except to go to a venue or media centre. BAG It was difficult to imagine the reputation of an event known as the Genocide Games sinking any lower, but Kamila Valieva’s presence in the glamour event after a positive drugs test managed to pull it off. By the end, a worldwide audience of millions watched the favourite melt down spectacularly then get chewed out by her coach before she was even off the ice, the silver medallist uncontrollably sob rage-tears and appear to retire on the spot while the gold medallist sat by herself catatonic in the green room holding a teddy bear and ignored by everyone. All of this was green-lit in order to – checks notes – prevent irreparable harm. Might even unseat the Nancy-Tonya debacle for on-the-night messiness. MB Men’s and women’s ice hockey organised to feature 38 pool matches resulted in the grand total of two women’s teams out of 22 nations not reaching the next stage. A lengthy pointless exercise, although at least Finland gave us a surprise victory in the men’s competition. Funniest moment SI Early in the Games two English journalists referred to Kamila Valieva as being regarded as ‘Miss Perfect’ in Russia – both mistakenly thinking they had read it somewhere. They were wrong, but it was too late. Days later the term was being used everywhere. BAG Jamaica’s first alpine skier, Benjamin Alexander, looking directly into the camera after finishing his second run of the men’s giant slalom more than a minute behind the podium spots: “I’m exhausted. I need a massage and a beer.” Same, bro, same. MB When a Games widely criticised for the environmental damage of relying on artificial snow had to cancel and reschedule events because it suddenly had too much of the real thing. Under the radar SI British skater Cornelius Kersten deserved more credit than he got for finishing ninth in the 1,000m. Also, the thousands of Chinese volunteers who were incredible, endlessly patient and will now have to undergo three weeks of quarantine before getting home. They all deserve medals. BAG Biathlon does not always get the shine it deserves so let us now praise Norway’s Bø brothers. The combined haul of Johannes Thingnes (four gold, one bronze) and Tarjei (two gold, one silver, one bronze) would have landed them in the top 10 of the medal table if they were their own country. MB Elsa Desmond may have finished last in the women’s luge but she essentially set up the Irish Luge Federation herself to get to these Games and goes home from Beijing back to working in an NHS hospital as a GP in Essex. Milano-Cortina 2026 will be … SI … fun, although the gaps between venues mean a lot of travel. BAG … the most sprawling Olympics ever featuring venues spread out over 22,000 sq km (about 10,000 sq miles) across northern Italy. The use of preexisting infrastructure is a plus for sustainability, but the alpine skier Federica Brignone was among a number of prominent Italian athletes who say it will diminish any sense of Olympic spirit. “Everyone will be in their own area,” the three-time Olympic medallist said. “From an ecological standpoint it will be much better. But in terms of Olympic atmosphere, I’m not sure how it will be but I don’t think it will be very nice.” MB … hopefully a chance to enjoy a Winter Olympics free of geopolitical showboating and doping scandals, but I’m not going to hold my breath.Boris Johnson’s plan to end most Covid rules in England was delayed at the last minute amid a row between the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, and the health secretary, Sajid Javid, over funds for free testing. Cabinet ministers were told of the delay as they arrived at No 10 on Monday morning during the final wrangling over the “living with Covid” strategy expected to be announced to the House of Commons in the afternoon. No 10 acknowledged the plan was yet to be completed with just hours to go, with sources confirming there was disagreement over how much should be spent on providing free Covid tests for older and vulnerable people. Johnson will announce the strategy later on Monday afternoon to the House of Commons, and is likely to announce an end to mandatory isolation, contact tracing and most PCR and lateral flow testing for Covid in the community. The Guardian revealed last week that there was a split between Sunak and Javid over how much cash should continue to be spent on testing, with the Treasury pushing for as little as £1.3bn – a 90% cut from this year’s £15bn forecast spend. The Department of Health and Social Care had asked for billions more, which could have funded free lateral flow tests for symptomatic over-50s, but this was rejected by the Treasury. The dispute is now centred on whether the DHSC could use some of its existing budget for a continuation of more community testing for longer. A government source said there was still no agreement between the Treasury and the DHSC on the extent of the testing cuts, although another source at the DHSC said Javid had accepted the position that most testing must end. The source denied Javid was seeking new money and said that instead he wanted to move funds from other areas within the department to cover the additional testing. “DHSC are absolutely not asking for additional funding; they want to reprioritise within the existing budget,” the source said. One of the issues has been that the DHSC asked for enough funding for testing to ensure the survival of the Panoramic antiviral drugs trial, which officials believe would need free lateral flow tests for over-50s and vulnerable adults under 50 until at least September. However, officials are now looking at alternative ways of funding the recruitment of people for the trial. The plan to end funding for most community Covid testing has angered the devolved administrations. Nicola Sturgeon, the Scottish first minister, said if the figures were correct it would be “catastrophic for the UK’s ability to ensure adequate Covid surveillance, outbreak management etc in future”. A Welsh government spokesperson said on Monday that “any decision to change the existing national testing programme would be premature and reckless”. Scientists, medics and public health experts have already expressed concerns about the plan to scrap most PCR testing and restrict free lateral flows, probably to older age groups. The national contact-tracing service is expected to be wound down and schoolchildren will no longer be told to get tested twice a week. Johnson is likely to announce the plan later on Monday in a Commons statement before giving a press conference, announcing an end to mandatory isolation in England and huge reductions in mass testing. Wes Streeting, the shadow health secretary, said: “The government is paralysed by its own chaos and incompetence and the British public are paying the price. This shambles cannot continue. “What confidence can the public have that the Conservatives are acting in the national interest, when they can’t agree a plan for Covid? It is clear the prime minister was trying to declare victory before the war is over, simply to distract from the police knocking at the door of No 10. “Labour published our plan for living well with Covid in January. It would prepare us for new variants and secure our lives, livelihoods and liberties. If the Conservatives are too incompetent to agree their own plan, they are welcome to use ours.” The delay came as one Tory MP expressed apprehension about the government’s plan to cut back on Covid testing in the community. Tim Loughton, a former minister, said he was pleased the government was trying to get back to as much “normality as possible”. But he told the BBC’s Westminster Hour: “I have slight apprehensions in that I think we still do need to have testing available widely because I think that is the reassurance people can have that they’ve taken all possible precautions and they don’t want to infect other people.”We have passed the point of no return: rising seas will soon directly affect hundreds of millions of people around the planet. They will indirectly affect many millions more as transport connections, water supplies and factories in low-lying areas are lost or have to be relocated. What exactly are we facing? The latest research suggests we are likely to see a rise of a metre by the year 2100. Given how much carbon dioxide is already in the air and oceans, as much as three metres may be baked in over the 200 years or so that follow. And while that might seem like a long way off, coastal groundwater levels will rise much sooner, wrecking infrastructure and causing toxic pollution well before cities such as Miami, New York and San Francisco are permanently inundated. Where will all those people, warehouses, water treatment plants and rail lines move to, given that the interior of large land masses will have become drier? The forced migration of hundreds of millions of people will undoubtedly lead to serious international conflict over space and basic resources like fresh water. Conflict is another word for war. So can we adapt instead of migrating, by learning to live with higher water? It’s an ironic question to ask in English, since the language arguably owes its origins to coastal flooding. Angles, Saxons and Jutes moved to Britain from a flat area of what is now Germany and Denmark during a period of extreme flooding from about AD400 to AD800. Wealthy families escaped to Britain from around the river once called Fifeldor, or the “door of monsters”, which is an apt name for a river that floods catastrophically. When these elite families arrived, some historians believe that as much as a third of the British population was enslaved. We can probably agree that migration of elites and enslavement of indigenous people is not a model that should be emulated. The Fifeldor river is now known as the Eider, and is equipped with a massive storm surge barrier. Major coastal engineering works have been part of the response to flooding since the 1960s, including the Thames Barrier, the Rotterdam Barrier, and the new concrete and steel floodgates in New Orleans, designed by Dutch engineers. These gates are the most visible pieces of complex machines that coordinate pumps, tide gates and flood storage systems intended to control monster floods. But these systems will require increased funding and concentrated political will to scale them up as rising tides and extreme storms become more common. Walls, gates and pumps are also fundamentally brittle, in the sense that the consequences of their failure is catastrophic. It would be smarter to have systems that are “safe to fail”, as urban planner Nina-Marie Lister has proposed, meaning systems designed to fail gradually or in ways that avoid harm. Otherwise, coastal defence machines may themselves become the new sea monsters. While we’re talking monsters, coastal regions are often contaminated, having hosted military bases, waste disposal sites, chemical plants or petroleum refineries. The old ones may be buried under various kinds of “caps”, but are typically not protected from flooding that comes up from below or from the sides, as groundwater and rainwater does. Many of these industrial and military sites are already leaking into local groundwater. As sea and coastal groundwater levels rise, these toxins can move in unexpected directions. If a volatile chemical such as vinyl chloride comes into contact with a cracked sewer line, or simply enters the gravel around a pipe, vapour can rise into homes, schools or workplaces – causing cancer and other illnesses. If such contaminants enter shallow tidal waters, they will kill fish, shellfish and birds. This is already happening in San Francisco Bay, where chemicals known as persistent organic pollutants were buried at the shore, at a site where thousands of houses are now planned to be built. Fish living in the adjacent mud have been found with multiple tumours and reproductive changes. So how could we live with all this if, on a global scale, we simply must? One possible strategy is to dig out the contaminated soils and make them inert, by combining them with other chemicals, baking them, or filtering out the worst. We might also sequester them by binding the scary materials in blocks of concrete, compacted dirt or glass. Those digs would leave us with extensive – and useful – ponds near areas where the sea and the groundwater are rising, and where rivers will flood more often. The Dutch have pioneered the use of floating urban districts in ponds that are protected from waves and tides, using flexible infrastructure connections and “slip-collars” on hefty columns that tether them to land while allowing them to rise and fall with small tides. Such a sea-city could be built in some of the newly dug ponds, while others could be used for recreation, or to support coastal wildlife. If we surround those ponds with low dikes, they could stay in place longer as seas continue to rise over the centuries, forming part of a “managed retreat” strategy. Most of the hundreds of millions who will be affected by rising seas live in less wealthy countries, of course, not in Europe or the US. To avoid forcing an unimaginable number of people to move when most have no viable destination, strategies for living with water need to be cheap. Ideally, people in the developing world would be able to build and maintain their chosen strategy on their own – without hiring European or US companies or buying equipment they can’t afford to replace. If their strategy for living with higher water is to move dirt around to create ponds and dikes, local leaders who can direct labour and equipment must be able to accomplish and maintain these independently. But, since adaptation in place prevents conflict, making everyone safer, we all have an interest in helping pay for it around the world. Floating cities come with many challenges: they will need new water supply and sewage infrastructure that are more local, and not so centralised. It’s also true that they can’t match the density of high-rise towers. And in some places they just won’t be suitable or appropriate. But despite these issues, they offer a template for thinking about one of the biggest problems our civilisation faces. For the next 200 years, every person on this planet who values peace, health and political stability must pay attention to the waters rising around us. • Kristina Hill is an associate professor of environmental planning at the University of California, Berkeley. Further reading The Water Will Come: Rising Seas, Sinking Cities and the Remaking of the Civilized World by Jeff Goodell (Back Bay, £17.99) All We Can Save: Truth, Courage, and Solutions for the Climate Crisis, edited by Ayana Johnson and Katharine Wilkinson (Oneworld, £13.99) New York 2140 by Kim Stanley Robinson (Orbit, £9.99)The elections watchdog has urged the government not to give ministers a greater say in its work, saying plans to do so would seriously undermine its independence and could affect confidence in the wider electoral system. In a strongly worded and highly unusual public letter, the Electoral Commission said provisions in the elections bill for ministers to draw up a new “strategy and policy statement” – which the watchdog must take account of – had no precedent in comparable democracies. “It is our firm and shared view that the introduction of a strategy and policy statement – enabling the government to guide the work of the commission – is inconsistent with the role that an independent electoral commission plays in a healthy democracy,” the letter said. “This independence is fundamental to maintaining confidence and legitimacy in our electoral system.” The letter was signed by the full board of the commission, representing all four UK nations, with the exception of Conservative peer Stephen Gilbert, the party’s representative on the board. The House of Lords is now considering the bill. Ministers have insisted that the provisions will not amount to interference. However, critics and opposition parties have labelled the idea an attempt to neuter the organisation and stop it looking too closely at areas such as party funding. In the letter, the commissioners said the plan would compel the watchdog “to have regard to the government’s strategic and policy priorities and to help the government to meet those priorities … It would thereby provide a mechanism, driven by the then governing party, enabling that party’s ministers to shape how electoral law is applied to them and their political competitors. “While the stated position of the current government is that it would not intend to use these powers to impact on the commission’s independent oversight and regulation of the electoral system, no such assurances can be given about how the broad scope of these powers would be used over time. “The statement has no precedent in the accountability arrangements of electoral commissions in other comparable democracies, such as Canada, Australia or New Zealand.” The idea of the strategy and policy statement was drawn up by the Cabinet Office under Michael Gove. Responsibility for the elections bill has moved with Gove to the Department for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities. Writing to Gove and other ministers in the new department, the commissioners urged them “to think again about these measures”, and instead work with the existing Speaker’s Committee on the Electoral Commission, a cross-party group. “Strong accountability is essential for this, but so too is demonstrable independence,” they wrote. “The commission’s independent role in the electoral system must be clear for voters and campaigners to see, and preserved in electoral law.” The elections bill contains a number of other controversial elements, not least plans to oblige anyone who votes in person at a general election across the UK, or in local elections in England, to show photo ID first. While ministers argue that this is necessary to prevent voter impersonation, critics say the plan is an illiberal and expensive overreaction to an almost nonexistent problem and could put off many thousands of people from voting, with some likening it to US Republican-style voter suppression tactics. The levelling up and communities department said: “We completely disagree with the Electoral Commission’s claims about the elections bill – our reforms will not affect their operational independence. “The Pickles review on electoral fraud was clear that reforms were needed to improve accountability. Making the Electoral Commission more accountable will strengthen the integrity of the electoral process and help prevent fraud.”Not quite a quiche, nor a crostata, this is a neat way to produce a golden-crusted, cheese-laden pie with very little effort. As with most pies, this is as comforting as it is delicious, and a thrifty way to use up all those bits of cheese that lurk in the fridge. Buy in good-quality, all-butter puff pastry and no one will believe that it isn’t homemade. Leek, cheddar and pancetta puff pie Prep 15 min Cook 1 hr 10 min Serves 4 300g new potatoes 50g butter 100g pancetta slices, roughly chopped 4 leeks, washed and sliced 6-8 thyme sprigs 6 tbsp creme fraiche 1 tbsp wholegrain mustard Salt and black pepper 320g puff pastry 125g cheddar (or any other mature hard cheese), grated 40g parmesan, grated 1 egg, to glaze Heat the oven to 180C (160C fan)/350F/gas 4. Put the potatoes in a pan of salted water, bring to a boil and cook for 15-18 minutes, until tender. Drain and, when cool enough to handle, peel and slice into 5mm-thick rounds. Meanwhile, melt the butter in a medium pan over a medium heat, add the pancetta and fry for four to five minutes, until it begins to release its fat. Add the leeks and thyme, cover and cook for a further 10 minutes, until very soft. Remove the lid, cook for another few minutes to drive off the moisture, then stir in the creme fraiche and mustard. Season well, take off the heat and leave to cool. Roll out the pastry so that it is roughly 3mm thick, making sure it is just larger than your pastry dish, which should be 24-26cm diameter. Put half the sliced potatoes on the base of the dish, then spoon over half the leek mix and sprinkle over half of both cheeses, then repeat. Brush a little egg around the rim of the pie dish, then top it with the pastry. Trim and crimp the edges, make a small air hole in the middle, then brush more egg over the top. Bake for 30-35 minutes, until crisp and golden. Serve with a crisp green salad. The simple flex … There are some great vegan puff pastries in the shops – use one here, exclude the dairy and swap in some wintry roots and Indian spice pastes for a delicious vegan curry puff pie. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from OcadoA van driver has admitted killing two young children and seriously injuring their mother in a motorway crash as the family returned from a birthday party. Martin Newman, 41, pleaded guilty to causing the deaths by dangerous driving of Jayden-Lee Lucas, three, and his four-year-old sister, Gracie-Ann Wheaton. He also admitted seriously injuring their mother, Rhiannon Lucas, in the crash on the M4 at 1.45pm on Saturday 5 February. The family, from Tredegar in Blaenau Gwent, south Wales, had been returning from a birthday party when the car they were travelling in collided with Newman’s Ford Transit on the motorway between junctions 28 and 29 near Newport. Newman, of Croeserw, a village near Port Talbot, spoke only to confirm his identity and enter his guilty pleas during a brief hearing at Cardiff crown court on Monday. Few details of the offence were given and Judge Daniel Williams listed the case for sentence on 8 April. Several of the children’s relatives were in the public gallery, and one person yelled “bastard” as Newman was led from the dock. The two children were taken to the intensive care unit at University hospital of Wales in Cardiff after the crash. Lucas and the children’s father, who has not been named, were also taken to hospital. Gracie-Ann suffered a cardiac arrest due to the severity of her injuries and died the next day at about 5am. Jayden-Lee died the following Friday at 4.30pm. In a tribute to Jayden-Lee, his cousin, Jamie Lucas, 19, said: “He was wonderful, creative and a kind soul. Turned the grey skies blue.” Of Gracie-Ann, he said: “She was so young. She had a bright future ahead of her. She was such a wonderful child. She was very smart, she was very creative. She had a really great imagination as well. She was just fantastic to be around.” A GoFundMe page set up to raise money for the siblings’ funeral has raised more than £14,700. Huw Waythe, the headteacher of Deighton primary school in Tredegar, described them as two “special children”. He said: “Our thoughts remain with members of the family, and words cannot adequately express the shock and pain which they must be feeling. “We are shocked and saddened by the loss of two of our own. We will never forget how special the children were to our school community. “They both put a smile on all our faces daily. They were a delight to have and both always lit up any room with their positive personality and beaming smiles.”Mo Gilligan performed no fewer than 10 nights at the 3,000-seat Hammersmith Apollo last autumn, a run now captured for posterity by this second Netflix special. In the UK, Gilligan’s star just keeps rising. Whether the rest of the world will fall for his tales of Magnum ice-creams, Shepherd’s Bush shopping centres and geezers down the pub remains to be seen. You wouldn’t bet against it. Beyond its local colour, Gilligan’s anthropological comedy – on being skint, being in relationships, and being out on the town – can probably be enjoyed by anyone. Then there’s the 34-year-old’s performing talent, which I enjoyed in close-up here having peered at it from Row ZZZ last October. There’s no point pretending the Camberwell man is blazing new trails in comedy. From the opening, fish-out-of-water tale of newfound celebrity to his material on childhood, the pre-fame hustle and social rituals across the gender divide, he’s swimming in the same sea as countless comics before him. But Gilligan is terrifically adept at bringing the material to life. There’s the act-out that finds his mother menacing boyhood Mo (head shaking, lower lip loose, whimpering “I don’t know where’s the change”) when a shopping errand goes wrong. Or the tense dialogue between young Mo, working the shopfloor at Jo Malone, and an unwelcome customer. That routine turns on the “code-switching” Gilligan must do to hold down a job in retail. What’s remarkable about his standup is how little code-switching is required to keep his several audiences onside. Some of the material is explicitly black British, one routine anatomises white Brits on the booze, and the closing section – on group social behaviour across the sexes – aims, with its broad but recognisable generalisations, to apply to everyone. And all the while, Gilligan is only ever his cheerful, warm-hearted self, as amused by the memory of life without a penny to his name as by his recent adventures in showbiz. Not everything takes wing: the call-and-response section was so-so in the room and is weaker still onscreen. But this remains a confident and likable hour by an act whose common touch seems proof, for now at least, against superstardom. Available on NetflixEngineering work delayed the cleaning of rails in Salisbury last October, less than two hours before a passenger train skidded on leaves stuck to the line and crashed, injuring 14, investigators have found. The routine autumn cleaning work had been rescheduled from 5pm to 11pm the same evening but at 6.43pm a South Western Railway train was unable to stop on the slippery tracks and collided with a Great Western Railway service outside a tunnel near Salisbury, Wiltshire. The collision was the worst between two moving passenger trains in the UK in 20 years, and left 13 passengers hurt and the South Western train driver with life-changing injuries. The Rail Accident Investigation Branch (RAIB) found the planned deployment of a rail head treatment train (RHHT) to tackle leaves on the line was delayed because of nearby engineering work. The track had been cleaned by a RHTT about 32 hours earlier. Network Rail’s RHTTs use water jets or a sand-based gel to clean off the leaves, which can compress to form a slippery film on the rails and pose a danger to trains. Accident inspectors found many areas around the crash site “had a medium or heavy level of contamination”, with black deposits on rails formed by crushed leaves, which were also wet from rain on the day of the crash. Strong winds and heavy rain were also likely factors, they found. In an interim report, the RAIB said that the South Western train was travelling at 86mph, within the speed limit, as it approached a stop signal near the tunnel but when the driver tried to brake, its wheels began to slide almost immediately. It slid for almost 200 metres before hitting the side of the other train at a junction. Inspectors said there was no problem with the signalling system, which was “operating as designed”. As well as the injuries to the 14 people on board, the crash caused major damage to the trains and the railway infrastructure. Services in the area were disrupted for two weeks while repairs were carried out. The RAIB investigation continues and will consider a number of factors, including Network Rail’s policies to manage risk and vegetation around the tracks.First came Storm Dudley, battering Northern Ireland, northern England and southern Scotland. Storm Eunice swiftly followed on Friday, with wind speeds of up to 122mph, causing further destruction. Then, Storm Franklin rolled in overnight on Sunday, causing heavy rain and flooding. Hundreds of people were evacuated from their homes, and more than 150 flood warnings remained in place on Monday in the north of England, with Yorkshire and Manchester among the worst hit. What happens if the extreme weather damages your property? Will my insurance cover storm damage? Buildings insurance policies usually state that they will cover financial loss caused by storm damage. Kelly Whittington, the property and speciality lines claims director at Aviva, said: “Currently, claims mainly relate to missing roof tiles and broken windows. However, we are seeing some more devastating cases such as fallen chimney stacks and trees falling on homes or vehicles. “We have field teams across the UK and they will be concentrating on the worst-affected areas. These teams will be visiting our customers to assist them with their claims over the coming days.” A spokesperson for Direct Line said the company has “significantly increased capacity” on its phone lines to deal with an “understandably high volume of inquiries”. The Association of British Insurers (ABI) said that firms would be prioritising their vulnerable and elderly customers first when dealing with claims. However, companies have been known to argue over what constitutes a storm. Last year Guardian Money dealt with a case where an insurer refused to pay to repair a leaking roof damaged during Storm Christoph. The Financial Ombudsman Service says these type of disputes are among the main complaints it gets about unpaid storm damage claims. The ABI says a storm is a period of violent weather defined as: wind speeds with gusts of at least 48 knots (55mph) – equivalent to 10 on the Beaufort scale or; torrential rainfall at a rate of at least 25mm an hour or; snow to a depth of at least 1ft (30 cm) in 24 hours or; hail of such intensity that it causes damage to hard surfaces or breaks glass. Your insurer may have this definition in its policy or may apply its own rules. If the weather in your area does not meet the criteria, it will turn down your claim. How do I claim? As soon as you can, you need to tell your insurer that your property has been damaged and you want to make a claim. Most insurers have 24-hour helplines and they should be geared up to deal with the fallout from the storm, as forecasters have been talking about it for days. Take photos and keep anything you can in case you need to show the insurer evidence to back up your claim. Speak to the insurer before arranging urgent repairs or somewhere to stay. It may have emergency repair teams to send out but, if not, your policy may cover getting the work done. Tell your insurer that this work needs doing, and make sure you get receipts to submit as you may be able to get the money back from your policy. When it is safe to, inspect your property properly and make a list of all of the damage. Take photos and keep anything you can in case you need to show the insurer evidence to back up your claim. What will be covered? This will depend on your policy. If you have buildings cover, this will pay out for damage to your home – it will cover the cost of replacing items and getting things fixed. It is also likely to cover accommodation costs if you are unable to stay in your property because of the damage. How much it will pay out will depend on the level of cover you have bought, and what excess you chose – this is the sum you pay towards any work. What cover it offers for things such as garden sheds will depend on the individual policy. Your possessions will be covered by contents insurance. You may have included garden furniture and bikes on this policy – if you haven’t, then you won’t be able to claim if these are damaged. How about power cuts? Contents cover often offers the option to protect everything in your freezer – if you bought this type of cover and have a power cut, remember to photograph and tot up the cost of everything you have to throw out. You may also be entitled to compensation if your electricity supply goes off. According to Ofgem, what you can claim depends on the following factors: If the cut is planned. How long the cut goes on for. If it was the network company’s fault. Your local network company that maintains supply on the grid is responsible for fixing power cuts and responding to compensation claims. When you can claim relies on how Ofgem categorises storms in severe weather. You are entitled to £70 as a non-domestic or domestic customer if your power goes off for 24 hours under storm category 1, or 48 hours under storm category 2. You can receive a further £70 for each additional 12 hours of being cut off from your supply, up to a total of £700. You will need to contact your energy supplier if you have been cut off for other reasons – such as a faulty energy meter. If you experience a power cut, call 105 for free to be put through to your local network operator for further help and advice. What about my car? If your car is hit by a tree or debris blowing around, it will be covered if you have a comprehensive insurance policy – as most drivers do. A third-party policy will not cover storm damage. The insurer Zurich says during November’s Storm Arwen claims for this type of damage increased by 17%. However, it said storm-related claims were more often for crashes – during Arwen claims for road traffic accidents were up by 35%. So if you are leaving the house, drive carefully. What if part of my house damages someone else’s property? If your neighbour’s car is damaged by tiles falling from your roof you may be liable – but they will have to show that you are at fault. If your roof was already in a bad state of repair they may be able to claim against you. The legal liability element of your home insurance should cover this.Spanish police have recovered the final piece of a 17th-century tapestry that was stolen 42 years ago by a notorious art thief. The 4-metre by 6.5-metre tapestry, known as La apoteosis de las artes (The Apotheosis of the Arts), was one of six Flemish tapestries taken from the church of Santo Domingo in the town of Castrojeriz in northern Spain, in the early hours of 7 November 1980. The pieces – which were made in Bruges in 1654 by Corneille Schutz, a follower of Rubens – were stolen by René Alphonse van den Berghe, better known to the Spanish public as Erik the Belgian. While all six tapestries were recovered after an Interpol-led investigation in Spain, France and Belgium, a lower lefthand section of The Apotheosis of the Arts depicting a cherub had been feared lost for more than four decades. Van den Berghe, a Belgian art dealer, died in Málaga in 2020 at the age of 80. The fragment was found after Ángel Alcaraz, a police officer engaged in an academic study of art thefts, got in touch with Van den Berghe’s lawyer and managed to establish its whereabouts. The lawyer handed over the piece and it was returned to the archdiocese of Burgos last Friday. “If heaven should lack one angel it would be a lesser heaven,” said Alcaraz. “And if this tapestry had lacked this little angel, it wouldn’t be the same tapestry. Today we are giving back to Castrojeriz something that should never have gone in the first place.” In a statement, Spain’s Policía Nacional described Van den Berghe as “an art dealer, restorer, painter, writer and international thief” who had carried out numerous robberies in the country’s churches and chapels. “He also led an organised group dedicated to stealing religious artworks – sometimes at the behest of wealthy collectors who were after a specific piece, and sometimes with an eye on an easy sale on the international black market,” the force said. Van den Berghe was arrested in 1982, but released from prison three years later after using his lawyer to help the authorities track down and recover many of the works he had stolen. The thief remained unrepentant until his death. Speaking to El País 10 years ago as he published his autobiography, Erik the Belgian – For the Love of Art, he said: “I’m no small-time crook. I’m a high-class thief. I have stolen for the love of art and I have stolen luxury items. Money has no luxury value.” Asked whether he had sought forgiveness for his sins, Van den Berghe said he had not gone to confession since he was an altar boy. “But I am a friend of Saint Peter; I’ve sold a lot of Saint Peter statues and I’ve saved a lot,” he said. “And if, when I arrive in paradise, he throws me into the flames, I’ll shoot him twice.”The classrooms of Kambuzuma high school are deserted, with no staff to be seen and Tanaka Mupasiri*, 16, and his friends are milling around the school yard. It is 9am on a Thursday, normally a time when the school, in a high-density suburb or township on the outskirts of Harare, would be a hive of studious activity but Zimbabwe’s national teachers’ strike has thrown the education system into crisis. Teachers in state schools have not been at work since 7 February and face a government deadline of Tuesday to return or lose their jobs. For children like Mupasiri, who will be sitting O-level exams this year, the industrial action is further affecting their education after a year of learning already lost due to school closures during Covid. “We come to school and sit; this is all we come to do. Since last week, we thought the situation would get better but it seems to be getting worse,” Mupasiri said. “The O-level syllabus needs time to master but with this strike, I may never learn everything I need to know before my final examinations.” In Zimbabwe, a teacher earns less than $200 (£150) a month using the official exchange rate, and less than $100 at the illegal market exchange rate widely used for goods and services. Teachers are demanding a basic salary of $540 a month and say that the government offer of $100 extra a month is not enough. Last week, the government responded by suspending more than 135,000 teachers without pay for failing to report to work. “All officials within the ministry who absented themselves from duty since the opening of schools on 7 February 2022 have been suspended without pay forthwith for a period of three months,” said Evelyn Ndlovu, Zimbabwe’s schools minister. A high court challenge by the Amalgamated Rural Teachers Union of Zimbabwe (ARTUZ) to stay the suspensions was granted. Only hours later, however, the Public Service Commission announced that teachers must return to class by 22 February; failure to do so would be regarded as a voluntary resignation. “All teachers, deputy heads and heads of schools who do not report for duty by Tuesday 22 February will be deemed to have resigned from service. Those reporting for duty but not teaching will also be deemed to have resigned,” a statement seen by the Guardian read. Raymond Majongwe, president of the Progressive Teachers Union (PTUZ), said: “We are not going to back down on our demands. Even if we assume that teachers go back to work on Tuesday, our demands would not have been met. “The most important thing is that the Public Service Commission is doing something that is not above board. Their instruction is illegal, and we dismiss it with the contempt it deserves.” Hundreds of teachers have already left the public sector to start illegal back-yard schools, where parents who have the money to spare pay for tutoring to get their children through exams. “We are being forced to part with more money to pay for extra lessons because of the strike. Government should get the teachers back to class. The future of children is at stake here if we are not careful,” said one parent. Like many, they worry that children out of school will be caught up in petty crime and drugs, which have seen a big upsurge among young Zimbabweans during the pandemic. Outside Harare’s Kuwadzana high school, Brian Jonasi*, 14, tussles for the football with his friends on a makeshift pitch. “Since last week, we have been coming to school but the teachers do not show up,” Jonasi said. “I am now in form 2 but do not have any idea what our syllabus entails, so there is nothing to read. That is why we are playing football.” *Names of children have been changedA rare Persian leopard being temporarily held in an Iraqi zoo faces an uncertain future, wildlife specialists fear. Six weeks ago the male leopard was caught in a trap set by a villager who had recently lost dozens of goats in the mountainous Batifa area of northern Duhok province, in the autonomous Kurdistan region, and had to have its right hind leg amputated. A vet, Dr Sulaiman Tameer, was called out to help capture the animal, and he said that he had walked with villagers and Kurdish Peshmerga soldiers into the mountains, tracking the leopard after it climbed to a peak, dragging the trap that gripped its leg. Tameer estimates the leopard had been in the trap for at least 10 days and had lost a lot of blood. The animal fell from the mountain and plunged into a river about 30 metres below. There, dogs surrounded it and Tameer was able to shoot it with a tranquilliser gun. The trap had broken the bone, torn muscle and tendons, and punctured an artery. It was clear to Tameer that he would need to amputate the lower half of the leopard’s leg immediately. A specialist team put together through the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) was asked to help treat the leopard. Dr Hans Nieuwendijk, a Dutch veterinary surgeon, and Dr Iman Memarian, an Iranian wildlife vet, arrived in Duhok later in January. They performed a second surgery to amputate the leg just below the hip joint, improvising an operating theatre in a cage at the zoo. Dubbed Plinga Batifa (Batifa leopard), the 65kg (10 stone) male is about five or six years old; its expected lifespan is 10-15 years. The animal is recovering well from the surgeries, but can never return to the wild. Missing a hind leg and having lost three of its canine teeth, possibly while being captured, it cannot jump or hunt. Plinga Batifa now spends most of his time in a 3- by 4-metre dark room, which provides some insulation from the noises and smells of the zoo, and opens into a 120 sq metre (1,300 sq ft) caged area that the leopard ventures into only after dark, when the zoo is closed and the people have gone. The smell of jaguars and tigers in neighbouring cages is also very stressful for the leopard. A recent video of the animal shows it moving around the cage, staying low to the ground. Experts hope it can quickly be moved to a more suitable location. “The best is to go to a rehabilitation centre, otherwise it will be a captive animal and in a zoo all its life,” said Tameer, but he noted there was no such option in Iraq or its immediate neighbours. The leopard’s current home is the worst place for it, according to Nieuwendijk. Persian leopards are “very solitary animals”, he explained. They are used to having a range of thousands of miles to themselves, meeting another leopard only once a year, for a single day, to mate. “It’s very afraid and out of that it’s very, very aggressive,” said Nieuwendijk, noting that the animal is a risk not only to itself in the zoo, but also to people around it. “If the animal stays, I just hope he dies quickly.” Persian leopards are found only in Turkey, Iran, Iraq, Armenia and the Caucasus mountains and are endangered: there are estimated to be fewer than 1,000 in the wild. Hana Raza, a biologist and founder of a leopard conservation programme in Iraqi Kurdistan, said there are only about 20 to 25 leopards left in Iraq. They range through the oak forests of the mountains, but their habitat is shrinking. The number of leopards in the wild is so small that removing even one individual puts the whole population at risk. “We don’t know what we’re losing right now,” she said. The region lacks the resources and expertise to breed the leopard as part of species conservation efforts. Raza would like to see the leopard loaned to a European facility where it would be cared for and used in a breeding programme as recommended by the IUCN, but would remain the property of the Kurdistan region, as would any potential offspring. “This would be great for Kurdistan’s reputation,” said Raza. She is trying to get the local government’s support, but has so far been unable to secure a meeting with the provincial governor. How quickly the leopard can be moved “all depends on how urgently the government treats this”, she said. The government’s position is to keep the leopard in the country, “under the supervision and care of the veterinary teams and specialists in an appropriate setting”, said Abdulrahman Seediq, head of the Kurdistan regional government’s environment board.The metaverse. You’ve heard about it. You’ve read about it. But do you really understand it? Unfortunately, most small business owners I know don’t. They should. The metaverse is virtual. But it’s also real. It’s an online world that might generate its own economy. So far it’s been mostly created and championed by Mark Zuckerberg, who literally changed the name of one of the most familiar brands in the world to match its future promise – Meta. But the big brands are jumping in … and in a big way. Microsoft is positioning its products for better business collaboration in the metaverse. Google is building a more-user friendly and less cringe-worthy version of its failed Google Glass so that people can use a new wearable device to access the metaverse without looking like a complete fool. Other companies like Magic Leap are building similar devices. Gaming company Epic Games has raised $1bn to support their “vision” for the metaverse. Walmart has filed “several new trademarks” that apparently indicate it will be creating its own cryptocurrency and a collection of NFTs (non-fungible tokens, the unique identifiers that are being attached to digital art and products to identify them as being one of a kind and original). McDonald’s recently filed 10 trademark applications including one for a virtual restaurant that would deliver to an actual home. Samsung recently launched a new smartphone on the metaverse – although not without some problems. Even the staid and traditional accounting firm PricewaterhouseCoopers has purchased virtual property on Sandbox, a metaverse platform. How big is the metaverse? When you add it all up, billions have already been invested, with some analysts saying it could be a $30tn marketplace within the next 10 to 15 years. By comparison, the entire US economy in 2021 was about $25tn. For people over the age of 30 the metaverse sounds strange, foreign … and even a little sad and creepy. But for the next generation – particularly the Gen Z-types born after 1995, and the kids currently in elementary school – the metaverse will be commonplace. They’ll be used to living in both a virtual and actual world. Just like we’re used to living online. In fact, the average American spends 24 hours a week surfing the internet. The average gamer is immersed in the worlds of Halo, Minecraft and Call of Duty for close to 800 hours a year. These are all the very first virtual worlds. The metaverse will take this to the next level. Right now it’s the big brands – as always – taking the first steps. But once a path is cleared, the doors will be open for a flood of new businesses to take advantage. How? If you’re running a small business you’ll soon be ditching Zoom and Teams and meeting with a hologram or avatar of a customer, partner, supplier or employee in a virtual conference room, discussing and reviewing virtual documents and items together. If you’re a realtor, you’ll take walk-throughs of virtual renditions of homes with your customers. If you’re in construction, you’ll do the same with properties under development. Your conferences will be virtual affairs. Your sales pitches will be in virtual locations. You will have a virtual version of yourself. Don’t worry – none of this will replace actual human contact. It will complement it. It will make your interactions more pleasant and more personal as opposed to the detached online meetings we’re having right now. All of this will come with a cost. You will need to buy real estate to have your meetings. You will need to equip those rooms with art and furniture. You will need to get the tools to make your presentations. But then again a lot of smart entrepreneurs will be selling this stuff, providing the infrastructure and offering hot real estate and products that everyone will want so there will be lots of money to be made too. How will this affect your small business in 2022? It won’t. But what about in 2027? Or 2032? It will. It’s a decade since the birth of the iPad, Instagram, Lyft, Square and Slack. In 2022 Amazon’s Echo, Apple’s Watch and AirPods and 4G either didn’t or barely existed. Now they do and all have had enormous impacts on the way we run our companies. So a lot can change in a decade. A lot will change in the next decade. That change will be the metaverse. And the smartest business owners I know are keeping an eye on how to profit from it.Sweat pours down Josh Taylor’s face as the rope whirrs above his head and his feet blur beneath him. The best boxer in Britain, and one of the leading pound-for-pound fighters in the world, skips faster and faster in a stark and anonymous building in Harlow, Essex. We’re in the gym where Taylor has spent so much of the past two months preparing to defend his undisputed world light‑welterweight titles against Jack Catterall in Glasgow on Saturday. In his last bout, nine months ago, Taylor became the first British fighter, and the fifth man in boxing’s four-belt history, to win the WBA, WBC, IBF and WBO titles in his division. He defeated the previously unbeaten José Ramírez in a thrilling battle, twice knocking down the tough American on his way to a unanimous victory on points in Las Vegas. Yet today, after a gruelling sparring session, Taylor howls in frustration when his feet get caught up in the rope and his frenetic skipping routine misses his target. He soon grins again as he resumes skipping and counting – only for the same thing to happen a minute later. This time there is also a mock wail of anguish because the rope hits his thigh with a real sting. Taylor rubs his leg while cursing cheerfully. The 31-year-old Scot has a perfect 18-0 record, and some compelling fights ahead of him if he beats Catterall, but he has grown used to not receiving the praise his boxing skills deserve. When we leave the gym a few hours later there are no surprised looks of recognition, or requests for selfies, from people walking past. No one even glances for long at Taylor who doesn’t seem bothered as he offers me a lift to the station. There is no need but it works as a reminder that Taylor still leads a relatively ordinary life despite his achievements. At least people who follow boxing closely are aware of Taylor’s spiteful talent in the ring and genuine relish for challenging contests. His status continues to grow in this small corner away from mainstream sport. “I think so,” he says. “It’s starting but, yeah, sometimes it’s a little frustrating. If I’d been someone else on a different platform, or from somewhere else, I’d have been all over the place.” Taylor shrugs when I ask why he has not been given the attention his exploits warrant. “I really don’t know. But I’m not in it for that anyway. I’m not a show pony. The achievement’s there and you can’t take away from what I’ve done. I don’t live for the adulation and the pats on the back. I’m doing it because I want to be the best in the sport.” Despite his landmark victory in 2021 he was ignored in the BBC’s annual sports review of the year. “I couldn’t give a monkey’s,” he says calmly. “But I thought I’d put out the point [on Twitter] that, in terms of sporting achievements and British boxing history, no one got anywhere near to what I achieved last year. To not even be mentioned or acknowledged was a bit funny and disrespectful. But I really couldn’t give a shit.” Taylor is ready for far harder tests and he suggests it would be better to risk defeat rather than avoid facing some of the greatest contemporary fighters in a weight category above him. The welterweight division is the best and most competitive and Terence Crawford and Errol Spence are probably in the top three pound‑for‑pound fighters in the world behind Canelo Álvarez. Crawford and Spence are yet to face each other and they are being chased by prodigious young American boxers such as Jaron “Boots” Ennis and Vergil Ortiz Jr. He needs to successfully defend his titles against Catterall but Taylor wants to move up and meet Crawford in an immensely dangerous fight. “If I can go my whole career without losing it would be absolutely fantastic but I don’t think it’s the be-all and end‑all,” he says. “I don’t think a loss defines any fighter. Look at the UFC where guys have had 20 fights and five or six losses. But they know that all the top guys can beat each other. That’s what boxing needs, even more so now after the Floyd Mayweather era where it became all about your unbeaten record. “A lot of fighters are trying to protect their records and it ruins the sport in terms of big fights not happening – or if they do happen it’s like Manny Pacquiao‑Mayweather, which was six years too late.” Crawford is his prime target but before we turn to the brooding and brilliant American I ask Taylor about Catterall, his mandatory challenger. The 28-year-old from Chorley had stepped aside 12 months ago so Taylor could face Ramírez in his unification battle. “We got that deal done after I gave my word that I would fight Jack next. I could have easily went for another fighter or moved up to welterweight. But I like to keep my word.” Catterall also has a pristine record, 26-0, but he has not faced the same calibre of opposition as the champion. I tell Taylor I recently heard Carl Frampton, his friend and former world featherweight champion, say that he only ever stayed behind to watch two fighters spar in the gym. Taylor was the first and Frampton spoke of how, after 10 pro fights, the Scot produced a masterclass in America when he sparred against a former world champion in Shawn Porter. “I remember getting quite nervous before that sparring session because it was Shawn Porter and I was just coming through. But I impressed everyone, including Porter. I knew how good I was at that point and that I was going to be a world champion. I knew I was world-class but I needed those sessions to really prove it to myself. I shocked Porter the first time because he wasn’t expecting much. But the next time he was really trying and I did really well.” Can Taylor guess the other fighter that Frampton loved to watch spar? “I’m not sure,” he says before, looking at me closely, he asks: “Jack Catterall? Yeah.” Is he surprised? “No. Carl told me that he’s quite talented, quite skilled. I see bits of Catterall’s skill set in his fights but he needs to do something very different against me.” When they have gone face to face has Taylor felt Catterall’s conviction that he can cause a shock and win in Glasgow? “I think so. If I was in his position, I know I would believe I could win. But I definitely picked up a bit of nervousness from him – the way he was acting and his body language. “I’ve not got any harsh feelings towards him yet because he comes across as a good, nice, respectful lad. But he’s standing in the way of my dreams and ambitions. The crowd is going to be well up for it and that gives me the butterflies and the buzz, the adrenaline rush that keeps you on your toes. I found it a lot harder the last couple of years boxing behind closed doors or in front of a very limited crowd.” His fight against Ramírez was affected by Covid restrictions but Taylor did not allow the muted Vegas atmosphere to affect him. All week he was a spiky and boisterous presence. “That was just my competitive nature coming out. There was no real animosity because you’re going in for a fight and the other guy’s trying to hurt you. It is violent but we’re going in there to do a job and we’re throwing punches with intent. You don’t want to cause any permanent damage but your mindset is to win the fight by hurting your opponent. It’s a vicious mindset. “I was in control most of the fight apart from in the third round when I switched off a little, made a mistake, and he had some success. But there were things we had been working on and I knocked him down in the sixth. I did the same in the next round with the uppercut. It was a real sweet one and he hit the canvas. He got up but I was in even more control. I thought I lost three rounds maximum. The judges’ scorecards were much closer and I thought they were really biased. But I never really needed to get into top gear.” The left uppercut that changed the course of the bout in the seventh round was a perfect punch and the memory makes Taylor smile. “It was a really good shot and even more satisfying because it was one we had worked on. We had watched Ramírez and we knew that the uppercut was going to work. He walked into them.” Ramírez is an excellent fighter but Crawford operates in a different dimension. Taylor knows his current obscurity in mainstream sporting terms would finally be overcome if he moved up a division and defeated Crawford. That ambition is his best way of gaining belated and sustained recognition for his boxing prowess. “If it goes the right way against Catterall I’ve achieved all I can at 140 pounds. “I always believe in improving and setting new goals so I’ve set my sights on becoming a two‑weight unified world champion. It’s definitely an achievable goal and this way it keeps my desire and fire burning to go down as an all-time great in British and world boxing.” Asked who he thinks would win a fight between the world’s two best welterweights, he says: “Spence is very good as well but Crawford’s on fire. I think he wins that one as he’s the best pound-for-pound fighter.” Even more than Canelo? “I think so. Crawford was the undisputed champion at 140, and he’s now unified champion at welterweight in a hot division. But if a fight with me happens I believe I’m 100% capable of winning. That’s the fight that would give me the fear factor and push me to new heights. Otherwise, if you don’t have that kind of challenge, you go stale.” Crawford and Taylor met in Las Vegas in November. “He was very respectful,” Taylor says. “We were both training at the Top Rank gym in the week of his fight [when Crawford stopped Porter] and I bumped into him and his team. He was cutting weight so you don’t want to get in his face. There was a little bit of sizing each other up but it was all respectful. He’s a really good guy and speaking to him I thought he’s a cool cat.” The sweat has dried on Taylor’s face. His problems with the skipping rope have long been forgotten and his anonymity in deepest Essex clearly does not irk him. His defining time, he believes, is coming. “Crawford is more than a cool dude,” he says. “He’s also a great fighter.” There is a fleeting pause and then, with a smile which is steely rather than relaxed, Taylor adds: “And so am I …”Swiss film-maker and former social worker Fred Baillif has created this pressure-cooked realist drama about a group of teen girls in a care home, where there is something more dysfunctional and tragic about the supervising staff than about the inmates themselves. Lora (Claudia Grob) is the director of this residential institution, a tough veteran of the system. Under her wing are troubled girls including Audrey (Anaïs Uldry), Précieuse (Joyce Esther Ndayisenga) and Justine (Charlie Areddy). Each of them is acting out, each has been abused in some way, but they find love and solidarity in this home: for them it is la famille, slangily shortened to la mif, equivalent, perhaps, to “the fam”. But from the very outset, it is Lora herself who is in serious trouble: she is officially reprimanded for allowing a situation to happen whereby one of the girls, at 17, has sex with a 14-year-old boy who has been allowed to visit with others for a party. She incautiously opens up to one of the girls about an unthinkably painful thing in her own life, and when this same girl spitefully throws this information back in Lora’s face during a later row, Lora’s drinking problem begins to resurface; she slaps one of the abusive mothers who insults her, having been unlawfully demanding to see her daughter at the home – and things spiral out of control from there. Each of the girls is introduced with a different “chapter” style section, and the action repeatedly rewinds to a specific and familiar point, though without any very startling difference or viewpoint-shift revelation. The energy between the girls is something that French cinema can do very well – I thought of Céline Sciamma’s Bande de Filles, but also Sarah Gavron’s Rocks). It is acted largely by nonprofessional newcomers and unscripted scenes have been allowed to unspool through improvisation and shaped in the edit. This is an engaging ensemble piece, acted with vehemence and sincerity, though it concludes a little melodramatically. • La Mif is released on 25 February in cinemas.The revelations that Credit Suisse has been used by crooks, money launderers and corrupt politicians are a public relations crisis for the banking giant. But the Suisse secrets investigation by the Guardian and its reporting partners is only the latest in a string of controversies to beset Switzerland’s second-largest lender. We take a look at some of the bank’s biggest scandals over the past few decades. * * * 1986: Fake names for Ferdinand and Imelda Marcos Credit Suisse is implicated in helping to store some of the estimated $5bn-$10bn that the Philippine dictator Ferdinand Marcos and his wife, Imelda, stole from the country during his three terms as president. It later emerged that Credit Suisse opened accounts for the couple under the fake names “William Saunders” and “Jane Ryan”, helping to shield their funds from scrutiny. In 1995, a Zurich court ordered banks, including Credit Suisse, to return $500m of stolen funds to the Philippines. * * * 1999: Japanese ‘shredding party’ Japanese authorities fined Credit Suisse and revoked its licence over a “shredding party”, at which bankers destroyed evidence related to an investigation into whether it was helping companies conceal their losses. A bank spokesperson said: “Serious lessons have been learned, corrective actions initiated and disciplinary steps completed.” * * * 2000: Banking funds linked to a Nigerian dictator Switzerland’s Federal Banking Commission reprimanded Credit Suisse for accepting about $214m-worth of funds linked to corruption by the Nigerian military dictator Sani Abacha in the 1990s. The lender was criticised for failing to recognise that his two sons were politically exposed. Credit Suisse said it had improved its monitoring procedures and staff who dealt with Abacha’s regime had left the bank. * * * 2004: Money laundering for the Japanese yakuza A Credit Suisse banker was arrested for allegedly helping launder at least 5bn yen linked to Japan’s largest yakuza gang. The banker was acquitted on the basis that he was unaware of the source of the funds. * * * 2009: US sanctions breaches Credit Suisse was fined $536m for deliberately circumventing US sanctions against countries including Iran and Sudan between 1995 and 2007. The bank said it had “enhanced” its procedures and was “taking action internally”. * * * 2011: German tax evasion Credit Suisse agreed to pay €150m to settle an investigation into tax evasion by about 1,100 of its German clients. “A complex and prolonged legal dispute has been avoided, with an agreed solution that provides legal certainty,” the bank said. * * * 2012: US sub-prime bond fraud US authorities charged four former Credit Suisse bankers with fraudulently overstating the price of $3bn of sub-prime bonds during the 2007 credit crisis. One former managing director, Kareem Serageldin, was the only individual jailed in relation to the US financial crisis. * * * 2014: US tax evasion Credit Suisse was fined $2.6bn and pleaded guilty to helping Americans evade taxes for decades in one of the bank’s most explosive scandals to date. The investigation was launched when the former UBS banker Bradley Birkenfeld passed information to US authorities in 2007. A Senate investigation uncovered aggressive tactics used by Swiss banks, with Credit Suisse having recruited clients at high-end events, courted a potential customer with free gold, and even delivered sensitive bank statements hidden in the pages of a Sports Illustrated magazine. Authorities eventually pressured Switzerland into unilaterally disclosing account information about US taxpayers from 2014. Credit Suisse said: “We deeply regret the past misconduct that led to this settlement.” * * * 2016: Italian tax evasion Credit Suisse reached a €109.5m settlement with Italian authorities over allegations it helped clients hide funds and dodge taxes through complex insurance policies, which were reportedly routed through its Liechtenstein and Bermuda subsidiaries. Credit Suisse said it welcomed the deal. * * * 2016: US anti-money-laundering fine A US regulator fined Credit Suisse $16.5m after identifying “significant deficiencies” in the bank’s anti-money-laundering programme. The lender said it was “taking appropriate internal remedial efforts”. * * * 2017: Anti-money-laundering fine related to 1MDB Singapore’s financial regulator fined Credit Suisse $700,000 for breaching money-laundering rules in transactions linked to 1MDB, the Malaysian investment fund at the centre of a $4.5bn corruption scandal. Credit Suisse said it took its money-laundering obligations seriously and was “firmly committed to upholding the high standards of the Singapore financial centre”. * * * 2017: European tax evasion Authorities raided homes and offices in the Netherlands and France, and launched investigations into Credit Suisse employees in the UK, Germany and Australia, in connection with suspected tax evasion involving 55,000 accounts. Credit Suisse said it was cooperating with authorities and later took out a series of adverts in British newspapers declaring that it “applies a strict zero-tolerance policy” on tax evasion. * * * 2018: Weak controls linked to dealings with Petrobras, PDVSA and Fifa The Swiss regulator ordered Credit Suisse to improve its anti-money-laundering controls after identifying shortfalls in its dealings with Fifa, the Brazilian oil corporation Petrobras and Venezuelan state oil company, PDVSA. The bank said it took its compliance responsibilities seriously. * * * 2018: Lescaudron fraud conviction A former Credit Suisse banker, Patrice Lescaudron, was sentenced to five years in prison after admitting to forging client signatures to divert money and make stock bets without their knowledge, causing more than $150m in losses. His clients included the former Georgian prime minister Bidzina Ivanishvili, who is still trying to recover his funds. Credit Suisse said the relationship manager “was not supported by any other employee of the Credit Suisse in his criminal activities”. Lescaudron killed himself in 2020. * * * 2018: Hong Kong jobs-for-business scandal Credit Suisse agreed to pay $47m to US authorities over a “corruption scheme” in which it tried to win business by offering jobs to family and friends of Chinese officials between 2007 and 2013. A spokesperson for the bank said it had improved its compliance processes. * * * 2019: Corporate espionage The bank was caught in a corporate espionage scandal, and eventually admitted to hiring private detectives to track two outgoing executives. It triggered a regulatory investigation and culminated in the departure of its chief executive, Tidjane Thiam, in 2020. A group of executives were later found to have ordered surveillance in a further five cases between 2016 and 2019. Credit Suisse said it had banned surveillance “unless required for compelling reasons, such as threats to the physical safety of employees”. * * * 2020: Bulgarian drug trafficking Swiss prosecutors issued an indictment against Credit Suisse for allegedly failing to run proper checks on clients and investigate the source of funds linked to a Bulgarian drug ring that allegedly laundered at least $146m through accounts between 2004 and 2008. The criminal trial, which began in February 2022, is the first against a Swiss bank in the country’s history. Credit Suisse said it would “defend itself vigorously” and “unreservedly rejects as meritless all allegations in this legacy matter raised against it”. * * * 2021: Archegos collapse Credit Suisse recorded a $5.5bn loss due to its risky exposure to the US hedge fund Archegos Capital Management, which collapsed in early 2021. Credit Suisse said it took action against 23 staff and fired nine, and subsequently promised to put risk management “at the heart” of its decision-making. * * * 2021: Greensill scandal Credit Suisse was forced to suspend $10bn of investor funds after the collapse of the supply-chain lender Greensill Capital, whose loans were packaged and sold to Credit Suisse clients. The Greensill scandal, which stemmed from risky loans it extended to companies owned by the metals magnate Sanjeev Gupta, spiralled after it emerged the former UK prime minister David Cameron lobbied ministers and government officials on its behalf. The bank is still trying to claw back money for clients and said “actions have been taken against a number of individuals” in relation to the case. * * * 2021: Mozambique tuna bonds Regulators fined Credit Suisse £350m to settle the bank’s role in the long-running Mozambique “tuna bonds” loan bribery scandal that pushed the country into financial crisis from 2016. Credit Suisse was implicated in $50m-worth of kickbacks that a government contractor handed to its bankers in exchange for better terms on nearly $1.3bn-worth of loans arranged for the People’s Republic of Mozambique between 2012 and 2016. The bank said it “condemns any unjustified observations and has already taken decisive steps to strengthen its relevant governance and processes”. The Democratic senator Elizabeth Warren is urging the US labour department to deny Credit Suisse the ability to manage workers’ retirement funds as a result of the bribery settlement. * * * 2022: Chairman resigns António Horta-Osório resigned as Credit Suisse chairman on 17 January after twice breaking Covid quarantine rules in Switzerland and the UK, including to attend football and tennis matches in London. “I regret that a number of my personal actions have led to difficulties for the bank and compromised my ability to represent the bank internally and externally,” he said. Credit Suisse immediately appointed the board member Axel Lehmann as its chairman. Lehmann was at the helm for only five weeks before the publication of the Suisse secrets leak. Credit Suisse response to Suisse secrets disclosures available here.Massimiliano Allegri looked like a man clutching at straws as he stared down the lens of a TV camera on Friday night and insisted that the single point his team had collected from a home game against Torino could help them qualify for the Champions League. By Sunday night, his words sounded prophetic. Despite throwing away a lead in the derby, Juventus improved their advantage over fifth-placed Atalanta, reduced the gap to title favourites Inter and did not lose ground to any direct rival. Five out of Serie A’s top six played over the weekend, but none of them managed a win. Most astonishing was Milan’s draw away to Salernitana. Not for six years has a team at the top of Serie A failed to beat the team in last place. There were 42 points between the sides at kick-off and the result looked like a foregone conclusion when Junior Messias opened the scoring for the Rossoneri in the fifth minute. The player who used to deliver refrigerators for a living exploited a gap in the defence that might genuinely have been wide enough to fit a lorry through. By the 15th minute, Salernitana had also seen Ivan Radovanovic, signed in January to shore up their midfield, exit the game with an apparent ankle injury. And yet, by the 75th, they were 2-1 ahead. Federico Bonazzoli punished Mike Maignan’s over-eager rush off his line with an overhead-kick equaliser, before Milan Juric crashed home a header to put them in front. They could have scored more. Bonazzoli missed an opengoal at 1-1, after stealing the ball from Maignan. It was hard to tell who had been more wasteful: the keeper, who lost possession while trying to dribble out of his own penalty box, or the striker, who could have passed the ball into an empty net but instead attempted a rabona that looped up into the air and gave Alessio Romagnoli time to recover. In the end, Milan were able to salvage a draw, rescued by an Ante Rebic strike from 25 yards. Their manager, Stefano Pioli, said that he and his players were disappointed with the result, which he blamed on “a few technical and positioning errors”, but he also railed against any discussion of the title race. “The situation around Milan is a bit strange,” he said during a post-game interview with Dazn. “Nobody thinks we can win the Scudetto but you lot keep asking us if we believe in the Scudetto.” It was a curious response – how could the team that sits top of the table after 26 games not be considered a contender to win the whole thing? – but perhaps reflective of this season in which no team seems comfortable with the role of frontrunner. Milan’s draw left Inter with a chance to reclaim top spot a day later. Instead, they lost 2-0 to Sassuolo. The Neroverdi have been the ultimate giant-slayers in Serie A this season, having won previously away to Juventus and Milan, as well as drawing against Napoli at the Stadio Diego Armando Maradona. Such results only become more eye-catching when you consider that they sit 11th in the table and started the month getting drubbed 4-0 by a Sampdoria side battling against relegation. At their best, Sassuolo can be scintillating, a dynamic and attacking team with a spine of young domestic talent. The 22-year-old midfielder Davide Frattesi conducts play from the middle of the pitch, while the little-and-large combination of Giacomo Raspadori, also 22, and Gianluca Scamacca, 23, lead the way up front. Inter have been linked with summer moves for Frattesi and Scamacca. Sassuolo’s CEO, Giovanni Carnevali, confirmed in a pre-game interview that the Nerazzurri had been “among the first” to make enquiries. Perhaps they ought to have acted quicker. It was Scamacca who grabbed Sassuolo’s second on Sunday, after Raspadori had opened the scoring. Both goals should have been avoided. The first went straight through the keeper, Samir Handanovic, while Scamacca was unmarked for the second. His initial reluctance to celebrate was interpreted by some as a desire not to antagonise fans of a club he might soon join. He later explained he had simply presumed, with so much space, that he was about to get flagged for offside. Inter’s attempts to find a way back were thwarted by an inspired display from Sassuolo’s goalkeeper, Andrea Consigli. Still, you could hardly accuse the visitors of stealing a result. They almost went 3-0 up before half-time when Domenico Berardi, the grizzled veteran of their attack at 27 years old, bent a shot against the upright. Inter’s defeat meant that Milan, despite drawing with Serie A’s bottom team, finished the weekend with an improved lead at the top. The greatest beneficiaries may yet be third-placed Napoli, who play away to Cagliari on Monday night, and the Nerazzurri can reclaim first if they win their game in hand. That hardly feels like a foregone conclusion, though, for a team who have lost three of their past five across all competitions. There are so many threads to draw out from this weekend’s results, and not enough words here to do it. Has this simply been a tough run of games for Inter or can we now call it a wobble? The midfield looked a mess on Sunday without the suspended Marcelo Brozovic. A lack of sharpness up front cost them dearly against Liverpool, and Lautaro Martínez has scored just once in his last 11 appearances. How much should we even be focusing on them? Sassuolo’s performances against Serie A’s biggest clubs deserve greater acknowledgement. Could Scamacca, Raspadori or Frattesi yet provide a spark for Italy in next month’s World Cup qualifying play-offs? Or indeed Berardi, the first player in Europe’s top five leagues to reach double figures for goals and assists this season? And what of Salernitana? Saturday’s game against Milan was their first under new manager Davide Nicola. Can he rescue them from relegation just as he did Genoa and Torino over the past two years? There is more to be said about the performance of Torino, too, especially Andrea Belotti – scoring in what is likely to be his last Derby della Mole – and their brilliant centre-back Bremer, who suffocated Dusan Vlahovic. He had done the same a month previously, when the striker was still playing for Fiorentina. Speaking of the Viola, we ought to mention their 1-0 win over Atalanta – sealed with a goal from Vlahovic’s replacement, Krzysztof Piatek. His strike allowed Juventus to strengthen their hold on fourth, despite failing to win the derby. Those straws that Allegri was grasping for on Friday turned out to have some grip after all. Better to have something flimsy to hold onto than nothing, on a weekend when everyone was flailing.Fuel prices on forecourts have hit a record high, piling further pressure on motorists and businesses and adding to the soaring inflation at the heart of the UK’s cost of living crisis. Petrol reached 149.1p a litre on Monday, meaning it would cost £81.95 to fill a 55-litre family car, while diesel also reached a record at 152.6p, making a similar-sized full tank almost £84. The motorists’ organisation RAC blamed the rise on profiteering by petrol retailers and stubbornly high oil prices caused by tension between Russia and Ukraine. “The relentless rising price of fuel is hurting households up and down the country, furthering the cost of living crisis,” said the RAC fuel spokesperson, Simon Williams. The threat of an invasion of Ukraine by Russia – one of the world’s largest oil producers – has helped drive a rally in the price of the fossil fuel, which was already recovering ground lost to the coronavirus pandemic. A barrel of Brent crude was up 0.6% to $94 (£69) on Monday, helping push fuel prices beyond the record set a week ago. However, the RAC accused big forecourt operators of needlessly inflating prices for motorists. “While the price of oil is still close to $100 a barrel, wholesale fuel prices don’t merit further retailer rises across the board at the pumps,” Williams said. “We realise that smaller retailers who don’t buy fuel as frequently will be hit by higher wholesale costs but the biggest retailers who buy all the time shouldn’t currently be increasing their forecourt prices. We urge them to play fair with drivers at this difficult time.” “Tension between Russia and Ukraine is still weighing heavy on the oil price but there is now a glimmer of hope that more oil may come on to the market from Iran due to a possible nuclear agreement with the US to end sanctions,” he added. Increased fuel prices are likely to exacerbate the cost of living crisis, which is being driven by higher energy prices and tax rises. Inflation has reached a 30-year high of 5.5% and has been predicted to reach 8% in April. Higher fuel prices mean tighter finances for motorists but also drive up costs for businesses that rely on transporting goods, potentially leading to further price rises. Jez Lamb, the founder of the Wirral-based craft beer marketplace Beers@No.42, said: “Delivery vans don’t run on fairy dust and we’re being absolutely hammered right now. “As a business that ships throughout the UK, we rely heavily on the courier network, which will inevitably pass on the rising fuel prices in what is termed the ‘fuel surcharge’. The big question is, do we pass that on to our own customers? “Wherever we can, we try to absorb these costs as much as we can but margins are being squeezed everywhere. Something has to give and, unfortunately, smaller businesses, as ever, are the ones to suffer.” As prices at the pump hit new highs, the trade union Unite signalled the possibility of fresh disruption because of a pay dispute with ExxonMobil, which owns the Fawley oil refinery that provides about a fifth of the UK’s road fuel. Unite has begun balloting about 100 workers at the Hampshire site, warning that strike action could follow in April unless Exxon improves its “insulting” pay offer. The union said members employed by three contractors on the Fawley site – Trant Engineering Ltd, Veolia Services and Altrad Services – had been “stunned” by an offer of a 2.5% pay increase for the next two years, given inflation is at 5.5%. Unite’s general secretary, Sharon Graham, said: “The employers need to take back this insulting pay offer, which is actually a cut, and think again. “Our members have mounting bills to pay like everyone else, and with runaway inflation there is no way we will accept a derisory 2.5% for this workforce … They deserve so much than this from Exxon, which is making money from oil and gas hand over fist.” An ExxonMobil spokesperson said: “We understand this matter relates to ongoing pay negotiations between members of the Unite the Union and their respective employers, which provide third-party contracting services to our operation at Fawley. “We hope that all parties can work together to reach a swift and amicable resolution.”Russia has suggested that talk of a summit between Vladimir Putin and the US president, Joe Biden, is premature, saying the two leaders could arrange a call or meeting at any time but there were no concrete plans for a high-level encounter. The Kremlin spokesperson Dmitry Peskov said on Monday that tensions over Ukraine were rising but diplomatic contacts remained active, adding that the Russian president would soon address a special session of Russia’s security council. The comments came after the Élysée Palace announced that Biden and Putin had agreed in principle to a summit aimed at de-escalating the crisis following two calls between the Russian leader and French president, Emmanuel Macron, on Sunday. The White House confirmed that the US president was prepared to take in a summit but remained highly sceptical on whether the offer from Moscow was genuine. “Of course President Biden said yes, but every indication we see on the ground right now in terms of the disposition of Russian forces, is that they are in fact getting prepared for a major attack on Ukraine,” Jake Sullivan, the national security adviser, told NBC’s Today show on Monday. As Putin staged his televised security council meeting, and ahead of the Russian leaders decision on Moscow’s next step, Biden summoned his top national security officials at the White House, including CIA director William Burns and the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff, General Mark Milley. France’s foreign minister, Jean-Yves Le Drian, who was in Brussels for a meeting with his EU counterparts on Monday, said he would hold talks with his Russian opposite number, Sergei Lavrov, later in the day, while the German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, would also call Putin, the Russian state news agency Ria-Novosti reported. The British foreign minister, Liz Truss, said after talks in Brussels with the Nato secretary-general, Jens Stoltenberg, that western countries were now preparing for a “worst-case scenario”. The airlines Lufthansa, KLM and Air France all cancelled flights to Kyiv. On Monday, Ukraine requested an urgent meeting of the UN security council to address the threat, citing security assurances also by signed by Russia, the US and Britain that it received in return for giving up its nuclear arsenal in 1994. “I officially requested UNSC member states to immediately hold consultations under article six of the Budapest memorandum,” the Ukrainian foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, tweeted. Peskov said Putin and Macron agreed on the need to “continue dialogue between foreign ministries and political advisers” on the Ukraine situation. He said Putin and Biden could meet if they felt it necessary, but stressed it was “premature to talk about specific plans” for a summit. “The meeting is possible if the leaders consider it feasible,” Peskov said after a flurry of last-ditch diplomacy by Macron over the weekend in which he spoke to Putin, Biden, Boris Johnson and the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy. Peskov said US media reports that Russia had drawn up a list of Ukrainians to capture or kill after an invasion were an “absolute lie” and described as “highly unusual” a warning from the US embassy to Americans in Russia that they should prepare plans to leave the country if necessary. Ukraine’s foreign minister welcomed the French summit proposal, saying Kyiv hoped it would result in Moscow pulling back its estimated 150,000 troops massed along the border, averting a Russian invasion that US and other officials have said could begin at any moment. “We welcome this initiative. We believe that every effort aimed at a diplomatic solution is worth trying,” Kuleba said in Brussels. “We hope the two presidents will walk out with an agreement about Russia withdrawing its forces.” Kuleba also called for the EU to start imposing sanctions on Russia now to deter Putin from attacking. “We believe that there are good reasons … to impose at least some of the sanctions now to demonstrate that the EU is not only talking the talk about sanctions, but also walking the walk,” he said. Macron’s office said on Sunday that in parallel with talks to secure a ceasefire on the ground in the enclave in eastern Ukraine held by Moscow-backed separatists, the president had proposed the Putin-Biden summit and both were open to the idea. The summit would go ahead, however, only “on the condition that Russia does not invade Ukraine”, the Élysée said. France’s minister for European affairs, Clément Beaune, said on Monday there was still hope for a diplomatic resolution. “If there is still a chance to avoid war, to avoid a confrontation and build a political and diplomatic solution, then we need to take it,” he told French television. Ukraine’s defence minister, Oleksiy Reznikov, said there was no sign of Russian forces withdrawing from the border, and that Moscow-backed rebels were continuing to shell Ukrainian positions. “Since the beginning of this day, as of 9am, 14 attacks have already been recorded, 13 of them from weapons prohibited by the Minsk agreements,” he told reporters in Kyiv. “One of our soldiers was wounded. It’s a war crime. They want to provoke us so Russia has a pretext.” Reznikov said his troops had been given strict instructions not to fire back. He dismissed Kremlin claims that Kyiv was preparing an offensive to retake separatist territories in the east of the country as “fake”. “Of course Russia can start an attack. I’m sure they have a plan like that. The Ukrainian military is ready to resist any scenario. We keep vigil,” he said at a press conference in Kyiv. A US satellite imagery company, Maxar Images, said its analysis showed “multiple new field deployments of [Russian] armoured equipment and troops” departing from existing military sites into forests and fields about nine to 19 miles from Russia’s border with Ukraine. The new photos, taken on Sunday, appeared to show vehicle tracks cutting through snow-covered fields that are surrounded by woodland and bordered by roads, with several buildings also visible, indicating troop and equipment movement near three locations in southwestern Russia, Maxar said.How do the banks continue to get away with it? The latest revelations about Credit Suisse provide yet another glimpse into the corrosive nexus of banks, corporations, accountants, lawyers and financial intermediaries that enables the wealthy and political elites to profit from illicit practices. The bank itself is no stranger to predatory practices. Since 2001 it has been fined at least 47 times by the US authorities and paid fines totalling $10.7bn. Since 2010, it has also been fined on at least six occasions by the UK’s Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) and paid fines totalling more than £300m. The fines have become just another cost of doing business, and are passed on to customers. Credit Suisse is not alone. The roll of dishonour shown by the Panama Papers, Paradise Papers, Pandora Papers, HSBC leaks, Luxembourg leaks and others shows that virtually every major bank is involved in predatory practices. All these leaks have provoked a public debate – but have drawn a minimal response from governments. Credit Suisse is authorised by the FCA, and the latest revelations ought to trigger an independent inquiry in its UK operations, especially as the bank is a repeat offender. However, the chances of that happening are low. The UK government is busy promoting deregulation and a culture of entrepreneurialism – and will not wish to highlight the darker side of this. This culture is a major enabling factor in predatory practices. In the City of London, stealing a march on a competitor, at almost any price, to gain a financial advantage is considered to be a skill, while promotion, status and profits are linked with meeting business targets. In such a system any “deal” is acceptable as long as it is profitable. The problem resides more in being caught than engaging in dishonourable or illegal activity. The smart business activity resides in constructing mechanisms through which benefits are derived from suspect activities while escaping any responsibility for their operations. Hence, a lot of attention is paid to building opaque structures and using financial experts to conceal nefarious practices. The UK Treasury has never been keen on investigating the organisational culture of banks, and predatory practices remain institutionalised. The Credit Suisse leak once again shows that there is an elaborate labyrinth of structures in this world that is difficult to penetrate. The state can respond by promoting transparency and accountability, shutting down offending businesses and prosecuting their senior officials. However, the probability of this is low, as the political system has little independence from big business. Political parties are funded by corporate money and rarely bite the hand that funds them. They parade themselves as “business-friendly”. Thus, little attention is paid to cleaning up the banking sector, even though it is routinely implicated in scandals. The threat of bankruptcy and regulatory action can discipline large banks and their executives, but that has largely been eliminated as the state has shown willingness to shower vast amount of moneys on the sector. The 2007-8 crash revealed that the UK banks had engaged in reckless risk-taking and fraudulent practices. The state responded by dutifully handing out £1.1tn of cash and guarantees to bail out ailing banks. They were further propped up by the subsequent injection of £895bn of quantitative easing. Such policies have removed the threat of bankruptcy from major banks and emboldened them to engage in predatory practices. When profits are privatised and losses are socialised, there is little economic incentive to curb nefarious practices. The regulatory environment can check predatory practices but is weak. In 2012, HSBC, a bank registered in the UK, was fined $1.9bn by the US authorities for money-laundering failures. HSBC “accepted responsibility for its criminal conduct and that of its employees”. It escaped prosecution by entering into a deferred prosecution agreement. There was no UK inquiry. A subsequent 2016 US report revealed that the British chancellor, George Osborne, and the financial services regulator intervened seemingly with the aim of protecting HSBC. Despite demands, there has been no ministerial statement to explain this intervention. Perhaps we are beginning a new chapter. Last year, in a first for the FCA, NatWest was convicted for money laundering after it voluntarily pleaded guilty and paid a fine of £264m. This was not followed by prosecutions of any directors, whose remuneration was presumably augmented by profits from such illicit practices. That said, last year NatWest was fined $35m by the US Department of Justice for “spoofing” – a type of market manipulation – and the press release referred to NatWest as “a repeat offender”. This did not prompt an investigation into the bank’s practices in the UK. Overall, with the veneration of entrepreneurial culture and a compliant state, there is little immediate prospect of cleaning up the banking industry. Prem Sikka is a member of the House of Lords, and an emeritus professor of accounting at the University of Essex and the University of SheffieldTalks over a funding settlement for Transport for London will continue until Friday after the government extended emergency finances to allow time for discussion of a new deal. The latest short-term extension comes as ministers and the mayor of London remain at loggerheads over financing the capital’s transport system after the drop in tube journeys hammered revenues. The transport secretary, Grant Shapps, told the Commons that the government had supported TfL with more than £4.5bn in extraordinary funding settlements and had now offered a fourth agreement, which the mayor, Sadiq Khan, had until Friday to consider. In a written statement, Shapps said: “We have recognised that demand and, therefore, passenger revenue has been volatile, and have responded accordingly, compensating TfL for that revenue loss to ensure services can be maintained. “The government is committed to supporting London and the transport network on which it depends, balancing that with supporting the national transport network.” However, TfL and Khan have been seeking a long-term settlement, which they say is needed to avert decline and keep investment in transport infrastructure, with passenger numbers on the tube still only about 60% of pre-pandemic levels on weekdays. Khan, who has proposed to extend road charges to make up the shortfall, said: “The pandemic is the only reason TfL is facing a financial crisis. I urge the government to engage with TfL and City Hall in good faith so that we can finally agree a fair, long-term funding deal that will protect London’s transport network – for the sake of the capital and the whole country. “London’s economy plays a huge role in the national economy, and around 43,000 jobs outside London depend on TfL’s investment.” A TfL spokesperson said talks would continue, adding: “It is essential London receives the sustained long-term government funding that is vital for the coming years if a period of ‘managed decline’ of London’s transport network is to be avoided.” Government sources have indicated they wish Khan to further raise fares and abolish some concessionary tickets for older passengers and children. TfL is looking for guaranteed capital grants for the next three years but has said it will aim for day-to-day sustainability by April 2023. London’s annual £700m operating grant was abolished under an agreement by the previous mayor, Boris Johnson, and the Conservative government. The TSSA union accused the government of “playing politics” and treating London with contempt.Conservative MPs are organising a revolt against the prime minister over the scrapping of a ban on the imports and sale of fur and foie gras. Government sources have confirmed to the Guardian that reports of a U-turn were “broadly correct”, despite the fact the bans were mentioned in the government’s action plan for animal welfare and aimed at bringing swing voters on side. The 2019 manifesto, which referred to the action plan, also committed to not compromising on animal welfare standards in international trade. The production of both fur and foie gras are banned in the UK. A Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra) spokesperson said the government was still “fully committed to animal welfare”. MPs in favour of a ban said they were shocked by the news and were demanding an explanation from Boris Johnson. Lorraine Platt, a grassroots Tory campaigner who is known as the “unofficial whip” on animal welfare policies, is organising an influential group of MPs to lobby the prime minister to think again. Platt is the founder of the Conservative Animal Welfare Foundation, which counts cabinet ministers including Dominic Raab and Zac Goldsmith among its members. She said: “We can’t let Boris be swayed off course by a minority of dissenters. We’ve known for some time there’s been a small minority of MPs who are against any ban on foie gras and fur imports. “We will be taking some action on this. We will be encouraging this measure to go forwards.” Sir Roger Gale, the MP for North Thanet, who has handed in a letter of no confidence to the 1922 Committee asking for Johnson to resign, said he thinks the prime minister made the choice to pander to the right wing of the party to strengthen his position. He said: “The amount of positive publicity these policies have had, it seems a strange decision. It’s not going to please anyone except a few hard-right MPs who regard this as woke nonsense. “I don’t know whether he’s trying to pander to the hard right in the Conservative party to see if he can prop up his administration. But reneging on these undertakings will do more harm in the parliamentary party than good.” It is thought Johnson was lobbied to scrap the policies, seen as pandering to the more ecologically minded wing of the party, by figures including Jacob Rees-Mogg. Rees-Mogg has been contacted for comment. One Tory who has been outspoken about his enjoyment of foie gras and lack of enthusiasm for a ban is Graham Brady, the chair of the 1922 Committee, who has previously joked: “I don’t much like the idea of having to go abroad to eat my favourite foods. And will you be allowed to smuggle foie gras on the Eurostar? For personal use?”Prosecutors have named the police officers charged over allegedly sharing racist and misogynistic messages on a WhatsApp group that included the officer who kidnapped and murdered Sarah Everard. The Crown Prosecution Service last Thursday announced charges against two serving Metropolitan police officers and one former officer, but kept their identities secret. The investigation by the Independent Office for Police Conduct (IOPC) began after a phone belonging to Wayne Couzens, then serving as a Metropolitan police officer, was seized and searched. He was later convicted of the kidnap, rape and murder of Everard, who went missing as she walked home in south London in March 2021. On Monday, the CPS named the officers alleged to have shared “grossly offensive” messages between April and August 2019. Senior CPS lawyer Rosemary Ainslie said: “Following a referral of evidence by the Independent Office for Police Conduct, the CPS authorised charges against two serving Metropolitan police officers and one former officer. “PC Jonathan Cobban, 35, PC William Neville, 33, and former officer Joel Borders, 45, will appear at Westminster magistrates court on 16 March for their first hearing. “Each of the three defendants has been charged with sending grossly offensive messages on a public communications network. The alleged offences took place on a WhatsApp group chat.” Borders, a former police constable, served in the Civil Nuclear constabulary as a firearms officer, before transferring to the Met. Couzens also worked for the CNC before joining Scotland Yard. The two serving Met officers had been suspended from duty, the force said. The IOPC said: “Police constable Jonathon Cobban, aged 35, and former constable Joel Borders, 45, are both charged with five counts of sending grossly offensive messages on a public communications network contrary to section 127 of the Communications Act 2003. “PC William Neville, 33, is charged with two counts of the same offence. The offences are alleged to have occurred variously between April and August 2019. “The IOPC’s investigation began following a referral from the [Met] in April last year (2021) and was completed in December when we referred a file of evidence to the Crown Prosecution Service (CPS). The CPS has taken the decision to authorise charges against the officers.” In September Couzens received a whole-life sentence, meaning he will never be released from prison. Two inquiries are under way into policing following details of Couzens’ crimes being made public. One, ordered by the Met, is being conducted by Dame Louise Casey. The other, ordered by the home secretary, is being conducted by Dame Elish Angiolini. Ainslie added: “The function of the CPS is not to decide whether a person is guilty of a criminal offence, but to make fair, independent and objective assessments about whether it is appropriate to present charges to a court to consider. “Criminal proceedings are active and nothing should be published that could jeopardise the defendants’ right to a fair trial.”Clad in yellow hi-vis jackets on a picket by a busy Coventry layby, striking bin-lorry drivers wave and raise fists every time a passing vehicle honks in support, which is frequent. History weighs on the minds of the strikers. An engineering and carmaking hub known as “motor city” and the birthplace of the iconic trade union leader Thomas Mann, Coventry’s past cannot be disentangled from that of the labour movement, or a Labour party that has run the council for 43 of the past 49 years. Yet one of the strikers, 60-year-old Peter Skerrett – a Labour member like his father before him – plucks his party card from his wallet, throws it in the mud and theatrically stamps on it. “How the hell can you keep paying for a political party that supposedly aspires to help workers when they’re actually working against us?” Seventy drivers are on strike against their employer, the Labour-run council, over what their union’s deputy convener Peter Randle tells me is over “fair pay for a fair day’s work”. But this is a dispute with implications that go far beyond this West Midlands city of 350,000 people. These drivers are represented by the Unite union, and if Labour’s masters were expecting some respite after veteran organiser Sharon Graham succeeded Len McCluskey as general secretary last year, they have miscalculated. She has already threatened to cut Unite’s national funding to Labour over the Coventry dispute – and bear in mind the union is the cash-strapped party’s biggest donor – and she shows no undue sentimentality about the party. “The fact is the council is a bad employer, and I treat all bad employers the same,” she tells me. Macho briefings from Keir Starmer’s team haven’t impressed her either. “We would have hoped that Unite would have got the message that the Labour party is under new management,” they told journalists. “Well, so is Unite,” she says, with a twinkle. Since she became general secretary four months ago, Unite has won 49 disputes: Graham intends to add Coventry to the tally. The Coventry dispute foreshadows more to come. Even before the pandemic, wages were stagnating, and in the last quarter, real-terms pay was 0.8% down on a year earlier. It is in this context that Graham seeks “a rebirth of the trade union movement”, with “unions as the vehicle for change”. That means slapping down the Bank of England governor Andrew Bailey (paid well over half a million pounds a year) who demanded “wage restraint” from workers. “Why should the Bank of England governor, a rich man, be telling workers to have pay restraint?”, she says, somewhat incredulously. At the core of her leadership is a belief that Unite’s political strategy over the last decade – to focus on remoulding Labour into a vehicle for radical transformation – has failed, and now industrial struggles must take precedence. Coventry may offer both an insight into what Starmer’s Labour represents, and what response it may provoke if it secures power. When I meet George Duggins, Coventry’s Labour council leader, he is in unrepentant mood. The council has distributed inflammatory anti-strike leaflets, claiming bin-lorry drivers are paid up to £52,000. All the drivers I meet on the picket line are on between £24,000 and £27,000, and have the payslips to prove it. The result? Earlier in the strike, drivers were subjected to shouts of “greedy bastards” from members of the public; one striker has had his family car’s tyres slashed. But Duggins doubles down, producing a spreadsheet suggesting one driver is indeed paid this amount: he would have to work 11 hours a day, 7 days a week to make that sort of money, and no other driver earns anywhere near it. So why use that example? Duggins is indignant when I compare this approach to Tories seeking out exceptional examples of benefit claimants to justify rolling back the welfare state. But can he see why such leaflets fuel abuse? “I’ve made it clear that as far as I’m concerned, abuse will not be tolerated and if there’s physical abuse then we will prosecute.” The core dispute is over which pay grade should be applied to the drivers, and here Duggins believes he has an ace to play. They can’t settle, says Duggins, because the council has determined that drivers have a grade 5 job, and it therefore can’t upgrade them to grade 6 “because it breaches the Equality Act”, which will lead them being inundated with other pay claims costing millions of pounds. “That is just nonsense, absolute nonsense,” says Graham. Her union believes the council has altered the job description to downgrade drivers, and notes their counterparts in Birmingham are being paid the rate that is being asked for. “There haven’t been any equal pay claims there, but if they are suggesting they’re shortchanging other workers for the job that they do well, they should not be doing that.” To Unite’s fury, the council leader and his fellow councillors have refused to personally attend any of the negotiations. That councils such as Coventry have suffered devastating government cuts is undeniable, and that imposes painful spending dilemmas. But the bin-lorry drivers also have increasingly painful dilemmas about how they spend their pay packets as prices surge. When Starmer was interviewed by a local journalist, he scoffed at the idea a strike in Coventry should “influence relations between the Labour party and its trade unions”. The insinuation was clear – why should a local dispute in Coventry, of all places, impact national politics? But this is a grave error. The hardship suffered by workers here is being experienced across the country: it is a national issue. Here is an opportunity for Labour to turn “levelling up” into a phrase of substance by working with union leaders like Sharon Graham to raise wages and improve working conditions in the UK. What a tragedy to waste it. Owen Jones is a Guardian columnistStorms blew away last week’s planned premiere of English National Opera’s new version of Janáček’s 1924 hymn to the cycles of the living world. The opening was quickly rescheduled for Sunday afternoon, but it was a useful reminder that our coexistence in nature has a pitiless side, as well as the pantheistic charge that fires Janáček’s ecstatic score. Jamie Manton’s busy staging is fuelled by anguish not sentiment. The composer set his opera in a Moravian forest, where a woodman captures a young vixen, who escapes back to the wild to raise a brood of cubs, only to fall victim to a hunter from the village. But Tom Scutt’s designs, fiercely lit by Lucy Carter, give us instead a deforested landscape, blasted by logging, in which the rhythms of life play out against a backdrop scroll that unwinds a visual representation of the story to reveal a chillingly blank sheet at the close. All the same, there is abundance of colourful life on stage too, with all the insects, birds, mushrooms and animals that make any staging of Janáček’s opera, including this one, by turns a delight and a risk. Jenny Ogilvie’s movement direction gets laughs as well as poignancy from a menagerie in which Joy Constantinides’s dragonfly, Clare Barnett-Jones’s dog, John Findon’s cockerel and Robert Berry-Roe’s frog all make their mark. There are fox cubs and hens in profusion, while hooded “timekeepers” shift the scenery and provide a constant reminder of the opera’s dark side. Martyn Brabbins conducts industriously but in a rather generalised sweep. Sally Matthews brings vocal allure to the Vixen that enables her to convey the opera’s transcendent qualities. She is well matched by the brighter soprano of Pumeza Matshikiza’s Fox. Lester Lynch’s Forester is richly toned and sympathetic in his getting of wisdom, but articulation, especially important in this opera, is not a strong point for any of them. Ossian Huskinson, who makes an impressive impact as the poacher Harašta is, by contrast, exemplarily clear. So are the experienced pairing of Alan Oke and Clive Bayley, who capture the important dramatic counterpoint of the unfulfilled lives of the village schoolmaster and priest. • Until 1 MarchThere has been a break in the rain, and the sun is shining on the orange groves of Bir al-Maksur, a quiet Bedouin village near Nazareth in Israel’s north. Three-year-old Ammar would have loved splashing in the winter puddles outside the Hujarat family’s home, his aunt said. But two days before, the little boy was shot and killed in a playground by a stray bullet fired during a car chase, and the grieving family is trying to make sense of the way his life ended. “The police don’t care what happens to Palestinians so [the gangs] know they can kill children while they are playing and nothing will happen. We are so angry,” said Ammar’s cousin, Imam, as she sat with his mother, Aisha. Still numb with shock, Aisha cradled her hands in her lap, eyes red from crying. Ammar was the first victim of 2022 claimed by the gun violence epidemic engulfing Israel’s Arab community: last year, a record 127 people lost their lives, and the numbers have risen year on year since 2013. At the same time, illegal firearms on the streets have proliferated. Some estimates put the number at hundreds of thousands of weapons, mainly stolen from Israeli military depots or smuggled over the Jordanian border. The gang violence means people in Israel’s 2-million-strong Arab minority are far more likely to be killed by fellow Arabs than Palestinians in the West Bank are by Israeli security forces. The prevailing assumption in the police to date, as one senior Israeli official put it, has amounted to: “As long as they are killing each other, that’s their problem.” About 20% of Israel’s population of 9 million people identifies as Arab, encompassing Bedouin and Druze as well as Muslim and Christian Palestinians. In theory, they are granted the same civil and political rights as Jewish citizens; in practice, these communities face severe institutionalised discrimination. In Arab and mixed-ethnicity neighbourhoods across the country, the gun violence crisis is a grim illustration of the issues facing minorities living in the Jewish state. Organised crime networks are deeply embedded in Arab society, who turn to mob bosses for loans when Israeli banks refuse their applications. Corruption and extortion in local politics is rife, as are protection rackets. The community distrusts and fears the police, leading Palestinian citizens of Israel to turn to traditional methods to solve disputes such as the sulha, a conflict resolution mechanism – in this context usually between rival clans or families. But with young Arab men the worst hit by the unemployment crisis caused by Covid-19, the streets are now full of well-armed foot soldiers willing to carry out hits for their bosses or, for the right price, wage someone else’s vendetta. The result is tearing at the social fabric that sustains these marginalised communities. Over the last month, the Guardian met more than a dozen people in the central city of Lod and towns around Israel’s “Arab triangle” who have lost innocent loved ones to gun crime. In Rambla, Mohamed Abu Muamar’s wife, beloved local teacher Sharifa, was killed by crossfire in August 2020 as she stood at the kitchen sink in the family’s second-floor apartment. She was found after the couple’s two-year-old tried to get her to wake up. “I can’t work, I am struggling with the children. I can’t even go back into the apartment now,” he said. “It’s too painful.” Other killings are calculated acts of brutality. In May last year, Chitam al-Wahwah’s youngest son Anas – an 18-year-old star student and volunteer with the ambulance service – was shot and killed in his car while she sat in the passenger seat, in what was apparently retribution for the wrongdoings of a distant member of the family. And sometimes feuds escalate thanks to the widespread availability of guns. In Qalansawe, neighbours Abier Hatib and Zahya Nasra lost their teenage sons, who were close friends, after members of a rival clan opened fire on a group of young men hanging out one weekend last March. The fight had originally started, months before, over a parking dispute. Killings of women by their partners and other male family members are also on the rise. “Most of this community was badly affected in 1948 [after the war surrounding Israel’s creation]. People were displaced, thrown into poverty. They had to start all over again, so of course there is crime,” said Fida Sh’hade, a local council member in Lod and one of several Arab women across Israel helping organise victims’ families into a vocal new political lobby called Mothers for Life. “What is happening now is the reality of what happens when schools, jobs, opportunities for a whole people are withheld. “About a decade ago, the police cracked down on the Jewish mafia, put the heads of the families in jail. Israel has the best security infrastructure in the world but the police can’t catch some Arab teenagers with guns, inside our own country? Come on. It shows exactly how much we are valued as citizens.” Only about a quarter of Arab murder cases were solved last year, compared with about 70% of murders of Jewish citizens – a disparity Israel police said in an emailed statement reflects that homicide investigations are “fraught with challenges”, including “lack of cooperation on the part of citizens”. All of the families the Guardian met, however, said their offers to help with investigations or entreaties for information on the progress in solving their cases had gone ignored. Abu Muamar, who agreed to testify against his wife’s killers, faced death threats from the gang, but nothing in the way of help from police except a roadblock at one end of his street. Israel’s new coalition government – which for the first time includes an Arab party – has made combating crime in the Arab community a central promise to the public, budgeting 1bn shekels (£230m) for more police stations in Arab towns and a special unit dedicated to Arab community affairs. In an interview, however, the Israeli cabinet minister for public security, Omer Barlev, who holds responsibility for policing, acknowledged it would take time for people to “really be convinced there is a change”. “In the last six months there has been a 30% jump in the number of people arrested and brought to trial,” he said. “Things were never done before with the intensity we are doing it today.” For victims who are organising and supporting each other through Mothers For Life, the umbrella group bringing Arab women’s voices to the forefront of politics for the first time, change cannot come quickly enough. In Bir al-Maksur, Ammar Hujarat’s home village, the family home was full of neighbours, relatives and strangers from far and wide who had come to pay their respects. “The solidarity from all these people, Muslim, Christian, Jewish, is the only thing keeping me strong right now,” said Aisha, the child’s mother. “I believe in the good of people. I never expected this would happen to us … I hope this anger will do something. The killing has to stop.”The fallout from a huge leak of Credit Suisse banking data threatened to damage Switzerland’s entire financial sector on Monday after the European parliament’s main political grouping raised the prospect of adding the country to a money-laundering blacklist. The European People’s party (EPP), the largest political grouping of the European parliament, called for the EU to review its relationship with Switzerland and consider whether it should be added to its list of countries associated with a high risk of financial crime. Experts said that such a move would be a disaster for Switzerland’s financial sector, which would face the kind of enhanced due diligence applied to transactions linked to rogue nations including Iran, Myanmar, Syria and North Korea. “When Swiss banks fail to apply international anti-money-laundering standards properly, Switzerland itself becomes a high-risk jurisdiction,” said Markus Ferber, the coordinator on economic affairs for the EPP, which represents Europe’s centre-right political parties. “When the list of high-risk third countries in the area of money laundering is up for revision the next time, the European Commission needs to consider adding Switzerland to that list.” The EPP released the proposal after media outlets including the Guardian, Süddeutsche Zeitung, the Organized Crime and Corruption Reporting Project (OCCRP), and Le Monde revealed how a massive leak of Credit Suisse data had uncovered apparently widespread failures of due diligence by the bank. The investigation, called Suisse secrets, identified clients of the Swiss bank who had been involved in torture, drug trafficking, money laundering, corruption and other serious crimes. “Bank privacy laws must not become a pretext to facilitate money laundering and tax evasion. The Suisse secrets findings point to massive shortcomings of Swiss banks when it comes to the prevention of money laundering,” Ferber said. “Apparently, Credit Suisse has a policy of looking the other way instead of asking difficult questions.” He added that the close ties between EU and Swiss banks meant that anti-money-laundering deficiencies in Switzerland’s banking industry “also pose a problem for the European financial sector”. Credit Suisse said in a statement it “strongly rejects the allegations and inferences about the bank’s purported business practices”, arguing that the matters uncovered by reporters were largely historical and based on “selective information taken out of context, resulting in tendentious interpretations of the bank’s business conduct”. Its lawyers told the Guardian any past individual failings by the bank did not reflect its current business policies, practices or culture. The bank has since announced it has set up an internal taskforce to investigate the leak. “We have robust data protection and data leakage prevention controls in place to protect our clients,” it said. Switzerland’s government declined to comment on the EPP statement, but said the country meets international standards around exchange of tax information, money laundering, terrorist financing and corruption. The country’s addition to the EU high-risk third countries list would mean regulated professions, such as bankers, lawyers and accountants, would be required to conduct enhanced due diligence on any transaction or commercial relationship with a person or company in the country. Tom Keatinge, the director of the Centre for Financial Crime and Security Studies at the defence thinktank RUSI, said that being added to the EU list could have a significant and far-reaching impact on Switzerland’s banks, as well as its broader financial sector. “There is the potential for considerable collateral damage,” he said. The Credit Suisse data was leaked to Süddeutsche Zeitung by an anonymous source who complained about “immoral” Swiss banking secrecy laws. In Switzerland, politicians and media organisations reacted angrily to the discovery that Swiss investigative journalists had been prevented from participating in the Suisse secrets investigation because of the country’s notorious banking secrecy law. Swiss law has for decades criminalised the disclosure of banking information by financial professionals. However, in recent years it was expanded to cover outsiders receiving banking data, potentially including investigative journalists. Amid international controversy, Andrea Caroni, a Swiss politician who in 2015 advocated expanding article 47, the infamous section of a 1934 banking law that introduced extreme secrecy regulations, accepted on Monday that “maybe the rules are not set perfectly” and suggested he would be open to considering a review. Samira Marti, a national councillor for the Swiss Social Democratic party, said the group would submit a proposal to combat article 47’s “censorship” in the spring session of the Swiss parliament, and called on the country’s centrist party, Die Mitte, and the Green Liberal party to support them. The Green Liberals said they would back Marti’s call for action. “Journalism plays an essential role in uncovering illegal practices,” said Julie Cantalou, a co-secretary general of the party. “We are therefore supportive towards the idea to reform article 47, and look forward to working with Samira Marti on this important matter.” Meanwhile, Switzerland’s Green party announced that it had tabled a legislative proposal for immediate reform of article 47. “The Suisse secrets show once again that Swiss banks continue to do business with dictators, autocrats and criminals,” the party said in a statement. “With a proposal submitted today, the Greens are now campaigning for an immediate revision of the Banking Act.” In what could be the first step towards a formal investigation into the Suisse secrets disclosures, Finma, the Swiss financial regulator, confirmed this morning that it was “in contact” with Credit Suisse concerning the investigation, but refused to be drawn on the details of its conversations with the bank. One Swiss commentator described the timing of the leak as “catastrophic” for Credit Suisse, which last year suffered a series of rolling scandals that battered its share price. Samuel Gerber, the deputy editor of the Swiss financial publication Finews, also warned that the bank’s latest controversy could jeopardise an international review of Switzerland’s anti-money-laundering measures expected to take place later this year. Referring to past scandals, Daniel Thelesklaf, the former head of Switzerland’s anti-money-laundering body, said Credit Suisse had “already lost a lot of its reputation”. “This can become another crack in the wall,” he said. “Unless Credit Suisse undergoes a massive change of culture, it will lose the trust of its remaining clients soon.”Over-75s and people with suppressed immune systems in the UK are to be offered another Covid-19 booster vaccination in the coming weeks to increase potentially waning protection, after advice from the government’s vaccines watchdog. The Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI) has formally advised a rollout of an additional booster this spring for groups of people deemed most vulnerable to severe coronavirus. The recommendation is that additional boosters should be offered to people aged 75 or over, and residents in older people’s care homes, and anyone aged 12 or above who is immunosuppressed. The announcement came just before Boris Johnson’s formal unveiling of plans to abolish all domestic coronavirus restrictions across England, including an end to mandatory self-isolation. A decision on the precise plan was delayed at the last minute amid tensions between the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, and the health secretary, Sajid Javid, over funds for free Covid-19 testing. Additional groups regarded as being at greater risk of severe coronavirus are also likely to be offered a further booster jab this autumn, before an expected rise in infections over next winter, the JCVI added. It is up to health departments in the four UK nations to decide individually whether to accept the JCVI’s advice. Javid said patients in England would be offered the second booster from about six months after their last dose, and that other nations would do the same. For people with suppressed immune systems, this would be the fifth vaccine jab they have been offered, comprising two boosters as well as three primary jabs. For older people it would be a fourth – two main vaccinations and two boosters. The bulk of the population has been offered three, two vaccinations and one booster. The JCVI statement said many of the oldest people had received their booster in September or October, meaning their immunity could be waning. Prof Wei Shen Lim, who leads on Covid vaccinations for the JCVI, said: “Last year’s booster vaccination programme has so far provided excellent protection against severe Covid-19. To maintain high levels of protection for the most vulnerable individuals in the population, an extra spring dose of vaccine is advised ahead of an expected autumn booster programme later this year. “The JCVI will continue its rolling review of the vaccination programme and the epidemiological situation, particularly in relation to the timing and value of doses for less vulnerable older adults and those in clinical risk groups ahead of autumn 2022.” Boosters are different to the primary Covid vaccinations, in part as they follow two main jabs and are aimed at boosting the protection already offered, and also as they can be smaller doses. Adults in both categories getting a second will be offered 50-microgram doses of the Moderna vaccine, while eligible 12- to 18-year-olds will be offered 30 microgram doses of the Pfizer/BioNTech version. Javid confirmed he had accepted the latest advice. The health secretary said: “We know immunity to Covid-19 begins to wane over time. That’s why we’re offering a spring booster to those people at higher risk of serious Covid-19 to make sure they maintain a high level of protection. It’s important that everyone gets their top-up jabs as soon as they’re eligible. “The JCVI will keep under review whether the booster programme should be extended to further at-risk groups.” The decision comes five days after Javid accepted separate JCVI advice for children aged five to 11 in England to be offered a vaccine, while emphasising that parents would be expected to make their own decision. Daniel Altmann, professor of immunology at Imperial College London said the recommendation was “a good safety measure for the more vulnerable”, adding that such schemes needed to be properly gauged for effectiveness. “In an ideal world, any advice of this type needs to remain firmly tethered to ongoing monitoring programmes of caseload and immunity – otherwise we’re just operating on guesswork,” he said. Prof Lawrence Young, a virologist at the University of Warwick, agreed. “It makes sense to continue to protect the most vulnerable – particularly if the requirement for self-isolation is removed and testing is going to become more limited,” he said. “We know that the elderly and most vulnerable are more susceptible to infection and can mount poor immune response to vaccination. So it makes sense to protect against future variants and to provide longer-lived immune responses for these individuals.”In 2019, Samuel Bailey’s play Shook marked him out as a distinctive new talent, writing about masculinity, class and friendship. But when he first began life as a playwright, his dramas were, he says, “rip-offs” of works he admired. “The first few plays I wrote were a Sam Shepard western, a Nick Payne Constellations play, and an Annie Baker. I was thinking: ‘Oh, this is what a play is!’” Having grown up on a housing estate in Worcester, Bailey felt reluctant to bring that world on to the stage. “It took me quite a long time to feel like I could write about where I came from and that people would be interested in it, partly because it wasn’t necessarily what I was seeing on stage.” That changed 10 years ago when he met Jesse Jones, who is now directing Bailey’s new play, Sorry, You’re Not a Winner, produced by Paines Plough. Jones read one of his early plays and said Bailey was mimicking other writers. “He asked me ‘What do you want to write about?’ I told him a bit about my background, and he said ‘Why are you not writing about this?’ It took him telling me that the thing that I was ashamed of was actually what was interesting … and it took a while for me to come round [to the idea that] here was something I could tell authentically.” Shook featured three fathers attending a parenting class at a young offender institution. An insightful study of the way men speak to each other and the intimacies they form, it had bags of humour and tenderness. Shook won him the Papatango new writing prize and had a sold-out run at Southwark Playhouse in London, with a West End transfer set for the spring of 2020 (the pandemic stymied that plan). “Shook was personal in the sense that it was about people I grew up with, cared about, and listening to their stories.” His new play, a coming-of-age drama about friendship, leaving home and entering a middle-class milieu, is closer to Bailey’s own lived experience. “I had been wrestling with it for most of my 20s – feeling this conflict between having left home, and not feeling quite comfortable in this place that I exist now – a more middle-class space at university and then a middle-class space in theatre. I felt like I should be really happy because this is what I want to do but something was making me feel on edge at times.” His girlfriend suggested he make sense of this internal conflict by turning it into a play. It begins the night before Liam departs for Oxford University, leaving his best friend Fletch behind. Bailey went to Cardiff University to study philosophy and politics. “It’s not about me but the emotional journey is one that I’ve been on in the sense of coming to terms with where I’m from, where I exist and operate now, and how you marry those two. When you come from a place that is one thing, and are now in a place that is culturally different, how do you align those things in your head?” Bailey was born in Lewisham, south-east London. His parents split up when he was three and his mother raised him alone in Worcester, first working in a pub and then in the charity sector, while his father and stepmother ran a film company in Bristol. Most of his childhood was spent on the estate but he saw glimpses of another world on his trips to Bristol, and observing their work gave him a head start, he feels. He wasn’t sure if he would ever finish Sorry, You’re Not a Winner, after writing the opening scene, or that he wanted to continue working as a playwright at all. “I resisted going along this path until my mid 20s because I’d seen how difficult it was to make creative work.” He had not only seen his parents “struggling massively” to make ends meet but also strained to make enough money himself. Winning the Papatango prize changed that, and now, at the age of 32, he is juggling several commissions, including a film about a lower-league football team with The Full Monty director, Peter Cattaneo, and a TV series about a woman who infiltrates white nationalist terrorist cells based on Julia Ebner’s book Going Dark. With all the shifts in his life, is he still connected to his early life in Worcester? Very much so, he says. His mother still lives there and his childhood friends are important to him. “I’m godfather to two of their children. I was best man at one of their weddings … I’ve always valued those relationships very highly in terms of what they mean to me. But in terms of the way they live their lives and the way I live my life – they’ve got kids, they’ve been settled down for a long time, the structure of their lives is very different to mine.” What is essential for Bailey, in writing about the people with whom he grew up, is to represent them with integrity. “My first responsibility is to make sure this is a play they can come and see and enjoy. I never want to write a play about people back home and think that if they came to see it, they’d feel excluded. So I need to make sure the form and humour relates to who I’m writing about. Otherwise, you get into a position where it’s like, I’ve moved away from home and I’m going to take their stories and put them on stage for primarily middle-class audiences.” Sorry, You’re Not a Winner is at Theatre Royal Plymouth, 24 February to 12 March; Bristol Old Vic, 29 March to 2 April; and Northern Stage, Newcastle, 5 to 9 April.European stock markets are a sea of red, amid rising tensions on the border between Ukraine and Russia. They started the day trading higher on hopes of a France-brokered summit between the Russian and US presidents, but a few hours later a spokesman for Vladimir Putin said there were no immediate plans for such a meeting. The UK’s FTSE 100 index has slipped 0.3% to 7,490 while Germany’s Dax and France’s CAC have lost more than 2%. UK and Dutch gas prices are rising again, reversing earlier declines, amid disruption from the storms (high winds have stoped liquefied natural gas cargoes from docking) and fears that Russian aggression in Ukraine will lead to further supply disruption. The British gas contract for immediate delivery gained nearly 4% to 180p per therm, while the Dutch contract for March increased by 3.5% to €74.70 per megawatt hour. Oil prices have see-sawed. Brent crude is now up 1.25% at $94.71 a barrel while US light crude has gained 1% to $92 a barrel. Here are our main stories: Thank you for reading. We’ll be back tomorrow. Stay safe – JK The British firm Synairgen has suffered a massive blow: its main product, an inhaled drug that was tested in hospitalised patients hospitalised with Covid-19, did not show any meaningful change compared to a placebo in late-stage trials. Shares in the company, a University of Southampton spinout, plummeted 84% to 26p today. Intermediate trials had been promising and the chief executive, Richard Marsden, said: While we are disappointed by the overall outcome, SNG001 has been administered to hospitalised patients on top of standard of care which changed substantially between our Phase 2 and Phase 3 trials. This improvement in patient care may have compromised the potential of SNG001 to show a clinical benefit in respect of the endpoints for this study, which were not met. Despite this we have observed an encouraging trend in prevention of progression to severe disease and death, which we strongly believe merits further investigation in a platform trial. We are now analysing the full dataset to better understand all the findings. The drug can be administered by patients themselves through a hand-held, battery-operated nebuliser. Storm Eunice crushed hopes for a good half-term week for retailers on Britain’s highstreets and shopping malls. The latest figures from retail experts Springboard show footfall dropped by 3.8% across the UK last week, with a 32% drop on Friday, when Storm Eunice battered the country, and a further 12.6% decline on Saturday. The north and southwest, where the storm hit hardest, footfall suffered the most. The week had started well, with an uplift of 18% last Monday. Trips out led to noticeable increases in footfall in central London, regional cities and historic towns across the UK between Monday and Thursday, averaging 16.2%, 10.8% and 10.7% respectively. Diane Wehrle, insights director at Springboard, said: Unsurprisingly, footfall across UK retail destinations last week was majorly affected by the severe storms, which negated the positive impact of the start of the February school half-term break. Storm Eunice landed on Friday and led to significant declines in footfall on both Friday and Saturday. Prior to that Storm Dudley had hit UK shores on Wednesday, but in overall terms this had a more minor impact on footfall. Inevitably high streets felt the greatest effects of the weather, with a slightly stronger result in shopping centres - the vast majority of which offer shelter from the elements - and in retail parks which are easy to access by car. Despite the February rebound in the PMI survey for Germany, the Bundesbank has warned that the Omicron wave of Covid-19 infections – which means many people are unable to go to work – will cause a sharp decline in the country’s economic output, or GDP, in the January to March quarter – the second quarter of decline. This would put the country back into recession, its second since the pandemic began. However the slump is likely to be short-lived: the Bundesbank expects a strong bounceback in the April to June quarter. It wrote in its monthly report: German economic output is likely to decline again markedly in the first quarter of 2022. This is due to the resurgence of the pandemic caused by the Omicron variant. In contrast to previous waves of the pandemic, the services sector is unlikely to be the only one in which activity is being adversely affected by containment measures and social and physical distancing requirements. In fact, working hours lost due to the pandemic could also be having a distinctly dampening effect on economic output – and in other sectors, too. Nevertheless, positive effects are expected from the industrial sector. Here there are signs of a further easing of supply bottlenecks, and demand for industrial products remains high. In light of very robust demand, GDP is likely to rebound strongly in the second quarter, provided the pandemic subsides and the supply bottlenecks continue to ease. Earlier today, official data showed German producer prices in January rose at their fastest rate since records began in 1949. They jumped 25% from the same month last year, due to spiralling energy costs, up 66.7%. Within this, gas went up by a whopping 119% from January 2021. Electricity prices rose by 66.7% and prices of mineral oil products by 32.9%. Stripping out energy, producer prices increased 12%, still a hefty rise. Returning to the storms… not only have pilots had a tough time in recent days, but baggage handlers are also struggling to unload luggage from planes, the BBC reports. British Airways said the stormy weather had made opening the luggage hold of aircraft tricky, and that machinery such as scissor lifts, needed to to offload bags, could not be operated in high winds. This has led to delays in passengers getting their bags after landing in the UK. BA apologised for “letting people down”. The high winds mean that many aircraft circle above the airport after failing to land before they try again, causing delays to other planes as well. Storm Eunice forced flight cancellations on Friday while Storm Franklin, raging now, has brought more travel chaos to Britain, including train cancellations. Here is the latest revelation from the Credit Suisse leak, which has revealed the secret owners of £80bn held in the Swiss bank. Revealed: king of Jordan used Swiss accounts to hoard massive wealth, by Martin Chulov, our Middle East correspondent. In 2011, as popular revolts reverberated around the Middle East, a monarch in the midst of it all made some banking decisions. Sometime that year, as neighbouring Egypt and Syria withered in the face of momentous civil protests, King Abdullah II of Jordan opened two new accounts with Credit Suisse, the Swiss bank that had discreetly served the region’s well-heeled for decades. Abdullah, one of the world’s longest-serving current monarchs, had chosen a banker that shared his approach to secrecy, particularly surrounding his personal wealth. Over the next five years, the king was the beneficial owner of at least six accounts with Credit Suisse, while his wife, Queen Rania, had another. According to a massive trove of data leaked from the bank that names both royals as account holders, one account would later be worth a remarkable 230m Swiss francs (£180m). And here’s an explainer: What is the Suisse secrets leak and why are we publishing it? As Storm Franklin sweeps across Britain – the third storm to batter the country in a week – wind power drove more than two-fifths of all electricity generated over the past day. According to National Grid, wind power accounted for 41.4% of electricity generation in the last 24 hours, and renewable energy as a whole (including solar and hydroelectric) accounted for 45% of the mix. At the moment, wind is powering 34.8% of all electricity generated. It’s not quite enough to break the record set over Christmas. On Boxing Day, wind farms supplied more than half of the UK’s electricity, when Storm Bella brought powerful winds to many parts of the UK. European’s main stock markets have all turned negative apart from the FTSE 100 index in London, which is flat at 7,515. Germany’s Dax down 0.1% at 15,026 France’s CAC down 0.57% at 6,890 Italy’s FTSE MiB down 0.8% at 26,285 JPMorgan economist Allan Monks has also looked at the UK PMI data: The employment reading also moved up by just under a point to 57.5, an indication that the recent slowing in job growth in the official data is temporary. In a signal of expectations for a broader and lasting improvement from the latest Covid wave, the year ahead future expectations reading rose to its highest since last August. The input price reading rose, while output prices fell modestly, owing to the manufacturing sector. In a sign of a further improvement in supply chains, the delivery times reading indicated another shortening in wait times and has now recovered half of its pandemic-related deterioration. While growth is not the Bank of England’s main focus at the moment, the surge in the PMI in February indicates strong momentum in growth ahead of a set of headwinds that are due to intensify from April. To the extent this momentum limits damage to the labour market, we believe that it will further encourage the BoE to continue normalizing rates in the coming months. Gabriella Dickens, senior UK economist at Pantheon Macroeconomics, said she was revising up her forecast for UK GDP growth in the first quarter to 0.6%, and added that the Bank of England will “almost certainly” raise interest rates again at next month’s meeting. The sharp rise in the composite PMI in February, to its highest level since June, suggests that the U.K. economy is rebounding from Omicron at a fair clip. The PMI was well above its average level in the second half of 2021—56.3—when GDP rose by 1.0% in both Q3 and Q4. The rise in the composite PMI largely reflected a jump in the services PMI to an eight-month high. In addition, the manufacturing sector—which was largely unscathed by Omicron—benefited from a further easing of supply chain disruptions; the suppliers’ delivery times index rose to a 15-month high of 31.9, from 30.4. February’s PMIs chime with other timely indicators that suggest activity has picked up in recent weeks. For instance, transport usage data showed that rail passenger numbers in the seven days to February 14 rose to 63% of their level in the same days of 2019, up from 60% a week earlier. All told, then, we are now revising up our forecast for quarter-on-quarter GDP growth in the first quarter to 0.6%, from 0.3% previously. Alas, a large majority of companies surveyed by Markit still are hiking prices; the output price index of the manufacturing sector fell only to 69.1, from 70.9 in January, while the prices charged balance of the services survey fell merely to 63.2, from 63.9. The combination of reviving economic activity and widespread price increases suggests that the MPC almost certainly will raise Bank Rate to 0.75% at next month’s meeting. Chris Williamson, chief business economist at Markit, said another interest rate hike from the Bank of England is on the cards, as soon as March. With the PMI’s gauge of output growth accelerating markedly in February and cost pressures intensifying to the second-highest on record, the odds of an increasingly aggressive policy tightening have shortened, with a third back-to-back rate rise looking increasingly inevitable in March. However, the indications of a growing plight for manufacturers will need to be watched, and the service sector’s new business index will need to be monitored for signs of the demand revival losing steam. Given the rising cost of living, higher energy prices and increased uncertainty caused by the escalating crisis in Ukraine, downside risks to the demand outlook have risen. Julian Jessop, an independent economist, tweets: The UK economy bounced back in February, with business activity the strongest since last June, led by a recovery in consumer spending on travel, leisure and entertainment, the latest snapshot from IHS Markit shows. It said services firms benefited from a loosening of pandemic measures. Its composite PMI index, which comprises manufacturing and services activity, jumped to 60.2 from 54.2 in January, marking an eight-month high. The closely watched survey also showed high inflation persisted in February, as higher wages, energy bills and raw material costs all contributed to firms’ rising operating expenses. Markit said: The overall rate of input cost inflation was the steepest since last November and the second-highest since the index began in January 1998. This resulted in another sharp increase in average prices charged by private sector firms, although the latest rise was softer than at the start of the year. Flash UK Composite Output Index February: 60.2, 8-month high (January final: 54.2) Flash UK Services Business Activity Index February: 60.8, 8-month high (January final: 54.1) Flash UK Manufacturing Output Index February: 56.7, 7-month high (January final: 54.5) Flash UK Manufacturing PMI February: 57.3, unchanged (January final: 57.3) The UK takeover spree continues with a move on Clipper Logistics, a Leeds-based warehousing company, and a higher bid for the Scottish aviation services company John Menzies from its Kuwaiti suitor. Russ Mould, investment director at the investment firm AJ Bell, said: The fight for UK assets by foreign companies continues apace with two targets in the services sector looking as if they will be the next ones gobbled up. Clipper Logistics is in the sights of US firm GXO and Kuwait group NAS has just increased its offer again for aviation services group John Menzies. Both takeovers may sense strategically as they would complement the predators’ existing expertise and increase their scale in important markets. The UK stock market may have a reputation being full of old economy companies and generally lacking the supercharged levels of growth seen in US tech space. However, what’s underappreciated is the plethora of small and medium-sized business which have carved out a niche and become important players. Clipper, a warehousing company that counts John Lewis, Marks &amp; Spencer, Morrisons and Asda among its customers, has agreed a possible takeover deal worth up to £940m with a New York rival, in the latest sign of the boom in online delivery, reports my colleague Jasper Jolly. The board of Clipper unanimously recommended the possible takeover offer by New York-listed GXO Logistics of 690p a share plus shares in the Connecticut-based company worth up to 230p for each Clipper share. Clipper’s shares jumped by 14% on Monday morning to 887p, near their record high of 910p. European stock markets are still trading higher, with the exception of Italy, which is down 0.46%, although the UK’s FTSE 100 index has given up some of its gains. It is now 30 points higher at 7,544, a 0.4% gain, while Germany’s Dax is 0.27% ahead and France’s CAC is flat. The Russian rouble is now trading at 77.13 against the dollar, up 0.2%, after a 1% gain earlier. Moscow has dampened expectations for a summit between Vladimir Putin and Joe Biden. Putin’s spokesman Dmitri Peskov said it’s “premature” to talk about specific plans for a summit between the Russian president and his American counterpart. Peskov said Putin and Biden could meet if they consider it necessary, but emphasised that “it’s premature to talk about specific plans for a summit” and no concrete plans were in place. You can read more on our Ukraine crisis live blog here: Chris Williamson, chief business economist at IHS Markit said: The eurozone economy regained momentum in February as an easing of virus-fighting restrictions led to renewed demand for many consumer services, such as travel, tourism and recreation, and helped alleviate supply bottlenecks. Business optimism in the outlook has likewise improved as companies look to the further reopening of the economy, encouraging increased hiring. However, although easing, supply constraints remain widespread and continue to cause rising backlogs of work. As such, demand has again outstripped supply, handing pricing power to producers and service providers. At the same time, soaring energy costs and rising wages have added to inflationary pressures, resulting in the largest rise in selling prices yet recorded in a quarter of a century of survey data history. Economic growth picked up sharply this month across the eurozone, as Covid-19 restrictions were eased, according to the flash PMI survey from IHS Markit, which captures activity in the currency bloc’s private sector. Future expectations, new orders and jobs growth also improved. Growth picked up especially in the service sector, though manufacturers also reported better production gains as a result of rising demand and fewer supply bottlenecks. However, while an easing of supply delays helped to reduce raw material input cost inflation, persistent cost pressures caused by rising wages and energy bills led to the sharpest rise in average prices charged for goods and services in the survey’s history. Price rises in the service sector hit a record high while those in manufacturing rose at a near-record rate. By country, the biggest bounceback was in France, where growth reached the highest since last June, though growth in Germany also picked up to the fastest since last August. Flash Eurozone PMI Composite Output Index at 55.8 (52.3 in January). 5-month high Flash Eurozone Services PMI Activity Index at 55.8 (51.1 in January). 3-month high Flash Eurozone Manufacturing PMI Output Index at 55.6 (55.4 in January). 5-month high Flash Eurozone Manufacturing PMI at 58.4 (58.7 in January). 2-month low Teis Knuthsen, chief investment officer of financial investments at Danish investment firm Kirk Kapital, has tweeted: The German economy has grown at the fastest rate in six months, despite a fresh wave of Covid-19 infections because of the spread of the Omicron variant, according to the latest business sector snapshot from IHS Markit. Flash Germany PMI Composite Output Index at 56.2 (Jan: 53.8). 6-month high Flash Germany Services PMI Activity Index at 56.6 (Jan: 52.2). 6-month high Flash Germany Manufacturing Output Index at 55.4 (Jan: 57.0). 2-month low Flash Germany Manufacturing PMI at 58.5 (Jan: 59.8). 2-month low Phil Smith, economics associate director, at Markit said: The German economy continued to regain momentum in February following December’s brief stagnation in output growth. Overall activity rose the most since last August, driven this time by the services sector as manufacturing production increased more slowly than in January, when it had provided the main impetus. Although goods production rose at a softer pace, data on new orders showed the fastest rise in six months. Moreover, supply chain pressures appeared to ease further as average lead times lengthened to the least extent since November 2020. Inflationary pressures remained strong, however. Overall input prices rose at a similar rate as at the turn of the year, despite the slowest rate of inflation in manufacturing for a year. Meanwhile, prices charged for goods and services increased at the second-fastest rate on record. The first of the flash PMIs is out – for France. It shows that business activity in February was the strongest since June. Flash France Composite Output Index at 57.4 in February (52.7 in January), 8-month high. Flash France Services Activity Index at 57.9 in February (53.1 in January), 49-month high. Flash France Manufacturing Output Index at 55.0 in February (50.9 in January), 7-month high. Flash France Manufacturing PMI at 57.6 in February (55.5 in January), 7-month high Joe Hayes, senior economist at IHS Markit, which compiled the survey, said: The slump in January proved to be short-lived as business activity growth accelerated sharply in February to its strongest since last June. Now that the trajectory of Covid-19 in France is on the downturn, this should continue to facilitate greater activity levels across both sectors. Indeed, anecdotal evidence from our survey panel suggests that business confidence is improving and supporting demand conditions. However, the economic themes for 2022 will be focused on supply chains and inflation, which seem a long way off normalising based on the latest PMI survey. Supplier delivery times lengthened sharply once again during February, while input cost inflation remains stubbornly elevated. Sources of inflation are broad – our panel members reported rising prices for a multitude of inputs, and these are now being compounded by rising utility costs and wages. Shares in AstraZeneca are up 1.5%, after the Anglo-Swedish drugmaker released positive results for its Enhertu cancer drug. Britain’s biggest pharmaceutical firm, which is working on the medicine with Japan’s Daiichi Sankyo, said that it had been shown to prolong survival and slow the progression of metastatic breast cancer in patients with low levels of a protein called HER2. The improvement is “clinically meaningful” when compared with standard chemotherapy, it said, adding that detailed trial results would be presented at an upcoming medical conference. Susan Galbraith, executive vice president of oncology research &amp; development at AstraZeneca, said: Today’s historic news from DESTINY-Breast04 could reshape how breast cancer is classified and treated. A HER2-directed therapy has never-before shown a benefit in patients with HER2-low metastatic breast cancer. These results for Enhertu are a huge step forward and could potentially expand our ability to target the full spectrum of HER2 expression, validating the need to change the way we categorise and treat breast cancer. In London, the FTSE 100 steelmaker Evraz, which is incorporated in London but has significant operations in Russia, is the top riser on the index, up 5.4%. The company is 29% owned by Roman Abramovich, the Russian owner of Chelsea football club. British Airways owner IAG (International Consolidated Airlines Group) is the second-biggest gainer, up more than 4%, as remaining domestic Covid-19 restrictions are ditched in the UK. And we’re off – European shares have opened higher. UK’s FTSE 100 up 34 points, or 0.46%, at 7,549 France’s CAC up 0.8% Italy’s FTSE MiB up 0.56% Spain’s Ibex up 0.7% On the markets, nickel prices have hit their highest level in more than a decade, because of low stock levels, rising demand from electric car battery makers, and the Ukraine crisis. Three-month nickel on the London Metal Exchange rose as high as $24,545 a tonne, the highest since August 2011. Analysts at ANZ , Australia’s second-biggest bank, said: Strong sales in electric vehicles are favouring demand for battery materials, including nickel. They added that the Ukraine-Russia tensions and the resulting supply risk were adding to spread volatility. A massive leak from one of the world’s biggest private banks, Credit Suisse, has exposed the hidden wealth of clients involved in torture, drug trafficking, money laundering, corruption and other serious crimes. Details of accounts linked to 30,000 Credit Suisse clients all over the world are contained in the leak, which unmasks the beneficiaries of more than 100bn Swiss francs (£80bn)* held in one of Switzerland’s best-known financial institutions. The leak points to widespread failures of due diligence by Credit Suisse, despite repeated pledges over decades to weed out dubious clients and illicit funds. The Guardian is part of a consortium of media outlets given exclusive access to the data. The investigation reveals how Credit Suisse repeatedly either opened or maintained bank accounts for a panoramic array of high-risk clients across the world. They include a human trafficker in the Philippines, a Hong Kong stock exchange boss jailed for bribery, a billionaire who ordered the murder of his Lebanese pop star girlfriend and executives who looted Venezuela’s state oil company, as well as corrupt politicians from Egypt to Ukraine. The huge trove of banking data was leaked by an anonymous whistleblower to the German newspaper Süddeutsche Zeitung. “I believe that Swiss banking secrecy laws are immoral,” the whistleblower source said in a statement. “The pretext of protecting financial privacy is merely a fig leaf covering the shameful role of Swiss banks as collaborators of tax evaders.” Credit Suisse said that Switzerland’s strict banking secrecy laws prevented it from commenting on claims relating to individual clients. “Credit Suisse strongly rejects the allegations and inferences about the bank’s purported business practices,” the bank said in a statement, arguing that the matters uncovered by reporters are based on “selective information taken out of context, resulting in tendentious interpretations of the bank’s business conduct.” Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. The week has started on a calmer note with news that US president Joe Biden and his Russian counterpart Vladimir Putin have agreed to meet to discuss the Ukrainian crisis. The French president, Emmanuel Macron, has invited Putin and Biden to attend a summit aimed at de-escalating the Ukraine crisis, and the leaders have agreed in principle, Macron’s office has announced, amid further US warnings that war is imminent. The Russian rouble fell to a one-week low but has since recovered to trade up 1% against the dollar. It is now at 76.5 after touching 77.69 in early trade. While tensions on the Ukraine-Russia border ramped up over the weekend, European markets are expected to rise slightly at the open. US markets are off for President’s Day. Brent crude, the global benchmark for Russia’s main export (oil), is down a fraction at $93.45 a barrel. Gold – seen as a safe haven investment in times of trouble – has eased 0.5% to $1,888.54 an ounce after hitting an eight-month high of $1,891.33 an ounce. However, markets remain on edge, and Asian stocks are mostly down today, with Japan’s Nikkei losing 0.78% and Hong Kong’s Hang Seng down 0.83%. Last week, the UK’s FTSE 100 index had its worst week since late November, when the discovery of the Omicron Covid-19 variant rocked markets. The blue-chip index lost 1.9% after a big tumble last Monday. In Japan, a key parliamentary committee has approved the government’s record 107.6 trillion yen (£690,000) spending plan for the next fiscal year, paving the way for the budget’s full passage through the legislature next month. The highlight on the economic front are flash estimates for closely-watched business surveys from Markit for February, released this morning for the eurozone and the UK. Michael Hewson, chief market analyst at CMC Markets UK, has looked at this. The outlook for the French and German economy continues to look uncertain, although after a weak December the German economy did see a modest bounce back in January. In the UK, December saw a sharp fall in services sector activity, to 53.6 from 58.5 in November, a move that saw a slight recovery in January, despite the Plan B restrictions which were brought in by the UK government half way through the month due to concerns about the Omicron variant. The restrictions on the hospitality sector clearly hit pubs and restaurants, as well as some retail outlets, but we still saw a recovery to 54.1. With the gradual lifting of restrictions midway through January we could see a further rebound to 55.5 although it is likely to be tempered by caution over the rise in the cost of living. Manufacturing activity in the meantime was steady, slipping modestly to 57.3, however selling price inflation has remained at record levels, a trend that looks set to continue. On the bright side new orders and employment also rose, with the hope that this will continue into the first quarter. The Agenda 8.15am GMT: France Markit manufacturing, services and composite PMIs flash for February 8.30am GMT: Germany Markit flash PMIs for February 9am GMT: Eurozone Markit flash PMIs for February 9.30am GMT: UK Markit flash PMIs for February (forecast composite: 55) 3.15pm Treasury Select Committee hearing on the future of financial servicesThe accidental killing of a hiker by a teenager who was hunting wild boar has rekindled a bitter debate over stricter regulations of France’s hunting tradition before the presidential election in April. The 25-year-old woman was walking with a friend along a marked trail near Aurillac in the heavily forested Cantal region when she was hit by a stray bullet on Saturday. She died instantly. The 17-year-old girl who pulled the trigger was part of an organised hunt in the forest and had received her hunting licence when she was 16. She was treated in hospital for shock and was still being questioned by police on Monday morning. Tests revealed no trace of drugs or alcohol in her body. The killing has sparked a row over hunting accidents in France and whether tough new rules should be imposed limiting hunting to certain days or weekends. France is the country with the largest number of hunters in Europe. It is the only country that allows hunting every day during the hunting season – unlike other countries that have put in place non-hunting days, allowing more security for hikers. “We urgently need more regulation of this activity,” said Yannick Jadot, the Greens presidential candidate. He said an Ipsos poll had shown 61% of French people wanted hunting banned on weekends and in the school holidays. Jean-Luc Mélenchon, who is leading in the polls among leftwing candidates, said this “abominable catastrophe must make us stop to think”. He called for a ban on weekends and school holidays “because that’s when there’s the biggest risk”. But he said he did not want to ban hunting completely as that would cause chaos in France. Hunting in France is not considered a class issue, unlike in the UK. The French Revolution stripped nobles of their exclusive hunting rights and today many of France’s more than 1 million hunters are working class, particularly in the south-west and north-east of the country. Hunting in France varies from wild boar and deer to different bird species. Unlike in the UK, horseback hunting with packs of hounds is not banned, though it is a minority sport. The centrist Emmanuel Macron adopted a pro-hunting stance at the start of his presidency, seen as a way of courting the rural vote. The far-right presidential candidate Marine Le Pen said hunting in France was “an ancestral tradition which must be maintained”. She said it should not be banned at weekends, but there should be stricter safety measures to allow walkers and hunters to enjoy the forest. “If it turns out we need to tighten the rules further, we will do so,” Macron’s secretary of state in charge of biodiversity, Bérangère Abba, told Agence France-Presse, noting that France had announced the creation of an app that could indicate areas where hunts were taking place. Le Monde cited figures from France’s biodiversity office of 3,325 hunting accidents in France since 2000, resulting in 421 deaths. France has in recent months banned certain highly criticised hunting techniques of birds, such as hunting with nets or bird cages or glue-trap hunting, in line with a 2009 EU directive.The Pegasus Project, a special investigation by the Guardian, Washington Post, and the Forbidden Stories Network of media partners, has won a prestigious George Polk Award in Journalism in the Technology Reporting category. Established in 1949 by Long Island University (LIU), the George Polk Awards commemorate CBS correspondent George Polk who was murdered in 1948 while covering the Greek civil war. The annual awards focus on investigative and enterprising reporting that gains attention and achieves results, honouring special achievement in journalism. The Pegasus Project, a collaborative investigation into NSO Group which sells hacking spyware to governments, was an unprecedented leak that revealed how the spyware technology had been used by repressive governments to commit widespread human rights abuses. Katharine Viner, editor-in-chief, Guardian News &amp; Media says: “This award is a huge honour for the Guardian and our reporting partners who helped bring this powerful, global investigation to millions of readers around the world. Rigorous investigative reporting is the lifeblood of the Guardian and the Pegasus project was one of the biggest and boldest investigations in our history, resulting in major impact around the world. In an age when public interest journalism faces more threats than ever, this is a timely reminder of the power of investigative reporting and the importance of independent, quality journalism.” Paul Lewis, head of investigations, Guardian News &amp; Media says: “The Pegasus Project revealed widespread abuse of a powerful surveillance tool – and showed what can be achieved with collaborative investigative reporting. Thanks to Long Island University and the George Polk Awards for this accolade, and recognition of this vital journalistic effort that held both people and power to account.” This is the third time that the Guardian has won a George Polk Award. The Guardian also won in 2014 for investigative stories on NSA surveillance based on top-secret documents disclosed by former intelligence analyst Edward Snowden, and in 1960 for a foreign correspondent dispatch. In 2019, Guardian and Observer reporter Carole Cadwalladr was also named as part of the New York Times’s Polk award for her reporting on the Cambridge Analytica Files. The award win follows the publication of the Guardian’s latest investigation, Suisse secrets, a global journalistic collaboration into a leak of data from the Swiss bank, Credit Suisse. Notes to editors About Guardian News &amp; Media Guardian News &amp; Media (GNM) publishes theguardian.com, one of the world’s leading English-language news websites. Traffic from outside of the UK now represents around two-thirds of the Guardian’s total digital audience. In the UK, GNM publishes the Guardian newspaper six days a week, first published in 1821, and the world’s oldest Sunday newspaper, The Observer.Mark Thomas, comedian I remember the producer Geoff Anderson and I having a conversation about making a radical version of That’s Life! But instead of bringing dodgy double-glazing salesmen to book, we’d bring down international capitalism. We failed. But we had a really good go. We piloted Comedy Product in 1995. I was 32 and had done a bit of telly stuff – The Mary Whitehouse Experience, and I’d hosted Loose Talk on Radio 1. But what most obsessed me was The Cutting Edge, a topical weekly comedy show that I’d been part of founding at the Comedy Store. The immediacy coinciding with the strength of the writing would often reflect or refine the audiences’ feeling about a story. Looking back, that was where I began to grind out the daily practice of political comedy. Channel 4 approached us about making the show but the commissioning process took so long. The commissioning editor at the time, Seamus Cassidy, was a great bloke – he was responsible for Father Ted and some other brilliant shows. Trouble was, he took ages to make up his mind. We did a pilot but it was another year before we were up and running. No one had tried to make this kind of show before. We were constantly asking each other, “Can we do this?” In the pilot, we were chasing Lord Bethell in his open-top election battlebus, heckling him with a megaphone, worried that we were going to get arrested. The final thing we did was catch a Finnish arms dealer moving guns around the world illegally. Our exposé led to Finland tightening up their legislation. It was a steep learning curve, from shouting abuse at a Tory MEP to chasing international arms dealers. The standup bits were filmed on a Sunday night before an audience in a south London pub called The Bedford, which used to be on the edge of Balham’s red-light district. Hard to imagine now, with the gentrification that’s happened there. We’d write the script on Friday afternoons. I’d do a couple of warmup gigs on Friday and Saturday night, with the researchers sorting out any problems as we went along. Then, on Sunday, we’d record the show. We made 45 episodes, and Channel 4 gave us a chance to learn on the job. Their lawyers tried to make things work and, on the few occasions they knocked us back, it was executives higher up the food chain on issues of taste and decency. We always shot two shows of the standup with different audiences. In between, we’d get the lawyers’ notes. It gave us space to have fun with it: there was a playful version and the legally required one. Sometimes, I was with the lawyers right up until I stepped back on stage. We had tenacity, an ability to improvise, and sometimes we got lucky. We got Peter Brabeck-Letmathe, CEO of Nestlé, on camera at a time when they were mislabelling their baby milk products in Africa, after a tip-off that he was giving a talk at Oxford University. The college had these great big gates, and a student just let us in. Within two days, he was faxing us new designs for their products with the change of wording. We had scientists, activists and whistleblowers helping us. Someone told us about the radioactive bird shit at Sellafield and we thought: “That can’t be true, can it?” Someone passed us the phone number of Jerry Rawlings, the president of Ghana, and there I was, phoning him on stage from a Balham pub! Some MPs were very open. One just called, I went round to their office and they handed over a load of information about how Britain was refurbishing guns for Morocco in the occupied area of Western Sahara. It became a badge of honour that we were being spied on, a feeling that we were doing something right. After the show finished, I carried on investigating the arms trade and presented evidence to the quadripartite committee [on arms export controls]. I got a call in 2006 from the chairman [Roger Berry MP] who said: “We’ve just published our report and if you look, right at the beginning, it says: ‘We commend the work of Mark Thomas’.” I told him, if you ever say that again, I’ll sue. Geoff Atkinson, producer Channel 4 gave us the money to shoot the very basic pilot, and from there, they commissioned a series and we just got on with it. The biggest motivation was keeping that journalistic integrity – the fear that getting something factually wrong would undermine everything. That drove us. We’re not journalists, we both came from a background in comedy and converted. I made the leap from writing for the likes of The Two Ronnies and Spitting Image to writing and producing for Rory Bremner a few years before. We were constantly performing mental gymnastics because you never had control of all of the elements. We didn’t think we’d get through to Jerry Rawlings, then we had to make sure it was actually him. It was completely absorbing, and the hard work repaid you when you got that extra bit of information or luck. There was no restriction on the subject matter. The format was originally a series of mini-adventures with standup in between, but it later became much more narrative-driven. That was something we grew into, rather than a conscious shift to longer-form storytelling. In the episode about Indonesian clothing factories, where we had schoolchildren interviewing Adidas’s [global director for social and environmental affairs] David Husselbee about the working conditions, we filmed a pre- and post-watershed version, with the former having kids in the audience. And that was the one that went out. After finishing the series, we did a few longer-form episodes for Channel 4’s Dispatches. At that time, [production company] Vera had a third-floor office. And there was a break-in one Sunday afternoon, they smashed their way in with a fire extinguisher, but they didn’t take anything. We put a security guard in, just to keep an eye. And on the next Thursday, at three in the morning, the main door was opened, and a smartly dressed guy came up the stairs. He’d obviously come back for something, and I can only think a bug had been planted. It could have been anyone but we had our suspicions. I used to naively think we were just comedians having fun. But afterwards, I realised they were taking us more seriously than we were [taking ourselves]. I don’t know why Channel 4 haven’t repeated it. We were useful at the time because we allowed them to say they were independent and critical of politicians. But they don’t need that at the moment: they’re fighting a government trying to privatise them. I often think of doing a series called Mark Thomas Déjà Vu, and we’d go back and see who still hasn’t cleaned up their act. Export credit guarantee is still abused, dams are still being built where they shouldn’t. And the arms industry isn’t exactly clean, is it? We were lucky in many ways but we made our own luck. We set out to have fun, doing what we thought an audience would like. Someone once dubbed it “Thomas the Prank Engine”. And I quite like that description. Mark Thomas: Product, a live UK tour with the comedian introducing clips from, and discussing the story behind various episodes of the television show, begins on 23 FebruaryReporting conditions for journalists covering the Beijing Winter Olympics fell short of international standards despite assurances from the International Olympic Committee (IOC), the Foreign Correspondents’ Club (FCCC) of China has said. The club said it was “dismayed” that at a time when global attention was trained on China more than ever the government and Olympic officials still failed to uphold their own rules on accredited foreign media. Instead “government interference occurred regularly during the Games”, both inside and outside venues, when journalists tried to interview athletes and local residents. The FCCC also highlighted significant online trolling and abuse of journalists who had covered Olympic events and related stories. “In some cases these attacks were fuelled by Chinese state media accounts and Chinese diplomats,” it said, describing an observed aspect of state-backed online harassment and propaganda campaigns. The FCCC statement listed a number of claims of intimidation, obstruction and harassment, including some that the IOC – widely criticised for granting the Games to a government accused of crimes against humanity – had dismissed as “isolated incidents”. “After an Olympic ski event, a foreign reporter was prevented by a Beijing Olympic official from interviewing a Hong Kong athlete in the Games’ mixed zone, a space supposedly governed by international Olympic rules,” the statement said. “Most visibly, a reporter with the Dutch national broadcaster NOS was hauled off camera during a live TV broadcast by plainclothes security men, despite the fact that he had been standing in a spot police directed him to only minutes earlier.” During the opening ceremony, the NOS’s Sjoerd den Daas was reporting live from outside the Olympic “bubble” in Beijing when he was grabbed and dragged away by security officials. “Unfortunately, this is increasingly the daily reality for journalists in China,” the Dutch outlet later tweeted, adding that Den Daas “is fine and could fortunately finish his story a few minutes later”. The IOC said it was an “isolated” event that would not affect foreign media reporting at the Games, but the FCCC said foreign reporters were frequently tailed or manhandled by security or officials while trying to report from outside Games venues. A France 24 correspondent said they were assigned a “guide” while reporting from outside the bubble, who reported back if their interviews “deviated” from the official narrative. The FCCC said it was disappointed that China had tightened conditions for the press, “contrary to the Olympic spirit”. It added: “The FCCC urges the Chinese authorities to uphold their own stated rules on accredited foreign press in China: namely, to allow journalists to book and conduct their own interviews without threat of state interference and to report freely in public areas. Unfortunately, neither rule was enforced at a time when global attention was trained on China more than ever.” Press freedom in China has been worsening in recent years, with increasing reports of harassment – online and in person – as well as government-led difficulties. Ahead of the Beijing Winter Olympics, the FCCC had accused officials of “continuously stymying” media attempts to cover the preparations and lead up. The Beijing organising committee denied the accusations and said it had “never recognised” the FCCC, but said it “guaranteed the freedom of reporting” by international media on the Games in accordance with “relevant Chinese policies”. The promise was on the proviso journalists abided by “relevant Chinese laws, regulations and anti-epidemic policies”.The prospect of a third successive interest rate rise from the Bank of England is looming larger after news that the easing of Covid restrictions is generating growth and inflationary pressure. Evidence of the strongest performance by the private sector since last summer left economists convinced Threadneedle Street would again increase borrowing costs when its monetary policy committee meets next month. While most analysts predicted an interest rate rise of 0.25 percentage points to 0.75%, some said the latest snapshot of activity from the IHS Markit and the Chartered Institute of Procurement and Supply (Cips) purchasing managers’ index meant a 0.5 point move to 1% was possible. Elizabeth Martins, a senior economist at HSBC bank, said for the Bank of England, the question may not be whether to raise rates but by how much. “Our view is that the Bank will stick to 0.25 percentage point increments: after all, having raised rates twice and launched a quantitative tightening policy already, it is somewhat ahead of the game compared to some developed market central banks. But there is no doubt that the strength in services sector activity, expectations and input costs in this release is hawkish.” Thomas Pugh, the UK economist at the audit and consulting firm RSM, said: “The strong February PMI reading makes it even more likely that the committee will raise interest rates from 0.5% to 0.75% at its next meeting in March; and raises the risk of a 0.5 point jump, although a 0.25 point rise is more likely.” An indication of current thinking inside Threadneedle Street will be provided when four MPC members – including the governor, Andrew Bailey – give evidence to the Commons treasury committee on Wednesday. The February PMI from IHS Markit/Cips showed the fastest pace of growth since last June. Stronger consumer spending on travel, leisure and entertainment was behind a pickup in service sector activity, according to the “flash” estimate of the state of the economy. However, the monthly health check also found growing inflationary pressures driven by higher wages, dearer energy and more expensive raw materials. Chris Williamson, the chief business economist at IHS Markit, said: “The latest PMI surveys indicate a resurgent economy in February, as business activity leaped as Covid-19 containment measures were relaxed. “With the PMI’s gauge of output growth accelerating markedly in February and cost pressures intensifying to the second highest on record, the odds of an increasingly aggressive policy tightening have shortened, with a third back-to-back rate rise looking increasingly inevitable in March.” Activity in the service sector rose from 54.1 to 60.8 – the highest level since June, while manufacturing remained unchanged at 57.3. A reading above 50 suggests output is rising. The survey said private sector companies were reporting a steep increase in incoming new work in February, with higher workloads leading to a pickup in recruitment. “Stronger client demand was widely linked to improving confidence about the UK economic outlook and rollback of pandemic restrictions,” it said. Gabriella Dickens, a UK economist at Pantheon Macro, said: “The sharp rise in the composite PMI in February, to its highest level since June, suggests that the UK economy is rebounding from Omicron at a fair clip. The PMI was well above its average level in the second half of 2021 – 56.3 – when GDP rose by 1.0% in both the third and fourth quarters.”JACK’S BACK In a 19-minute long sit-down with The Athletic last August, the only time Jack Wilshere came close to cracking anything resembling a smile was when he struggled to remember the identities of his close friends in football. Without a club after being released by Bournemouth, the sight of the one-time Arsenal and England superstar revealing how difficult it was to explain to his eldest child that no club anywhere wanted him, while candidly discussing the fact that his two youngest had never seen him play football and probably don’t know what he “does” was enough to bring a tear to a glass eye. It was certainly a far cry from the cock-a-hoop Jack the Lad who got himself in bother eight years ago for singing anti-Tottenham songs while wearing shades and a bucket hat during the celebrations that followed Arsenal’s 2014 FA Cup win. In the last six months, Jack has kept his head down, sometimes training with his former club and often training alone, despite not knowing what exactly it is he’s training for. Aged just 30, Wilshere should be in his playing pomp but not a single club in any of Europe’s top five leagues were prepared to take a punt on him. His reputation for having ankles made from biscuits doesn’t so much precede him as march in front of him loudly banging a giant drum while shouting “ABANDON HOPE ALL YE WHO THINK OF SIGNING JACK!” One suspects that if somebody had arrived from the future in a time-travelling DeLorean to tell 2015 Jack that in seven-and-a-half years he’d be signing for Danish side Aarhus, he’d have laughed and presumed they’d mistaken him for Nicklas Bendtner. But it is off to mid-table Superliga side Aarhus that Jack is headed, in the hope of staying fit enough to prove there’s life in the old dog yet. “I am very grateful for the opportunity AGF has offered me and I will do everything I can to help the team move forward,” said Wilshere, to his children, Aarhus fans and the wider public in general. “I am very much looking forward to contributing to the team.” And while his first move abroad may not be among those he envisaged as a young player with the world at his feet, one of football’s weirdly forgotten and unwanted men has at least secured himself something he openly admits he hasn’t had for some time: a good reason to get up in the morning. QUOTE OF THE DAY “Each player who has played, and it doesn’t matter what level, has great games and tough games, and [Moore] had a tough day at the office. Obviously, she’s sad and disappointed, but she’s an unbelievable person and player who belongs on this team. We are all behind her in this tough moment” – New Zealand manager Jitka Klimkova offers her support to defender Meikayla Moore, who scored a hat-trick of own goals in 36 minutes before being substituted during the 5-0 defeat by USA. RECOMMENDED LISTENING Join Max Rushden and the pod squad for Football Weekly! FIVER LETTERS “Regarding Brian Ross’s response to Ian Copestake’s response to Brian Ross’s response to Ian Copestake’s prizeless letter o’ the day (Fiver letters passim), your sentence wasn’t a question, Brian, and therefore did not require a question mark. The fact that you believe it did is the most surprising thing that has happened since my Uncle Eric’s widow tuned up at his funeral, only to discover for the very first time, upon meeting the other attendees, that her dear departed husband had seven grown-up children and three previous wives” – Mac Millings. “I stayed up to the flamin’ wee small hours to watch the match at the Etihad. So much for ‘Spursiness’” – Richard Fernandez. “Leeds v Manchester United is a blueprint for success if football’s appeal ever falters. Merely install temporary managers, or those that can’t speak English, flood pitches before the game so the ball can’t roll smoothly, and employ giant wind machines” – Williams. “The Guardian informed me the other day I had read 1,057 articles in the past year. I’m thinking this achievement should be recognised by The Fiver” – Murray Todd. “Re: 30th birthdays (Fiver passim), I spent mine in Lisbon watching Ally McCoist break his leg, Portugal pumping Scotland 5-0 and all hopes of going to USA ‘94 going up in smoke. Your readers’ dull 0-0 draws seem decent by comparison” – Dougie. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’ the day is … Mac Millings. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS Pep Guardiola has reminded hacks that he “never said the title race was over” after a weekend in which Spurs (yes, Spurs!) and Liverpool reignited it. Swansea v Bournemouth and Fleetwood v Sheffield Wednesday have been called off after stadium-knack caused by Storm Franklin. Look away now Mikel Arteta: Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang made history by becoming the first footballer to score a hat-trick in the Premier League, Ligue 1, Bundesliga and La Liga after his treble for Barça against Valencia. The PFA has called again for the introduction of temporary substitutions for head injuries after Robin Koch was allowed to play on for Leeds against Manchester United. Off the pitch, nine people were arrested “for a number of offences including public order, throwing of missiles and breach of banning order”, according to West Yorkshire Police. England manager Sarina Wiegman praised 21-year-old Hannah Hampton after the debutant goalkeeper kept a clean sheet in the 0-0 draw with a strong Spain team. “She’s a young player, very talented,” she cooed. “She just needs games like this to develop.” And Ben Garuccio had not scored a goal in four years and then he went and did a flamin’ scorpion kick in the flamin’ A-League to backheel himself into Puskás Award contention. STILL WANT MORE? Sneer and loathing in West Yorkshire: Paul MacInnes and our snapper, Tom Jenkins, braved the rain, fireworks and flying golf balls to bring you a first-person account of Leeds v Manchester United. Barry Glendenning’s column this week is on Damien Duff who, despite being “scared” and “uncomfortable”, has swapped the south of France to take the managerial reins at League of Ireland strugglers Shelbourne. Count ‘em: here’s 10 things from the weekend’s Premier League action to get your juices flowing. Jonathan Wilson is feeling excited, and wants to tell you why. Nobody wants to win Serie A, apparently. Nicky Bandini has more. Frenkie de Jong sits down for a hot chat with Arthur Renard to discuss an unexpected text from Sergio Busquets, life without Lionel Messi and how Xavi is helping him improve. And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! OUCH!The University of Oxford accepted at least £1.6m from oil, gas and petrochemical companies in 2020-21 despite its 2035 net zero commitment, according to a report by students. The funding was in addition to the more than £11m Oxford received from fossil fuel donors between 2015 and 2020. The research was based on a freedom of information request filed in October by the student-run Oxford Climate Justice Campaign (OCJC). It revealed that four firms, Eni, Mitsubishi, BP and Shell, had all given donations and research funding to the university totalling between £1.6m-£1.7m from 1 August 2020 to 31 July 2021. This included £208,700 for research funding from Mitsubishi Heavy Industries and £58,600 for research funding and donations from Shell, according to the report. The largest contribution however, came from the Italian oil group Eni. It gave more than £1.3m to the Saïd Business School, according to the FOI. Of this, it appears that £769,500 funded Eni scholarships and the remaining £571,000 supported the school’s Centre for Corporate Reputation. The report describe this as “another case of corporate greenwashing”. The figures do not include the £100m that the petrochemical group Ineos donated to create a new institute to study antimicrobial resistance. The researchers noted the continued presence of positions and institutions named after or dedicated to fossil fuel donors including the Eni-Oxford Africa scholarships. OCJC’s last report also found that the Oxford Institute of Energy Studies was two-thirds funded by the fossil fuel industry. The OCJC member behind the FOI request, Philip Hutchinson, said: “Oxford often tells us that donation money doesn’t influence their research. But how can the Saïd Business School provide talks and advice on climate policy while at the same time taking money from major fossil fuel producers? It doesn’t take a genius to see that if you’re taking so much money, millions every year, this will influence what advice you’re giving to leaders.” He added: “This is especially true for the Centre for Corporate Reputation. If you’re playing a role in deciding what is acceptable for corporations to do, this money creates a huge conflict of interest which really questions whether the Saïd Business School can actually give honest advice on these issues.” According to the report, Oxford disclosed it had received between £20,000-£98,000 from BP in 2020-21, saying that revealing the exact amount of money donated would “undermine its ability to secure future research funding from this source”, which is a valid exemption under the Freedom of Information Act 2000. “I think that’s an inappropriate use of section 43 of the FOI act,” Hutchinson added. “It’s simply untrue to state this will damage BP’s commercial interests when information about BP’s ties to Oxford University has been out for years. Why would it only damage their commercial interests now?” Cambridge, in contrast, publicly report the exact amount of money every company, not just fossil fuel companies, provides in research grants to the university every year. An Oxford spokesperson said: “The University of Oxford safeguards the independence of its teaching and research regardless of the nature of their funding. Those donating money to the university have no influence over how academics carry out their research or what conclusions they reach. Researchers publish the results of their work whether the results are seen to be critical or favourable by industry or governments. “Our research with different industries allows the university to apply its knowledge to real challenges of pressing global concern, with funding often going directly into research into climate-related issues and renewables. None of the philanthropic funding highlighted [by this report] has gone into extraction and exploration research but has been used to widen access to education, to fund scholarships, academic posts, and capital costs.” • This article was amended on 23 February 2022. An earlier version cited the Exxon-Mobil scholarship in global health science as an example noted by the OCJC researchers of “the continued presence of positions and institutions named after or dedicated to fossil fuel donors”. The Nuffield Department of Population Health, University of Oxford contacted us after publication to say that the Exxon-Mobil scholarship has not been offered by them since 2014.The Pegasus project, a special investigation by the Guardian, Washington Post and the Forbidden Stories Network of media partners, is among the recipients of the prestigious 2021 George Polk awards in journalism. The joint investigation into NSO Group, which sells hacking spyware to governments, revealed how the technology had been used by repressive governments to commit widespread human rights abuses. Using forensic analysis of iPhones, the project uncovered widespread surveillance of journalists, human rights defenders and lawyers by authoritarian government clients of NSO around the world. Katharine Viner, the Guardian’s editor-in-chief, said: “This award is a huge honour for the Guardian and our reporting partners who helped bring this powerful, global investigation to millions of readers around the world. “Rigorous investigative reporting is the lifeblood of the Guardian and the Pegasus project was one of the biggest and boldest investigations in our history, resulting in major impact around the world. In an age when public interest journalism faces more threats than ever, this is a timely reminder of the power of investigative reporting and the importance of independent, quality journalism.” Paul Lewis, the Guardian’s head of investigations, said: “The Pegasus project revealed widespread abuse of a powerful surveillance tool – and showed what can be achieved with collaborative investigative reporting. Thanks to Long Island University and the George Polk awards for this accolade, and recognition of this vital journalistic effort that held both people and power to account.” It is the third time that the Guardian has won a George Polk award, having also won in 2014 for investigative stories on NSA surveillance based on top-secret documents disclosed by the former intelligence analyst Edward Snowden, and in 1960 for a foreign correspondent dispatch. The awards were established in 1949 by Long Island University to commemorate George Polk, a CBS correspondent murdered in 1948 while covering the Greek civil war. The 2021 awards will be presented at the Yale Club in New York on Friday 8 April. The Guardian and its partners revealed how Hungary’s government was spying on journalists, Narendra Modi’s government monitored political opponents, and Dubai’s ruler, Sheikh Mohammed bin Rashid al-Maktoum, spied on his daughter and ex-wife. The Pegasus project also drew on a list of 50,000 phone numbers that was leaked to Forbidden Stories and is understood to have consisted of persons of interest to government clients of NSO. It included the numbers of the French president, Emmanuel Macron, relatives of the murdered Washington Post journalist Jamal Khashoggi and close associates of the Dalai Lama. NSO strongly denied that the data had any connection to the Israeli firm and said the phone numbers on the list were not targets of NSO customers. The Guardian’s reporting team included Stephanie Kirchgaessner, Paul Lewis, David Pegg, Sam Cutler, Dan Sabbagh, Nina Lakhani, Michael Safi, Shaun Walker, Angelique Chrisafis and Martin Hodgson. Other media partners included Süddeutsche Zeitung, Le Monde, Die Zeit and the Organized Crime and Corruption Reporting Project (OCCRP). Others honoured in the Polk awards included Clarissa Ward and her crew for their real-time coverage of the rapid rise of the Taliban as the US withdrew from Afghanistan; the staff of the Washington Post for the three-part online series The Attack that cited systematic security failures in advance of the January storming of the US Capitol; and Jeff Horwitz and the staff of the Wall Street Journal for the Facebook Files, documenting how Facebook ignored internal findings that company practices promoted anger, divisiveness and extremism, protected drug cartels, human traffickers and dictators, and endangered teenage girls susceptible to body-image concerns, anxiety and depression.In just six days the UK has been battered by a triple whammy of Dudley, Eunice and Franklin and next up could be Gladys. But does the naming of storms heighten awareness to the danger, or inure us? Liz Bentley, chief executive of the Royal Meteorological Society, says that it does work and heightens awareness. “Having named storms gives them a kind of uniqueness, identity and higher profile … that need for people to listen and take action.” The naming of storms in the UK and Ireland is a recent phenomenon, although it has been used around the world for decades. But in 2015 the UK Met Office and Ireland’s Met Éireann launched the Name our Storms project to improve communication of high-impact weather events. The public are invited to suggest names for the storms and a list of alternate male and female names is issued in September. Last year it began with Arwen and if there is a storm later this week it will be Gladys. Future names include Imani, Nasim, Ruby and Tineke. The naming of storms comes on top of the system in which the Met Office issues yellow, amber and rare red warnings. Bentley accepted that having so many weather warnings could inure people to their danger. “I’ve heard people say: ‘We always have warnings and people become blase about them.’ But they are there for a reason.” People will only become blase, Bentley believes, if they stop believing them. “The worst thing that could happen is that we push out lots of these warnings and then nothing happens. There’s that feeling of we’re crying wolf.” She said the Met Office had done an impressive job in naming Eunice last Monday. “To get that message out five days in advance is pretty good going.” Named storm warnings work, said Bentley, pointing to the 22 lives lost in the “great storm” of 1987, which came through when most people were asleep. Eunice was during the day and three people in the UK were killed. “Any loss of life is terrible but it could have been an awful lot worse.” The pioneer of storm naming as we know it was a meteorologist called Clement Wragge, who worked for the Queensland government between 1887 and 1907. It was adopted by US navy and air force meteorologists during the second world war for the naming of tropical cyclones and became common practice in the US and Australia from the 1950s. Andrew Charlton-Perez, professor of meteorology at Reading University, was part of a team that explored the impact of naming storms by looking at Storm Doris, which took place in 2017, and how information flowed. “You can definitely see very large spikes in attention around that term a couple of days before the event, there really is communication going on.” Naming Storm Eunice so far in advance “really did change behaviour”, he said. “Both the warnings and storm naming is all about changing behaviour and making sure that people don’t put themselves at risk so I think yes absolutely, that worked in this case.” He praised the Met Office for making the right calls at the right time, meaning people took note. “You can end up with doing this too much and people get inured to it.” So far, that was not happening, he said.Following the critically acclaimed Dearest Sister, Laos’s first female director, Mattie Do, has crafted another enigmatic tale that sets itself apart from the usual horror fare, offering plenty of genre pleasures while retaining an arthouse aesthetic. In an impoverished Laotian village, an unnamed farmer (Yannawoutthi Chanthalungsy) leads a near-hermit-like existence. His daily rituals involve scavenging for metal scraps, which he sells for little money. His reticent demeanour, however, betrays none of his discontent. Yet, just as secrets lie beneath the landscape, he has skeletons in his closet. He is haunted by his mother’s death from severe lung disease, and while people whisper about his ability to speak to the dead, no one knows that, since his childhood encounter with a ghost, he has taken it upon himself to relieve dying women of their suffering by euthanising them. As their apparitions wander for eternity, these spectres embody his own inability to break free of the past. The film takes place in a near future where the government injects everyone with a surveillance chip, but the otherworldly plot is grounded by exacting characterisation. Chanthalungsy is astounding in his portrayal of a man so consumed with regret that his humanity slowly shreds away. Enthralled by his new ability to travel back in time to influence the course of his mother’s passage into the next life, he is blind to how his interventions result in frightening consequences. Blurring the line between good intentions and selfishness, The Long Walk is a chilling and wholly original exploration of destructive human desires. • The Long Walk is released on 28 February on digital platforms.Name: Pickleball Age: Pickleball was invented by three dads on Bainbridge Island, near Seattle, in 1965. So that would make it 57 years old. Seriously, there’s a game called pickleball? Make that a sport. In fact, make that not just a sport but the fastest growing sport in the US. Does it involve kicking a gherkin about? It does not. Golden snitch, but made of a pickled onion? Again, no. There are no actual pickles involved. It is played with a wiffle ball … Is that like a quaffle? No! It’s not Quidditch, OK? A wiffle ball is one of those light, plastic balls with holes. Go on then, how do you play? It’s like a cross between tennis, badminton and ping pong … Whiff whaff? Shush. It’s played with hard paddles, a little larger than a ping-pong bat, on a court about a quarter the size of a tennis court, with a lower net … So like tennis for people who can’t play tennis? Not at all, though the fact that it is easier to learn is one of the reasons behind its success. Playing singles or doubles, you’ll soon be able to get rallies going. There’s less sprinting so it’s easier on the body, making it popular with retirees. So like tennis for old people? Not just. Those Washington dads invented it for their kids. Perhaps there are some celebrity pickleballers? Matthew Perry plays several times a week. And, in the newest season of Curb Your Enthusiasm, Larry David admits to enjoying a game. There are Instagram pickleball influencers, and pickleball bloggers. Several of the big sports networks are planning to cover the sport. But again, this is not about slebs and pros … What is it about? “It’s about connection, joy and play – and the importance of play in a world where exhaustion and workaholism are status symbols,” Brené Brown, vulnerability researcher, author and owner of Texas team the ATX Pickleballers, told the New York Times. It’s ordinary people picking up a paddle and pickleballing. And that’s what they’re doing, in their numbers. What kind of numbers are we talking? The Sport and Fitness Industry Association estimates that 4.8 million Americans played pickleball in 2021. What about outside the US? The UK say? So there are already several places where you can play. Yeah, but it’s not really going to catch on, is it? Why not? It’s called pickleball! Hmm, yes I see what you mean. It probably won’t make the Olympics any time soon. Do say: “Anyone for pickleball? No, not you Novak …” Don’t say: “Bring out the Branston!”Tributes have been paid to music entrepreneur and SBTV founder Jamal Edwards, who has died aged 31, with admirers and loved ones organising a vigil in west London to honour his life and legacy. His mother, Brenda Edwards, a regular panellist on ITV’s Loose Women, paid tribute to her “beautiful son”, who died suddenly on Sunday morning. In a statement released on the show’s official Twitter account, Edwards said her family and friends were “completely devastated” and confirmed that Jamal had died “after a sudden illness”. The music entrepreneur gained fame after setting up the new music platform in 2006, and was credited with helping to launch a series of UK music acts to stardom, including Ed Sheeran, Dave and Jessie J. Brenda Edwards wrote: “It is with the deepest heartache that I confirm that my beautiful son Jamal Edwards passed away yesterday morning after a sudden illness. Myself, his sister Tanisha, and the rest of his family and friends are completely devastated. He was the centre of our world. “As we come to terms with his passing, we asked for privacy to grieve this unimaginable loss. I would like to thank everyone for their messages of love and support. Jamal was an inspiration to myself and so many. Our love for him lives on, his legacy lives on. Long live Jamal Edwards MBE, MBA, PhD.” Jamal was known for founding the media platform SBTV, which started off as a YouTube channel and helped catapult grime and a wave of new artists to a global audience. He was also a director, author, DJ, entrepreneur and designer, and at 24 he was awarded an MBE for his work in music. The Prince of Wales and the Duchess of Cornwall paid tribute to the entrepreneur, with the Clarence House Twitter account stating: “Thinking of the family of Jamal Edwards today. His work in music but also as an ambassador for a new generation, including his work for The Prince’s Trust, were an inspiration to so many.” Former prime minister David Cameron, now chair of the National Citizen Service’s Board of Patrons, said his thoughts and prayers were with Edwards’s family, adding that through his work with the NCS Edwards had supported young people “to be the best they could be, leading from the front &amp; showing what’s possible with hard work and determination”. Sir Richard Branson, who penned the foreword for Edwards’ 2013 book Self Belief: The Vision, said: “What a loss of a truly extraordinary young man who made a huge difference to so many people’s lives.” On Loose Women on Monday the panel became tearful as they watched clips of Edwards. Host Charlene White said: “The love Brenda had for both Jamal and her daughter, Tanisha, was massive. Her heart was full of so much love for those children. So you know just how shocked Brenda is and just how hard it’s hit all of us who knew him and of course all of us who love Brenda.” The Instragram account Acton Unframed organised a candlelight vigil “in loving memory of our local hero Jamal Edwards” on Acton High Street. The careers of a long list of the world’s most successful musicians were launched through SBTV, before they were signed by major labels. Jamal said he started SBTV “on a £20 phone” while he was at school. His YouTube channel was established in 2006 and has 1.2 million subscribers and nearly 1bn total views. He was born in Luton in 1990 and grew up in Acton, west London. He received a BTec diploma in media moving image from Ealing college and worked at the retail chain Topman to support himself while developing SBTV. When he found success, Edwards undertook extensive philanthropic work, including in mental health and the funding of youth centres. He worked to break down taboos about men’s mental health, speaking of his own anxiety, and in 2021 launched a project aimed at refurbishing and reopening youth centres. He was also an ambassador for the Prince of Wales’s charity, the Prince’s Trust. The singer Rita Ora said in an Instagram post: “My first ever interview was with you. Jamal, Our endless talks on music and the belief you had in me and so many of us before we even believed in ourselves. I’m devastated. No words can describe how grateful I am to of been in your presence. Thank you for all you ever showed me. My heart goes out to @brendaedwardsglobal and the whole family. RIP.”Australian basketballer Josh Giddey has won many plaudits of late. During the recent NBA All-Star weekend, LeBron James became the latest to heap praise on the 19-year-old Oklahoma City Thunder rookie. “He has a great pace about the game, great vision,” said the basketball legend. “He’s playing beautiful basketball.” Giddey has won rookie of the month in the Western Conference for three consecutive months, and made history as the youngest-ever NBA player to record a triple-double. Most recently, just last week, the Victorian became the first NBA rookie to register three straight triple-doubles since basketball Hall-of-Famer Oscar Robertson 60 years ago. But a true measure of Giddey’s character can be found not in this rush of recent success, but from a time of disappointment. Mid-last year, the teenager was part of the training squad for the national team when Giddey was told he would not be part of Australia’s 12-man side at the Tokyo 2020 Olympics. It would have been a crushing blow, missing out on the opportunity to play in the green and gold on the grandest stage, just edged out by fellow youngster Josh Green. Ultimately, the non-selection cost Giddey a bronze medal – the Boomers’ historic first-ever international triumph. Yet he took it in his stride. “I could have sat around and sooked about it for a while,” Giddey admitted last year. “[But] I used it as motivation. I didn’t hold grudges and say, ‘they should have put me in the team’ or ‘this was wrong’. I just accepted the decision, moved forward.” Despite being cut from the Tokyo team, Giddey remained with the Boomers at a camp in Las Vegas – starring in an exhibition match against Nigeria. Rather than smart from non-selection, he put his head down and got to work. Giddey’s attitude towards disappointment suggests a bright future ahead. Being an elite basketballer comes with more than its fair share of ups and downs; players who can dust themselves off after a fall are the ones who thrive. In basketball, you quite literally miss every shot you don’t take. “Going forward,” he said of the Boomers snub, “it’s probably going to be for the better as it motivates me and makes me hungrier to make the next team.” Born in Melbourne, Giddey has basketball in his blood. His parents, Kim and Warrick Giddey, were both professional basketballers with the Melbourne Tigers. Kim was known for her scoring, Warrick for his tight defence. Giddey junior combines both attributes; he is now a 6ft 9in guard with superb on-court intelligence (even if his father jokes, of the complementary parental traits, that his son “excels in neither of those two areas.”) Midway through high school, Giddey joined the NBA Global Academy – co-located with the Basketball Australia Centre of Excellence, within the Australian Institute of Sport, in Canberra (where, coincidentally, he was coached by Marty Clarke, a former teammate of his father). The AIS basketball program is internationally renowned: almost every male and female Australian basketball star in the past four decades has come through the system. It was at the AIS where Giddey blossomed, adding four inches of height to press his claim for an NBA draft spot. With his wingspan, gangly build and smart passing game, the teenager quickly emerged as a future star. Yet rather than follow the well-trodden path to an American college team, Giddey opted to remain at home for an extra season – joining National Basketball League outfit the Adelaide 36ers, where he won rookie of the year. It was an astute decision, becoming the first home-grown talent to participate in the league’s Next Stars program, which has attracted a number of international prospects to Australia in recent years. Even still, Giddey was tipped to go mid-first round in the NBA draft; most observers predicted the Australian would be picked at 10 or lower. Instead, in a minor-shock, Oklahoma took Giddey with their No 6 pick, putting him in an elite category of Australians to have been drafted in the top 10, alongside former No 1 picks Andrew Bogut and Ben Simmons, and Dante Exum, who went at five. But the selection came as no surprise to Giddey, who had his heart set on the Thunder (he told a team reporter: “Ever since the pre-draft process started, Oklahoma is where I wanted to be. I said to my agent, ‘you’ve got to do everything you can to talk to these guys and get them to draft me’.”) The draft pick proved shrewd business for OKC. While the team languish in 14th in the Western Conference, Giddey has made a strong bid for rookie of the year. He is averaging 12.4 points, 7.8 rebounds and 6.4 assists a game. At the All Star weekend, James singled out the Thunder’s general manager for praise. “The MVP over there is Sam Presti,” he said. “I mean, Josh Giddey is great. But Sam Presti, I don’t understand this guy’s eye for talent. He drafted [Kevin Durant], Russ [Westbrook], Jeff Green, Serge Ibaka, Reggie Jackson, Josh Giddey and the list goes on and on and on.” If Giddey is to follow in the footsteps of the likes of Durant and Westbrook, he has a long road ahead. Many rookies shine bright before fading into obscurity. But the 19-year-old from Melbourne has the physical attributes, basketball intelligence and mental fortitude to star at the highest level. Come the Paris Olympics in two years’ time, there is little chance Giddey will miss out again. Australian basketball has a new star.By far our most memorable and worst gig was the first one, on 23 October 1982. Billy Walsh, who was then in an early version of the Cosmic Psychos called Spring Plains, had run up all these parking fines. So my friend organised a gig to make the money back. Bass player Phil Nelson and I were just learning how to play, but he said “Let’s get a band together, we’ll get more people there.” So that was why the band started – to play Bill Walsh’s parking fines. It was supposed to be a one-off show. At the time, Hunters &amp; Collectors were the coolest band in town, and I wanted a piss-take of their name – something AND something else – so my friend Tess, now my wife, goes, “How about the Painters and Dockers?” as a joke. And I said, “That’s it!” At the time, there was a royal commission into the Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union, because some members had literally been knocking each other off. Our singer Paulie Stewart ended up in the band at the last minute. He met Phil at the Prahran market and told him he could play trumpet. Basically, anyone we knew who said they could play anything was in. We didn’t have a drummer, so Bill played for Painters and Dockers and Spring Plains that night. He was so fucked that in one of the songs he just stopped playing – his arms were so tired he couldn’t keep up. We played the gig at a pub called the Rising Sun in Port Melbourne. What we didn’t know was that this was where members of the actual Painters and Dockers Union used to drink. I remember my eldest brother saying to me, “You’ve got to change your name. These guys don’t fuck around, they’ll kill you!” But while we were playing, one of them walked in (the crowd parted like the Red Sea) and gave us all a beer, so then I thought, OK, we’re not gonna die. Unfortunately, a man who lived nearby got the shits with the noise so came in with a machete and started chopping up the mixing desk because he wanted us to stop playing. Six divvy vans turned up, cut the whole street off, and the whole pub evacuated in two minutes. We were running down the street with our amplifiers trying to get out of there. It was insane. The next morning my mate went to the pub so we could get paid. It was probably about five or six hundred bucks – enough to pay Billy’s fines – but the owner at the time said, “Oh, there’s been a bit of damage, let’s just call it even.” Check out Painters and Dockers’ Facebook page for upcoming gigs around AustraliaThe prime minister, Scott Morrison, will announce $804m for strategic and scientific programs in Antarctica over the next decade as the government flags its intention to increase Australia’s role in the increasingly contested region. Announcing the funding pledge in the key Tasmanian seat of Lyons on Tuesday, Morrison will talk up the commitment as a “clear international signal of Australia’s world-leading Antarctic leadership”. The package – about half of which is committed over the next five years – will include $136m for charting activities, mobile stations and traverse capability, and $109m for a new drone fleet, autonomous vehicles and medium lift helicopters. This will allow the government to map “inaccessible and fragile areas of east Antarctic”, and set up a new “Antarctic eye” program that will monitor parts of the continent with integrated sensors and cameras that provide real-time information. The helicopters, which have a range of 550km, will allow researchers to travel to parts of the continent that have not previously been accessible using the government research vessel RSV Nuyina as a launchpad. “The money we are investing in drone fleets, helicopters and other vehicles will enable us to explore areas of east Antarctica’s inland that no country has ever been able to reach before,” Morrison said ahead of Tuesday’s announcement. “My government will continue to back our world-class scientists and expeditioners with the necessary funding and resources, because their research on the frozen continent and in the Southern Ocean is critically important to Australia’s future.” A range of other projects under the package will focus on new scientific endeavours, including $7.4m for research focused on Antarctic ice sheet science to build global understanding of climate change impacts. The government said this will improve Australia’s ability “to support Pacific partners to monitor information about climate and oceans, including sea level rise”. Last year, ice scientists warned that parts of the massive Thwaites glacier in west Antarctica – about the size of Great Britain – could fracture and collapse within five years, accelerating the rate of sea level rises. The package will also include $4.7m for RSV Nuyina to conduct extended science voyages, while $17.4m will be committed for marine science in the Southern Ocean and a new state-of-the-art krill aquarium in Hobart. Another $14.3m will be committed for environmental management, including a “Cleaner Antarctica Strategy” to remove legacy waste. The environment minister, Sussan Ley, said that in the face of increasing pressures in the region, there was “strategic importance” in Australia’s pursuit of scientific leadership. “We need to ensure that the Antarctic remains a place of science and conservation, one that is free from conflict and which is protected from exploitation,” Ley said. From 2026-27, the government will allocate an extra $92.2m a year for further support of Antarctic activities, which is also included in the $804m figure. The announcement comes amid a debate about how Australia should be protecting its interests in the Antarctic territories, where China has become increasingly assertive, particularly over fishery access. The issue came to a head after Ley scrapped plans to build a 2.7km concrete runway on Antarctica, prompting China hawks within the Coalition to blast the decision as “retrograde”. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning A Lowy Institute paper published last year said that China “wants to benefit economically, and potentially militarily, from Antarctica”, and was pushing the terms of the Antarctic Treaty System (ATS), primarily over fisheries access, and was active on the ice. It said that prior to 2016, China’s Antarctic stations and science “seemed designed to position it for a territorial claim in the AAT if the Antarctic Treaty were overturned at some point in the future”. The Minister for Foreign Affairs, Marise Payne, said the investment was a clear marker of Australia’s “enduring commitment to the Antarctic Treaty system” and Australia’s leadership within it. The funding package allocates $3.4m to enhance Australia’s international engagement “to support the rules and norms of the Antarctic Treaty system and promote Australia’s leadership in Antarctic affairs.” Morrison said the investment in Antarctica would directly support jobs in Australia, and particularly in Tasmania, “with Australian businesses, contractors, medical suppliers and providers reaping the benefits of local procurement.” The prime minister has begun the week campaigning in the Tasmanian marginal seats of Bass and Lyons, which are crucial to the Coalition’s chances of remaining in government. On Monday, he visited a winery with the member for the seat of Bass, Bridget Archer, who has clashed with Morrison over his failure to deliver on an election commitment for an integrity commission and the government’s proposed religious discrimination laws. Archer crossed the floor on both issues. Morrison said that Archer was a “fiery” member of his team, but said the Liberal party “don’t throw someone out” if they have disagreements. “It’s called Liberal for a reason. The Labor party throw people out when they speak up on important issues to them,” Morrison said. “Bridget, I know, is passionate. Bridget has come with life experience to our team that I greatly value and I greatly respect. You know, we love Bridge. We really do. And I’m really pleased she’s on my team, and she’s on my team and she’s a fiery member of my team and she’s a fiery member for Bass.” • This article was amended on 22 February 2022. Thwaites glacier is about the size of Great Britain, not “about 100 times the size of the United Kingdom” as an earlier version said.When I told a friend I was writing about the most environmentally friendly way to care for polyester, he joked: “Put it in the bin.” Since polyester is a plastic that won’t biodegrade in landfill, he’s definitely wrong. But his joke reflects a growing concern that polyester clothing is an environmental hazard. To start with, virgin polyester is derived from fossil fuels, and as the technology stands, recycled polyester is more accurately downcycled plastic. The process takes bottles out of a closed loop system and degrades them so they can’t be recycled again. These environmental challenges are compounded during use. Polyester is a smelly, sweaty, stain-prone material that sheds plastic microfibres when it is washed and worn. But, because it’s cheap, it’s in more than half our clothes. Since it’s very likely we all have something made from polyester in our wardrobes, here is some expert advice on how to minimise its impact. Let’s start with microfibres Microfibres are tiny particles that break off our clothes when we wash and wear them. Velina Karadzhova, the head of First Sentier MUFG Sustainable Investment Institute, says they’ve “been found in air, rivers, oceans, soils, tap water and human food such as fish and vegetables”. To make matters worse, since synthetic materials don’t break down in natural environments, microfibre pollution is accumulating. Paul Servin, the applications development director at Xeros Technology Group, says “around one third of all primary microplastic pollution comes from washing our clothes in the washing machine”. Small changes to the way you do laundry can help Rebecca Van Amber, a textile scientist from RMIT university, says you can significantly reduce microfibre shedding by making simple changes to your laundry. She suggests using a liquid detergent and lower water temperature, switching to a front-loader washing machine and, instead of tumble drying your clothes, hanging them out to dry. According to Servin, washing garments in a full load of laundry can reduce shedding by up to five times. He also recommends washing garments less often and says: “Try and consider if the garments need washing or if they can be cleaned in other ways.” Get a washing machine filter Servin says having your washing machine fitted with a microfibre filter is the most effective way to prevent microfibres from wash cycles entering the environment. The latest filter developed by Xeros, called the XFiltra, can capture more than 90% of microfibre pollution. In recognition of the scope of the problem, governments are moving to make microfibre filters a requirement on washing machines. In Australia, the National Plastics Plan aims for “an industry-led phase-in of microfibre filters on new residential and commercial washing machines by 1 July 2030”. There is similar legislation being drafted in the UK and France. Use a Guppyfriend bag Another way to prevent microfibre pollution is by using a Guppyfriend bag. Place your polyester or synthetic garments inside it during washing. Studies show the bags reduce the amount of shedding and catch microfibres that do break off. But, Servin says, be mindful of how you dispose of microfibres caught inside the bag. “The temptation would be to rinse it out under a tap, which would defeat the object.” Experts say the safest thing is to put them in the bin. Different fabrics shed at different rates Another thing to keep in mind is that different fabrics shed microfibres at different rates. Karadzhova says polyester sheds about three times more than nylon, while fabrics from mixed materials also appear to shed less than fabrics made from 100% polyester. Textile weave should be factored in too, Van Amber says, to avoid “fabrics which are fluffy and pill” because this is visible evidence of microfibre shedding. A good example is fleece fabrics that have a brushed surface and raised fibres. She says these fabrics are “much more likely to shed fibres than yoga pants” because smooth stretchy materials are made of longer fibres that have less threads protruding and so are less susceptible to shedding. Move quickly to prevent odours and stains Since polyester is plastic, it has a complicated relationship with sweat and oil. Which is to say, it holds on to both and won’t let them go. That’s why polyester starts to smell and why stains on polyester can be impossible to wash out. “Any stain should be treated as quickly as possible” because if it has time to dry and set, it will be much more difficult to remove, Van Amber says. “Gently blot an oil stain with soap or detergent and water immediately.” Sweat stains should also be moved on quickly to prevent odour from setting in. Van Amber says polyester fabrics with a looser weave or knit structure should be more resistant to odours. This is because “the gaps and spaces between the fibres and yarns facilitates air flow through the fabric.” On the other hand, fabrics with a very tight weave should be more resistant to staining because “any liquid spilled on it will land as a drop” and the tightness of the structure should delay the drop being absorbed. Finally, be aware of polyester or synthetics claiming to have antimicrobial and anti-odour capabilities. Studies show that while they can control bacteria, they do not control smell.A majority of voters see China and the bilateral relationship as a complex issue to be managed rather than a threat to be confronted, and more voters trust Labor than the Coalition to manage that complexity, the latest Guardian Essential poll suggests. After a bare-knuckle political week where the prime minister, Scott Morrison, branded Labor’s deputy leader a “Manchurian candidate” and declared the ALP unequal to the task of managing the regional threat environment, the latest poll of 1,089 respondents suggests Australians hold a nuanced view of the Australia-China relationship. While last week’s partisan confrontation played out in stark binary terms, the new poll shows 61% of respondents characterise the bilateral relationship with Beijing as complex, and only 26% see it as a threat to be confronted. The proportion of respondents seeing the China relationship as a threat is now only two percentage points higher than it was when voters were asked this same question in September 2021. Last year, 66% of respondents characterised the relationship as a complex dynamic to be managed. Morrison last week repeatedly accused Labor of being “weak” on security threats and declared that only the Coalition would not “appease” Beijing. But the data shows the opposition currently maintains a nine-point lead over the Coalition when people are asked which party they trust to manage the Australia-China relationship. Just over a quarter of respondents (28%) say they trust the Coalition to build the relationship in Australia’s best interests, while 37% say they trust Labor to, and 34% of respondents are unsure. Morrison sought the partisan confrontation with Labor on national security and China after suffering a significant parliamentary defeat the week before, when moderate Liberals effectively torpedoed the prime minister’s signature religious discrimination legislation. The politicisation was blatant enough to prompt a rare public rebuke from the head of Asio, Mike Burgess. Burgess warned twice last week the pre-election weaponisation of serious issues made it harder for Asio to do its job. Former Asio chief Dennis Richardson went further. He argued in a series of interviews last week that the Morrison government was serving China’s interests, not Australia’s, by politicising national security ahead of the election, and “seeking to create the perception of a difference [between the major parties] when none in practice exists”. National security is generally considered fertile political territory for the Coalition. But metrics charting primary voting intention and approvals suggest Morrison and the Coalition went backwards during the past parliamentary fortnight – although the movements are within the poll’s margin of error, which is plus or minus three points. Voting intention figures calculated by Guardian Essential now express the head-to-head metric of the major party contest as two-party preferred “plus” rather than the standard two-party preferred measure. This change in methodology, adopted after the 2019 election, highlights the proportion of undecided voters in any survey, providing accuracy on the limits of any prediction. Labor is on 49% (up two points) and the Coalition on 45% (down one point), with 6% of respondents undecided in the latest two-party preferred “plus” measure. Labor’s primary vote is 38%, up from 35% a fortnight ago, and the Coalition is on 35%, down from 37%, with the number of undecided voters going from 8% to 6%. Labor’s primary vote in the current survey is the highest it has been since January 2020, when Morrison’s standing took a hammering during the catastrophic bushfires of that summer. Morrison’s net approval has also moved from zero to negative in the latest data, with 44% (down two points) of respondents saying they approve of the prime minister’s performance and 49% (up three points) saying they disapprove. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Anthony Albanese’s net approval has bumped up from zero to positive, with 42% (up three points) of respondents saying they approve of the Labor leader and 39% (steady) saying they disapprove. Albanese also closed the gap slightly with Morrison on the poll’s “better prime minister measure”. Morrison still leads his Labor counterpart 40% to 35%, with 25% undecided. A fortnight ago Morrison led Albanese 42% to 34% with 25% undecided. A number of questions put to voters about the attributes of the two major party leaders suggest Morrison has lost standing with voters since the middle of last year. But despite his current difficulties, Morrison continues to rate ahead of the treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, and the defence minister, Peter Dutton, as the preferred Liberal party leader (30% say Morrison, 13% say Frydenberg and 9% say Dutton, while 16% respond “other” and 32% are unsure).The New South Wales transport minister, David Elliott, started Monday on a rhetorical cliff and kept walking. On Sydney radio station 2GB, Elliott described industrial action taken by the state’s rail workers as “terrorist-like activity”, then accused the Rail, Tram and Bus Union of acting like “cowards”, spreading “bullshit” and “hijacking the city”. At a hastily arranged media conference a few hours later, he effectively accused union members of seeking to change the government. The industrial action taken by the rail union was designed to “bully the electorate” into voting for Labor, as well as “disrupt the recovery from Covid”, he said. Elliott was not alone. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, weighed in, also on 2GB, to condemn the “strike”, while the NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, described the action as a “coordinated attack by the Labor party and the union movement”. Labor and the union movement, Perrottet said, were “in bed with each other to cause mass destruction in our city and our states”. The union flatly rejected the government’s description of their industrial action as a “strike”, calling it a “low level” measure that wouldn’t have affected services. As the day went on it became clear the government had taken the extraordinary step of closing down the transport network because it had “misinterpreted” an agreement it struck with the union during negotiations over the weekend. Workers had turned up for their shifts on Monday to find they had been locked out by the transport department. “The NSW government is spitting the dummy and trying to make a point,” the RTBU secretary, Alex Claassens, said. While the government accused the union of taking politically motivated industrial action, Elliott’s interventions on Monday were revealing in terms of his own focus. Neither his 2GB interview or the snap press conference – which some media were not alerted to – were held with transport officials who could have explained, for example, what contingency measures had been implemented to assist commuters during the shutdown of the network. Nor was the government able to explain – beyond citing the safety concerns of those same absent transport officials – why the network needed to be abruptly shut down when the union had publicised its intention to take limited industrial action as early as Wednesday last week. Indeed Perrottet was asked on Monday on whether the shutdown was a copy of Qantas’ decision in 2011 to ground its fleet amid an industrial dispute, a step which prompted the Fair Work Commission to terminate the workers’ action because of the risk to the economy. He denied that was the case. By Monday evening, the government had backed away, with limited services to run on Tuesday and the Coalition agreeing to “continue to negotiate with the unions and work through their list of claims”. Elliott’s handling of the matter was being questioned by senior ministers and the union had committed to continue its planned industrial action after crowing the transport minister had “backed down”. “To deliberately shut down the rail network on such a big day for many people, seemingly so they can run a fear campaign about unions, is quite extraordinary,” Claassens said. But despite the messy handling of the dispute, the government’s decision to lash out at the union on Monday is revealing. It is certainly true that with a federal election looming and the next NSW election only 12 months away, the union movement is flexing its muscle. Indeed, Unions NSW boss Mark Morey was on the front page of the Daily Telegraph on Monday declaring 2022 would be the year of the strike if the government refused to scrap its 2.5% wages cap. It was less than a week ago that the state’s nurses were holding their first state-wide strike in almost a decade outside the state’s parliament, and teachers and bus drivers have also flagged their intention to conduct further industrial action. The NSW Public Services Association secretary, Stewart Little, said his union – which represents prison workers, some education staff and a variety of other public sector workers – would also consider taking protected action if the state government moved to repeal Covid-era workers’ compensation laws. Little also said removing the 2.5% wages cap – which has been in place since the NSW Liberal government came into power in 2011 – had taken on a new urgency for unions amid increasing job pressures during the pandemic, as well as inflation and increased cost of living pressures. “I think it’s inevitable that you’ll see more industrial action and strike action,” Little said on Monday. “The pressures on working people are increasing and the unions can’t sit by while our members are seeing their conditions deteriorate.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning It’s in that context that Elliott, Perrottet and the prime minister’s comments must be viewed. The NSW government believes that a year out from a state election it is being targeted by a concerted union campaign. But it also sees an opportunity. By painting Monday’s action as an “unAustralian” act of “industrial bastardry”, as Elliott did, the government is seeking to paint the union movement – and with it Labor – as out of touch with the concerns of everyday people. “This is reminding me of the way they behaved in the 1970s, and I don’t think they’ve read the room,” Elliott said on 2GB. It’s a tactic that has worked before. After all, the majority of Australians are no longer members of a trade union, and many see industrial action as a disruptive annoyance, and conservative governments often feel on safe ground fighting a trade union movement they claim is unrepresentative of average people. The question is whether, after two years of a pandemic in which frontline workers such as nurses, teachers and, indeed, transport workers, have kept the country going, it is the government that has “read the room” by picking this fight.What exactly is being proposed? It is, by any measure, an extraordinary intervention in Australia’s rapidly evolving electricity market. A consortium worth hundreds of billions of dollars on Saturday lodged a formal offer to buy AGL Energy – the country’s biggest greenhouse gas emitter – for just short of 5% above the closing share price on Friday. The headline name behind the bid is Mike Cannon-Brookes, the 42-year-old co-founder of software company Atlassian, green solutions investor, climate action advocate and one of Australia’s richest people. But in reality, Cannon-Brookes’ company Grok Ventures is the smaller player in the consortium, which is led by Brookfield, a Canadian investment giant with $688bn worth of assets under management last year. Including AGL’s debt, the bid was just short of A$8bn. Why are they doing it? According to the main players, a significant part of the motivation is to close and replace the company’s coal-fired power plants and prevent a controversial demerger that would hive off those coal plants from AGL into a new entity called Accel Energy. The consortium says it has up to $20bn to spend on building and contracting at least 8 gigawatts of renewable energy and energy storage to replace about 7GW of existing power plants. AGL’s Bayswater and Loy Yang A coal plants, currently scheduled to shut by 2033 and 2045, would be gone by 2030. The company would reach net zero emissions by 2035 and suddenly be playing its part in limiting global heating to 1.5C, in line with scientific advice. The proposal is much bigger than just the coal power plants. It would involve Brookfield and Grok Ventures acquiring all of AGL’s generation assets and its retail business. Cannon-Brookes stresses it isn’t a philanthropic investment. He says he is confident backing renewable energy over ailing old coal power plants can keep electricity prices down, create 10,000 construction and 600 ongoing jobs and wipe out about 40m tonnes of carbon dioxide a year – more than 8% of Australia’s annual emissions footprint – while turning a profit. Analysts and some within AGL see access to the company’s 4.5 million customers across the country as a key motivation for any would-be suitor. For Brookfield’s part, it is a shareholder in significant fossil fuel assets, but it is noteworthy that the bid includes the name of Mark Carney, the company’s head of transition investing since 2020. He made his name as first the governor of the Bank of Canada, then the Bank of England, and then the United Nations special envoy for climate action and finance in the lead-up to last year’s Cop26 summit in Glasgow. A Brookfield renewable energy arm has about US$65bn assets under management. The bid is timed with at least one eye on the upcoming demerger, which AGL declared on Monday was on track to happen by 30 June. The consortium says the split risked leading to the separated entities trading at a lower share price, reducing value for shareholders. How did the company respond? There was a swift rejection after the board met on Sunday afternoon. It claimed the offer “materially undervalues the company”, as it offered only a 4.7% premium on Friday’s share price. The consortium rejected this rebuttal just as quickly. It says the offer represented about a 20% premium on the company’s three-month volume-weighted average share price of $6.28 and pointed to its expectation the value would fall after the split. Cannon-Brookes told Guardian Australia on Monday the consortium would continue to engage with AGL and he would focus on “trying to explain to shareholders why we believe this is the best option”. Within AGL, there was some excitement at the prospect that a billionaire entrepreneur with Cannon-Brookes’ success at creating a software firm was making a play for the company. It had lost up to 80% of its share value over the five years prior to the takeover offer although its stock had started to bounce back in the past 12 months. AGL shares gained more than 10% during Monday’s trade. Putting aside the business machinations, is this even doable? According to the experts, yes, though it would be challenging. Cannon-Brookes was quick to point to a draft blueprint for the future grid published by the Australian Energy Market Operator in December, known as the integrated system plan. That document suggested under a step-change scenario – now considered the most probable path – coal would exit the system at roughly three times the pace than proposed and there could be a ninefold increase in large-scale renewable energy such as wind and solar farms. It is not a report the Morrison government tends to emphasise. No one disputes that the rise of renewable energy is making coal plants unviable as the around-the-clock generators they were meant to be. They can’t compete with an influx of cheap solar energy in the middle of the day and were mostly not built to ramp down and then back up when needed. Department officials project renewable energy will increase from about 30% now to 69% by 2030. Labor says under its policies it would reach 82%. It is not only AGL that is under pressure. In the most recent announcement, Origin Energy gave notice that the country’s biggest coal-fired power plant, Eraring, could shut seven years earlier than scheduled – in 2025 rather than 2032. The consortium says they can drive a rapid change at AGL in a way the current public ownership can’t because raising the vast amount of capital needed is difficult, but they already have it. Are there unanswered questions? Plenty, including whether the consortium would be open to paying more and the timing and specifics of the investment plan. The bid would have to be cleared by the Foreign Investment Review Board and the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission – and possibly the Morrison government, should it choose to intervene. Buying AGL would involve taking on 3.2 million gas customers. Cannon-Brookes indicated the consortium would want to move them to renewable electricity, a significant undertaking in its own right. Cannon-Brookes acknowledges it is “on a global scale a massive decarbonisation effort” but says the plan makes sense. The consortium’s offer letter says it conducted detailed market modelling with consultants Marsden Jacob Associates and was confident its plan was achievable. “The economics stacks up, the science stacks up, what we require is just the gumption to go for it and actually make it happen, and that’s what we’re trying to do,” Cannon-Brookes says.The chair of UK Sport, Katherine Grainger, has said future funding for winter sports will be based on grassroots participation as well as medals, after Great Britain left the Beijing Winter Olympics with only two medals. Grainger pointed to the need to “make our sports as wide and diverse as possible” and reach a wider cross-section of the public. “It comes down to the fact that this public money – the public should have a benefit from it,” Grainger said. “A huge amount of that has been in the past two decades built around the focus on success, meaning the medals, and that is what gives us that status globally.” Both Team GB medals were secured in the final days of the event after gold- and silver-medal performances by the curling teams led by Eve Muirhead and Bruce Mouat. Other winter sports face questions about the failure to match a target of three to seven medals. Team GB won five medals in both 2014 and 2018. “Curling lifted the team but a lot of people – athletes first and foremost – would have been disappointed with the performances out there and we need to find out the reasons why that happened,” Grainger said. This will be a moment for reflection as the various sports begin to review recent events and look to find solutions in order to improve in the years leading up to Milan-Cortina in 2026. “We will make our big investment decisions around the summer this year and the main thing is for all the sports individually to go into a huge review process of not just the Games itself but also the last four years to see what worked, what didn’t work, and what can be improved,” she said. Despite frustration over some results, Grainger argues that the overall impact of the sports should also be considered: “You might be saying, ‘That’s a disappointing Games,’ but actually the influence it can have and the reach it can have really matters. And that is why we will keep funding the winter sports and really backing them.”Welcome to a delicious and sustainable way of eating that’s good for you, your gut microbes and the planet. If you’re looking for an easy, science-backed way to increase your energy, boost your mood, regulate your digestion, find your happy weight and slash your risk of chronic disease, you’re in the right place. As a dietitian and research scientist, I’m here to explain why simply shifting your diet to include more plants could be the best thing you ever do for your health and happiness. And it’s an approach based on facts, not fads. My new book ‘Eat More, Live Well’ shows you how versatile plant-based eating actually is. Forget cutting out or cutting down, I’m going to show you how – and why – increasing the number and range of plant foods you eat taps into the very latest scientific discoveries about how your body works best. That’s right, eating more can improve your health, and my recipes and menu plans will show you just how easy and delicious it really is. Whether it’s something you’ve been thinking about for a while or a concept you’ve only just started hearing about, research suggests that more and more of us are interested in exploring plant-based eating. This might mean simply eating more veg meals each week; cutting down on meat, fish and other animal-derived products with meat-free Mondays; being a ‘flexitarian’; or excluding some or all animal products completely, as in vegetarianism or veganism. But we all know that we need to eat more veg, and there’s lots of information already out here, so what’s different about this book? Well, first of all, the science. I’m not promoting a fully vegan diet, because research doesn’t necessarily support that from a health perspective (more on that in the book). I’m not even suggesting you should go vegetarian, although this book is still for you if you’re vegetarian or vegan. What the evidence suggests is that we could all benefit from eating more plants, but that doesn’t necessarily have to mean only plants. So, rather than being about what not to eat, this book is all about the many varied and astounding benefits, flavour included, of basing your diet around plants. Because once they’re the star attraction, trust me, you’ll experience a health transformation. My first book, Eat Yourself Healthy, was designed to help people identify and tackle their digestive issues and achieve great gut health. Since it was published, I’ve received thousands of messages from people whose health is flourishing after following the programme it sets out. I know there are lots of you out there who are on board with the idea that gut health underpins overall health. Many people also got in touch to ask for a followup that looked more closely at exactly which foods our gut loves and why. So, this book zooms out and speaks to anyone and everyone who simply wants to eat in a way that’s more aligned with what our bodies (and gut microbes) need. And what they definitely need more of is plants. My approach to nutrition is categorically not about dieting. Neither is it a trendy fad that cuts out food groups or nutrients. Instead, it’s your introduction to, and inspiration for, a life-changing way of eating that brings profound, science-backed health benefits in both the short and the long term. Sure, one of those may be to do with weight management, but the benefits linked to nourishing our gut microbes go much further than that – from mood, to skin, to hormones and immunity; they are powerful little things. There is no calorie counting here, no weighing and measuring (of yourself or the foods). In fact, there’s none of the cutting out you may see with other eating plans. I see this approach as enriching, not restricting; inclusive, not exclusive. More plants, more variety, more fibre, more flavour. I call it the Diversity Diet. We know that, generally speaking, the greater the diversity of the trillions of gut bacteria that live in our digestive track (known as our gut microbiome, or GM), the better our overall health and resistance to infection. I always come back to that sports team analogy – you need a breadth of skills to be at the top of your game. And with so many different types of microbe out there (scientists estimate there are tens of thousands of strains of unique bacteria that can dwell in the gut), it’s no surprise that we each have a distinct combination within us. Our GM is unique to us, like our fingerprints. Identical twins may share the same human genes, environment and lifestyle, but their GM will always be different. So long as it’s well supported (that’s where Eat More, Live Well comes in), our inner universe is a hive of activity, working super-hard at tasks like: Munching up fibre and phytochemicals from the plants we eat. Making vitamins (K and the different Bs), amino acids, hormones and chemical messengers. Training our immune system. Activating and deactivating medicines and toxins (this explains why, at least in part, people can respond in different ways to the same medications). Making chemicals that strengthen the gut barrier, helping to balance blood sugars, lower blood fats and regulate appetite. Communicating with our brain, skin, liver, thyroid, heart and just about every organ in the human body. Protecting us against a proliferation of harmful microbes. Assisting gut movement and function. In other words, a thriving GM can optimize digestion, immunity, metabolism, hormones, brain function and gene expression (turning our genes ‘on and off’, affecting what scientists previously thought was our ‘destiny’). I don’t know about you, but with them having this responsibility, I think we owe it to these microbes to give them as much support as we can. Whether you think of your GM as your inner universe, Tamagotchi, pet, friend or simply untapped potential, the next time you sit down to a meal, it’s worth acknowledging you’re never just eating for one. The empowering news is that so much of our GM’s health and happiness is in our control. There are many ways we can look after our GM, in terms of what we eat and how we treat it (with things like sleep, stress and even exercise). In fact, our diet and lifestyle choices actually have a much bigger effect on how healthy our GM is than our genetics do. And so far, research indicates that people who consume high-fibre diets made up of a wide range of whole plant-based foods from the ‘Super Six’ (wholegrain, vegetables, fruit, legumes, nuts, seeds and herbs and spices) typically have the greatest GM diversity and stability. This was the main driving force behind me writing Eat More, Live Well – to spread this landmark discovery beyond the research bubble and help as many people as possible to embrace the far-reaching benefits of the Diversity Diet. Learn more about the Secrets of good gut health at Dr Megan Rossi’s upcoming masterclass, taking place on taking place on Wednesday 13 April 2022. Tickets are available to book now.Jamal Edwards, who has died suddenly aged 31, was a music entrepreneur whose online video platform SBTV has more than 1 million subscribers and collaborates with some of the world’s biggest musical names. From a small acorn, filming his friends at school in west London on a cheap mobile phone, Edwards created a very large tree, helping to launch the careers of British musical figures such as the singer-songwriters Jessie J, Emeli Sandé and Ed Sheeran, and later working with established international names that have included Drake, Nicki Minaj and Wiz Khalifa. As Edwards’ personal fortune grew, he expanded into other entrepreneurial ventures, often with a focus on improving the lives of disadvantaged young people. Born in Luton, Bedfordshire, he was brought up in Acton, west London, by his mother, Brenda (nee Artman), an accounts manager and part-time singer, and a supportive stepfather, Patrick Edwards, a mortgage broker, who provided him with cameras and equipment in the early days of his experimentation. At Acton high school Edwards was by his own admission “a bit of a class clown”, rebelling against his strict Christian upbringing and subject to a short attention span that needed constant stimulation. The first film he made was of foxes on his local council estate, after which he began to turn his hand to recording classmates rapping, first on his mobile and then on a camera he had been given for Christmas. A fledgling singer himself, he used the initials of his rapping name, SmokeyBarz, for SBTV, the YouTube channel he set up at the age of 16 in 2006 to upload his film clips and bring them to a wider audience. On his parents’ advice, Edwards quickly switched the focus away from rap to the jagged sounds of grime, which had broken out all around him in its London birthplace and which he saw as “like the punk movement, in terms of lyrics and rebellious attitude”. Shortly after its launch, SBTV became the first new media business to be featured on YouTube – then only a year old. As Edwards noted later in his career, “it was a local boy, global voice thing: when you put your stuff on the internet it goes out to a global audience straight away”. Within a short time SBTV was attracting a large number of subscribers and he was able to begin to make money out of his hobby. Having left school with a handful of GCSEs, Edwards spent three years studying for a BTec national diploma in media moving image at West London College, while also experimenting on music studio equipment at local youth centres. He later worked as a retail assistant in a Top Man clothes store to support himself until the cash from SBTV began to roll in. As SBTV gradually moved beyond grime to take in other musical genres, the scope of Edwards’s influence expanded. At the age of 20 he was featured as an example of the power of the internet in a huge advertising campaign to promote the web browser Google Chrome, which became one of the year’s most viewed items on YouTube. From then onwards his star rose rapidly, and by his early 20s, after SBTV had received significant financial backing from a private equity firm, Edwards became one of the youngest successful entrepreneurs in the UK, a sought-after music mogul who was stopped on the streets by admirers. In his teens he had tasted fame vicariously through his mother, who, after appearing on The X Factor, had picked up further television work and singing roles in a number of West End musicals. Now, however, he was in the spotlight. “I was always Brenda from X Factor’s son, and then it switched to her being the mum of Jamal from SBTV.” While he was soon able to come to terms with the initial strains of fame at such a young age, Edwards’s youthfulness also created some difficulties in his business life. “Everyone I employed was older than me, which was very daunting,” he said. “Sometimes I was swayed by their opinions just because I’ve been brought up to respect my elders. I had to overcome that.” Appointed MBE in 2014, the year he became an ambassador for the Prince’s Trust, he branched out from SBTV into other projects. He designed and launched a headwear collection with his previous employer Top Man – informed by his hoard of hundreds of baseball caps – and was involved with a number of other fashion ventures, among them Primark. In 2017 he made a documentary with the Guardian about male suicide, in which he spoke to childhood friends who had suffered with mental health problems. Two years later he helped to refurbish and reopen four youth centres in Acton with money that he had raised from Google and the Wellcome Trust, later expanding the initiative into other parts of the UK. In 2020 there was a partnership with the Department for Education to encourage young creatives to take up an apprenticeship, and in 2021 he launched the 8BARS app, a digital platform intended to discover new musical talent. Latterly he had embarked on a new, part-time existence as a club DJ under the name Jamal Artman. Despite his swift rise to fortune in the rough and tumble of the music world, Edwards remained an unassuming character, describing himself as a “modern caveman” most at home in a quiet environment. “For me, meditation is removing myself from social media, switching off the phone, reading a book, chilling out,” he said. “Too much social media gives you a headache, damages your eyes. It upsets the whole system.” A keen cyclist, he liked to visit the countryside and was an advocate of eating locally grown food, something he promoted through another of his co-ventures, a chain of health food bars called Ugot. He is survived by his mother and his sister, Tanisha. • Jamal Edwards, entrepreneur, born 24 August 1990; died 20 February 2022Boris Johnson has announced the end of all domestic Covid restrictions in England in a process starting later this week. Here is what is happening and when. When is self-isolation ending? Subject to parliamentary approval of Johnson’s plan, the legal requirement to self-isolate will end on Thursday, with people instead advised to stay at home if they have Covid, or believe they do. They will be advised to take a lateral flow test on the fifth and sixth day of the illness, and if both are negative, and if they have no temperature, they can resume normal life. The current need for non-vaccinated adults to self-isolate if they have been in close contact with someone who has tested positive will also finish, as will the requirement for vaccinated adults and children who have been in contact with a Covid case to test themselves for seven days. There will also be an end to contact tracing. What about self-isolation payments and sick pay? These are also reverting to pre-Covid provisions. The £500 payment for some people on lower incomes will end on Thursday. From 24 March, statutory sick pay and employment support allowance will only start being paid after four and seven days of absence, rather than immediately, as has happened during the Covid pandemic. And testing? Free testing for the public will end in England from 1 April, with most people having to pay for lateral flow and PCR tests. There will be some exceptions, with free symptomatic tests remaining for NHS patients and in care homes, and some asymptomatic testing for both. Among the public, the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) will set out who will still be eligible for free tests, but it is expected to be limited to people aged 80 and above or those with compromised immune systems only. There will also be tests kept for the Panoramic study, which is assessing the efficacy of antiviral drugs, for the Vivaldi scheme, examining Covid in care homes, and Siren, which looks at the NHS. The guidance for staff and students in schools and childcare to have twice-weekly tests is ending immediately. What else is ending? Covid status certificates will no longer be needed, and people will not be expected to show proof of vaccination. Also, the government will revoke the Health Protection (Coronavirus, Restrictions) (England) (No 3) Regulations, which allow councils to respond to local Covid outbreaks with their own restrictions. Wider guidance for businesses will change, for example an end to the current need for employers to explicitly consider Covid in their risk assessments. Why is this happening, and how much will tests cost? The end of free tests is, essentially, to save money, with Johnson saying free tests cost the government £15.7bn this financial year. The Department of Health and Social Care will now have to meet any costs of testing from its existing budget, after a long and bruising debate with the Treasury. The cost of tests will depend on private suppliers, but officials suggest it will be “in the low single pounds” for each lateral flow. Currently, people can get a box of seven for free each day via the post, or up to two boxes at a pharmacy. Will restrictions come back? Is it possible. Officials have stressed that Covid is not yet endemic, and that it is possible that new variants could emerge that are both more transmissible and severe than Omicron. What protections will remain? There are three main areas. The first is the surveillance system, which monitors infection levels and new variants, with the ongoing ONS study, which tests a representative sample of people, being maintained at what is called a “sufficiently granular” level. Secondly, the UKHSA will keep stockpiles of lateral flow tests and maintain capacity to process PCR tests, to increase tests if needed. The third is the focus on the most vulnerable people for tests. Is this UK-wide? No. This plan is for England only. Health is a devolved matter and it is up to the other UK nations to decide on their strategies. The Scottish and Welsh governments have already warned against the end of free testing. What parliamentary approval is needed? For now, just a statutory instrument – a type of legislation that does not need an immediate vote. MPs would have to approve it within 28 days.The bombshell revelations of the Suisse secrets, reported by the Guardian and a number of international outlets, are a continuation of the path-breaking work of the Panama Papers and the Paradise Papers. In one sense, it’s the same old story over and over again. Every time journalists lift the financial sector’s curtain of secrecy, a web of corruption and nefarious activities is revealed, disproportionately from shady customers and families of dictators, with a smattering of seemingly respectable politicians in democracies caught in the net. But this time, there’s something different. This time it’s not a small, obscure offshore island or a struggling developing country trying to figure out an alternative business model to drugs. It’s a major bank in the middle of Europe, in one of the most prosperous countries in the world; a country where the “rule of law” is supposed to reign supreme. Even more disappointing, given that the country and bank involved have made promises of transparency and doing better. And that’s the point: without more transparency, there can’t be accountability. In fact, Switzerland’s position increasingly appears two-faced, with a legal framework that penalises those who attempt to pierce its secrecy. Countries around the world have passed whistleblower laws, recognising how hard it is to uncover untoward behaviour. Frances Haugen’s exposure of Facebook’s misdeeds probably wouldn’t have been possible without the US’s strong whistleblower laws. But Switzerland, one of the oldest democracies in the world, seems to have doubled down on its commitment to secrecy, regardless of the incentives it provides for bad behaviour, by threatening journalists and others who try to access data showing what is going on in the dark shadows of its financial system. Regrettably, but not surprisingly, no Swiss outlet was able to join the global journalism collaboration due to the danger of severe legal consequences under the country’s banking secrecy laws. But journalists in other countries should be given kudos too, for risking the possibility of Swiss authorities’ prosecution. Surely, Switzerland must know the chilling effect of its legislation: perhaps its very intent was to preserve its business models as long as possible, of taking a little slice of the ill-gotten gains of others, in return for providing a safe and secret place to hoard and store the geld. The Suisse secrets have two particularly alarming aspects. The international journalistic collaboration only saw a small portion of the bank’s client data, but if in this tiny portion are already so many problematic customers, including dictators and their families, suspected war criminals, intelligence officials and chiefs, a human trafficker, sanctioned businessmen and human rights abusers – a true rogues’ gallery – what would we see if the window into the bank were larger? Second, it appears the countries that suffer the most from the bank’s assistance to bad actors are developing countries and emerging markets. The revelation confirms what experts have warned of for a long time: Switzerland agreed to an automatic information exchange mostly with other advanced countries, but not with poor countries, and especially those that might be the home to these illicit activities. As a result, kleptocracy and corruption can still flourish. It’s good to see that journalists believe in their duty to report, and that they fight for “the right to know” of the citizens of countries such as Switzerland, who can’t control what their politicians hide. Politicians in advanced countries are fond of making speeches condemning corruption elsewhere. But it is countries like Switzerland that are the key enablers: that provide the haven, ensuring the long-term returns. We should be clear: Switzerland is not alone. It rightly complains that closing the door there will simply shift the activities to real estate and finance in Miami, London or other money-laundering centres. Still, there is something morally repugnant about those in the US, UK or Switzerland living off spoils stolen from those so much poorer. And those countries like Switzerland that have designed a legal code that makes this system flourish should be especially embarrassed. How many stories, how many revelations, how many exposés, will it take for Switzerland, the US, UK and other countries to change their laws on secrecy in banking and real estate, and all the other activities that facilitate money laundering and promote crime and corruption? While this treasure trove showed Switzerland benefiting from a flow of money from poor countries, the system itself is corrupting: the rot of tainted money spoils all that it comes in touch with. Hopefully, the Suisse secrets, this enormous achievement of honest and honourable journalism, will put to shame those who have resisted creating a more transparent financial and economic system. Joseph E Stiglitz is a Nobel laureate in economics and a professor at Columbia UniversityEarlier today I set you the following puzzle about a game show, which has been used during Oxford university admissions interviews for joint philosophy courses. The puzzle has three versions and I will discuss the solutions to all of them below, as well as how they relate to basic issues in computer science. 1. The standard version You are a contestant on a game show with a £1m prize. A second contestant is in another room. The game is cooperative, so either you both win, or you both lose. You have never met the other contestant before, but you can assume they are just as logical as you are. The game begins with round 1, then proceeds with rounds 2, 3, and so on, for as many rounds as need be. On each round, each contestant has two choices: EITHER To tell the host: “I end the game” and announce a colour (any colour, of the contestant’s choice.) OR To send a message (of any length) to the other contestant. If you both choose to send a message, the messages are sent simultaneously, crossing in transit. To win the game you must both end the game on the same round, announcing the same colours. If only one of you ends the game, or you both end it announcing different colours, you lose. Round 1 is about to begin. What do you do? Solution As I mentioned in the earlier post, a bad strategy is to end the game by announcing a colour on round 1, since it is very unlikely the other contestant will do the same with the same colour. Instead, you and the other contestant should message each other to plan when to end the game, and with which colour. Here’s a sensible-sounding candidate for your first message: “let’s declare red in round 3, please confirm in round 2”. The game is cooperative, so the other contestant will follow your lead if they think it is in both of your best interests. Indeed, this strategy would work if only you sent a message in round 1, and only they responded (to confirm the plan) in round 2. You would win in round 3. However, this strategy does not work for this puzzle because your messages are sent simultaneously. Since the other contestant is as logical as you, maybe they are thinking of sending a similar message. In fact, they may send exactly the same message, in which case, you will both announce red on round 3 and win. Hurrah! But then again, they may make the proposal with a different colour. For example, let’s say you send “let’s declare red in round 3, please confirm in round 2”, as suggested above, and you receive the message: “let’s declare blue in round 3, please confirm in round 2”? Where does that leave you both? Do you stick with red or do you defer to the other contestant and announce blue? They will be struggling with the same dilemma. Indeed, you may come to the realisation that whatever message you send the other contestant, they may simultaneously send you exactly the same message but concerning a different colour. To solve the problem you need to find a way to break the symmetry. The quick answer is to flip a coin. A very good idea is to introduce an element of randomisation. For example, let’s say your first message is “I suggest we both announce red next round. I will do so if you also suggest this.” And let’s say that you receive the message “I suggest we both announce blue next round. I will do so if you also suggest this.” A sensible course of action would be to flip a coin each round, and send the “red” message on heads and the “blue” message on tails. If the other contestant does the same, then in a few rounds you will send each other the same message, and win on the following round. There are other ways to introduce randomness depending on what message you send (or receive). For example, you could flip a coin to send a message about who will lead the process. Heads, you send: “let’s say red next round, if your message indicates you will follow my suggestion.” Tails, you send: “I am going to follow your plan of action if you send one this round.” Within a few rounds you will have established a leader. Provided you send (and receive) a workable plan, any deadlock between you can be broken by introducing randomness. Flip a coin to determine whether to be insistent on your plan, or amenable to theirs, and eventually an agreement will be reached. In computer science, a similar problem comes up in an issue called contention resolution. For example, just say you connect identical computers together on a network. If the computers are identical, they will all want to talk to each other at the same time. But if they do talk at the same time they will garble each other. In order to break the symmetry, the computers do the equivalent of flipping an internal coin, so that an order of priority emerges. 2. The collision variation: The contestants have three choices each round. Either they can end the game and announce a colour, or they can send a message, as in the standard version, or they can do nothing. If both players send a message, the messages collide and are not delivered. In this case, an error message is generated. What do you do? Again, randomness comes to the rescue. Flip a coin to decide whether to send a message or stay silent. On heads, send the message “Announce red on next round, if this message gets through.” On tails, do nothing, and plan to follow whatever is suggested on the message that might be received. It is very likely that in a few rounds a message gets through one way or the other, with a quick win straight afterward. 3. The pigeon variation: Only one contestant sends a message per round. You start in round 1, the other contestant sends in round 2, and you continue alternating between you. Although this time, you are a long distance from each other and the messages are sent via carrier pigeon, which means you can never be sure that the messages arrive. What do you do? The pigeon variation is a version of the two-generals problem, a well-known problem in computer science about communication between two parties where a failure in communication is possible. Since no messages you send may reach the other contestant (and vice versa), you cannot guarantee winning the prize. However, you can attain a very high degree of confidence with the following plan. On round 1 you send the message, “We shall say red on round 1000, please confirm.” On each subsequent round, you send this message again, together with a complete record of all prior messages sent/received. The other contestant, if receiving the message on round 1 should simply follow along and send confirmations. If they don’t receive anything, they should reply with “sorry, no message received; please resend.” Most importantly, they should not start a competing plan, which would only reintroduce the priority issue of the main puzzle. Eventually, messages are likely to get through and the two players will be on track to win with high probability. Today’s puzzles were written by Joel David Hamkins, who used them on admissions candidates when he was Professor of Logic and the Sir Peter Strawson Fellow in Philosophy at University College, Oxford. “In the admissions interviews, which were generally less than 25 minutes, we were happy if a candidate got to the realisation of the symmetry issue in the main puzzle, before going on to the alternating version [in which one message is sent per round], which most students got quickly, and then the collision version, where the randomness idea seemed to arise more naturally. The best candidates were then able to realize how to apply the randomness idea to the main version. With the pigeon version of the puzzle, successful candidates realized the need to achieve confirmation and confirmation of confirmation, and a few put this together to mount the impossibility argument for the case of certainty, and most realized how to increase the likelihood of success by picking a distant round and repeating messages.” Hamkins is currently the O’Hara Professor of Philosophy and Mathematics at the University of Notre Dame. For further discussion of this puzzle, please see his blog. I set a puzzle here every two weeks on a Monday. I’m always on the look-out for great puzzles. If you would like to suggest one, email me. I’m the author of several books of puzzles, most recently the Language Lover’s Puzzle Book. I also give school talks about maths and puzzles (online and in person). If your school is interested please get in touch. On Thursday 21 April I’ll be giving a puzzles workshop for Guardian Masterclasses. You can sign up here.As Storm Franklin raged through the night, Mick Malkinson, 72, lay awake with a familiar sense of fear about what the morning would bring. From his riverside home in Tadcaster, a Yorkshire market town, he heard the “thunderous” noise of metal kegs crashing to the floor as the River Wharfe tore through a brewery warehouse nearby. “The noise was horrendous,” he said. “It was like a world war. There was no sleep at all last night.” By dawn, the house he shares with his wife, Elizabeth, and their one-year-old cocker spaniel Miska, was among three properties completely cut off by several feet of flood water. “All we can see is a vast lake of water. We can’t get out. It will be up to my neck at the end of my drive. We will be stuck here for a couple of days now.” It is the third time in 10 years that Tadcaster has suffered significant flooding. The last time, in 2015, nearly 100 homes and businesses were damaged when Storm Eva roared downstream, partly demolishing the 18th-century bridge that connects the two sides of the town. Many of the families and businesses that suffered seven years ago woke to the same fate on Monday: Storm Franklin had led to the flooding of about 60 properties, including a butchers, an estate agent and a beauty salon on the high street. The river level did not rise as high this time as during Storm Eva – peaking at nearly 4 metres compared with 4.51 metres in 2015 – but that was little consolation to those affected. “We’re devastated. It’s heartbreaking to see it like this. It’s higher than we expected,” said Andy Charlesworth, the chairman of Tadcaster Albion Football Club, whose historic 2,000-capacity stadium was under water for the third time in seven years. The club has played football on the banks of the Wharfe since its foundation in 1892. Like many of its neighbours, however, it has been looking for a new home because of the ruinous cost of flooding. Few if any local businesses are insured in the event of flood damage – a familiar tale in towns prone to such disasters, despite calls for better protection for small firms. Charlesworth said the club was looking at between £50,000 and £80,000 worth of damage: “What we really could do with is a Premier League footballer to give us a week’s wages. That would just sort it. They’re not exactly strapped for cash.” Brian Bartle, 72, leapt out of bed in the early hours to try to salvage what he could from the estate agent founded by his family in 1978. By mid-morning his shop was under water. “It’s pretty grim,” he said, watching helplessly from 300 metres away, at the edge of the water. It took a year to recover from the 2015 storm, he said, and now he was “back to square one”. “Last time it was pure neglect by the Environment Agency because the bridge was blocked with trees,” he said. “This time it’s just vast water flow coming down too fast.” Many local people questioned why it had taken so long to improve the town’s flood defences after the devastation caused by Storm Eva. A report by North Yorkshire county council last June revealed that the works, led by the Environment Agency, had been delayed until 2024 due to “inaccuracies” with the hydrological model behind the plans. Richard Sweeting, a Conservative district councillor for Tadcaster, said he was “devastated and heartbroken” that the town had been hit again. “The government need to look closely at getting some kind of flood prevention in our town,” he said. “They need to get their act together and put Tadcaster as a priority.” Zoe Devine, 48, co-owner of the flooded Devine Meats, said millions of pounds had been allocated to flood defences, but the work appeared to have been delayed by the Covid pandemic. “You know that the people you are going to get angry at are the very people who will be out helping you, so getting angry is no good,” said Devine. “We’ve been here and done this before.” Malkinson, meanwhile, was preparing to spend days trapped in his home. The retired agricultural engineer had tried twice to sell the house after Storm Eva wrecked their ground floor, but it was “basically impossible” owing to the flood risk. When the flood sirens sounded on Sunday, they had nowhere to go so stayed put and prayed for the rain to stop. No one from the authorities had checked up on them by Monday afternoon, he said: “It is disappointing, especially when they know that our houses are at risk. I’m sure they’ve got a lot on their plate, but it irks sometimes.” An Environment Agency spokesperson said: “We are aware of a small number of flooded properties in Tadcaster and are working closely with the emergency services and other agencies to keep the community safe. “A review of the planned flood risk management scheme in Tadcaster highlighted inaccuracies in the complex modelling of the design. This has unfortunately delayed the start of construction but we are working to progress the scheme as quickly as possible to better protect the community from flooding and extreme weather.”Myanmar’s military junta has appeared in place of the detained Aung San Suu Kyi at the UN’s top court, where it sought to throw out a case alleging that it committed genocide against the country’s Rohingya minority. The decision to allow the junta to represent the country in court, after it seized power in a coup last year, was strongly criticised by advocacy groups and a former UN special rapporteur, who warned that it risked delaying justice. The claim that Myanmar’s military carried out genocide was brought to the international court of justice (ICJ) by the Gambia after a brutal 2017 military crackdown that forced an estimated 700,000 Rohingya to flee over the border to neighbouring Bangladesh. UN investigators have since alleged the military’s operations were carried out with “genocidal intent”. Previously, Aung San Suu Kyi travelled to the court to defend Myanmar against claims the military carried out mass murder, rape and destruction of Rohingya Muslim communities. She is now being held in detention at the behest of the military, which seized power in February 2021 and charged her with a raft of offences. Aung San Suu Kyi was replaced in court by the junta’s minister of international cooperation, Ko Ko Hlaing, and its attorney general, Thida Oo. Both are subject to US sanctions prompted by the military’s use of brutal violence to repress opposition to the coup. The national unity government (NUG), formed by elected lawmakers, ethnic minority representatives and activists, had said it intended to represent Myanmar at the ICJ. It said it had withdrawn preliminary objections – unlike the junta, whose representatives argued on Monday that the Gambia did not have the legal right to file the case. Yanghee Lee, a former UN special rapporteur on human rights in Myanmar, called the hearings a disgrace. “The court should instead recognise the NUG’s authority, formally dismiss the objections, and move swiftly to dealing with the actual substance of the case, the atrocities against the Rohingya people.” The junta’s lawyers outlined several objections, including claims that the Gambia was acting as a “proxy” for the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation, and therefore lacked standing because the ICJ only rules on disputes between states. Ko Ko Hlaing told the court that the junta, which he referred to as the government of Myanmar, was determined to solve the problems in Rakhine state “through peaceful means of negotiation and reconciliation”. Rights groups point out that the military is in the midst of a deadly campaign of violence against the public. Over the past year alone, in the aftermath of the coup, its has torched villages, massacred civilians and carried out airstrikes across the country to silence opposition. Tun Khin, president of the Burmese Rohingya Organisation UK, said the military had totally failed to comply with a previous order issued by the court, which said Myanmar must prevent genocidal violence against Rohingya and preserve any evidence of past crimes. “The Rohingya in Myanmar today are subjected to daily harassment and intimidation by authorities, while there are also state-enforced restrictions on their movement, as well as their access to healthcare, education and livelihoods,” Tun Khin said. The junta was also blocking humanitarian assistance, leaving many Rohingya on the brink of starvation, he added. A representative of the Rohingya Student Network, who spoke from Cox’s Bazar in Bangladesh, told the Guardian the ICJ case represented not only the prospect of justice for Rohingya people, but also the “hope to bring a federal democracy in Myanmar for all those who are fighting [for an end to military rule] in Myanmar right now”. The military’s seizure of power has prompted a shift in attitudes towards minorities. Previously there was little solidarity with Rohingya, but since the coup some protesters have apologised for not standing by Rohingya or believing their claims of persecution. “They joined our fight from 1 February,” said the Rohingya activist, who asked not to be named due to security concerns, referring to the date of last year’s coup. “They just joined our fight, that we [have been] fighting for decades.” Akila Radhakrishnan, president of the Global Justice Centre, said she did not believe the junta’s appearance before the court would lend legitimacy to the military. It was likely to simply reflect a continuation of the status quo in court procedures, she said. Radhakrishnan added: “There is such a strong link between impunity and the coup occurring, and the fact that the military has very rarely faced any direct consequences, that I think there is import to the fact that they are learning that they will be hauled into court – and this time around, unlike 2019, they can’t hide behind Aung San Suu Kyi and the civilian government.”When I was young – this was, of course, many scores of years ago – we spent a lot of time arguing about fur. On one level, it was a pretty crude political awakening (animal cruelty, for or against?); on another, an early introduction to meaningless position-taking, and how enjoyable it can be (if you could never afford a mink coat, does it matter whether or not you agree with buying one? Well, yes, as a matter of fact, it does!). Philosophically, the knottiest bit was whether you were allowed to buy fur secondhand, considering the fox had already died, most likely in the 1940s. Then someone looked up how astrakhan was made and it was so brutally disgusting that it killed all conversation stone dead and we moved on to arguing about vivisection. I hope I speak for my entire generation, then, when I say how delighted I am to find the controversy reawakened by Jacob Rees-Mogg, along with a similarly familiar one about the sale of foie gras. Ah, the smell of ethics-napalm in the morning. It’s like being 14 all over again. This must be how boomers feel when they trawl through Facebook and find posts about the good old days, when men could be men, and women understood that when a stranger squeezed their arse they meant that in a nice way. Thrilling rage and exhilarating disbelief; these, plus maybe snakebite and black, are what lost youth smells like. It was the British government’s pledge to ban the import of fur and foie gras, part of a drive to make the UK the least cruel nation in the world. This was intended as an element of our sweet sovereignty, the bliss of being emancipated from the EU. Naturally, we had the freedom to outlaw these products at any time, but let’s not get bogged down in things that are real. We wasted the past five years doing that. And now the government is thinking of ditching the pledge after opposition from within the cabinet. The next five years are going to play out roughly like this: every day will throw up a technical hitch or a broken promise. Perhaps the promise was made with no heed to the technicalities behind it, or maybe its fulfilment was never part of the plan in the first place. It might be a huge promise, such as frictionless trade and boosted prosperity, or it might be a vague one, such as “your oranges will stay exactly the same (probably)”, or “genetically engineered food is nothing to worry your pretty head about”. Sooner or later it will be derailed, and then the Rees-Moggs and Trevelyans and Trusses of this world have two options. They can hope that we all get bored of the details and wander off. Deep down, they know that won’t happen. Even if the vast majority of us are already bored, there will always be one disgruntled remainer, looking up the side-effects of imazalil, or doing a deep dive on why the EU bans ractopamine in pigs. Luckily, there’s an alternative: to drag every issue, from the collapsing food and drink export industry to the made-up market demand for mink, into a culture war, pitting the woke army of generation X against the boomers who’ve been radicalised by the Daily Express. All that’s required of ministers thereafter is to sit back and watch the fireworks – the explosions, hopefully, being a lot livelier and more dangerous, now we’re free of the EU and all their boring safety and whatnot. It’s so predictable, and so basic. The problem for all of us in the woke army will be staying awake. Zoe Williams is a Guardian columnistWhen you are searching online for some of the remotest islands on the planet, it helps to get the name right. But a row has broken out over the labelling of the Chagos Islands on Google maps. The UK maintains that it still holds sovereignty over what it terms British Indian Ocean Territory (BIOT) – one of the smallest of red dots on the traditional cartographic globe. But Mauritius, which has been recognised as legitimate owner of the archipelago in a series of international court judgments and United Nations votes since 2019, has formally asked Google to re-describe the islands as part of its territory. Letters seen by the Guardian have been sent to the search engine’s California headquarters requesting that BIOT, which includes the strategic US military base of Diego Garcia, be wiped off the map. Mauritius first sent a request in January 2020 to Sundar Pichai, the chief executive officer at Google. It asked the company to “rectify this error immediately” and included as evidence references to the advisory opinion of the international court of justice in The Hague. The judgment said the UK “unlawfully” detached the Chagos Islands from Mauritius prior to granting it independence in 1968. Mauritius said that an overwhelming majority vote by the United Nations General Assembly adopted the court’s opinion and “demanded that the United Kingdom terminate its unlawful colonial administration”. The letter said the “error could be interpreted as tacit approval … of the UK’s unlawful administration”. The islands, it added, should be marked “Chagos Archipelago (Republic of Mauritius)”. Two further requests were sent by Mauritius criticising the “mislabelling”, but no change has yet been made online. Legal proceedings, Mauritius has warned, could be brought against Google. Jagdish Koonjul, the Mauritian ambassador to the United Nations, said: “We never received a reply. It’s disappointing. One would have assumed that Google would be the ideal place to obtain information and that whatever they are [displaying] would be accurate. What they are showing is incorrect.” The Google Maps search engine, when it locates BIOT, merely explains that it is “a disputed British Overseas Territory of the United Kingdom situated in the Indian Ocean halfway between Tanzania and Indonesia”. After being approached by the Guardian, Google said it was looking into the matter. Apple Maps, by contrast, agreed to change its labelling. Searches for both “BIOT” and “British Indian Ocean Territory” on Apple Maps produce the response “No results found”. The Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office (FCDO) said: “The UK has no doubt as to our sovereignty over the British Indian Ocean Territory, which we have held continuously since 1814. Mauritius has never held sovereignty over the territory and the UK does not recognise its claim.” Meanwhile, the former Labour party leader Jeremy Corbyn, a longtime supporter of exiled Chagossians, has published a letter of support following Mauritius’s first expedition to the Chagos Islands to assert its sovereignty. He declared: “The British government must now engage with Mauritius and negotiate a settlement of these issues. I call on the government immediately to restore the right of return of the Chagossians to their homeland and work with Mauritius on a trial resettlement programme.” Alyn Smith MP, foreign affairs spokesperson for the SNP in Westminster, said: “The SNP stands four-square behind international law and it is clear that the Chagos Islands are not UK territory. In 2019, the UN general assembly voted overwhelmingly to condemn the UK’s continuing, systematic occupation of the Chagos Islands. In the same year, the international court of justice also ruled the occupation illegal. Last month, the UN’s international tribunal for the law of the sea upheld this verdict. “It is high time for the UK to end its illegal occupation of the Chagos Islands. The SNP will continue honouring its longstanding manifesto commitment to supporting international efforts for the Chagos Islands to be returned to their rightful owners and raising the issue at home.”Boris Johnson has announced that free Covid testing will end for the general public in England from 1 April and positive cases will no longer legally have to isolate from Thursday 24 February. Free PCR and lateral flow tests will therefore no longer be available for the vast majority of people, apart from some symptomatic vulnerable and very elderly people. We would like to hear what you think about the plans. Do you agree or disagree? Do you have any concerns? Share your thoughts You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.Covid laws and free mass testing are to be swept away across England after Rishi Sunak won a cabinet battle on cutting the cost of the pandemic, prompting fears that the poor and vulnerable will pay the price. Boris Johnson announced plans to end free testing for the general public from 1 April, saying it was time for people to “get our confidence back”. People who test positive for Covid will no longer have to isolate by law from this Thursday – and from April will not even be advised to stay at home if infected, the prime minister said. The chief medical officer, Chris Whitty, and the chief scientific adviser, Patrick Vallance, struck a more cautious note, however, urging people to keep taking precautions such as isolating and wearing masks while infections remain high. Speaking alongside Johnson at a Downing Street press conference, they emphasised the need to keep monitoring for new variants, with Whitty warning that Covid could still cause “significant problems” and cautioning that it is not a “trivial” illness. The prime minister unveiled the changes after Sunak, the chancellor, won his fight to slash the cost of Covid testing, which has topped £15bn in the past year, by up to 90%. Sajid Javid, the health secretary, had pushed for £5bn to £6bn to fund more community testing and surveillance studies, but failed. After last-minute wrangles that delayed a cabinet meeting by more than two hours, additional funding will now have to be found from his own department’s budget. No 10 insisted that efforts to reduce the NHS waiting list backlog would not be affected. Tory MPs opposed to Covid restrictions were delighted at Johnson’s move, but it was greeted with dismay by some medics, scientists, charities and unions. Many raised concerns that the low-paid will not be able to afford tests and may come under pressure from employers to work when ill with Covid. Those on low pay will no longer get financial support to isolate if they test positive, and sick pay will revert to the pre-pandemic rules, with eligibility from day four of illness rather than day one. Charities said the end of free tests was also a blow to clinically vulnerable people and older age groups, warning that they may lose confidence about going out in public, while business groups expressed frustration that they would have to take decisions on testing and isolation policies for their own staff. The government said “a small number of at-risk groups” and care home staff will continue to get free lateral flow tests (LFTs), possibly the over-80s, but No 10 admitted the details of who will be eligible and its funding had yet to be worked out. Johnson emphasised “personal responsibility” for Covid in future, rather than the government setting restrictions to control it. He said “pharmaceutical interventions”, such as antivirals and vaccines, would be the primary line of defence from now on. “We don’t need laws to compel people to be considerate to others. We can rely on that sense of responsibility towards one another,” he told the Commons. Other changes announced by the prime minister included: Contact tracing will end from Thursday and contacts of people testing positive will no longer have to test or isolate. Schools and other education settings will no longer be advised to test twice-weekly, with immediate effect. NHS and social care staff will no longer get asymptomatic testing but this is expected to continue for patients and care home residents. Covid passports will be scrapped from 1 April, with venues no longer recommended to use them. They will still be available for international travel. The Office for National Statistics survey of Covid in the community will be maintained but in a slimmed-down version. The Vivaldi study on care homes and Panoramic study on antivirals will continue, the government insisted, although it was not clear how they will be funded and whether enough testing is being done to support them. At Johnson’s first press conference since 19 January, Whitty and Vallance emphasised that the ability to maintain surveillance and “ramp up” testing again would be crucial in future. Whitty stressed that people with Covid should still self-isolate, even though the government has not committed to renewing that advice beyond April. Johnson insisted there was no division on the “living with Covid” strategy. “I don’t want you to think that there is some division between the gung ho politicians and the cautious, anxious scientists. We have a very clear view on this, that this has not gone away,” he said. Vallance suggested he was concerned about the rates of infection once people returned to pre-pandemic behaviour. “In terms of the current situation, I’d like the prevalence to be lower, I’d like rates of infection to be lower … We are not back to pre-pandemic behaviours yet. And as those returns you would expect the pressure and transmission to increase.” The changes were met with scepticism from Labour, who accused the prime minister of weakening sick pay in a way that will “hit the lowest paid and the most insecure workers the hardest”. Keir Starmer said: “We can’t turn off Britain’s radar before the war is won. ‘Ignorance is bliss’ is not a responsible approach to a deadly virus. It actually risks undoing all the hard won progress the British people have achieved over the last two years.” Some scientists said it was right to begin winding down the pandemic response now the Omicron peak has passed but others expressed worries about the consequences of an abrupt end to free testing. Prof Stephen Reicher, a member of Sage’s behavioural science subgroup, said he was concerned it “exacerbates inequalities for those who can’t afford to test or to self-isolate”. “All the rhetoric about freedom, and about choice and about allowing people to exercise ‘personal responsibility’ hides the fact that those freedoms and choices are limited to those who have the means,” he said. “Johnson’s removal of support for self-isolation and testing takes choice away from those who cannot afford to stay home or buy testing kits. Johnson exposed the fallacy of his argument in asserting that ‘anyone who wants to can buy a test”. No they can’t. if you are already having to choose between eating and heating, tests are an impossible luxury.” Following the announcement, free government LFTs appeared to have run out, with a message saying “there are no home delivery slots for these tests right now”.In 2006, the first uploads appeared on Jamal Edwards’ YouTube channel SBTV. On grainy footage, young MCs dart in and out of the camera, spraying bars into the lens, old school grime instrumentals playing on loop in the background. These rough cuts were a symbol of what was to come for a man and a generation of MCs emerging out of working-class corners of the UK. At a time when genres such as grime and rap had been barred from the stages of British mainstream music, and were largely absent from charts and radio, award shows and TV, Edwards and SBTV became a refuge and a haven for young MCs seeking an outlet. Edwards was a conductor and a vessel, embodying the culture’s DIY essence, and allowing adolescent expression to find voice on the newly levelled terrain of YouTube. The channel raised generations of musicians. Known as Smokey Barz back then, it launched soon after YouTube itself. What started as Edwards filming local friends with double lives as MCs became a hub and a meeting point for an entire scene. In the first 10 years of its life, the channel ran music videos, interviews and behind-the-scenes footage. But its showcase pieces were its freestyle sessions, the most popular of which were F64 and Warm Up Sessions. Over the years, the sound’s most popular and most cherished artists have graced those sessions: from respected veterans such as Boy Better Know and Akala, Margs and Black the Ripper, NoLay and Skinnyman, then staggering down the generations, featuring rising stars Dave and J Hus in 2015, and a standout Warm Up Session from Big Zuu in 2016. When it came to the freestyles, Jamal was deep in the weeds – even once the channel had grown to over a million subscribers, and he had helped launch the careers of mammoth pop stars such as Ed Sheeran, Jessie J and Jess Glynne, and he had been given an MBE for services to music in 2014. Many MCs and musicians such as the late MC Cadet recount stories of how he would tell them to rewrite their lyrics, pushing them to go deeper, asking them to bring who they are, the conditions that shaped them, on to their records. The result is vital collection of British music. The channel, still running, is a time capsule and a snapshot of contemporary sound in Britain. Through its videos you can trace the evolution of music in Black Britain, grime moving into UK rap, then both bleeding into Afroswing and UK drill. Its essence and meaning to the community from which it sprang is best captured in a Warm Up Session by Birmingham grime pioneer Vader, who raps: “Big up Jamal, best wishes … keep showing the world the best of the British.” But the legacy of Edwards is not consigned to artists and MCs alone. There are generations of creatives who have passed through the revolving doors of his company. I worked at SBTV for about 15 months, stretching from 2016 to 2018, working across editorial and YouTube, searching for my break in a media industry that seemed sealed at the doors. In SBTV I found a space to deepen my craft. I found encouragement, connections and deep friendships that carry on to this day. In that experience I was not alone. There are a string of creatives and photographers, media personalities and directors, who Edwards has given a leg up. “That to me is the most important thing,” he said in an interview, “because that’s what I got into it for, being able to help get these artists get to the next level.” When Jay-Z was seeking to get in touch with talented rapper turned director Rapman, it was Edwards who linked the two. The result was Rapman signing to Roc Nation, and the eventual release of his successful cult film Blue Story. Many across the country have similar stories to tell. Sitting in the office, you would often hear stories of young creatives seeking Edwards out for advice, photographers who had stopped him on the street, asked for an opportunity to work and within a few weeks were shooting and creating content for brands and the SBTV Instagram. He was a dreamer who reached out and grabbed his future. And when he found success, he encouraged and inspired a wave of watching kids to do the same. “Everyone has the potential in them,” he once said in an interview with Ross Kemp, “it’s just at what point in your life you unlock it.” In the hours since he died aged 31, social media has been awash with stories of his generosity from music executives and media personalities, producers and writers who he laid out a bridge for, a connection between his community and industries that had long resisted them. This work to uplift and encourage goes beyond music. In recent years Edwards had launched JE Delve, a youth charity in Ealing, London, dedicated to giving young people the opportunity to develop skills in fields from film-making to architecture, continuing his devotion to nurturing talent emerging out of the edges. The same boy who picked up a camera and changed the fortunes of himself and hundreds of others more than decade back retained the same focus and intent as a grown man. In a year where rap and Black music in Britain continues to scale new heights, now with its own official category at the Brits, producing some of the highest-selling artists in the country, Jamal Edwards’ contribution cannot be overstated or forgotten. He was a pioneer who laid the ground for those who came after, carved a door out of the ether and beckoned his people, his community, his friends and even strangers to walk through it.Boris Johnson’s use of apocalyptic demons to aid his survival in office knows no limit. Since his near-death experience of “partygate”, he has shamelessly exploited war, floods and pestilence. All have responded. Pestilence is now his greatest ally. The decision announced today to end all remaining pandemic restriction measures in England goes flatly against his more cautious advisers and appears highly political. That does not make it wrong. The prime duty of government is to protect people from death and disease. After two years of Covid, the most basic measure of that protection is the “excess death rate” from all causes. In England this is now negative, that is, running below the seasonal norm, while Covid-related hospitalisations across the entire UK are falling fast. The crisis is over. Were Covid not in the air, mass testing for, say, infectious flu would seem an excessive precaution, given the government’s claims that it costs an astronomical £2bn a month. Whether this continues apparently remains a matter of argument. It is true that excess deaths also fell a year ago before the return of Covid via the Omicron variant, a return not remotely as serious as previous variants. It was countered by the clearly effective remedy of vaccination. Nonetheless, the return was enough for “the science” to challenge Johnson’s decision to end quarantine requirements and scale back mass testing. He is determined to “return to normal” after two years of national disruption, leaving individuals and organisations to make their own judgments on caution, as with other diseases. Yes, he says, it is a risk, but his job is to judge risks, and sometimes to take them. In this case Johnson is surely right. Leaving aside vaccination – unquestioned hero of the hour – the external cost of the Covid lockdown has been unquantifiable but appalling. In medicine alone, cancers have gone unreported, with other illnesses untreated and mental health neglected. The money spent on lockdown compensation, much of it reckless and some even corrupt, has been denied to other welfare uses. The cost to child welfare is inestimable, as has been the cost to education. It is, of course, possible that ending mandatory self-isolation may lead to another upturn, though whether this should justify a return of lockdown must be doubted. Support for the clinically vulnerable should remain, and be shored up with new resources. More to the point is that the government – and the country – should now be able to turn its resources and attention to recovering from Covid’s wider damage to the nation’s welfare caused over the past two years. It is worrying how rarely those pleading for continued lockdown refer to this damage. It is as if because a cost is unquantifiable in the short term it does not exist. Too often scientists sound like just another interest group out to protect its reputation and budget. As Neil Ferguson’s Imperial College London modelling group were quoted as admitting: “We do not consider the wider social and economic costs of suppression.” It is why Sweden’s decision to avoid a draconian lockdown merits serious analysis. Its GDP fell by 2.9%, Britain’s by 9.4%. In the European league tables Sweden falls around the middle in deaths per capita, still well below Britain. Experts should be on tap, not on top. They should be listened to but not obeyed. We vote for politicians to rule us and no one else, thank goodness. Now Johnson can get back to his other demons, still dancing attendance at his door. Simon Jenkins is a Guardian columnistEleven villagers were enough to bring down a giant, so it goes. On the day the 1958 World Cup final was played in Solna, another game took place 2,200 miles south, which wasn’t where they wanted it but that made it better in the end. Athletic Club de Bilbao – Atlético then, by dictatorial decree – had requested the final of the Copa del Generalísimo be held in a neutral city, but the Generalísimo wasn’t going anywhere which meant that nor were they. At best, they were told, Spain’s showpiece game could be moved to the Metropolitano so they said let’s stick to the Santiago Bernabéu. That way, more of their fans would get in to see them win it. Which was pretty bold, a bilbainada – a song and a mindset, a declaration of invincibility all the better if it’s against the odds. They followed through on it. In front of 125,000, it finished 2-0 against that Real Madrid in their own home, a month after Paco Gento’s goal had given them the third of five consecutive European Cups. Once aldeanos – 11 villagers, an entire lineup of locals – had done over the world’s side, Athletic’s president Enrique Guzmán declared, the name of a team and the identity of a club expressed in a line that lasted. On Sunday night, footage from the 1958 final was broadcast on the screens at San Mamés before the Basque derby against Real Sociedad, in honour of Mauricio Ugartemendia Lauzirika. Born in Gernika, an Athletic midfielder for 11 years, making 295 appearances and getting 72 goals, scorer of the second in that final that would define them, the man who ran Bar Poxpolin after he retired, “Mauri” had passed away two days earlier, aged 87. The club’s anthem was played on the piano accompanied by silence from the stands, the teams lined up wearing black bands. And then, when it finished, Athletic’s players paid him tribute by beating Real Sociedad 4-0 despite missing a penalty. Athletic hadn’t scored four against la Real in 45 years – and the last time they had won a derby by four goals, Mauri was still playing. Legend has it that when the captain Piru Gaínza collected the cup in 1958 he turned to Franco and said: “See you next year.” Actually, he didn’t, but the Once Aldeanos – Carmelo, Orúe, Garay, Canito, Mauri, Etura, Artetxe, Uribe, Arieta, Aguirre, Gaínza – were some team: league winners in 1956, cup winners in 1955 and 56, they defeated Honved and beat the Busby Babes 5-3 in 1957 (although, down to 10 men, they lost the second leg at Old Trafford), before winning that final against Di Stéfano’s European champions. The following season, Mauri scored a hat-trick against Celta during a run in which Athletic won 9-0, 9-0, 8-1 and 7-0 in a row. The year after, they scored six against Oviedo, five against Atlético, four against Barcelona. And beat Real Sociedad 4-0 at San Mamés. Times have changed, though, and it didn’t happen again. It didn’t look much like it was going to happen this time, either. “Strip away all the paraphernalia that surrounds a derby and what you’re left with is an unsmokeable chestnut,” claimed El Correo Vasco. Rubbish, in other words. That was only a half-truth: the paraphernalia is part of the point, maybe even the whole point. Football without feeling is worthless and there may be no game anywhere with the depth of identity that this derby has, the culture, the pull of history and the connection to its community on both sides. There’s no meeting more local and there certainly isn’t anywhere you would see blue and white shirts spread around red and white stands even on a night when no away tickets have officially been sold. The games are often fun, with something enjoyable in the different styles within a context where much is shared. This wasn’t bad either, yet there was something in that comment, certainly in the first half. There wasn’t much football and, although Raúl García managed to get a yellow card after four minutes, there weren’t even that many fouls: nine each in the 90 minutes. There was not much blood, not much thunder, and in the first 45 minutes there weren’t any goals. Not least because Álex Remiro, the former Athletic goalkeeper who was whistled and chanted at throughout, whose mistake cost la Real the last derby, saved an Iker Muniain penalty, earning temporary revenge and two kilos of beef from a local radio station. But, the Athletic coach Marcelino García Toral insisted, the fact that Athletic didn’t disappear from the game after that, that they “never got demoralised”, was “supremely important”. And then suddenly, midway through the second half, it exploded. The Athletic striker Iñaki Williams talked afterwards about how he loved and had missed that feeling that “every corner is a goal [and] teams fear us”. The sporting director, Rafael Alkorta, conjured up the combination of expectation and excellent delivery, big men with granite foreheads waiting for the ball, referring to corners as “half a goal”, and if that wasn’t quite right either it wasn’t so far off. They’re better than penalties, anyway. Athletic have scored two of seven spot kicks, Muniain becoming the third player to miss; on Sunday night, by contrast, from corners they scored two from six. And then, liberated, launched into their opponents. Dani Vivian headed in the first corner on 68 minutes. Less than four minutes later Oihan Sancet volleyed in the second. He had only been on the pitch 10 minutes but he changed the game completely, scoring the second, leading the move for a superb third, finished by Williams, and assisting Muniain’s fourth. It all happened so fast that la Real didn’t have time to work out what was going on, and nor did anyone else. They had played in Europe on Thursday night, arriving back on Friday, and although the midfielder Martín Zubimendi insisted “that’s no excuse: we can’t let ourselves go after letting in one goal”, their physical condition probably played a part. Athletic’s certainly did: no team produce as many high-intensity runs, flying around the field. Williams was unstoppable, right side and left, every surge in step with the stands, like they were the ones pressing the accelerator. “It’s easier when you go hand in hand with the fans,” he said. Suddenly, they were coming from everywhere. In 19 minutes, Athletic scored four, the noise rolling round. By the final minute, the olés were too. “A perfect night,” the Correo Vasco called it. “A merciless destruction,” AS said. “What a tearing apart,” Marca declared. The Real Sociedad coach Imanol Alguacil said: “I’m the one to blame and that’s it, full stop.” Marcelino beamed: “I’m proud of my players for letting me experience the joy of another magical night at San Mamés.” Another was the word. There’s something childlike, almost sweetly disbelieving about Marcelino’s smile, there again on Sunday night, and it has been seen a lot lately: in the past month alone, Athletic have beaten Madrid, Atlético and Barcelona and have now scored four against Real Sociedad, their first derby win in five taking them to within a point of their rivals and just two from a European place. Level at 1-1, they also have the second leg of the Copa del Rey semi-final to come, having knocked out Barcelona and Madrid. The last time Athletic scored four against Real Sociedad, in 1977 in a 4-2 win, it was two months and one day before they played a cup final against Betis. Sunday night was two months and three days before another cup final. They meet Valencia in one semi-final; Betis lead Rayo in the other. If Athletic get through, that would be three consecutive finals, plus two Super Cup finals, one of which they won against Lionel Messi’s Barcelona having beaten Madrid to get there. Marcelino meanwhile is 90 minutes away from reaching his fourth in a row, having won it with Valencia before joining Athletic (where his first was inherited from Gaizka Garitano). Omens have a habit of ending up empty, they will never get back that fortnight when they lost cup finals against Real Sociedad and Barcelona, and there’s a hint of desperation, a need to take this one last step, but to have got this far is an achievement, like something from another time. And, as Marcelino insisted, “it’s not chance”. This may not be Once Aldeanos exactly, but it doesn’t get much closer these days: every player in the Athletic squad was born less than 100 miles from San Mamés, where they turned Sunday night’s derby into a homage to Mauricio Ugartemendia Lauzirika and all those men who came before them.A 24-year-old English teacher developed a chronic gambling addiction that started with betting small amounts on controversial fixed-odds betting terminals (FOBTs) when he was in the sixth form, an inquest into his death has heard. Jack Ritchie, a Hull university history graduate, took his own life while teaching English in Hanoi, Vietnam, in November 2017. His parents, Charles and Liz Ritchie, from Sheffield, argue that government failures contributed to their son’s death in that he was hooked on “products licensed by the state”. The inquest examining Ritchie’s death is believed by his parents to be the first so-called article 2 inquest in a case relating to suicide after gambling. That means its scope will include an examination of whether any arm of the state breached its duty to protect their son’s right to life. On Monday, the opening day, a witness statement from Ritchie’s childhood friend Nick Clough was read. He described going with Ritchie to betting shops when they were aged 16 or 17 and spending small amounts on the machines. Ritchie’s intention was to double his money “to get a free lunch”. But he added: “With Jack it became more than that.” A trigger moment was when Ritchie won £1,000 in less than 30 seconds, a win that changed his attitude to gambling as he began chasing his losses and looking for the big win. Other witness evidence read to the inquest described how no one had realised the extent of Ritchie’s problems until he had taken his own life. Forensic evidence presented to the inquest showed he was a regular visitor to the BetVictor online gambling website in the days leading up to his death. The inquest at Sheffield town hall opened with a video montage of happy moments from Ritchie’s life. His father described him as a “fine young man on the threshold of his life” who “brightened the lives of everyone around him”. Charles and Liz Ritchie have campaigned for reform of gambling legislation through a charity, Gambling With Lives, that they helped set up. The couple believe an undiagnosed gambling disorder lay behind their son’s death and argue there were no public health warnings about the risk to life posed by gambling products. Their son was not diagnosed or offered treatment that linked his symptoms to gambling disorder, they say. The coroner David Urpeth said the evidence at the hearing, expected to last two weeks, would cover topics including what information was available to Ritchie and his family about the risks of gambling and also what medical treatment was available to him. Urpeth said that his examination of how Ritchie died would include “whether gambling caused or contributed to his death”. The coroner said he understood that the family wanted the scope of the inquest to be an even wider analysis of government gambling policy and told them: “I do not want the family to think I am disinterested in their wider concerns. It’s just that such concerns are beyond the power invested in me.” Officials from the Gambling Commission and the Department of Health and Social Care and Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport are among those expected to give evidence at the inquest. Charles Ritchie previously told the Guardian that he had discovered his son’s addiction when he was 18. He promptly took him into every betting shop in Sheffield, where Jack Ritchie left a photograph and signed a form that would exclude him from placing bets there. But his addiction simply transferred online. In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org. Anyone concerned about their gambling, or that of a loved one, can visit BeGambleAware.org for free, confidential advice and support. The National Gambling Helpline is available on 0808 8020 133 and operates 24 hours a day, seven days a week.A former Post Office worker has recounted how she pleaded guilty on the day of her daughter’s birthday, while another was sentenced as her granddaughter was born, in a day of harrowing testimony of victims wrongly prosecuted for stealing in the Horizon IT scandal. Siobhan Sayer, 54, told a public inquiry on Monday that she was barred from seeing her distressed six-month-old daughter when investigators visited her home in 2008 seeking £18,000 in funds missing from her Post Office business. “They came in, asked if they could search the property, and I said I had no issue as I had nothing to hide,” she said. “They went through kitchen drawers, the filing cabinet, [and] tipped my underwear drawer upside down while joking about where I hid the money, saying it would be much easier if I told them where it was. I was humiliated, terrified. I had a six-month-old daughter. I wasn’t allowed to see her. She started crying and I wasn’t allowed to leave to go and see her. That ended me. I had to end the interview as I couldn’t continue any longer.” Sayer said that during the lengthy investigation she felt “generally harassed and intimidated”, including regularly finding someone parked outside her house. Ultimately, on the advice of lawyers, she pleaded guilty to charges of false accounting in 2010 – on the day of her daughter’s birthday. “I went to court that morning thinking I wouldn’t be coming home,” said the mother of four. “Thinking it would be left to Dad to discuss [my incarceration] with them. I was advised I would receive a custodial sentence. I went to court that day with a case packed not knowing if I would be coming home.” Pauline Thompson, 72, also recalled being told by lawyers to “pack a bag” on the day the judge handed down her sentence, although she too ultimately avoided jail. She had already endured being arrested in the heart of her village, being held in a cell and having her DNA and fingerprints taken. “I had to sell the local newspaper [in the Post Office] with my face all over the front page,” she said. “The day I was sentenced, my daughter gave birth to my granddaughter. The judge was very kind – he realised I was in a dark place and finished by saying, ‘Go and enjoy your first grandchild.’ I felt that was taken away from me as I couldn’t enjoy her pregnancy. My lawyer had told me to pack a bag. I felt quite ill. Pack a bag … what do you pack?” In a day of emotional hearings, victims recounted similar stories of the huge toll on more than 700 Post Office operators wrongly prosecuted for theft and false accounting between 2000 and 2014 due to a flawed IT system suggesting financial shortfalls. “I got tarred overnight,” said Timothy Burgess, who remembers noticing shortfalls the first day the IT system was installed. “People ignored me, crossed the street. People were hostile. I ‘killed the village’ – I had that levelled at me.” Burgess’s relationship with his daughter “deteriorated quite a bit” and even a shift to a new school 30 miles away “was not far enough” to avoid the scandal. An attempt by his sister-in-law to buy the village pet store, something she “had her heart set on”, was thwarted by the owner because of her association with Burgess. Oyeteju Adedayo, whose conviction in 2005 of stealing more than £50,000 from her Gillingham post office was overturned last year, said she went from being a young entrepreneur who was full of life to being fearful for herself and her family. “They said I might go to prison for two or three years, so before I went to the crown court, I took my oldest child around the house and showed them how to use the washing machine,” said the 57-year-old. “I got [my children] an alarm clock and said, ‘Make sure you get up and go to school and do your homework.’ It was terrible to tell a young child.” While ultimately Adedayo did not go to jail – the judge took into consideration her young family and that she had started to pay the Post Office back – the years of being considered guilty wreaked an enormous emotional and financial cost. “All of a sudden I was a thief; they wrote it on the wall,” she said. “I wanted to die, I really did. I would go shopping at night – [my children] missed out on socialising as well. If anyone invited them to, say, a birthday party, I would make excuses to say no because I couldn’t face anyone. I couldn’t go to the school gates to meet them because I was ashamed. “Everything I ever worked for went down the pan overnight. I went into this business because [the Post Office] is a trusted brand and the logo was my pride. And look what I got out of it.”Asda is facing potential disruption to supermarket deliveries after thousands of lorry drivers, warehouse staff and clerical workers voted to reject a pay offer. Almost 70% of the GMB union’s 8,000 members within Asda’s distribution network, which employs 12,000 in total, voted to reject pay rises of between 5% and 7.5%. That pay rise compares to inflation of 7.8% – on the retail prices index measure – while the legal minimum wage is set to increase by 6.6% in April. The government’s preferred measure of inflation – the consumer prices index – is expected to rise from 5.5% in January to almost 8% in April. Almost 80% of those balloted said they were ready to take action over the pay deal, raising the prospect of strikes that would affect all 23 distribution depots serving the UK’s third largest supermarket chain. Nadine Houghton, a national officer for the GMB, said: “The UK is facing the worst cost of living crisis for a generation. Inflation is rampant and energy prices are out of control. “Yet Asda workers are being taken for mugs with a below-inflation pay offer that basically means a real-terms pay cut. “They’re not going to take it lying down – it’s now up to Asda bosses to come back with a reasonable offer and avert the threat of industrial action.” Jon Parry, the vice-president of Asda Logistics Services, said: “We value the key role our colleagues play to keep our stores well stocked, and we have negotiated in good faith with the GMB to make a fair, competitive and sustainable pay offer that recognises rising inflation. We are disappointed this has been rejected.” Asda said it expected the GMB to honour a national recognition agreement under which the next step would be a meeting between the union, the supermarket and the conciliation service Acas. Asda is the latest major business to face potential industrial action over pay as shortages of workers, particularly those qualified to drive large lorries, empowers those in relatively low-paid work. The supermarket was forced join rivals in offering signing-on fees of as much as £1,000 last year as a combination of the Covid-19 pandemic and Brexit reduced access to suitable staff. The average hourly rate for Asda distribution workers is currently £15.07 for a driver and £13.09 for a warehouse worker. Before Christmas, Tesco avoided threatened strike action by the Usdaw and Unite unions, which would have affected about 13 of its 22 distribution centres, after offering an improved pay deal. Drivers were offered a 5.5% rise backdated to July and a further 0.5% from the end of February this year. Drivers at the courier group Yodel, which works with some of the UK’s biggest retailers, including Marks &amp; Spencer and Aldi, also won a pay rise to £16 an hour after a threat of strike action by GMB members. A further strike by Unite members at Tesco’s Booker wholesale business planned before Christmas was suspended pending a pay review. It is understood talks are continuing.Health and the handling of the Covid-19 pandemic are a significant drag on the Coalition vote, with one in three Australians less likely to vote for the Morrison government due to the level of public hospital funding, according to new polling. An Essential poll, commissioned by the Australian Medical Association, found voters who had traditionally supported the Coalition on health and hospital funding were now deserting them. Support in this key area had dropped, with 34% now questioning the government’s record. Only the Morrison government’s handling of the climate crisis and cost of living pressures registered greater levels of disapproval. Of those polled, 37% were less likely to vote for the government on climate, while 38% were not supportive of Morrison on cost of living. The poll of 1,069 voters was conducted from 3 to 6 February, before a torrid parliamentary fortnight in which the Morrison government dropped its religious discrimination bill and pivoted to national security to recover its poor standing in the polls. On Friday states and territories reiterated their demand for the commonwealth to provide 50% of public hospital funding, up from 45%, and abandon a 6.5% growth cap on health funding. States believe the cost-sharing deal struck during the Covid-19 pandemic is not fit-for-purpose now coronavirus is circulating in the community, as it does not keep up with increased staffing costs, PPE and expected new demand from delayed care and long-Covid. Despite the pressure from the states in the lead-up to the 2022 election, the AMA is yet to secure a commitment from either side of politics for 50-50 funding, with Labor more focused on GP and specialist out-of-pocket costs. Anthony Albanese has promised Labor will “always be better” on health, signalling higher levels of funding, but is yet to announce its full policy. Coalition voters still approved of the Morrison government’s handling of hospitals, with 29% saying it made them more likely to support the government and 19% less likely. But the issue is biting among voters aged 55 and over, 19% more of who said they’d be less likely to vote Coalition, and non-major party voters, 37% more of who said they’d be less likely to vote Coalition. The AMA’s Clear the Hospital Logjam campaign argues that the public hospital system was struggling before Covid-19, but now faces blowouts in ambulances ramping, emergency departments at capacity, and long waits for essential surgery. The AMA president, Dr Omar Khorshid, said the results “put the political parties on notice that public hospital funding is resonating as a vote-changer with the Australian electorate”. “The distressing picture we are getting of our hospital funding crisis should be a warning shot to all politicians that they need to pledge they’ll fix public hospital funding if elected,” he said. In October the Morrison government dismissed calls for more hospital funding as a form of “shakedown politics”, targeting the Queensland premier in particular despite the bipartisan call from Labor and Liberal premiers. The Queensland health minister, Yvette D’Ath, told Guardian Australia “Queensland’s position is unchanged – we’re calling for long-term sustainable health funding from the commonwealth”. In addition to 50-50 funding, it wants “an extension of the current financial arrangements in the fight against Covid because the challenge the pandemic poses to Queensland is ongoing”, she said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “The Morrison government needs to start taking its health responsibilities far more seriously. “This includes providing aged care packages to the more than 500 Queenslanders who are currently in Queensland public hospital beds.” The Victorian health minister, Martin Foley, said the health system “is under extreme pressure and the current funding arrangement with the commonwealth, where the states pay more, is unfair and unsustainable”. “The impact of the Covid-19 pandemic on everything from primary health care in the community to our hospitals will mean states will be carrying the impact of this one-in-100-year event for many years to come.” The federal health minister, Greg Hunt, has again rejected calls for more funding, citing the federal contribution to health growing by 92% between 2012-13 and 2020-21, compared with state increases of 44%. “There is nothing stopping the states and territories matching the Australian government investment in public hospitals, and if they did, hospitals would be adequately funded,” a spokesperson for Hunt said. The Essential poll showed the Coalition was also losing votes on economic management and online safety.First the interview, now the invisibility. Romelu Lukaku has mostly been a conundrum since returning to Chelsea last summer and, while the £97.5m striker has not done much talking off the pitch since that ill-advised chat with Sky Italia at the end of December, nothing summed up his struggles more than when he produced a performance of record-breaking anonymity against Crystal Palace last Saturday. This was Lukaku at his most laboured, predictable and disconnected from his teammates. He touched the ball a grand total of seven times, the fewest in 90 minutes of Premier League football for any player since Opta began keeping track in 2003, and nobody was about to argue he was merely keeping his powder dry for the big moments. Even Thomas Tuchel, who desperately needs the Belgian to find form, is not putting a positive spin on the numbers. Chelsea’s manager understands their significance and he was unsure whether he can help Lukaku by tweaking his tactical approach when the European champions host Lille in the last 16 of the Champions League on Tuesday night. “What can I do?” Tuchel said. “I don’t know. We have to deal with it. The data is out there and the data speaks a certain language. He was not involved in our game. It’s not what we want or Romelu wants but it’s not the time to laugh and make jokes about him. He’s in the spotlight and we’ll protect him.” It did not sound as if the mood is going to become cheerier in the near future. True, Lukaku scored twice when Chelsea won the Club World Cup this month. Yes, he should fancy his chances of hurting Lille given the French champions are floundering this season. But no, it would not be a great surprise if it turns out to be another evening of Lukaku waiting in vain for quick balls to be slid down the channels, his teammates ignoring his prompts and Tuchel despairing at his marquee signing looking so out of place. This was not part of the plan when Chelsea bought Lukaku. The 28-year-old had just fired Internazionale to the Serie A title and it seemed he was going to prove similarly inspirational in Chelsea’s attempt to challenge Manchester City and Liverpool. Lukaku was looking an uneasy fit even before an ankle injury further disrupted his momentum in October. An immobile presence, he does not make it easy for Chelsea to attack with fluidity. Increasingly there is a sense of Tuchel compromising his beliefs by sculpting everything around a target man and the problem is exacerbated by Chelsea’s reluctance to play to Lukaku’s strengths, often leaving him frustrated by opting for a controlled buildup. Nobody is adapting. It is not simply down to Lukaku. Kai Havertz, Callum Hudson-Odoi, Christian Pulisic and Timo Werner are not providing for him and do not score enough. Mason Mount, who is unlikely to return from an ankle injury until Chelsea face Liverpool in the Carabao Cup final on Sunday, has had a stop-start campaign and Hakim Ziyech remains inconsistent despite chipping in with some important goals. In that context it is no wonder Chelsea remain a cup team rather than one capable of challenging for the title. They do not create or shoot as much as City and Liverpool, raising questions over whether the tactics are too restrictive. “Maybe,” Tuchel said. “There is a history of strikers struggling at Chelsea so it is not the easiest place in the world for strikers. I don’t know exactly why. We want to be a hard-working group that is not shy to make it physical and not only a skilful game.” For Lille, that was a reminder that Chelsea still know how to play a cup tie. They conceded twice in the knockout stages of the Champions League last season and their defensive prowess will make them contenders again. They are dangerous in these situations but they cannot merely rely on their defence. They are weaker on the left without Ben Chilwell and, although Reece James is close to a return on the right, contractual uncertainty hangs over three key players. César Azpilicueta could join Barcelona at the end of the season, talks with Andreas Christensen have broken down and Antonio Rüdiger is yet to sign an extension despite being offered about £170,000 a week. Gaps have appeared, gaps that would be easier to hide if the attack began to function. Ultimately Tuchel knows he can trust his defenders. The questions are at the other end and the focus has to be on Lukaku somehow developing an understanding with his fellow forwards. They have to accept more responsibility and Tuchel has to give them a spark. A £97.5m striker having seven touches a game is unsustainable and, unless something changes, it is hard to see Chelsea holding on to their European crown.The mottled ice at Curl Edinburgh was thronged with players, as competitors in a ladies’ league gracefully lunged forwards with their curling stones, arms and legs out-stretched. Teammates busily swept hard at the ice, to help the granite gain an extra few millimetres of ground. Mondays are often busy at Edinburgh’s only curling centre. But this Monday has been transformed by Team GB’s gold and silver medal triumphs at the winter Olympics. Two of the medal-winners play there, as do previous Olympic and world champions. Aaron Forsyth, the rink’s manager, said the centre had been inundated with inquiries about the sport since the victories in Beijing. “We’ve received hundreds of emails or clicks in the last few days where people have asked to try curling,” he said. “It’s fantastic.” Part of the challenge, Forsyth said, could be accommodating them all, and particularly supporting the younger children whose interest in the game has been sparked. Guiding those 20kg (44lb) stones down the ice takes greater strength than it may seem. He believes curling is the UK’s dominant winter Olympics discipline. Team GB’s modest medal rush came late in the games and entirely from curling. After the frustrations of the mixed team coming fourth, the men’s team took silver on Saturday and then the women’s team comprehensively defeated Japan 10-3 in Sunday’s final. And Curl Edinburgh is perhaps one of the sport’s most successful venues. Open more than 12 hours a day to numerous clubs and leagues, its players drawn from the city’s banks, doctors, local teams and from nearby towns such as Peebles, it is also a popular venue for holidaymakers. Seen in the UK as an archetypally Scottish sport, Forsyth hosts school parties from England, companies from London organising staff awaydays, and large groups of friends visiting Edinburgh for stag and hen parties. “The Olympics is going to add to this,” he said. “The goal is to keep the momentum going.” Those medals could not have come at a better time, said Maggie Wilson of Scottish Curling. The organisation hopes it will produce a rise in interest from new, younger players. “The Olympics has shown how exciting it is, and really entertaining for all the ages,” Wilson said, citing the women team’s nerve-racking victory over Sweden in the semi-finals. One of the game’s youngest ambassadors is Jamie Rankin, an 18-year-old student from a curling dynasty. His mother, Janice Rankin, was part of Great Britain’s gold medal-winning team at the Salt Lake City winter games in 2002; his grandmother Barbara was playing in a league competition at Curl Edinburgh on Monday morning while he worked part-time in its cafe upstairs. Rankin, a business student originally from Elgin, coaches Edinburgh University’s curling team. And he is “100%” clear about his ambition. “I want to go to the Olympics one day. That’s what I’m working towards, definitely.” He believes the sport will attract younger competitors. At home in Elgin, the local youth team was 25 to 30 strong. “I have got a couple of my friends watching it, and they’re always messaging me, saying, ‘Why are they doing this?’ or ‘What does that mean?’ I’m going to get them to come along.” The sport has had a difficult pandemic. It is chiefly played in the winter and almost entirely on indoor rinks. And even though Team GB’s medal winners are in their 20s and 30s, most of curling’s active players are middle-aged or older. Scotland’s rinks were closed by lockdowns over the winter of 2020-21, and again in October last year, just three weeks after the season began. Older players were reluctant to congregate in indoor venues, and many drifted away. Scottish Curling estimates that about a tenth of its 10,000 members gave up the sport during the Covid crisis. The sport’s greatest challenge, Wilson said, is keeping its youth players involved in the sport once they leave home for university or their first full-time job. Then the participation rates take a steep dive. Dave Leith, the head of performance support with British Curling, the sport’s competition organisation, said: “It’s quite a big challenge. We’ve already started to crack that nut to some degree because we’ve got a lot of strength in depth now, in a way I don’t think we’ve seen for quite some time, but there’s still a lot of work to be done there.”Russian forces are “creating lists of identified Ukrainians to be killed or sent to camps” in the event of an invasion, according to a letter sent by the US to the UN human rights chief, Michelle Bachelet. Citing “disturbing information recently obtained by the United States” the letter, from the US ambassador to the UN, Bathsheba Crocker, warns that “we have credible information” that target lists have been drawn up by “Russian forces”. It warns that a Russian invasion of Ukraine would create a “human rights catastrophe” and that further abuses are being planned, which have previously included “targeted killings, kidnappings/forced disappearances, unjust detentions, and the use of torture”. A few hours later Jake Sullivan, the US national security adviser, said that Russia’s plans for Ukraine were “extremely violent” – and it was necessary to lay out the threat in the letter for the UN. “We also have intelligence to suggest that there will be an even greater form of brutality because this will not simply be some conventional war between two armies. It will be a war waged by Russia on the Ukrainian people, to repress them, crush them, to harm them,” he said. Evidence to back up the US statements is relatively limited. The warnings are part of the wider western strategy to highlight what are believed to be Putin’s intentions towards Ukraine, partly in an attempt to dissuade him from an invasion, and the Crocker’s letter is the latest in a string from western intelligence about the plans the Russian FSB and GRU agencies have for acting in concert with the Russian military. Last week, Foreign Policy reported that US officials had concluded that lists had been drawn up containing anybody that it believed could challenge Russia, and reported similar conclusions were being drawn by the UK and other anglophone Five Eyes intelligence partners. Britain has made more measured warnings. Earlier this month it emerged that the UK believed that the FSB has been given the task of engineering coups in Ukraine’s major cities in the immediate aftermath of any invasion. The broader plan would see Russian forces would encircle Kyiv and other major cities, leaving the spy agency the task of delivering them, as part of a strategy of “regime change” across Ukraine. Crocker, in her letter, says she was writing to the UN high commissioner for human rights because of its mandate and its presence in Ukraine. The letter states that those most likely to be targeted include “Russian and Belarusian dissidents in exile in Ukraine, journalists and anti-corruption activists, and vulnerable populations such as religious and ethnic minorities and LGBTQI+ persons”. The letter emerged after the latest flurry of diplomacy, which saw Joe Biden and Vladimir Putin approve in principle the idea of a summit between the two leaders, aimed at de-escalating the Ukraine crisis. The step – conditional on Russia not invading Ukraine – was taken with the help of the French president, Emmanuel Macron, after calls on Sunday night with the two leaders. A format for the summit is to be decided at a meeting between the US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, and the Russian foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, on Thursday. Further details also emerged of US sanctions plans, with Reuters reporting that the US intends to bar US financial institutions from processions transactions for major Russian banks in the event of an invasion. The report, which cites three sources, said the measures aim to hurt the Russian economy by cutting the “correspondent” banking relationships between targeted Russian banks and US banks that enable international payments. While the threat of sanctions had already been floated, the plan to cut correspondent banking ties, which underpin global money flows, had not been previously reported.Re your article on bedtime stories (16 February), use a favourite duvet cover or quilt as the starting point. My favourite stories were made up by my mother telling me about the fabrics she had used to sew the patchwork quilt on my bed. “This was the dress I was wearing when your dad asked me to dance with him the first time…” Lynne Pointer Bampton, Oxfordshire • As a northern lad born and bred in Derbyshire, I must correct Alan Hallsworth (Letters, 20 February). We always knew the saying as “Derbyshire born and Derbyshire bred: strong in the arm and wick in the head”. Wick meaning lively and energetic. Geoff Wheeler Coventry • As a small boy who got a place at Watford grammar school for boys back in 1949, I used to describe myself as “weak in the arm but strong in the head”. Ron Brewer Old Buckenham, Norfolk • Growing up in South Africa, I, like many other children, went barefoot indoors and out unless to school or formal occasions (Letters, 20 February). Perhaps this created less floor cleaning than shoes did. I persist with this habit and have never had a foot injury in 70 years. Colin Hartley Deal, Kent • A friend of mine was puzzled to discover a pack of shortbread in his online order (Phish Food for fish fillets? Strangest online grocery swaps revealed, 19 February). A check of his grocery list revealed it was a substitute for a small loaf. Ged Gardiner London • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.A Wordle habit probably wouldn’t protect Emma Brockes from dementia (My five-letter reaction to the New York Times taking over Wordle? I quit, 17 February). There is a myth about puzzles and brain health. The human brain is large because we are social beings. Meeting our fellow creatures is more likely to keep us well. The Lancet’s review, published in 2020, is useful for those interested in what makes a difference – eg exercise, eating well, voting for clean-air policies and embracing education. If your family tells you that your hearing is getting worse, get it checked. Gather with others in whatever way you can. If you like peace, quiet and indeed word puzzles, enjoy them in moderation. Tim Sanders Leeds • In response to Emma Brockes and other adopters of Wordle, I have one word: crosswords. Never knowingly bettered. Anne Cowper Bishopston, Swansea • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.The Queen is expected to speak to Boris Johnson on Wednesday for her regular weekly update from the prime minister as she continues to recover from Covid-19. Audiences with foreign ambassadors are expected to go ahead – also on a virtual basis – as the monarch remains in self-isolation at her home in Windsor. A day after testing positive for the virus – which Buckingham Palace said on Sunday was manifesting itself in the form of “mild cold-like symptoms” – the Queen was still undertaking light duties in her capacity as head of state. Messages of goodwill continued to roll in from in the UK and overseas, while Boris Johnson told MPs in parliament that the Queen’s positive test was a reminder that the virus “has not gone away”. Her work on Monday included sending condolences to the people of Brazil after flooding in the city of Petrópolis. “I am deeply saddened to hear of the tragic loss of life and destruction caused by the terrible floods in Brazil,” she wrote in a message posted on the royal family’s official Twitter account. “My thoughts and prayers are with all those who have lost their lives, loved ones and homes, as well as the emergency services and all those working to support the recovery efforts.” But while the Queen’s conversation with the prime minister on Wednesday will not take place face to face, campaigners and advocates for elderly people said that many of those among a cohort of more than 1.3 million people who continued to work over the age of 65 included some in public-facing roles who had no choice but to keep on working. The relaxation of Covid restrictions and the ending of self-isolation was a source of worry for many people aged 65 and over, said Morgan Vine, head of policy and influencing at Independent Age. “We are concerned that this sudden change in direction of public safety is likely to increase anxiety among older people, and even cause some to shield themselves and limit daily activities.” The charity added that recent research – between 9 and 13 February – had shown that the challenges faced by those in later life due to the pandemic had worsened many people’s mental health. “If the requirement to isolate is removed, this fear is likely to increase alongside the likelihood of coming into contact with someone who has Covid,” said Vine, speaking a few hours before Johnson’s announcement that the requirement to self-isolate after testing positive in England would end on Thursday. Concerns that many in the older population were deeply anxious about making a transition back to a more normal way of life were also echoed by the UK’s largest charity for older people, Age UK. Ruth Isden, head of health and care influencing at Age UK, said it was going to take time and effort to reassure people and that it was important that government messaging carefully explained the next steps when it came to elderly people and the clinically vulnerable. “We are in a very different position, and vaccines have made a huge difference, but it’s important that the government explains and reassures people as it moves forward with its plans. “If you are in an older age group and have had your vaccinations, and then have kept them up to date, then you are in a much better place, but we have to keep on reassuring people, as well as recognising that it’s not just simply a case of how we feel about ourselves. We need to be cautious and careful when it comes to others.” Rowan Hardwood, professor of geriatric medicine at the University of Nottingham, reiterated the message of other experts that those who have been vaccinated and had kept it up to date, at no matter what age, were in a radically different position from anyone who had not had a jab. But he added: “It is important to recognise that the situation with older people can vary much more than other groups. Virtually anyone by the age of 90 is frail, and by frail, we mean vulnerable and prone to deterioration. “If you have contracted the virus and are quite well to the extent that you are managing to do daily activities, then the vaccine will stand you in good stead. That would apply to anyone of any age.”Gaby Hinsliff (Universal basic income can be the worst of all worlds – but ‘free money’ schemes do work, 18 February) hit the nail on the head in her discussion of “free money” schemes, in particular the impact of cash on cognition and mental health. Having now distributed well over 1,000 such grants since 2020 to destitute migrants with no recourse to public funds in Greater Manchester, we have seen exactly those results. For the people we support, it can help clear their heads and provide just enough choice to achieve longer-term resolutions to their situations. For the people accessing our fund, Hinsliff’s point about the “basic income” part of universal basic income is even more on point. Migrants have been blocked from access to any income whatsoever by ongoing hostile policies, so simply allowing them access to the welfare state would be a huge leap forward for social and humanitarian justice. Robbie Cowbury Migrant Destitution Fund GM • Re the suggestion that people out of a job could be given enough money to get by, I have a name for such a scheme: levelling up. Rachel Marks Twickenham, London • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Angela Rayner’s outspoken views on crime (Angela Rayner: police should ‘shoot terrorists and ask questions second’, 17 February) emerge as Sadiq Khan attempts to sort out decades of inaction in relation to the conduct of the Metropolitan police. She advances a policy of police shooting first and using violence against “criminals” by beating down their doors “until they realise disrupting lives is not OK”. Police like that used to be called stormtroopers. Does Rayner really think that the structural racism and sexism identified in police forces are going to be tackled when a brief like this has been flagged up by Labour’s deputy leader? What fun the Tory party will have with Labour’s law and order policies. If Keir Starmer doesn’t clarify the party’s position, then it won’t be drifting to the centre ground, it’ll be wallowing on the far right, and many of us voters will be considering our position. Peter Martindale Grantham, Lincolnshire • Angela Rayner would do well to remember Jean Charles de Menezes, an innocent man who was shot dead by the Met police on his way to work. These stupid soundbites lose the votes of reasonable people and gain the support of Trump-like reactionaries. Mike Harris Dromahair, County Leitrim • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Nesrine Malik (Scared to be ‘woke’? It’s time for progressives to take a stand in the culture wars, 21 February) sets out the bemusing battlefield surrounding the concept of being “woke” and how it has been weaponised by the right wing of Conservative repression. Part of the issue is clearly the way different groups and factions define the meaning of woke. She correctly deduces that Labour needs to own it. We have already been pointed in the necessary direction by a man speaking in the saddest of situations. Dave Merritt, the father of the young lawyer Jack Merritt, who was killed in the London Bridge terror attack in 2019, gave a moving speech after his son’s inquest. He described how proud his son would have been to be called woke. He defined its meaning very simply as “the opposite of ignorant”. Ric Carey Southsea, Hampshire • Nesrine Malik expresses the problem brilliantly. But I’m so angry I couldn’t read her piece all in one go. Angry because it’s impossible to imagine anyone on Labour’s current frontbench saying anything a tenth as powerful, and angry that I, and many thousands of other members, were gulled into believing that Keir Starmer had a fairly radical and progressive agenda. He must have known perfectly well that he would never get elected if we knew then that he would align himself so completely, whether through conviction or tactics, with Labour’s right wing. Richard Barnes Windermere, Cumbria • The weaknesses of the west are not the result of a “painful woke psychodrama”, as the Tory party chairman Oliver Dowden claims (Report, 14 February). His slur is simply another distraction for those who are angry that the high-skilled, high-wage jobs promised by the neoliberals never materialised. We are among the largest economies in the world, yet 30% of children live in poverty and we have food banks. Years of austerity are now being followed by a catastrophic cost-of-living crisis. None of that was caused by woke ideas. Instead, the west has been divided by politicians playing fast and loose with democracy, undermining the validity of elections, refusing to take responsibility for their actions and widening the divisions between people through racist tropes. Politicians have weakened European institutions, either by undermining Nato (as Donald Trump did) or Europe itself (as the populists have done). The woke are not undermining the west. They are seeking to ensure that all are represented and have a place in society. Decolonising the curriculum is about telling a more complete picture, ensuring that everyone sees themselves reflected in a classroom and that we do not hide from the past. Spoiler alert: the empire was brutal, cruel and exploitative. It involved slavery, murder and the stealing of land and resources from other people. Perhaps understanding the past and ensuring all are represented will bring greater unity rather than the divisions Dowden claims. Prof Andrew Moran Saffron Walden, Essex • Reading Marina Hyde (You can’t erase history. But if you lived on Prince Andrew Way, you might have a go, 18 February), I was reminded to check whether my Tory MP had answered my fourth request to explain what woke means (apart from not being asleep). Again, no explanation. I assume that even Tory central office doesn’t know. Rosemary Gill Salisbury, Wiltshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Two environmental activists have been convicted of charges relating to a protest against HS2 after occupying a 100ft-high drilling rig to highlight damage they claimed the rail project was causing to London’s drinking water supply. James Brown, 57, a partially sighted former Paralympics cycling champion, and James Ruggles, 25, appeared at Uxbridge magistrates court charged with criminal damage and aggravated trespass after a protest in February 2020 when they climbed on to drilling machinery in the Colne Valley, Hillingdon. Both spent several hours on the rig and unfurled a banner that said: “Protect London’s drinking water: stop HS2.” They and other environmental campaigners claimed the pile-driving into a chalk aquifer in the Colne Valley posed a risk to 20% of the city’s drinking water supply. Brown was cleared of the criminal damage charge but found guilty of the aggravated trespass charge. Ruggles was found guilty of both charges. The men were given conditional discharges. The activists told the court they carried out the protest on the drilling rig to raise awareness about the environmental damage they believed HS2’s work was causing. “Because I have a bit of a public profile I believed that by being present on the day I might be able to attract public attention through the media,” Brown told the court. District judge Andrew Johnson said in his ruling that while he did not doubt the sincerity of the defendants, if this sort of conduct was not punished “it would lead to anarchy,” he claimed, adding: “There has to be a line drawn.” Speaking after the ruling, Brown said: “This is one of an increasing number of climate and environment-related cases. I think in the months to come we will be seeing many more. Awareness of these issues amongst members of the public is massively on the rise. Our government is simply not tackling the climate crisis with the energy it requires.” An HS2 spokesperson said: “HS2 take our responsibilities incredibly seriously and we have a world-leading team of engineers, hydrogeologists, and environmental scientists in place to ensure that the construction of the Colne Valley viaduct affords the right protection for the environment, and is completed as safely and efficiently as possible. As a result, we have almost completed half the piling for the viaduct, with no impact on public water supply.”Two severe “danger to life” flood warnings have been issued in Shropshire and Worcestershire after Storm Franklin brought a day of flooding, power cut misery and travel chaos on Monday. Parts of the historic village of Ironbridge were being evacuated as the river Severn threatened to overwhelm flood defences, and in Bewdley in Worcestershire, residents were told to expect flooding from Tuesday morning. The Environment Agency urged people to implement emergency flood defence plans and follow evacuation advice. A further 129 flood warnings were in place as river levels rose across England and Wales. Matlock town centre in Derbyshire was described as a “river” by local resident Phil Gregory after the Derwent burst its banks. “It’s probably only a foot or two deep in truth, but enough to wreck businesses,” he said. “It’s just really terrible and the rain is continuing.” The town council described the flooding as devastating and urged people not to visit Matlock. Babington hospital in nearby Belper was under water and forced to close and cancel appointments. In Tadcaster, North Yorkshire, the main bridge was closed and shops flooded after the River Wharfe overflowed its banks. An Environment Agency spokeswoman said: “We are aware of a small number of flooded properties in Tadcaster and are working closely with the emergency services and other agencies to keep the community safe.” Train operators urged people on Monday to avoid travel if possible as services in some parts of the country experienced severe disruption and were expected to be halted by gale-force winds and heavy rain. Southwestern said more than 50 trees had fallen on to the tracks in the last three days. Southeastern said response teams had been “stretched to the limit” and that several lines were unable to operate in and out of London. Major road bridges were again closed because of high winds, including the Severn Bridge between England and Wales and the Dartford Bridge crossing. Two stretches of motorway in north-west England were closed in the morning after incidents involving lorries, including one that overturned on the M60 in Greater Manchester. Airlines had cancelled 122 flights to and from the UK in the morning, according to data from analysts Cirium. British Airways apologised to customers who had faced additional long waits for luggage at Heathrow as well as flight disruption in the last few days. It said it was unable to operate the machinery needed to unload cases because of the high winds. It comes only days after Storm Eunice killed at least four people and left 1.4m homes without power. The energy minister, Greg Hands, on a visit to Kent, said 32,000 households across the UK remained without power. UK Power Networks, which covers the south-east, London and east of England, said about 12,000 of its customers had yet to have power restored. Basil Scarsella, the CEO, said it had decided to make extra goodwill payments to those worst affected by power cuts. “This means that if you were impacted by Storm Eunice, you will be eligible to receive £50 after 24 hours without electricity, an additional £70 when you reach 48 hours, and an additional £70 thereafter for every 12 hours without power.” On Monday, Northern Rail issued a “do not travel” alert to passengers, while TransPennine Express strongly urged customers to avoid travel if possible, particularly those planning to travel north of Preston in Lancashire before 10am. Great Western Railway urged customers to travel only if absolutely necessary as services were expected to be “significantly disrupted across the network”. Southwestern Railway also urged customers not to travel, warning that the weather conditions were “likely to hamper efforts to help stranded customers”. National Rail warned anyone making essential journeys once services resumed to expect major disruption to routes across most of the country, including cancellations, delays and slower train speeds. Met Office meteorologist Becky Mitchell said last week marked the first time that three major storms – Dudley, Eunice and Franklin – had been recorded within seven days since the naming system began in 2015. The Met Office said Monday’s highest wind speed, 79mph, was recorded at Capel Curig in Wales, followed by 78mph at Orlock Head in Northern Ireland. The worst of the storms are over for now with no weather warnings in place for the coming days. It will, though, be “a blustery week”. The storms have had calamitous consequences for thousands of trees, including a clone of Isaac Newton’s apple tree that was planted at Cambridge University’s Botanic Garden in 1954. It fell on Friday during Eunice. A spokesperson for the gardens said: “We have a clone that will be planted elsewhere in the garden soon, so Newton’s Apple will remain in the garden, but sadly not in its accustomed place.”Authorities in South Lake Tahoe in California have launched a special trapping effort to trap a 500-pound black bear known as “Hank the Tank”. Hank is, according to authorities, “readily identifiable due to [his] exceptionally large size and dark coat with a lighter muzzle”. The average weight of a black bear in the western US ranges from 100lb to 300lb, according to the Washington department of fish and wildlife. Hank appears much larger. Since last July, Hank has broken into at least 28 houses in and around the Tahoe Keys area. Described as “extremely food-habituated”, Hank has also caused extensive property damage in more than 30 documented cases. Local residents have filed at least 102 police reports about Hank. “It’s easier to find leftover pizza than to go in the forest,” said Peter Tira, a California department of fish and wildlife spokesperson, according to the New York Times. Authorities have used a combination of deterrents including loud sirens, dry-firing their tasers, which creates a “clicky-clack noise that the bears hate”, and beanbag rounds. However, none of these methods have proved successful. “This is a bear that has lost all fear of people,” Tira said. “It’s a potentially dangerous situation.” Ann Bryant, executive director of Bear League, a California-based wildlife rescue service, noted that it remained unclear how Hank acquired a human palate but affirmed that “he didn’t get fat like that eating berries and grubs”. On Friday, the South Lake Tahoe police department responded to reports of the bear inside a house. Hank had broken in through a small window and squeezed inside. Police banged on the outside of the house until he emerged and left through a back door. The authorities noted that residents could apply for a bear box, a locked container that campers typically use to protect food, for a fee. As efforts to trap Hank repeatedly fail, authorities have said they may need to consider euthanizing the bear, which they said was their “last option”. Earlier this year, authorities removed a bear trap after someone spray painted “Bear Killer” on it. “He just sits there and eats. He doesn’t attack them. He doesn’t growl. He doesn’t make rude faces … Why should this big dummy die?” Bryant told the Times.What price an Olympic gold medal these days? We know about the blood, sweat and tears, but the costs paid by the 15-year-old figure skater Kamila Valieva in pursuit of the glittering prize rose exorbitantly over the past week in Beijing. The already unstable Olympic currency of values, integrity and humanity devalued further. There was almost universal horror watching Valieva’s coach, Eteri Tutberidze, in action. Her harsh questions as Valieva sought to escape the rink after her unravelling performance caused consternation. Even the fence-sitting International Olympic Committee president, Thomas Bach, spoke out. But after the initial repudiation and disgust, her approach struck a troublesome chord. Perhaps a flashback to a teacher or parent, a sports coach or another instructor. It has rung bells in my own head and with others I used to train and compete with. Sam Parfitt, chief executive of The True Athlete Project, said what is perhaps most chilling about Tutberidze’s behaviour is that it is “so reminiscent of what you’ll see every weekend, at all levels of sport, from coaches and parents of children who love and then inevitably hate sport”. The Beijing ice rink drama showed us new obscene depths of where a “win at all costs” mentality can end up. The IOC’s 2020 Agenda of Credibility, Sustainability and Youth that set out to “safeguard the Olympic values and strengthen the role of sport in society” seems irrelevant. As for the founding philosophy of Olympism that wanted to make the world a better place through sport, Baron de Coubertin’s principles lie shredded, carved up in the thousands of cuts in the Ice Cube’s Olympic rink. While Valieva’s Cinderella was left in tatters at the end of her skate in a plot with more sinister twists than most fairytales, the next few minutes brought two Russian ice sisters who extended the damage: first, the gold medallist, Anna Shcherbakova, spoke of feeling happiness yet at the same time emptiness. Then the silver medallist, Alexandra Trusova, cried: “Everyone has a gold medal, everyone, but not me. I hate skating. I hate it. I hate this sport. I will never skate again. Never.” Consider the experience of these young girls: rarely seen to compete beyond a single Olympics and forced to fit into a high-pressured “perfect princess” media narrative, they are soon discarded, damaged dolls left with only a hatred of the sport they once loved and for which they had found a talent. It is too easy to vilify the Russian Olympic Committee (and the system that enables them to behave with impunity). But we should refrain for a moment from throwing stones from our own glass-plated sporting world. Are we content we are sufficiently different from this detestably narrow pursuit of sport defined by national pride, a medal table and expendable athletes? Hasn’t the British press followed a consistently narrow approach each day, asking where the British medals are going to come from? Don’t we also have female athletes at the pinnacle of sport exposed to intolerable levels of pressure, with the case of the speed skater Elise Christie immediately coming to mind? Let’s seize this moment to get our own house in order. Baroness Tanni Grey-Thompson’s Duty of Care report from 2017 still has major recommendations outstanding while the Whyte report into British Gymnastics due in the spring will provide another important opportunity to scrutinise our high performance environments and learn some vital lessons. I have heard from a range of coaches around the world who conclude sadly that the past week in Beijing further proves that the only way to protect minors will be to bring in age limits for elite competition. Valieva has shown the human cost is simply too high. But whatever new regulations ensue, bigger change can only come from greater leadership to set a broader purpose for sport, shift mindsets and behaviours and instil meaningful metrics beyond medals. I have spoken to school heads of sport and performance coaches seeking to redefine the purpose of sport for their students and athletes. Aware of their responsibility to develop healthy citizens first and foremost, they want to reframe ambitions beyond the next local league trophy or international medal. Too many barriers block their way to building broader frameworks around sport based on values, personal growth, teamwork and a connection to wider communities. This sort of framework was clearly absent from Valieva’s experience but high performers deserve a healthy experience of sport, too. Opportunity lies at this juncture if only we can shake off the old engrained macho narratives and beliefs around sport. Take Norway, who have won a record-breaking number of gold medals in Beijing and top the medal table. This country of five million people has won more Winter Olympic medals by some distance, while taking a radically different approach to sport based on a concept known as the “joy of sport for all”. No early talent spotting or streaming; the focus is on participation in as many sports as possible. No individual rankings or national championships for children under 13. Tore Ovrebo, director of the Olympiatoppen high performance centre, has spoken of the importance of “developing citizens and not only athletes”. The defining moment of the summer Olympics last year was Simone Biles stepping back from physically and mentally hurting herself in competition – an incredible act of self-confidence and bravery that followed years of abuse from a similar age as Valieva. She became a global role model for reasons beyond the gymnastics arena. Biles, Naomi Osaka and Emma Raducanu are out in front changing the narrative around the meaning and experience of high performance sport. I hope Valieva is one day able to join them. Meanwhile, let’s step up to the plate as a country that has so much more to gain from sport than simply counting medals. Let’s create a better way to succeed in sport and beyond – the next generation deserves better. Cath Bishop is an Olympic rower, former diplomat and the author of The Long Win. She is an adviser to The True Athlete Project and Chair of Love Rowing, GB Rowing’s charitable foundation. • This article was amended on 22 February 2022. Kamila Valieva’s coach is Eteri Tutberidze, not “Eleni” as the text and photo caption of an earlier version said. And Alexandra Trusova won silver, not gold as a caption said.The average wage of the top 1% in Britain rose to £13,770 a month in December. Jeevun Sandher, an economist at King’s College London, points out the very richest saw their incomes rise the fastest during the pandemic. This group were also likely to have been able to save the most while Covid raged. Where do the very wealthiest spend their cash? One place is housing, for which there is a low level of stock being released on to the market. The result is rising house prices. Over the past 12 months, asking prices have gone up by 9.5%. This has a knock-on effect for renters. UK rents rose by 8.3% in the last three months of 2021. For would-be first-time buyers, the situation is as bad if not worse, with the current average price of £277,000 nearly £25,000 higher than just a year ago. Those looking to have a roof to live under will find little solace in official figures. These record an 11% drop in the number of total homes added in 2021 compared with the year before. The number of new affordable houses that began being built dropped 16% year-on-year. Shortages of labour and materials, as well as planning delays, will make it harder for the 11th Tory housing minister since 2010 to meet government targets for new homes. Britain’s housing stock is being turned into an asset class as a consequence of the excessive financialisation of the UK economy. For those who own their homes, these buildings serve a dual purpose: they provide shelter, and function as investments. For around 2.5 million landlords, who between them accounted for 18% of all property purchases in 2019, they are only investments. If the underlying problem is a lack of homes, then one solution may be to build more. But if the problem is landlords, and the fact that property owners are incentivised by rising prices, as well as their desire for more space (a desire that may have been augmented by the switch to home working), to buy as much of it as they can, then building more homes won’t help. It could even make matters worse, by creating more opportunities to extract exorbitant rents from those who have an income but lack the capital for a deposit, or the confidence to take on a huge debt. Over recent decades, ballooning property prices have served home owners well, especially in the south of England. The form of inequality this has created currently appears to be generational. Older people are more likely to own their homes than younger ones. City firms are ploughing billions of pension savings in “build-to-rent” developments that could see a transfer of wealth as younger people end up paying the pensions of older people. The Labour party could be bolder in dealing with the property haves and have-nots. Its housing policy is for first-time buyers to get priority in new housing developments and to ban foreign owners buying up new properties. But hoarding by commercial landlords that hurts young renters and many homeowners needs tackling. One suggestion by housing barrister David Renton is for “right to buy” to be extended to the private sector – say to where landlords own a minimum of five properties. There may be outrage from those who regard rent as economic growth. This surely must change. While Korea makes consumer electronics and Germany makes cars, Britain churns out buy-to-let landlords. There’s little to envy in such “success”.Since 2016, successive data leaks have exposed the methods by which some of the world’s most powerful companies and individuals secrete eye-watering sums of money off-shore, beyond the reach of tax authorities and governments. Collaboratively reported by investigative journalists from around the world, the Panama, Pandora and Paradise Papers have held the dark practices and financial chicanery practised by the super-rich up to the light. This week the Guardian, along with 47 international partners including the Süddeutsche Zeitung and Le Monde, has published the latest addition to this crucial body of work. Also the result of a vast data drop by a whistleblower, the “Suisse secrets” revelations focus on the activities of Credit Suisse, one of the world’s biggest private banks and a traditional giant in Switzerland’s notoriously opaque financial system. Analysis of accounts linked to 30,000 Credit Suisse clients from all over the world suggests that, in multiple cases, a culture of complicity on the part of Credit Suisse has allowed huge sums of dubious provenance to be stashed away with far too few questions asked. In some of the most egregious cases discovered by our investigative team, it is hard to believe that any proper process of due diligence took place at all. By 2010, just before the Arab spring revolt, an account opened for the sons of the Egyptian dictator, Hosni Mubarak, contained £138m. An attorney convicted in 1992 for money laundering on behalf of the corrupt Philippine dictator, Ferdinand Marcos, was allowed to become a client in 2000. Unbelievably, this was despite the bank having previously been ordered to repay looted funds to the Philippines after opening accounts for Marcos and his wife, Imelda. The accounts of human traffickers, torturers and participants in industrial-scale bribery in the developing world also feature in the leak. In response, Credit Suisse has argued that most of the cases uncovered by the investigation are historical and practices have since been tightened up. But more than two-thirds of the accounts detailed in the leak were opened after 2000, many were open well into the last decade, and some are still open today. Nor does the bank’s recent track record inspire confidence. Only last autumn, for example, the bank agreed to pay $475m to settle a corruption case relating to a Mozambican tuna fishing project. This is not an institution that seems to have learned lessons when it comes to risk management. More broadly, the leak suggests that Switzerland’s banking culture remains in need of far-reaching reform. The country’s infamous banking secrecy law – dating back to 1934 – remains in place, criminalising the disclosure of client information. It is true that, in 2018, Switzerland responded to international pressure by requiring its banks to share client data with some foreign authorities. But many developing countries are excluded from that system. Meanwhile, wealthy elites continue to funnel wealth out of cash-strapped countries, hiding their riches and evading the tax payments that would help impoverished governments to stay afloat. On Monday there were calls from the European parliament’s main political grouping for a review of the EU’s relationship with Switzerland in light of the Suisse secrets investigation. That would be a grave development for a country which has jealously guarded and defended its banks as a source of pride and wealth. The threat of being blacklisted should be a catalyst for necessary change in a sector that has been allowed to exist in the shadows for too long.A five-year-old boy who was “hidden from the outside world” while isolating with Covid was murdered by his mother, stepfather and a teenager before his body was dumped “like fly-tipped rubbish” in a river, a jury has heard. Logan Mwangi, described in court as a “lovely little boy”, suffered 56 injuries to his head, face and body in the attack at his home in south Wales last summer, Cardiff crown court was told. His mother, Angharad Williamson, 30, her 40-year-old partner, John Cole and a 14-year-old boy, who cannot be identified, “coolly and callously” concocted a cover-up, the court heard. Cole and the boy allegedly dumped the body in a river and Williamson rang the police claiming Logan had been kidnapped from his home in the village of Sarn, near Bridgend. The jury was told that Williamson’s relationship with Logan was clearly “fractured” while Cole had acted “unkindly” to the boy in the past. The teenager was described in court as a complex, troubled and violent boy who did not like Logan and had threatened to kill him. On the day before Logan’s body was found, a social worker visited the family home but Williamson did not let her into the flat because, she said, Logan was isolating and was feeling “a bit up and down”, the court heard. Williamson, Cole and the 14-year-old deny murdering Logan. But Caroline Rees QC, prosecuting, said each of the defendants played their part. She said: “He would not have stood a chance against any one, let alone the three acting together. Having killed Logan, each played their part in a cover-up.” At 5.46am on 31 July, Williamson made an “apparently heartfelt” 999 call to police claiming she had woken up to find Logan missing, the court heard. She appeared to be hyperventilating and claimed he had been kidnapped. But Rees said it was a “manipulative performance”. Police quickly discovered Logan in the river. He was taken to hospital but pronounced dead at 7.15am. A pathologist found he had suffered “catastrophic” injuries, as severe as if he had fallen from a great height or been involved in a high speed crash. Experts concluded he must have suffered a “brutal and sustained” attack. Rees said CCTV footage caught Cole carrying what he accepted was Logan’s body to the river at 2.43am on 31 July. He was with the 14-year-old boy, who claims he thought it was rubbish being fly-tipped into the river. While the pair were away from the house, the light in Logan’s bedroom came on. The prosecution says this must have been Williamson. Later, Cole and the boy allegedly made a second trip out to hide Logan’s dinosaur-patterned pyjama top. Rees said they disposed of Logan’s body as if they were fly-tipping rubbish. Williamson claimed she woke at 5.30am and believed her son had vanished. She said she saw Cole and the boy assaulting Logan on 29 July, hitting him in the head and abdomen. The court was told that on 21 July Logan had been found to have coronavirus and went into self-isolation. The prosecutor said it must have been difficult for Logan and those around him for him to be confined. She said: “At the time of his death he was hidden from the outside world, there was no scrutiny.” All three defendants are also accused of perverting the course of justice. Williamson and the youth deny this but Cole admits it. Williamson and Cole deny causing or allowing the death of a child. The trial continues.The lifestyle shifts of the pandemic “have made people more open minded about body shape”, the London fashion week designer Rejina Pyo said at a preview before her show yesterday. Time spent at home in comfortable clothes “has shown us that clothes don’t have to restrict our bodies to make us feel special”, she said. “Some designers love to make clothes really tiny, but I have always designed clothes with a bit of room. Food is really important to me so I like to make clothes that are comfortable when your belly is full of dinner!” Pyo, who has written a cookbook with her chef husband, served snacks and cocktails at her show at the Aubrey restaurant in a Knightsbridge hotel. “It’s a really fancy place,” she said. “I wanted to create that mood of excitement that you get at the beginning of the evening when you go out to eat with your friends and family. I love that moment when you arrive and see your friends and you can read their mood from what they are wearing.” An actor, a costume designer, a photographer and a new mother were among the show’s models. “Because our clothes are sized generously, we aren’t restricted to only using really skinny models,” the designer said. “And I didn’t want that typical stompy model walk. I said to the women, imagine you’re in a restaurant and you’ve stood up to go to the loo and spotted someone who looks interesting at another table – that’s how to walk across a room.” Taking inspiration from the anything-goes dress codes of supper clubs in 1920s America, the collection ranged from denim and tweed suits to an acid green ruffled gown and a slinky column dress. Some pieces were upcycled from deadstock jeans made for a previous collection. Neither Burberry nor Victoria Beckham, British fashion’s two most powerful brands, are taking part in this London fashion week. Burberry will stage a catwalk show in London next month instead; Victoria Beckham spent Saturday making a film of her new collection which will be shown online next week. Designers who have seized the opportunity to step into the spotlight vacated by the absent big names include Roksanda, whose show at Tate Britain featured the first NFT sold at London fashion week, a virtual ball gown shoppable on the designer’s own website through a partnership with Clearpay. Red carpet favourite Roksanda, whose front row featured the actor Harriet Walter in a lime trouser suit, brought her trademark exuberant glamour to a collaboration with Fila, which included puffer coats in the joyful rainbow brights of a patchwork quilt, and neon moonboots. “Sportswear and loungewear became much more part of my vocabulary over the past couple of years,” the designer said backstage after the show. Students from the English national ballet school replaced models at the first catwalk show in two years for Preen. “We were thinking about youth culture and youthful exuberance, so we wanted to work with young dancers. The students brought a phenomenal energy which made the project feel really joyful,” said designer Thea Bregazzi backstage. Erdem Moralıoğlu brought supermodel starriness to London fashion week, with Karen Elson opening his show dressed in an embroidered double-breasted black silk coat from the Erdem’s recent menswear collection, set off by a slim velvet scarf. “Having designed menswear for the first time, I thought it was so interesting to see how the silhouette was transformed when you put it on a woman,” he said. “That double breasted broadness looks so different when you see it on Karen,” the designer said backstage of a collection which revisited the gender fluid dressing and decadent nightlife scene of the 1930s. “There’s a Cabaret kind of sexiness to it – a louche cardigan, a glimpse of a bra.”Neighbours of a flat in which the body of a 61-year-old woman was found dead have claimed they first raised concerns about her welfare more than two years ago. Police officers forced entry to the property in south-east London on Friday after residents reportedly sounded the alarm over a balcony door banging open and shut as Storm Eunice battered the capital. While the woman’s death is not being treated as suspicious, neighbours said they had contacted the housing association Peabody, which owns the property, repeatedly over the last two years over a “horrendous smell” emerging from the flat. One resident of the block told MyLondon that neighbours had complained about the smell, which was so bad that she had had to block the gap under her door with a towel, 40 to 50 times to Peabody since 2019. She said: “My son was getting headaches – he was feeling sick. When I was pregnant I was vomiting all the time. I would ask my neighbours, ‘Can you smell that? Or is it because I am pregnant?’” Describing the police entry on Friday, she said: “We heard them run up the stairs and then bang, bang, bang. They came in a rush. It was so frightening the way they ran in. My son said he froze and he called me to say, ‘Mum, there’s a lot of police running in the block.’ There was a really big van and a few cars.” A spokesperson for Peabody told the Guardian: “We are saddened to learn that our resident has passed away. Our dedicated tenant and family support team carry out regular welfare checks with people who may be vulnerable. “We did make repeated attempts to check on the resident and liaised with the police to try and make contact. We are offering support to neighbouring residents, who will understandably be upset, and our teams are there today. We are working closely with the authorities and will investigate all of the circumstances and actions taken in this case.” A spokesperson for the Met police said: “At 19:01hrs on Friday, 18 February police were called to a flat in St Mary’s Road, Peckham. Concerns had been raised about the welfare of a woman who lived at the address. “Officers attended and forced entry. The body of a 61-year-old woman who was deceased was found inside. The woman’s death is being treated as unexplained but not suspicious. A file will be prepared for the coroner.”First Wordle was a grassroots hit that went viral, then the the online word puzzle was bought by the New York Times for a seven-figure sum, and now it has spawned legions of imitators. From Nerdle to Worldle, the simple format has been copied in dozens of new ways in recent weeks, sometimes to satisfy urges unfulfilled by the original, such as the opportunity to play more than once a day, but also to step up the challenge, profit from online advertising, or tap into niche interests. The proliferation of replica games in particular reflects the experimental and collegial nature of software developer and online gaming culture, gaming experts said. Adam Procter, who leads Southampton University’s game design programme, said the copycats were mostly people taking advantage of Wordle’s simplicity to use it “as an exercise to learn some code or to flex their muscles”. A culture of “see if you can copy it” is “built into the DNA of software coding”, he added. In terms of reaching new users, the games that have been most successful are those that are a “unique variation” on the format, rather than the “carbon-copy clones”, said Prof Chris Headleand, head of games design at Staffordshire University. Here are some of the most popular and distinctive variations. Nerdle One of the more popular spin-offs, Nerdle converts Wordle into a numbers game by challenging players to figure out a six- to eight-character calculation, for example 7+6/3=9, in just six guesses. The game was created in the UK by Richard Mann, who has worked in tech startups for 20 years, after discussing with his teenage children the absence of a Wordle equivalent for maths fans. His son worked out the 17,723 valid solutions for eight-digit Nerdle. “After playing it for a while on paper, we knew it was just as fun playing with numbers as playing with letters,” he said, adding that users especially enjoy combining it with Wordle as a daily test of mental agility. Since launching on 20 January, the game been played by more than 1 million people in more than 200 countries. It raises revenue from advertisers and sponsors to cover its costs, as well as fundraising for child numeracy, but Mann hopes to grow it into an educational technology business since the game is popular with teachers, who use it to build confidence among pupils and teach them new concepts. Worldle A geographical guessing game that shows a silhouette of a country or territory and gives users six chances to work out the answer, Worldle is now pulling in 2 million users daily. The game was created by Antoine Teuf, a 31-year-old French software developer. He has worked in online gaming and has previously unsuccessfully attempted to build web games, but had a eureka moment when he saw Wordle’s success and realised that “it’s better to keep it simple”. Like some other developers, he has set up an account on Ko-Fi, which allows users to buy him a “virtual coffee” to thank him for creating the game. So far, he has earned €4,800. Crosswordle For those who think Wordle is a bit too easy, there are several different versions of Crosswordle available. One describes itself as a cross between Wordle and Sudoku. The game provides the answer for the final row and the goal of the game is to fill in the rest of the grid. Another version, created by Robert Flack, a 35-year-old Canadian software engineer for Google, requires users to guess two intersecting words. He sees his contribution as reflective of developer culture, and plans to use it as a launchpad to make more games. “It’s really common for people in the software field to be passionate about building software, so they’ll often have side projects which are things they couldn’t make a full-time living from.” Taylordle From Lordle of the Rings to Wizarding Wordle (for Harry Potter fans), there are any number of games aimed at testing how fanatical a fan you are. One especially popular game is Taylordle, created by three thirtysomething Taylor Swift superfans working in tech. In the first week, the game received more than 1.4 million visits and has now racked up 5.9 million plays. “We tried to populate the game with words that newer Swifties would know and then we also have words that maybe only the hardcore stans would be able to figure out,” the creators said. “Our main goal now is to get Taylor Swift herself to play it.” Lewdle There are a number of slightly more risque spin-offs, including Sweardle, Queerdle and Lewdle, which have a similar format to the original but use more, er, specific vocabulary. Lewdle’s creator, Gary Whitta, a 49-year-old British screenwriter living in the US, developed the game with his friend Adam Nickerson, and has been surprised to see 4.5 million others enjoy it too, with the result that many now submit their own ideas for lewd words to include. “Since we both have a very juvenile sense of humour, we wanted to see what a version that only used naughty words would look like,” he said. He added that in the original spirit of Wordle, there were no plans to monetise the game. “Neither of us really need this to be anything other than what it is – a fun hobby that has kind of grown a bit out of control in the most delightful way.”Medina Spirit has officially been disqualified from the 2021 Kentucky Derby. The colt crossed the line first in May’s race but failed a post-race drugs test. His trainer, Bob Baffert, was banned from entering horses at the Kentucky Derby for two years after the controversy. He denied deliberately doping the horse, which had been a 12-1 outsider to win the race, and blamed the failed test on an ointment used to treat a rash on the horse. Medina Spirit died in December after suffering a suspected heart attack while working out at California’s Santa Anita track. On Monday, the Kentucky Horse Racing Association also fined Baffert $7,500 and handed down a 90-day suspension. Medina Spirit’s owner, Amr Zedan, will not be allowed to collect the $1.8m prize for winning the Derby. Mandaloun, who finished second behind Medina Spirit, is now the official winner of the race. “We look forward to celebrating Mandaloun on a future date in a way that is fitting of this rare distinction,” Churchill Down, which hosts the Derby, said in a statement on Monday. Baffert’s attorney, Craig Robertson, told the Daily Racing Form that “we will be filing an immediate appeal” against the sanctions. Medina Spirit is the third winner of the famous race to be disqualified. In 2019, it was ruled that Maximum Security impeded the path of two horses in the final turn before crossing the line first. In 1968, Dancer’s Image was disqualified after testing positive for a banned anti-inflammatory.An abandoned ship that caught fire in the mid-Atlantic last week was carrying $401m (£295m) worth of cars, including Porsche, Audi, Bentley and Lamborghini models, an insurance estimate has revealed. Felicity Ace, a specialist cargo ship carrying more than 4,000 cars, caught alight near the Azores on Wednesday evening. The vessel’s 22 crew members were evacuated but the fire continued to burn for several days, fuelled by lithium-ion batteries in electric vehicles on board. Insurance experts at Russell Group said on Monday they estimated that $438m of goods were on the ship, including an estimated $401m of cars and goods vehicles. Suki Basi, the group’s managing director, said the incident would result in losses of at least $155m for Volkswagen, which owns Porsche, Audi, Bentley and Lamborghini. “These figures showed once again the precariousness of global supply chains,” Basi said. “The incident comes at a bad time for global carmakers, who are in the middle of a supply chain crisis sourcing semiconductors, resulting in new delays for new cars. An event like this will not do a great deal in instilling trust with consumers.” The ship’s operator, MOL Ship Management (Singapore), said on Monday that the vessel was “still assumed to remain on fire south of the Azores, drifting further away from the islands”. It said two firefighting tugboats were due to arrive at the site of the ship on Monday and would “start spraying water to Felicity Ace together with the patrol boat with the initial salvage team onboard already on site to cool down the heat from the vessel”. The company said the ship remained stable and was not leaking oil. Another salvage craft with firefighting equipment is due to arrive from Rotterdam on 26 February. João Mendes Cabeças, the captain of the nearest port in the Azorean island of Faial, told Reuters over the weekend that lithium-ion batteries in the electric vehicles were “keeping the fire alive”, adding that specialist equipment was required to extinguish it. It was not clear whether the batteries sparked the fire. Felicity Ace was travelling from Emden, Germany, where Volkswagen has a factory, to Davisville, Rhode Island, according to the website MarineTraffic. VW has not commented on how many of its cars were on the ships. The automotive enthusiast website The Drive reported that the ship was carrying 189 Bentleys. Ship manifests show that on a previous voyage last month it carried 21 Lamborghinis.Vladimir Putin, the Russian president, has announced that he is recognising two breakaway territories in eastern Ukraine as independent. Here is a look at the implications for the wider crisis, in which the US says Russia may be poised to invade Ukraine with a force of up to 190,000 troops that it has amassed near its neighbour’s borders. What are the breakaway territories? Russian-backed separatists in Ukraine’s Donetsk and Luhansk regions – collectively known as Donbas – broke away from Ukrainian government control in 2014 and proclaimed themselves independent “people’s republics”, until now unrecognised. Since then, Ukraine says about 15,000 people have been killed in fighting. Russia denies being a party to the conflict, but has backed the separatists in numerous ways, including through covert military support, financial aid, supplies of Covid-19 vaccines and the issue of at least 800,000 Russian passports to residents. Moscow has always denied planning to invade Ukraine. What does Russian recognition mean? For the first time, Russia is saying it does not regard Donbas as part of Ukraine. That could pave the way for Moscow to send military forces into the separatist areas openly, using the argument that it is intervening as an ally to protect them against Ukraine. Alexander Borodai, a Russian parliament member and former Donetsk political leader, said last month that the separatists would then look to Russia to help them wrest control of parts of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions still under the control of Ukrainian forces. If that happened, it could lead to open military conflict between Russia and Ukraine. What about the Minsk peace process? Russian recognition effectively kills off the 2014-15 Minsk peace agreements that, although still unimplemented, have until now been seen by all sides, including Moscow, as the best chance for a solution. The accords call for a large degree of autonomy for the two regions inside Ukraine. How will the west respond? Western governments have been lining up for months to warn Moscow that any movement of military forces across the Ukrainian border would draw a strong response, including stringent financial sanctions. Antony Blinken said last week that recognition “would further undermine Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, constitute a gross violation of international law, [and] call into further question Russia’s stated commitment to continue to engage in diplomacy to achieve a peaceful resolution of this crisis”. The US secretary of state said it would necessitate a “swift and firm” response from the US and its allies. Has Russia recognised breakaway ares before? Yes – it recognised the independence of Abkhazia and South Ossetia, two Georgian breakaway regions, after fighting a short war with Georgia in 2008. It has provided them with extensive budget support, extended Russian citizenship to their populations and stationed thousands of troops there. What are the pros and cons for Moscow? In the case of Georgia, Russia used recognition of the breakaway regions to justify an open-ended military presence in a neighbouring former Soviet republic in an attempt to indefinitely thwart Georgia’s Nato aspirations by denying it full control of its own territory. The same considerations would apply to Ukraine. On the downside, Moscow faces sanctions and international condemnation for abandoning the Minsk process after long maintaining that it was committed to it. It will also be saddled indefinitely with responsibility for two territories ravaged by eight years of war and in need of massive economic support.Business leaders and unions have warned the government that scrapping free Covid tests in England and watering down sick pay will discourage workers from self-isolating and could damage the economy. Although welcoming Boris Johnson’s ambition to ease restrictions almost two years into the pandemic, company bosses said the prime minister’s newly unveiled “living with Covid” strategy came with major risks and could do more harm than good. Claire Walker, co-executive director of the British Chambers of Commerce (BCC), said the changes inched companies closer to pre-pandemic conditions. “However, for many firms, this move will not be without its challenges, and government must not pass public health decisions on to the business community, who are not public health experts.” The prime minister announced on Monday that people testing positive for Covid-19 would no longer legally have to isolate from this Thursday, while free testing would be removed from 1 April. Self-isolation support payments are to be jettisoned, while sick pay rules will revert to less generous pre-Covid arrangements, which will mean workers are paid from day four of any absence through illness rather than day one. Johnson told the Commons: “Restrictions place a heavy toll on our economy, our society, our mental wellbeing and on the life chances of our children. And we do not need to pay that cost any longer.” However, business groups said the economic benefit of looser restrictions would be undermined by the end of free Covid tests and support for those who self-isolate. Matthew Fell, chief policy director at the Confederation of British Industry, said: “While free testing cannot continue for ever, there is a balance to be struck between confidence-building and cost-cutting. Mass lateral flow testing has kept our economy open and firms continue to believe the economic benefits far outweigh the costs.” Frances O’Grady, the Trades Union Congress general secretary, said low-income workers would suffer the most at a moment of mounting pressure on households. “Charging for Covid tests in the middle of a cost-of-living crisis is a crazy decision,” she said. “Ministers have been warned again and again by unions, businesses and public health experts not to scrap free Covid tests. But they have ignored these pleas.” The government said it would move away from deploying regulations and requirements in England and replace specific interventions for Covid-19 with public health measures and guidance, further details of which are expected later this week. However, the move raises the prospect of the government guiding workers who test positive for Covid-19 to self-isolate, while also dismantling the financial support and testing infrastructure to help them to do so. Christina McAnea, the general secretary of the union Unison, said ending free testing was a “foolish move” because people wouldn’t be able to afford to check their Covid status. “The government has taken leave of its senses. Ditching every last Covid safety rule while thousands are still catching the virus every day is irresponsible,” she added. Business leaders said that while infection rates had fallen from a recent peak, there was still a risk of future outbreaks. Walker said: “Firms will only truly be able to ‘live with Covid’ when they are confident that a plan is in place for future outbreaks. “Uncertainty will put a brake on investment and the shadow of the pandemic could continue to loom over our economy for some time to come.” Hospitality leaders said removing restrictions could help pubs, clubs and bars, although they cautioned that ongoing financial support was vital for building back from the health emergency. Michael Kill, chief executive of the Night Time Industries Association, said extra measures were necessary at next month’s spring statement from the chancellor, Rishi Sunak. “This is a sector that has sacrificed more than just about any other part of the economy, and it seems right that continued support is commensurate with the scale of hit that we took during the pandemic.” Kate Nicholls, the chief executive of trade body UKHospitality, said many venues would still err on the side of caution despite the end of self-isolation rules. “We have a greater burden of care because we’re dealing with situations where, if hygiene is lax, there are big ramifications,” she said. “Just because something isn’t there in law, doesn’t mean it won’t be there as part of normal mitigation and risk assessments.” Unions responded with fury to the news that statutory sick pay will revert to pre-Covid rules. The TUC has warned that the UK has the lowest statutory sick pay in real terms for almost two decades and is the least generous in Europe. Under the rules, employees are paid £96.35 a week by their employer if they are too ill to work. Dan Shears, national health and safety director at the GMB trade union, said: “Today’s nonsensical announcement guarantees workers will attend the workplace with Covid. “This will prolong the pandemic with more outbreaks. Asking people to exercise responsibility whilst taking away a key workplace provision for them to do that just shows how incompetent this government is.” Additional reporting by Rob Davies and Sarah ButlerBelarus is being annexed by Russia and its government will face the same “massive” sanctions as Moscow should there be an invasion of Ukraine from its territory, the EU’s foreign affairs chief has said. Speaking at the end of a tense 10-hour meeting of the bloc’s 27 foreign ministers, Josep Borrell said the Belarusian president, Alexander Lukashenko, was allowing his country to become a Russian satellite state. The lack of transparency from Minsk over Russian troop deployments on Belarusian territory left the EU without any choice but to treat it as being complicit in the aggression against Ukraine, Borrell said. “I want to repeat once again that any further aggression against Ukraine will have a strong answer from the European Union,” he told reporters in Brussels. “But I want to add that this will also apply to Belarus should an attack be conducted from each territory with its involvement. “Belarus is being dragged into the crisis. It is losing its sovereignty. With a non-transparent deployment of Russian forces, Belarus is losing its nuclear neutrality. It is in the process of satellisation with respect to Russia.” Russian troops were due to leave Belarus on Sunday following their planned joint exercises with the Belarusian armed forces, but the country’s defence minister announced over the weekend that the 30,000 soldiers would remain indefinitely. Lithuania’s foreign affairs minister, Gabrielius Landsbergis, said the Belarusian armed forces were no longer acting purely on orders coming from Minsk. He said: “Belarusian troops are receiving their commands now more and more from the Russian political decision-makers … and that means that there’s low, very low, levels of independence in the Belarusian army.” Borrell said ministers had been closely watching the televised Russian security council at which Vladimir Putin had discussed recognition of the independence of the eastern Ukrainian territories of Donetsk and Luhansk. There remain differences of opinion among the 27 member states on what level of sanctions will be imposed on Russia over the move. But Borrell said he would table the full prepared package of punitive measures at an extraordinary meeting for ministers to decide, and that Russia should be warned that there would be a “strong and united” response. He said: “I will certainly put on the table the sanctions package that has been prepared. We have a package prepared … This package has certain components that can be implemented with certain degrees depending on the level of aggression.” The developments in Moscow had radically changed the agenda of the EU ministers meeting, Borrell conceded, with hopes of a summit between Joe Biden and Putin dashed. “At 9am in the morning we were still thinking of holding high-level meetings between President Putin and President Biden, diplomatic activities,” he said. “At the end of the day, the scenario is completely different because we are no longer talking about summits.” The EU has threatened “severe costs and massive consequences” in the event of a further Russian incursion into Ukraine. The package has yet to be made public, but it would involve a block on exports of key electrical components on which Russia is reliant, potentially an import ban on Russian oil and gas, and the freezing of assets of individuals and companies affiliated to the government in Moscow.Michael Gove has told MPs the taxpayer may have to pay more to make thousands of buildings safe after saying it was proving hard to get companies who made combustible materials to pay to fix the building safety crisis. In comments that struck a less bullish tone about his previously stated ambition to make the construction industry and developers pay, he conceded that the “government has to share some of that responsibility as well” and that the “taxpayer is the backstop”. Gove had said he wanted freeholders, developers and product manufacturers to pay £4bn to help fix combustible cladding on all tower blocks above 11 metres tall, after the government already committed £5.1bn. But the secretary of state for levelling up, housing and communities told a Commons select committee: “The chancellor will probably shiver to hear me say it, but we have a responsibility here. But what we want to do is to make sure that with the taxpayer having already committed a significant amount, those who do have a direct stake in ownership do so.” He was speaking after last week’s promise to effectively ban developers and product manufacturers that do not help fix the cladding scandal from trading. He promised to limit leaseholders’ bills for non-cladding costs to a maximum of £15,000 in London and £10,000 elsewhere. But the Home Builders Federation industry group have told him they believe they are only responsible for a small fraction of the £4bn he is seeking and have complained they are being targeted “because, as UK-headquartered businesses, it is a simpler proposition than pursuing overseas developers, influential property sector interests and foreign product manufacturers”. Gove said to the MPs: “Some of the most egregious transgressors are companies based outside the UK, so there are practical difficulties in pursuing them in the way that we would want to. Some of the things we have been trying to do with Kingspan, Arconic and these other companies is trying to demonstrate to them that they can’t evade these responsibilities.” Ireland-based Kingspan made some of the combustible insulation used on Grenfell and on scores of other buildings, while US-based Arconic made combustible cladding panels for Grenfell and other blocks. Gove was also unable to promise than public funds to build new social housing would not be raided. His appearance came as the public inquiry into the Grenfell Tower disaster began to examine the role of the government and affiliated organisations in setting rules that allowed combustible materials to be used. On Monday the inquiry heard from Debbie Smith, managing director of BRE Global, formerly the government’s Building Research Establishment, who said that in 2002 she told the government that after failed tests, aluminium composite panels with a polyethylene core (used on Grenfell and at least 481 other high-rise residential buildings in England) should never be used on a tall building. Hours later, Gove said: “It was clear that there was a collective failure to ensure that appropriate safety rules were followed and that information was shared in an appropriate way … Government has to share some of that responsibility.” Gove also said he would look at soaring insurance premiums, an issue raised by the broadcaster and journalist Jeremy Clarkson, who owns an affected flat, in his column in this weekend’s Sunday Times.Britain believes there are figures within Russian military and security services who have “serious doubts” about invading Ukraine as the Kremlin continues to move more troops within 50km of the border. The claim, made on Monday, is understood to be based on western intelligence, although the concerns that exist are not expected to have any initial impact if President Vladimir Putin were to order an attack. “There are elements within the military and Russian security services who harbour very serious doubts about the plan to invade and its effectiveness,” said one western official, who added they were “perfectly confident” about the assessment. However, no further evidence was offered to back up the statement, one of a number of intelligence-led warnings made by the US, UK and others in the past fortnight, all part of a wider political effort to try to demonstrate that the west has an understanding of Russia, its plans and intentions. Any invasion of Ukraine would be fraught with risk, in what would be the largest war in Europe since the second world war. It would pit 150,000 Russian troops, plus another 30,000 separatists, against a regular Ukrainian army of 145,000 plus tens of thousands of paramilitaries, many of whom have military experience. But Putin’s dominance of the Russian political and security scene has meant that any internal concerns about an invasion has been muted. Downing Street said on Monday that there still remained a “window for diplomacy” to resolve the crisis, but added that repeated complaints by the Kremlin that Ukraine had engaged in military provocations in the eastern Donbas region had suggested a plan to attack had already been decided upon. “Intelligence we are seeing suggests Russia intends to launch an invasion and President Putin’s plan has in effect already begun,” a No 10 spokesperson said. “We are seeing elements of the Russian playbook we would expect to see in those situations starting to play out in real time.” The western assessment is that Russian forces are now “poised to invade” if Putin gives the order. It is estimated two-thirds of Russia’s 110 battalions in the region have taken up positions within 50km of the border in both Russian and neighbouring Belarus, an increase from half a week ago. Half of those two-thirds are “tactically deployed” in temporary or makeshift locations even close to Ukraine, where they are awaiting further orders. Defence sources said they could stay in position “for a matter of days” before having to retreat to nearby staging areas, with better facilities. The defence secretary, Ben Wallace, said that the continued build up of Russian forces monitored by western intelligence did not suggest that the Kremlin was ready to ease tensions. “These are not the actions of a Russian government fulfilling its repeated declarations that it has no intention of invading Ukraine,” he told MPs. Updating MPs, the minister said there had been “a proliferation of false flag operations and propaganda stunts and Russian news outlets carrying fictitious allegations”. Russian officials said five “saboteurs” who tried to breach its border with Ukraine have been killed in the Rostov region were killed. Ukrainian armed vehicles were also destroyed, Russia said. Ukraine said its forces were not operating in the Rostov region and that such claims were “fake news”. Western officials added that Russia had access to a supply of Ukrainian military vehicles captured in 2014-15, when fighting between the two countries was at its most intense, which were available for “false flag” operations. British sources also sounded a note of caution about the efforts of France’s President Emmanuel Macron on Sunday to set up a summit meeting between US president Joe Biden and Putin, arguing that Ukraine had to be closely involved if there were to be direct negotiations between the two leaders. A UK government source said it was “too early” to say whether the summit was a good idea although opportunities for diplomacy were welcome. “We need to make sure Ukraine is played in and we have our set position on Ukraine’s sovereignty and their right to choose on things like Nato and that will remain,” they added.Good morning. Sydney residents can expect more train troubles today, with limited services to resume after Monday’s shutdown as the dispute between the rail union and the NSW government continues. More strikes are “inevitable” this year if the NSW government refuses to scrap its 2.5% wages cap, say unions after rail chaos hit Sydney. A long-running industrial dispute between the Rail, Tram and Bus Union and NSW government saw staff across the state’s transport network “locked out” and train services ground to a halt on Monday. The transport union has accused the NSW government of playing politics with commuters, and the state government has ramped up its anti-union rhetoric, with the NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, describing the action as a “coordinated attack by the Labor party and the union movement”. The NSW transport minister, David Elliott, liked it to “terrorist-like activity”, then accused RTBU of acting like “cowards”, spreading “bullshit” and “hijacking the city”. A majority of Australian voters see China and the bilateral relationship as a complex issue to be managed (61%) rather than a threat to be confronted (26%), and more voters trust Labor than the Coalition to manage that complexity, the latest Guardian Essential poll suggests. Despite Scott Morrison last week repeatedly saying Labor is “weak” on security threats and declaring that only the Coalition would not “appease” Beijing, the opposition currently maintains a nine-point lead over the Coalition when people are asked which party they trust to manage the Australia-China relationship. Vladimir Putin will recognise the Russia-controlled territories in south-east Ukraine as independent states in a pivotal decision, scuttling an existing peace agreement and possibly triggering tough new sanctions from the west. According to the Kremlin, German Chancellor Olaf Scholz and French President Emmanuel Macron “expressed their disappointment with this development of the situation” but “indicated their readiness to continue contacts”. The German leader earlier warned that “such a step would be a gross contradiction of the Minsk agreement for a peaceful settlement of the conflict in east Ukraine and a unilateral breach of these deals from the Russian side.” France and Germany are both signatories of the Minsk agreement, a peace deal that will likely be abandoned as a result of the Russian decision. Australia The Coalition government has pledged $804m for strategic and scientific programs in Antarctica and to ensure the increasingly contested region is “free from conflict”. Why is a tech billionaire trying to buy Australia’s dirtiest energy company AGL? Mike Cannon-Brookes believes backing renewable energy over old coal power plants will keep electricity prices down, create jobs and slash emissions – is he right? We answer the big questions here. John Yalu has been identified as the man charged with murder after allegedly cutting off an older man’s leg with a circular saw, as part of what police claim was an “arrangement” between them. The NSW government has begun issuing flood plain harvesting licences in NSW despite objections from the upper house – a move that has been labelled “an act of bastardry” and “bad faith” by key crossbenchers. The world Boris Johnson has announced the end of all domestic Covid restrictions in England in a process starting later this week. Free Covid testing will end for the general public from 1 April and people with positive cases will no longer legally have to isolate. Germany will offer a new protein-based Covid-19 vaccine in the hope of swaying a sizeable minority that remains sceptical of the novel mRNA technology. About 1.4m doses of Nuvaxovid developed by the US biotech company Novavax are to arrive in Germany this week, after EU approval in December. The final piece of a 17th-century tapestry that was stolen 42 years ago by a notorious art thief has been recovered. The Flemish work taken by notorious art thief “Erik the Belgian” was tracked down by an officer doing academic research on art thefts. Myanmar’s military junta has appeared in place of the detained Aung San Suu Kyi at the UN’s top court, where it sought to throw out a case alleging that it committed genocide against the country’s Rohingya minority. Recommended reads When Chris O’Connor formed rock band Painters and Dockers to pay off a friend’s parking fines, he didn’t count on union thugs, a knife-wielding maniac and six police vans turning up to the group’s first gig in Melbourne. “A man who lived nearby got the shits with the noise so came in with a machete and started chopping up the mixing desk because he wanted us to stop playing. Six divvy vans turned up, cut the whole street off, and the whole pub evacuated in two minutes. We were running down the street with our amplifiers trying to get out of there. It was insane.” People’s experience of amputation differs. Jane Nicholls shares the story of having her leg “chopped off above the knee” after an unexplained blood clot in an artery in her lower leg. “I have a conical vestige of a leg. People call that my ‘stump’. Ugly word. I call it ‘my leg’. It is my leg,” she writes. “You dread an above-knee amputation. It changes your life. The knee has a crucial role in maintaining balance. If your leg is amputated below the knee, you can still do most of the things you used to do. I can’t run. Climbing steps can be terrifying. I can’t ride a bike. My life is about maintaining my balance. Not falling over.” There’s no denying that polyester clothing is an environmental hazard – it doesn’t biodegrade in landfill, virgin polyester is derived from fossil fuels, and it sheds plastic microfibres when it is washed and worn. But, because it’s cheap, it’s in more than half our clothes. Since it’s very likely we all have something made from polyester in our wardrobes, here is some expert advice on how to minimise its impact. Listen The Morrison government has been accused of weaponising national security in an attempt to sway the polls ahead of the election. The head of Australia’s spy agency Asio has also warned against stoking “community division”, saying it could have serious implications for Australia’s democracy. In today’s Full Story, Laura Murphy-Oates speaks to Guardian Australia’s foreign affairs and defence correspondent, Daniel Hurst, about this strategy and how it will impact Labor, the Coalition and Australia’s democracy. Full Story is Guardian Australia’s daily news podcast. Subscribe for free on Apple Podcasts, Spotify or any other podcasting app. Sport Australian basketballer Josh Giddey has won many plaudits of late, including from LeBron James. But a true measure of Giddey’s character can be found not in this rush of recent success, but from a time of disappointment, writes Kieran Pender. Reporting conditions for journalists covering the Beijing Winter Olympics fell short of international standards, according to the Foreign Correspondents’ Club of China, which says reporters were tailed and manhandled by security despite assurances from Games officials. Media roundup A national campaign to ban the use of spit hoods has been launched after Northern Territory police revealed their increased use on children as young as 12 years old in the last two years, reports the NT News. A third of Australian men who kill their female partners are high functioning elsewhere in their lives and had not previously come to police attention, the Sydney Morning Herald reports. Coming up We can expect updates from the dispute between the transport union and the NSW government. And Clive Palmer will address the National Press Club. Sign up If you would like to receive the Guardian Australia morning mail to your email inbox every weekday, sign up here. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com. Discover Australian Weekend Every Saturday at 6am, enjoy early access to the best journalism planned for the weekend in one elegant app, plus a curated selection of the week’s news and analysis from Australia and the world.Ofwat, the water regulator, has noticed that the industry it oversees in England and Wales has been in the news recently. So it has been. Discharges of raw sewage into rivers and coastal waters are a scandal happening in plain sight, and each set of data feels more shocking than the last. A highly critical report from MPs on the environmental audit committee in January made a strong case that Ofwat itself, plus the Environment Agency, should be more assertive. And here comes a regulatory response of a sort to the “current high level of scrutiny” of the sector: a letter from David Black, Ofwat’s interim chief executive, to the chairs of remuneration committees of the water firms suggesting, in a roundabout way, that bosses’ bonuses should be cut if the pollution record is poor. The letter is the first of its kind and acts on one of the MPs’ suggestions, but one cannot call it strongly worded. Performance-related pay should show “a substantial link” to delivery for customers, including on “environmental commitments and obligations”, wrote Black, which is hardly laying down the law. There was a reminder to boards that they are allowed to recognise shortfalls “whatever the initial framework for [pay] incentives”, which is just a statement of something the directors should know already: bonuses are always discretionary. One could say, generously, that Ofwat is merely at the preliminary stage of issuing a high-level warning and that tougher tactics could follow. The problem with that interpretation, though, is that Black didn’t specify what penalties would be imposed if his appeal for good behaviour on pay and bonuses is ignored, which must be a possibility. In recent press interviews, he has hinted at fines or changes to licence conditions, but the letter itself only said Ofwat would be “assessing your company’s approach” and did not describe possible sanctions. Maybe the pay-setters will come cleanly, as it were. But Ofwat, which is under scrutiny as much as the companies, would help itself if it laid out specific examples of unacceptable pay practices. Curbing boardroom bonuses for polluters is a good idea. But the policy requires the regulator to be stronger than it currently sounds. Menzies takeover a shame Never trust a bidder’s claim that its offer is “full and fair”. Kuwait’s National Aviation Services uttered the supposedly significant words when it was pitching 510p a share for the Edinburgh-based aviation services group John Menzies. Now it’s offering 608p, a mighty 19% improvement that exposes last week’s boasts as so much guff. Barring the (unlikely) arrival of a new bidder, 608p, or £559m, will be enough to win. Indeed, the Kuwaitis had already bought almost 20% of Menzies in the market last week, which undermined the ability of the target’s board to put up a fight. If your big shareholders aren’t with you, resistance is futile. A “willing to recommend” statement duly followed. For a few reasons, it feels a shame. First, because Menzies’ chairman and chief executive, Philipp Joeinig, was making a decent case for continued independence, inviting investors to look beyond the pandemic’s effect on a share price that was 288p before the excitement started. Second, because Menzies is the larger company and has indeed fallen to an opportunistically timed bid, albeit one at a fat notional premium. Third, because we have learned, for the umpteenth time, that too many mid-tier companies look basically cheap when viewed from abroad; the UK takeover door continues to be wide open. At the top, the tide turns slowly for women A sea change has occurred in UK boardrooms, according to the Department for Business, and, up to a point, it is correct. Women hold 39% of board positions at FTSE 100 companies compared with just 12.5% in 2011, the year Lord Davies’ high-profile report voiced worries that the UK percentage seemed to have reached a plateau and urged a faster pace of progress. On a simple headcount measure of female presence in top boardrooms, the UK now ranks second to France in international tables and has overtaken quota-friendly Norway. Yet the seascape appears all too familiar in another way. While FTSE 100 companies have recruited many more women to their non-executive ranks, the executive picture is almost unchanged. There were five female FTSE 100 chief executives in 2011; now there are eight. At that rate of change, rough parity will be achieved sometime around the middle of the next century.Cabinet ministers were already waiting in No 10 on Monday morning when it became clear the sign-off for the prime minister’s much-anticipated end to Covid regulations was not going to be as perfunctory as they had imagined. A festering row between Rishi Sunak’s Treasury and Sajid Javid’s health department was responsible, first reported by the Guardian last week and still unresolved. Few cabinet colleagues had much sympathy with Javid’s demands for extra cash to continue some Covid testing programmes beyond next month. “We are pushing through a hugely unpopular tax rise for his budget,” one cabinet minister said of the impending £12bn healthcare levy, funded by a national rise. “He’s got a budget that is triple the defence budget. No one can say he is being squeezed.” But privately some were horrified by the scramble to agree a deal between the Treasury and Department of Health and Social Care (DHSC) just hours before the prime minister’s announcement. One Tory MP called it a “shambles” and said it returned doubts about the No 10 operation to the forefront of colleagues’ minds. “We thought this had been signed off days ago,” one grumbled. “Why is the prime minister calling a cabinet meeting when the details aren’t finished?” As word leaked out that ministers were being turned away from the delayed meeting, No 10 began by suggesting Boris Johnson’s briefing on Ukraine had overrun. But it soon became apparent that there was ongoing wrangling between Javid and Sunak over the future of testing for NHS staff in particular, and Covid surveillance programmes. It was an awkward few hours before the final agreement was done. The cabinet was hastily reconvened on Microsoft Teams, with ministers given less than 10 minutes’ notice of the 1.30pm meeting. Although his department has consistently denied requesting more cash, multiple sources said Javid was fighting to keep billions of pounds extra in funding to continue some free testing, including free lateral flow tests for symptomatic over-50s, but this was rejected by the Treasury. Over the previous week, sources said Javid had reduced his demands for additional funds but argued consistently for maintaining testing programmes designed to monitor new variants and surges. In the end, both sides claimed victory, with health sources saying Sunak had wanted to scrap the surveillance system completely. But one cabinet minister called the result a “total victory” for Sunak, saying the Treasury stuck to its original plans to cut Covid budgets by almost 90% and that Javid had to find the funds from his existing healthcare settlement. Johnson gave his backing to the chancellor’s refusal to agree further funds. Javid now faces the unenviable task of finding funding within his budget to continue surveillance programmes like the Office for National Statistics survey without hitting funds designated to clear the NHS backlog. A health source said Javid had always been arguing to be able to “reprioritise” within his budget, saying the health secretary understood the “fiscal case” to end most free testing. Yet as Johnson appeared before MPs to loud criticism from Labour and the SNP for the decision to end free Covid tests, several ministers remarked at how isolated Javid had been at cabinet for his push to retain some free testing. “Cabinet is pretty united on this direction,” one source said. Those Tory MPs who have doubts about whether the strategy is shortsighted have largely remained quiet. Greg Clark, the former cabinet minister, asked tentatively in the Commons how long it would take to restart mass testing should it be needed, but did not make the case to retain more of the programme. For the most part, as he announced the end of a testing regime which Johnson had once heralded as the envy of the world, Tory MPs cheered him on – arguably the most united the government benches had been in months.Jennifer Gonzales fears that Boris Johnson’s decision to lift all remaining Covid restrictions will end in “disaster”. The 56-old-year home educator says: “Covid is still here so we should carry on self-isolating if we get it. It is too soon to be changing that now.” Her view is typical of much of the nervousness in Horsham on Monday afternoon as the prime minister set out plans to lift restrictions. The West Sussex market town has the highest rate of Covid in England at 930 cases per 100,000 people. Speaking in Horsham’s Swan Walk shopping mall, Gonzales says she is also worried about the end of free testing. “Even with free testing, a lot of people haven’t been using it and if you have to pay for it even fewer will. We will be mingling with people with no restrictions who may not know they’ve got it. I think that will be a disaster.” Lindsey, a 37-year-old care worker who did not want to give her surname, agrees. Sheltering at a bus stop from the tail end of Storm Franklin, she says: “I know they say that we should live with it. But we can still help prevent it, so self-isolation and free testing should continue.” She adds: “I know from my experience of working with vulnerable people that if you’ve got Covid you shouldn’t go into work.” She is also suspicious of Johnson’s motives for lifting restrictions now. She says: “Everything that happened with the wine and cheese parties and barbecues was ridiculous. When the government tell us one thing you should follow that. So I think he could be trying to get the public back on his side again.” Hetty Constable, 27, a hairdresser, also thinks Johnson’s plan is politically motivated. “He’s trying to get votes, but he’s a muppet and no one trusts him.” She adds: “I think you should still be made to stay at home if you have Covid. If I had it I wouldn’t come in to work. We’ve got to keep people safe.” Even some of those who back Johnson in this safe Conservative seat are uneasy about the plan. “It’s being done too quick,” says Darren Avey, a 56-year-old Tory voter who works at Horsham’s Horace Fuller lawn mower shop. He adds: “I’ve got a bad lung problem. My doctor said if you catch it you’d be gone because your lungs are so rotten and you won’t be able to fight it.” He reckons the move is financially motivated. “They’re doing it now because they can’t afford to keep the testing going. But they’ve got to keep people safe. Too many people are vulnerable.” But many in Horsham will be pleased to see the back of the restrictions, including David Tiller, 78, who spent five nights in hospital with Covid in September 2020. He says: “To me it was like flu. I ended up in hospital because I went down with pneumonia. Everybody seems to be panicking about it. It used to be that if you wore a mask when you went into a bank you’d be arrested; now you’ll be arrested if you don’t wear a mask.” David’s wife, Carol, 61, who works in Horsham Waitrose, says: “We can’t carry on with these restrictions, and people aren’t taking much notice of them anyway. I think it’s time people take their own responsibility and look after themselves, and not be told what to do.” Lyn Bishop, 73, a retired secretary, agrees. “The sooner we get back to normal, the better. I think it’s time really. I’m not nervous about it because I take my own precautions.” A 64-year-old retired officer worker who gave her name only as Stef, says she takes her inspiration from the monarch, saying: “The Queen has got it and she’s not panicking.” She adds: “The whole thing is different now: it is not 2020, we’ve got the vaccines, we’ve got the treatments. We shouldn’t say ‘herd immunity’ but we have built up resistance in the community.” “I’ve known umpteen people who have had it and only two who have been hospitalised and they are fine now. I’m sitting here with no mask and I don’t feel vulnerable.”Frontline health workers in Solomon Islands have warned that its health system is on the brink of collapse as the country struggles to deal with a devastating outbreak of Covid-19. A senior doctor and two nurses at the National Referral Hospital (NRH) in the capital of Honiara have told of how there are no beds for Covid patients – leading to people dying on the floor of the wards – as well as a lack of facilities and staff shortages that have led to Covid-positive nurses being recalled to work and probationary nurses tending to critically ill patients solo, when they should be supervised by a more senior nurse. “People are dying on the floor, the hospital is overcrowded … Sick people and dead bodies were all over,” a senior doctor at NRH said. “The morgue is full. It’s a sad experience. I have never seen this before.” Solomon Islands, a country of about 700,000 people in the South Pacific, had remained Covid-free throughout the pandemic, without a single case of the virus in 2020 and 2021. However, since Covid arrived in the country in mid-January, the country has recorded nearly 6,000 cases and around 70 deaths. The doctor, speaking on condition of anonymity, said the true number of deaths was likely to be much higher. “We have witnessed that there are deaths at home, not brought to hospital because of the fear that any dead body that comes to the hospital will be swabbed and once tested positive will not be allowed to be taken out by the relatives,” he said. “So some deaths are kept at home and it’s a sad and terrible thing to happen.” ‘We don’t have enough nurses’ The doctor warned that healthcare facilities were struggling to cope, with the 56-bed Central field hospital fully occupied. He said that while tents had been prepared outside the hospital for the treatment of Covid-19 patients, they had no toilets, shower rooms or air-conditioning, which he alleged showed the government’s lack of preparation. “I would say that the government has failed this nation.” NRH has turned its orthopaedic ward into a “red zone” Covid ward, where critically ill patients needing oxygen are treated. But both he and a nurse in the hospital confirmed there were Covid patients across other wards in the hospitals. Staff were completely overwhelmed by the number of cases, the doctor said. “We do not have enough nurses to look after the Covid-19 patients, meaning there’s no proper observations and monitoring will take place on sick patients.” A registered nurse, who wished to remain anonymous, said staff were so overstretched that Covid-positive nurses were being called in to work. “In the past weeks, we have had no option but to recall those tested positive yet asymptomatic to come back to work as we can’t handle the increasing Covid-19 cases daily.” A newly-graduated probationary nurse who is working at NRH said junior nurses, who are meant to be supervised, were looking after critically ill patients by themselves. “We were newly graduated … we badly need supervision at all times. And this is a risky undertaking, especially when manpower is overstretched, which means we have to handle the cases ourselves.” The doctor warned that patients suffering from other illnesses and conditions, such as cancer, diabetes, high blood pressure, and those requiring surgery were not getting treatment, monitoring or medication, potentially leading to more deaths. “There are lots of people with illnesses that did not follow up because of their fear of Covid-19,” the doctor said. “They are simply afraid of coming to the hospital … This results in some dying at home; some presented at the emergency and died.” Last week, the government issued a statement saying the rapid spread of Covid was beyond the testing capability of health authorities, contributing to under-reporting of actual case numbers since the outbreak began. The health minister, Dr Culwick Togamana, warned last week that the health system could not cater for all the people who tested positive or were showing symptoms of Covid. “That is why we have advised those with mild symptoms to strictly isolate at home and only moderate to severe cases [be] brought to health facilities for clinical management,” he said. At the end of 2021, Solomon Islands had a very low vaccination rate, with about 20% of adults fully vaccinated. Since the outbreak, vaccination sites that remained empty all of last year are now experiencing massive turnout from the public, and the health minister said there had been allegations of medical practitioners selling vaccines to people. The ministry of health did not respond to questions.That’s it from me, Léonie Chao-Fong, and from the UK politics blog this evening. Here are the key events from today: Boris Johnson has announced the end of all domestic Covid restrictions in England in a process starting later this week. On Thursday, the legal requirement to self-isolate with people instead advised to stay at home if they have Covid, or believe they do. The £500 payment for some people on lower incomes will end on Thursday. From 24 March, statutory sick pay and employment support allowance will only start being paid after four and seven days of absence, rather than immediately. Free testing for the public will end in England from 1 April, with most people having to pay for lateral flow and PCR tests. There will be some exceptions, with free symptomatic tests remaining for NHS patients and in care homes, and some asymptomatic testing for both. In response, the campaign group Covid-19 Bereaved Families for Justice said the lifting of all restrictions is “reckless and dangerous” and that scrapping free testing will cause avoidable deaths. Education unions warned that the lifting of Covid restrictions could result in chaos in schools in England and put school leaders in an impossible position. Geoff Barton, general secretary of the Association of School and College Leaders, warned the changes could lead to more disruption to education. Labour leader Sir Keir Starmer described Boris Johnson’s statement in the House of Commons as “a half-baked announcement from a government paralysed by chaos and incompetence”. He said Labour does not want to see restrictions in place “a moment longer than necessary, but we have to take the public with us, and that requires clarity”. Over-75s and people with suppressed immune systems in the UK are to be offered another Covid-19 booster vaccination in the coming weeks to increase potentially waning protection, after advice from the government’s vaccines watchdog. London Mayor Sadiq Khan confirmed rules on wearing face coverings on public transport will be lifted, however he added that the Transport for London will “likely” continue to recommend their use on the network. Sky News’ political editor Beth Rigby asks how scientists are simultaneously urging caution by saying the pandemic isn’t over while the government eases restrictions. Johnson replies that the government has a “clear view that Covid has not gone away”. On the anxiety point, I don’t want you to think that there is some division between the gung ho politicians and the cautious scientists. We have a very clear view of this that this has not gone away. We’re able to make these changes now because of the vaccines and the high level of immunity. We have to face the fact that there could be likely will be another variant that will cause us trouble. But I believe that thanks to a lot of the stuff that we’ve done, particularly investment in vaccines and vaccine technology and therapeutics, that we will be in a far better position to tackle that new variant when it comes. ITV News’s political editor Robert Peston asks the prime minister if he will isolate if he gets coronavirus, adding that by removing statutory sick pay provisions, the government is making it harder for people to do the right thing. Johnson replies: I will exercise restraint and responsibility and try to avoid infecting other people The BBC’s political editor, Laura Kuenssberg, asks about whether scrapping free testing will be a mistake. Boris Johnson says ending testing in April can only be done because of the high levels of immunity and relative weakness of Omicron – but says that the government will make sure vulnerable people continue to have access to free tests. The UK will continue to invest in ongoing surveillance and “keep observing what is happening” in terms of the prospect of new variants, the PM says, and acknowledges that tests are the way to do that if the Covid situation worsens again. We want to have the keenest eyes in the crow’s nest to watch for an iceberg in the form of a new variant. Taking questions from members of the public, Boris Johnson is asked if people who are vulnerable are being effectively asked to stay inside and remove themselves from the world. No, Johnson replies: What everybody needs to do is treat people who are vulnerable in any way with the utmost consideration. If we’re symptomatic with any disease you should treat vulnerable people with courtesy and avoid spreading it. He says people who are clinically vulnerable will still have access to tests and any therapeutics they need. Sir Chris Whitty adds that it is really clear that vaccination in pregnancy “is a very good thing to do” for both the mother and her baby – and urges pregnant women to get vaccinated. Sir Patrick continues to urge caution, quoting an American colleague: You can celebrate when the sun’s shining – but take your umbrella with you. Chief scientific adviser Sir Patrick Vallance warns the pandemic is not over and “the virus has got a lot of room to evolve”. It will continue to do so at a fast pace “probably for the next couple of years”, he says. And there is no guarantee that the next variant will be of the same reduced severity as Omicron. As it evolves, what it’s trying to do is transmit more readily to grow. So that could be because it has got intrinsic transmissibility advantage, or escapes immunity and the change in severity is a random byproduct. So we expect there to be further variants, and they could be more severe. Prof Whitty says the change of restrictions is a “steady move” over a period of time rather than one big step. This is a gradual steady change over a period of time as the rates are going down. As we head into spring, I think it’s important to understand that context is not a sudden everything stops. This is a steady move. People should still isolate if they have Covid-19, he urges. As we look at the next weeks, we still have high rates of Omicron and I would urge people in terms of public health advice, and this is very much the government’s position, that people should still if they have Covid try to prevent other people getting it and that means self-isolating. So, that is the public health advice. It would have been the public health advice, and will be the public health advice, for multiple other diseases. The Omicron wave is still high, Prof Whitty says. If you look around the UK, we’re still in place where between one in 21 and 25 people have got Omicron if they were tested according to ONS data. The rates are coming down but this is still a very common infection. He says new variants are expected: Some of those new variants will just disappear, but some of them will cause us significant problems and they could be either more vaccine escaping but as severe as Omicron, but the net effect would be actually more people end up in hospital because a lot of our protection is from vaccination, or it could be more intrinsically severe, because Omicron came from a much earlier variant. Prof Whitty says we “could certainly end up with something which is more likely to lead to hospitalisations than Omicron”, adding that winters are expected to be “tricky” even in the absence of significant new variants due to the combination of Covid, flu and other respiratory problems. Prof Sir Chris Whitty says the number of people with Omicron is still very high. The number of people in hospitals is “still significant” and putting pressure on many hospitals, but rates “have been going down steadily now for some weeks”. The number of deaths was smaller in the Omicron peak than in previous waves. In fact, the total number of deaths in recent weeks is lower than expected at this time of year, he says. As he announced in the House of Commons earlier today, Boris Johnson confirms that from Thursday the legal requirement to self-isolate if you test positive for Covid-19 will end in England. He says: Until April we will still advise you to stay at home if you test positive. But after that, we will encourage people with Covid symptoms to exercise personal responsibility just as we encourage people who may have flu to be considerate towards others. The pandemic is not over, Boris Johnson continues, and there may be “significant resurgences”. Our scientists are certain there will be new variants and it is very possible that those will be worse than Omicron. So we will continue to protect the most vulnerable with targeted vaccinations and treatments. Today is not the day we can declare victory over Covid after “two of the darkest years in our peacetime history”, he continues. This virus is not going away, but it is the day when all the efforts of the last two years have finally enabled us to protect ourselves whilst restoring our liberties in full. Boris Johnson says we have “emerged from the teeth of the pandemic”. Speaking at the Downing Street press briefing, he says: When the pandemic began, we had little knowledge of this virus and none about the vaccines and the treatments we had today. So there was no option but to use government regulations to protect our NHS and save lives. But those restrictions on our liberties have brought grace costs to our economy, our society and the changes of our children. From the outset, we were clear that we must chart a course back towards normality as rapidly as possible. As a result of possibly the greatest nation effort in our peacetime history, that is exactly what we have done. Boris Johnson will give a Downing Street press conference at 7pm, alongside Sir Patrick Vallance, the chief scientific officer, and Professor Chris Whitty, England’s chief medical officer. You can follow here for live updates. Steve Chalke, founder of the Oasis academy trust of 52 schools across England, warned the lifting of restrictions would lead to immunosuppressed pupils turning away from schools and to home education because of health concerns. It was “a huge gamble”, he said, adding that he feared many immunosuppressed pupils – and those living with vulnerable relatives – would be effectively excluded because of families’ fears. I think it will become a forced form of exclusion of those who are vulnerable, those immunosuppressed children and staff who are put at increased risk. Also staff who are living with their own immunosuppressed children. They will not be able to afford to take the gamble. I think we will see a group of children turning away from education. It will lead to a further rise in home education. It can be a route for those who are worried or scared. All of this will play together in some unhelpful ways. The gamble in my mind is that attendance among many of the most vulnerable stops or goes down, so it becomes a form of exclusion. Removing the requirement for positive cases to self isolate puts them all at increased risk. Here’s a look at how MPs have responded to Boris Johnson’s unveiling of the government’s “living with Covid” strategy. From Bell Ribeiro-Addy, Labour MP for Streatham: Jonathan Ashworth, Labour MP for Leicester South has also focused on the government’s decision to take statutory sick pay from day one. From Chris Bryant, Labour MP for Rhondda: Tim Farron, Liberal Democrat MP for Westmorland and Lonsdale, writes that Johnson’s decision is “based not on any proper evidence”. Wera Hobhouse, Lib Dem MP for Bath, accuses the PM of “throwing vulnerable people to the wolves”. Ian Blackford, SNP Westminister leader, reiterates his claim that Johnson is “desperately trying to save his own skin”. Prof Stephen Reicher, a member of Sage’s behavioural science subgroup and Independent Sage, says the prime minister’s rhetoric about freedom and choice hides the fact that those freedoms and choices are limited to those who have the means. He says there are some welcome compromises – keeping free LFTs until 1 April and continuing with the ONS survey, at least in some form. But he says there are still three “dire problems”: The first is that lifting self-isolation and ending testing will increase infections (at a time when the ONS survey indicates one in 20 infected in England and even more – one in 13 – infected in Northern Ireland). That is why everyone from the WHO and the NHS Federation to the BMA and Nursing Unions are calling the measure premature. The second is that it sends a very clear message that the pandemic is over and that infections don’t matter (despite protestations to the contrary) and hence undermines all protective behaviours, including vaccination and boosters (and this at a time when the booster program is stalling and nearly a third of adults still aren’t vaccinated). Thirdly, it exacerbates inequalities for those who can’t afford to test or to self-isolate. Indeed all the rhetoric about freedom, and about choice and about allowing people to exercise ‘personal responsibility’ hides the fact that those freedoms and choices are limited to those who have the means. Actually, Johnson’s removal of support for self-isolation and testing takes choice away from those who cannot afford to stay home or buy testing kits. Johnson exposed the fallacy of his argument in asserting that ‘anyone who wants to can buy a test”. No they can’t. If you are already having to choose between eating and heating, tests are an impossible luxury. From our political correspondent, Peter Walker, on how scrapping free testing will impact clinically vulnerable people and poorer people. Boris Johnson presented the end of all domestic Covid restrictions in England as based on liberty. But that’s not the case for ending free testing – that’s to save money, Walker writes. And for those who are clinically vulnerable, the end of free tests will further limit their freedom. Asked by Conservative former minister Sir Edward Leigh if he could rule out any more lockdowns in the coming decade while he remains prime minister, Boris Johnson replies: What you can certainly rely on is that this government will take the tough decisions to protect the British people and we will have a vaccine and science-led approach to dealing with this pandemic. Here’s a look at how some members of the UK’s scientific community has responded to Boris Johnson’s lifting of restrictions in England: Mark Woolhouse, professor of infectious disease epidemiology, University of Edinburgh, said he supported the further lifting of restrictions given current trends in the data, adding that even when restrictions have previously been lifted, public behaviour has remained cautious. If that pattern is repeated - encouraged by robust public health advice and enabled by access to testing and support for those off work - then I don’t expect this latest round of relaxations to have a dramatic impact on the short-term course of the epidemic. However Woolhouse said the most likely medium-term problem is the almost inevitable appearance of another variant, adding it is important public health agencies across the UK are able to respond within days when it happens. If those plans include measures such as the rapid roll-out of self-testing kits - which worked extremely well during the omicron wave - then it is vital that the infrastructure is in place to deliver that very quickly indeed. However Prof Rowland Kao, also of the University of Edinburgh, noted that evidence suggests Covid puts a greater stress on more deprived communities. “For example, ICU occupancy and deaths are now increasingly due to people living in the most deprived areas,” he said, adding that is likely in part down to lower uptake of Covid vaccinations as well as fewer lateral flow tests in such areas. As the requirements to isolate are released – and therefore with no compensation for isolating – and with the expectation that free testing will also be removed, this will likely most impact those who are under the most pressure to work in places where distancing is difficult and therefore potential exposure to infection high. Kao added that they are also people in the areas which, because of existing health deprivation, are most likely to have severe outcomes. While it is acknowledged that continued restrictions such as we have now are unsustainable in the long term, releasing all restrictions so quickly does represent a gamble and one that, if it fails, will likely have the most impact on those who are already disadvantaged. John Drury, Professor of Social Psychology, University of Sussex, also voiced concerns over inequalities, noting policy changes can affect public perception of Covid. Given that financial support –or lack of it – is a major driver of adherence to self-isolation, dropping the £500 compensation for self-isolation provided to a minority of people will reduce risk perceptions, reduce self-isolation, and likely lead to a spread of infection disproportionately amongst less privileged groups. London Mayor Sadiq Khan has urged the government to keep free Covid testing as he confirmed rules on wearing face coverings on public transport will be lifted. He said: Following the government dropping all legal Covid restrictions, and in light of falling infection levels in London, it is expected that wearing a face covering will no longer be a condition of carriage on the TfL network. However, we know that face coverings remain a simple, effective measure that give Londoners confidence to travel, and following clear advice from public health advisers, TfL will likely continue to recommend their use on the network. I urge passengers to be considerate of their fellow Londoners and continue to wear a face covering where appropriate unless exempt. The government is reviewing the overseas Covid travel passenger locator form, Boris Johnson says. Asked by Labour MP Ben Bradshaw why he is keeping the “bureaucratic and irritating” form while Europeans can travel freely by showing a vaccine certificate, the prime minister replies: I can tell him we have one of the most open travel systems in the world and the passenger locator form, I understand his grievance against it, we are certainly reviewing it. Green Party MP Caroline Lucas says lifting restrictions in England “flies in the face” of advice from many NHS leaders and health experts and will make vulnerable people more fearful. Telling people should take personal responsibility while taking away the means for people to do so through free tests was “utterly perverse”, she says. For many clinically extremely vulnerable people, this “freedom day” was instead a “day of profound loss of freedom”, Lucas adds. The campaign group Covid-19 Bereaved Families for Justice says the lifting of all restrictions is “reckless and dangerous” and that scrapping free testing will cause avoidable deaths. In a highly-critical response to Boris Johnson’s announcement, Lobby Akinnola, a spokesperson for the group said: For the over 1,000 families that have lost loved ones to Covid-19 in the last week, the pandemic is anything but over. People will die directly because of the decision to scrap free testing, and those deaths are avoidable. Just as the government was late starting testing, costing thousands of lives, they are going to be too early finishing it, with the same consequence. Testing is the most effective way to avoid the need for restrictions, the spokesperson continues, so scrapping free tests will not benefit ordinary people. The prime minister talks of the country ‘needing to get our confidence back’, but this will only further damage the confidence of the millions who are vulnerable. The prime minister “knows that it will lead to unnecessary deaths”, they say. It’s clear from the government’s refusal to start the inquiry that even they don’t really believe that the pandemic is over, yet they are happy to use it as a slogan to justify throwing ordinary families to the wolves. This is exactly the sort of decision making that we feared when we called Boris Johnson a ‘walking public health hazard’ and tragically our worst fears are coming true. SNP Westminster leader Ian Blackford accuses Boris Johnson of making decisions that are “bereft of science or consultation” and “purely political and made up on the hoof”. He claims the changes are “made for England by a failing prime minister” but that the “illogical reality of UK finance” means there will be funding implications for the devolved nations. He adds: A prime minister who has no moral authority to lead desperately seeking to appease his backbenchers.... This statement is not about protecting the public, it’s about the prime minister scrambling to save his own skin.” Boris Johnson says the UK will be able to deploy a “surge” of testing in the future to deal with potentially dangerous variants of Covid. Responding to Tory former minister Greg Clark’s question about how quickly mass testing could be deployed again, Johnson replies: That is why we are putting so much emphasis on the ONS with its amazing granular ability to detect what is going on in local areas and as well as other forms of surveillance we want to spot the new variants of concern as soon as we can, then we want to surge our testing capacity in the way that we did before and of course much faster now. We will have stockpiles, we will keep our labs in readiness and we will be able to surge when necessary but now is not the right time to continue with mass testing. Former health secretary Matt Hancock agrees with Boris Johnson and says now is the right time to drop Covid measures. He tells the House: Isn’t it extraordinary that despite that consensus on restrictions back then, the consensus on giving people back their freedom - which is often so much harder - that consensus only appears to exist on this side of the House?” Johnson agrees with him, replying: I think it’s a great shame the opposition cannot find themselves to support what I think is a balanced and proportionate approach. And one, Mr Speaker, that recognises that coronavirus has not gone away and that we cannot throw caution to the wind. “ Education unions warned that the lifting of Covid restrictions could result in chaos in schools in England and put school leaders in an impossible position. Paul Whiteman, general secretary of the National Association of Head Teachers, called for urgent guidance from the government and public health experts, and patience from parents as school leaders get to grips with yet more changes. There is no doubt that today’s announcement by the prime minister has the potential to have an enormous impact on schools. What is absolutely essential now is that government very quickly provides clear and unambiguous guidance so that schools and parents have a clear understanding of what to do should a child or member of staff have Covid. Without that clarity, there is a real risk the government could create a chaotic situation in schools and put school leaders in an impossible position. We simply cannot expect schools to manage this on an individual basis, there must be clear guidance from the public health experts. Whiteman called for co-operation between schools and families. “Judging from what the prime minister has said, the government has replaced the legal responsibility for testing and isolation with a personal responsibility to keep each other safe. Schools and families will still need to co-operate to keep schools open. Access to lateral flow tests is an important part of any plan to live with Covid as we move forward. It’s crucial that they remain free for all pupils, or the consequences and disruption for disadvantaged pupils, in particular, could be severe. Geoff Barton, general secretary of the Association of School and College Leaders, warned the changes could lead to more disruption to education. By removing the legal requirement to self-isolate after a positive test, along with twice-weekly testing for pupils and staff in schools and colleges, there is a risk that this may actually lead to an increase in disruption if it means that more positive cases come into the classroom. Staff and pupils are often absent not just because they test positive but because they are actually ill with the coronavirus and this will obviously not abate if there is more transmission. We are also concerned about where this leaves vulnerable staff and pupils, or those with a household member who is vulnerable. These individuals will inevitably feel more scared and less protected by the relaxation of even the fairly limited control measures that are currently in place. Boris Johnson says the evidence for ending Covid restrictions in England is “amply there in the scientific evidence”. Responding to Sir Keir Starmer, he says: The evidence for what we are doing today is amply there in the scientific evidence, in the figures for the rates of infection that I have outlined today and in all the data that is freely available to members of the House. They can see what’s happening with infection rates, with mortality, with what Omicron is doing across the country. On the clinically extremely vulnerable, Mr Johnson says What we are going to do is make sure they continue to be protected with priority access to therapeutics and of course, to vaccines as well. Responding to Starmer, Boris Johnson says the Labour leader has made “the wrong call on every single one of the big decisions” throughout the pandemic. Johnson tells the Commons: Month after month I’ve listened to Labour denouncing the cost of NHS Test and Trace, and now they want to continue with it when we do need to go on with it in the way that we are currently doing. He goes on to accuse Starmer of having shown a “ferocious grip of the wrong end of the stick”, adding: He was wrong on July 19, totally wrong, he said we shouldn’t open up on July 19. He said we needed a road map back into lockdown during December. They wanted to stay in the European Medicines Agency, contrary to his denials in this House, he voted several times to do so. He has been consistently wrong on all the big calls. He was wrong then, he is wrong now. Johnson adds that his government is “moving forward in a balance, sensible and proportionate way”. Labour leader Sir Keir Starmer has called on the government to publish the scientific evidence behind removing the requirement to self-isolate “including the impact on the clinically extremely vulnerable”. He says the British people will continue to act “responsibly” and “do the right thing” of testing and isolating if positive. But he can’t understand why the government is “taking away the tools that will help them to do that”. Starmer says: Free tests can’t continue forever, but if you’re 2-1 up with 10 minutes to go you don’t sub off one of your best defenders. Labour leader Sir Keir Starmer describes Boris Johnson’s statement as “a half-baked announcement from a government paralysed by chaos and incompetence”. He tells the Commons: Our plan would see us learn the lessons of the past two years and prepared for new variants. His approach will leave us vulnerable. He adds: As a nation, there is no doubt we need to move on from Covid. People need to know their liberties are returning and returning for good. But this is a half-baked announcement from a Government paralysed by chaos and incompetence. It is not a plan to live well with Covid. Starmer goes on to say that the Labour party does not want to see restrictions in place “a moment longer than necessary, but we have to take the public with us, and that requires clarity”. Boris Johnson said from April 1 the use of voluntarily Covid status certification will no longer be recommended, adding: The NHS app will continue to allow people to indicate their vaccination status for international travel. The government will also expire all temporary provisions of the Coronavirus Act. Of the original 40, 20 have already expired and 16 will expire on March 24, and the last four relating to innovations in public service will expire six months later after we’ve made those improvements permanent via other means. Johnson said “targeted vaccines and treatments” will be in place for the most vulnerable, telling the Commons: Today we’re taking further action to guard against a possible resurgence of the virus, accepting JCVI advice for a new spring booster offered to those aged 75 and older, to older care home residents and to those over 12 who are immunosuppressed. Boris Johnson explains why the plans have been brought forward. He says: Restrictions pose a heavy toll on our economy, our society, our mental well-being and all the life chances of our children and we do not have to pay the price any longer. We have a population that is protected by the biggest vaccination programme in our history. We have the advantage of the treatments and the scientific understanding of this virus and we have the capabilities to respond rapidly to any resurgence or new variants. He says we need to get our confidence back. We chose to compel people to be considerate to others. We can rely on that sense of responsibility towards one another by providing practical advice in the knowledge that people will follow it to avoid infecting loved ones. Boris Johnson says levels of immunity are high and deaths are low and this is why the restrictions can be lifted now. He says: It’s only because levels of immunity are so high and deaths are now if anything below where you would normally expect for this time of year that we can lift these restrictions and it’s only because we know Omicron is less severe that testing for Omicron on the colossal scale we’ve been doing is much less important and much less valuable in preventing serious illness. The cost of Covid vaccinations and testing has been immense, he says. The “biggest testing programme per person of any large country in the world”, he said “came at vast cost”, adding: The test, trace and isolation budget in 2020/21 exceeded the entire budget of the Home Office. It cost a further 15.7 billion in this financial year and 2 billion in January alone at the height of the Omicron wave. Free universal testing will end in England on April 1, Boris Johnson has told MPs. He says: From the first of April when winter is over and the virus will spread less easily, we will end free symptomatic and asymptomatic testing for the general public. He said the government would continue to provide free symptomatic tests to the oldest age groups and the most vulnerable. Boris Johnson announces that self isolation for people who test positive for Covid will be axed. People will be asked to exercise personal responsibility just as we encourage people who may have flu to be considerate to others. The prime minister says the time is now to move away from government restrictions and to personal responsibility when it comes to living with coronavirus. Boris Johnson says that while the pandemic is not over we have now passed the peak of the omicron wave. He says: It is now time to move from protecting people with government interventions to vaccines and treatment as our first line of defence. Boris Johnson has begun his statement on his ‘Living with Covid’ plan. He starts his speech by sending “best wishes” to the Queen, adding that her diagnosis is a reminder that Covid has not gone away. Boris Johnson is preparing to make a statement to MPs to unveil the government’s long-term strategy for living with the virus. The prime minister is about to announce the plan to end all Covid restrictions in England in the House of Commons. The statement had to be put back after a delayed meeting with his cabinet to discuss his proposals this morning, which was postponed after a reported row about funding. Johnson will then hold a news conference to reveal details to the public at 7pm. The shadow defence secretary, John Healey, pressed the government on its plan to “cut the British Army by another 10,000 soldiers” and its focus on the Indo-Pacific. He said: Does Ukraine not expose the flaws in the government’s integrated review last year? With its first focus on the Indo-Pacific and with its plan to cut the British Army by another 10,000 soldiers? Ben Wallace stressed that in the defence command paper, the government “put a premium on speed and readiness, and sometimes that premium means less mass”. He added: I’m now able to offer our Nato leaders true forces, forces that will actually turn up on the day rather than what we had even in my day when I was serving in West Germany or North Germany, which was fictional numbers. Theresa May commended the UK government for its “robust” stance in response to Russia’s threats against Ukraine, adding: President Putin wants to weaken Nato and the western alliance, but does (defence secretary Ben Wallace) agree with me that any further action to invade Ukrainian territory by the Russians can only lead to a strengthening of the determination of the UK, Nato and the western alliance to defend the rights of sovereign states and to defend democracy? Wallace said the Conservative former prime minister was “absolutely right”, adding in the Commons: In 2014 after the invasion of Crimea, President Putin got exactly the opposite of what he wanted - he got more forces in the east of Europe, he got more defence spending. If he continues down this line, I suspect he’ll continue to get more forces on his border and greater defence spending across Nato - the very opposite of what he is trying to intend to do. Wallace said he hopes Putin “learns the lesson” of Crimea, but warned: “At the moment it’s not looking good.” For those just joining today, here’s a refresher on why Boris Johnson’s statement in the Commons did not take place as 2:30pm as planned. My colleagues Jessica Elgot and Rowena Mason have looked into what happened this morning: The prime minister’s announcement on his plan to end most Covid rules in England was delayed at the last minute amid a row between the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, and the health secretary, Sajid Javid, over funds for free testing. Cabinet ministers were told of the delay as they arrived at No 10 on Monday morning during the final wrangling over the “living with Covid” strategy expected to be announced to the House of Commons in the afternoon. No 10 acknowledged the plan was yet to be completed with just hours to go, with sources confirming there was disagreement over how much should be spent on providing free Covid tests for older and vulnerable people. Johnson will announce the strategy later on Monday afternoon to the House of Commons, and is likely to announce an end to mandatory isolation, contact tracing and most PCR and lateral flow testing for Covid in the community. The Guardian revealed last week that there was a split between Sunak and Javid over how much cash should continue to be spent on testing, with the Treasury pushing for as little as £1.3bn – a 90% cut from this year’s £15bn forecast spend. The Department of Health and Social Care had asked for billions more, which could have funded free lateral flow tests for symptomatic over-50s, but this was rejected by the Treasury. The dispute is now centred on whether the DHSC could use some of its existing budget for a continuation of more community testing for longer. A government source said there was still no agreement between the Treasury and the DHSC on the extent of the testing cuts, although another source at the DHSC said Javid had accepted the position that most testing must end. The source denied Javid was seeking new money and said that instead he wanted to move funds from other areas within the department to cover the additional testing. “DHSC are absolutely not asking for additional funding; they want to reprioritise within the existing budget,” the source said. One of the issues has been that the DHSC asked for enough funding for testing to ensure the survival of the Panoramic antiviral drugs trial, which officials believe would need free lateral flow tests for over-50s and vulnerable adults under 50 until at least September. However, officials are now looking at alternative ways of funding the recruitment of people for the trial. Read the full story here: Ben Wallace told MPs: “We urge Russia to stick to its commitments that it has openly made and signed up to over the years.” He added: While we will take them at their word, we must judge them by their actions. It is important that one of Europe’s biggest military powers the UK maintains strong lines of communications with Russia in order to avoid miscalculation or the risk of inadvertent escalations. The UK, he said, “has not just spoken but acted”, adding: Intimidation and aggression must not be rewarded, we should be under no illusion the Russian forces have now massed on Ukraine’s borders 65% of all their land combat power. The formation present and action of the Russian state to date not only threaten the integrity of a sovereign state, but undermine international law and the democratic values in which all of us in Europe so strongly believe.” He added: The MoD will continue to monitor Russian actions, support Ukrainian defensive efforts and contribute to Nato’s response measures. We continue to hope President (Vladimir) Putin will relent and pull back from an invasion but we must prepare ourselves for the consequences if he does not. Vladimir Putin’s “commitment” to invade Ukraine will lead to a “humanitarian crisis”, the defence secretary, Ben Wallace, warned. Wallace said: I believe he is in danger of setting himself on a tragic course of events leading to a humanitarian crisis, instability and widespread suffering, not just of Ukrainians but also of the Russian people. The defence secretary also warned of continued “false flag” operations orchestrated by the Kremlin, which he described as a “strong cause for concern that President Putin is still committed to an invasion”. Russia continues to be ready to attack Ukraine and has increased troop numbers in the region, the defence secretary has said. Ben Wallace told MPs: In the last 48 hours, contrary to Kremlin assurances we have see a continued increase in troop numbers and a change in... position including from holding areas and potential launch locations. All the indicators point to increasing numbers and readiness of Russia forces and, not surprising to many of us, the pledge to withdraw Russian troops from Belarus at the end of their joint military drills on February 20, were not carried out and the exercise has now been extended until further notice. Ben Wallace says Vladimir Putin appears to still be committed to an invasion, which would be a “tragic course of events” leading to widespread suffering of Ukrainians and Russian people. He says: “All the indicators point to increasing numbers and readiness of Russian forces,” citing two amphibious groups in the Black Sea, nine cruise missile-equipped Russian ships and further four cruise missile-capable vessels in the Caspian Sea. He welcomes attempts to find a diplomatic solution to Ukraine crisis but warns “intimidation and aggression must not be rewarded”. For more on this topic, my colleague Jennifer Rankin is following the developments of the Ukraine/Russia crisis here: Energy minister Greg Hands has said he supports Boris Johnson’s “living with Covid” plan and dismissed claims that it was premature. He told the PA news agency: We’re looking forward to living with Covid, going forward from here how do we, if you like, normalise the situation. I’m looking forward to the prime minister laying out his proposals this afternoon in the House of Commons. He added: I think it’s a balanced approach. Clearly we’re not taking our eye off the ball, but equally there comes a time when you have to learn to live with Covid and that’s what today’s proposals, I think, will be setting out how we do that. A Conservative donor has said he cannot see himself voting for the party unless there is a “complete change of tack”. Sir Rocco Forte, a hotelier, said he had been disappointed in the government’s approach to coronavirus restrictions and tax. He told BBC Radio 4’s World At One programme: My disappointment with the prime minister and this government is it’s not acting as a Conservative government. Instead of reducing regulations, increasing it, instead of lowering taxes, it’s increasing them, and now as a lot of businesses who’ve suffered heavily through the pandemic and have become more heavily indebted as a result are facing increased national insurance costs and increased corporate taxes, and it’s completely the wrong way to approach the situation. Asked whether he had stopped donating to the party he said: Well, I mean, you don’t donate every five minutes to the party. Asked whether it was on pause he said: Yes... I’d like to see a complete change of tack by this government and if it doesn’t change tack then I won’t be even interested in voting for them. Over-75s and people with suppressed immune systems in the UK are to be offered another Covid-19 booster vaccination in the coming weeks to increase potentially waning protection, after advice from the government’s vaccines watchdog. The Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI) has formally advised a rollout of an additional booster this spring for groups of people seen as most vulnerable to severe coronavirus. The recommendation is that additional boosters should be offered to people aged 75 or over, and residents in older people’s care homes, and anyone aged 12 or above who is immunosuppressed. Javid said: Thanks to our Covid-19 vaccination rollout, we are already the freest country in Europe. It has saved countless lives, reduced pressure on the NHS and is allowing us to learn to live with the virus. Today I have accepted the advice from the independent Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI) to offer, from spring, an additional Covid-19 booster jab to people aged 75 years and over, residents in care homes for older adults, and people aged 12 years and over who are immunosuppressed. All four parts of the UK intend to follow the JCVI’s advice. We know immunity to Covid-19 begins to wane over time. That’s why we’re offering a spring booster to those people at higher risk of serious Covid-19 to make sure they maintain a high level of protection. It’s important that everyone gets their top-up jabs as soon as they’re eligible. Talks over a funding settlement for Transport for London will continue until Friday after the government extended emergency finances to allow time for discussion of a new deal. The latest short-term extension comes as ministers and the mayor of London remain at loggerheads over financing the capital’s transport system after a big decrease in tube journeys hammered revenues. The transport secretary, Grant Shapps, told the Commons that the government had supported TfL with more than £4.5bn in extraordinary funding settlements and had now offered a fourth agreement, which the mayor, Sadiq Khan, had until Friday to consider. In a written statement, Shapps said: We have recognised that demand and, therefore, passenger revenue has been volatile, and have responded accordingly, compensating TfL for that revenue loss to ensure services can be maintained. He added: The government is committed to supporting London and the transport network on which it depends, balancing that with supporting the national transport network. Here is some more of that story from my colleague Helena Horton. She reports that Conservative MPs are organising a revolt against the prime minister over the scrapping of a ban on the imports and sale of fur and foie gras. Government sources have confirmed to the Guardian that reports of a U-turn were “broadly correct”, despite the fact the bans were part of the 2019 Conservative manifesto aimed at bringing swing voters on side. Lorraine Platt, a grassroots Tory campaigner who is known as the “unofficial whip” on animal welfare policies, is organising an influential group of MPs to lobby the prime minister to think again. Platt is the founder of the Conservative Animal Welfare Foundation, which counts cabinet ministers including Dominic Raab and Zac Goldsmith among its members. She said: We can’t let Boris be swayed off course by a minority of dissenters. We’ve known for some time there’s been a small minority of MPs who are against any ban on foie gras and fur imports. We will be taking some action on this. We will be encouraging this measure to go forwards. Good afternoon. Tom Ambrose here and I’ll be with you for the next hour or so. Downing Street has declined to say whether Boris Johnson backs a ban on the import of foie gras amid suggestions of cabinet opposition to the plans, according to the PA Media news agency. The BBC had reported that the government was likely to drop the proposal after several ministers raised concerns. British farmers are already banned from producing the liver-based French delicacy because ducks and geese are force-fed during its production. But officials said in May that the government would explore a ban on the sale of foie gras under a raft of legislation designed to protect animals. Asked on Monday whether Johnson intends to ban the import of the product, the prime minister’s official spokesman said: No decisions have been made on that. The production of foie gras from ducks or geese using force feeding is rightly banned in the UK – it’s incompatible with our own welfare standards. Pressed as to whether the prime minister would like to see a ban in the animals abroad bill, he said: I think we will need to wait for the bill, I’m not going to pre-empt that. I’m simply not seeking to pre-empt government policy, you’ll see the position when set out. Here’s what you can expect this afternoon in the Commons: The defence secretary, Ben Wallace, will be giving a statement on the situation in Russia/Ukraine at 3.30pm. Boris Johnson to set out his “living with Covid” plan at around 4.30pm. After that the business secretary, Kwasi Kwarteng, will make a statement on the impact of the recent storms. Then this evening, there will be a press conference regarding the easing of Covid restrictions at about 6.30pm or 7pm. The delayed cabinet meeting is now reportedly taking place. Downing Street is confident Boris Johnson will still deliver his “living with Covid” plan on Monday despite a delay to ministers approving his proposals. The cabinet was due to sign off the prime minister’s plan, which includes the axing of the legal obligation to isolate after a positive test, this morning. But the green lighting of the next step back to normality was pushed back to Monday afternoon, with the delay thought to centre on a request from the health secretary, Sajid Javid, regarding how elements of the blueprint would be funded. Johnson’s plan is still due to be published on Monday, and that he will address the commons at around 4.30pm, which could take an hour or so. The prime minister will then hold a press conference alongside the chief medical officer for England, Prof Sir Chris Whitty, and chief scientific adviser, Sir Patrick Vallance, this evening. We’ve been told this will be at around 6.30pm but some are reporting it won’t take place until 7pm. Meanwhile, Nicola Sturgeon’s Covid strategy statement for Scotland will take place tomorrow. Russia would respond with sanctions against the UK if Boris Johnson imposed punitive measures on Moscow. The Russian ambassador in the UK, Andrei Kelin, suggested British efforts to build a united front in drawing up sanctions in the event of an invasion of Ukraine was a “huge overreaction to the unusual circumstances”. Asked if Russia would retaliate, the ambassador told the PA news agency: We will of course find ways to respond. Sir John Bell, regius professor of medicine at Oxford University and the government’s life sciences adviser, has been speaking about Boris Johnson’s “living with Covid” plans on Radio 4’s The World at One. He said: I think we’re in a position now where mandatory legally enforced quarantine for people who are positive is probably not necessary, given the disease we currently have is relatively benign. The only people are really suffering badly from this disease are the unvaccinated ... I suspect we could keep going [with restrictions] if we wanted to, but it’s not at all clear to me that we’re going to have a serious problem in short/medium term. At some point we have to decide we have to step back from this and just get on with life. He also talked about the end of free testing and said: I think sliding back to a purely commercial model of testing is going to be problematic ... nevertheless we are doing a lot more testing than we need to do. Labour MP Richard Burgon has pointed out to some recent YouGov figures regarding public opinion on self-isolating after a positive Covid result. He said: Boris Johnson’s decision to end the requirement to self-isolate if you have Covid isn’t backed by the science - and it isn’t backed by the public. Health and social care workers are bracing themselves for the announcement about the end of free Covid testing. Although it’s clear the government wants to end the Covid testing programme, it remains unclear who will be eligible for free tests going forward. Prof Karen Middleton, chief executive of the Chartered Society of Physiotherapy (CSP), has called for free testing to remain available to staff working in all health and social care settings, not just hospitals and care homes. She said: Without a comprehensive testing system in place for asymptomatic people as well as those showing symptoms, we cannot reduce the spread of the virus, particularly as new variants emerge. Removing this system and ending self-isolation is a reckless act at a time when we have barely emerged from the peak of this wave and cases remain so high. The CSP is concerned that these changes will also have a greater detrimental impact on those in low wage or insecure employment. There doesn’t appear to be any public health rationale behind the decision and it risks leaving the NHS and social care systems with ever greater staffing shortages – not to mention the higher risk faced by already-vulnerable patients going into health settings for treatment. It also seems highly counter-productive for the costs of any continuation of testing to come from health budgets when pressures are so great. Nurseries in England continue to be severely affected by the pandemic, with latest official data showing record numbers of early years and childcare settings reporting Covid cases at the end of last month. As the government prepared to lift remaining Covid restrictions, government statistics published on Monday revealed more than 5,000 settings reported one or more cases of Covid in the week beginning the 24 January. The total was slightly lower a week later, dropping from 5,189 to 4,559, but the National Day Nurseries Association (NDNA) said the figures showed that staff and children were still catching and becoming ill with Covid. Purnima Tanuku, NDNA chief executive, said NDNA survey data for the second week in February showed absence rates for staff and children beginning to drop. “This will be a major relief for nurseries and parents but with absence still around 9% this shows the impact of the pandemic is not completely over for settings or children.” It was also confirmed by Ofsted that as of today nurseries and childminders will no longer be required to report to the watchdog if there is a confirmed case of Covid. Tanuku said: While settings will be relieved that the administrative burden of reporting cases will be eased … it shows that staff and children are still catching and being ill with Covid-19. Nurseries are still telling us that Covid is impacting on how they staff and resource their setting and this must be taken into account by Ofsted inspectors when any visits take place; either by allowing deferrals or taking into account the pressures that settings and staff are under. The elections watchdog has urged the government not to give ministers a greater say in its work, saying plans to do so would seriously undermine its independence and could affect confidence in the wider electoral system. In a strongly worded and highly unusual public letter, the Electoral Commission said provisions in the elections bill for ministers to draw up a new “strategy and policy statement” – which the watchdog must take account of – had no precedent in comparable democracies. “It is our firm and shared view that the introduction of a strategy and policy statement – enabling the government to guide the work of the commission – is inconsistent with the role that an independent electoral commission plays in a healthy democracy,” the letter said. “This independence is fundamental to maintaining confidence and legitimacy in our electoral system.” The letter was signed by the full board of the commission, representing all four UK nations, with the exception of Conservative peer Stephen Gilbert, the party’s representative on the board,. The House of Lords is now considering the bill. Ministers have insisted the provisions will not amount to interference. However, critics and opposition parties have labelled the idea an attempt to neuter the organisation and stop it looking too closely at areas such as party funding. In the letter, the commissioners said the plan would compel the watchdog “to have regard to the government’s strategic and policy priorities and to help the government to meet those priorities.” The letter continued: It would thereby provide a mechanism, driven by the then governing party, enabling that party’s ministers to shape how electoral law is applied to them and their political competitors. While the stated position of the current government is that it would not intend to use these powers to impact on the commission’s independent oversight and regulation of the electoral system, no such assurances can be given about how the broad scope of these powers would be used over time. The statement has no precedent in the accountability arrangements of electoral commissions in other comparable democracies, such as Canada, Australia or New Zealand. Read more here: Downing Street said the postponed cabinet meeting on Monday afternoon would be held via a call rather than in person “because of expedience”. The prime minister’s official spokesman said it would be a “simpler way to facilitate the discussion” after the planned in-person meeting on Monday morning was cancelled at short notice. He said that “during the pandemic, lots of significant government policy was agreed in that format”. He added: I think the public would understand that meetings can be moved when discussing issues like this and when there’s other things at play including national security. A Welsh government spokesman said any decision to change the existing Covid testing programme would be “premature and reckless”. He said: Testing has played a pivotal role in breaking chains of transmission of Covid, and has acted as a powerful surveillance tool helping us to detect and respond rapidly to emerging variants. It is clearly essential that this continues. Any decision to effectively turn off the tap on our national testing programme with no future plans in place to reactivate it would put people at risk. This is not acceptable. In Wales, we will continue to make decisions to protect the health of people based on the scientific evidence available to us. Boris Johnson is now expected to speak to MPs at 4.30pm about his “living with Covid” plan. This has been delayed from 2.30pm thought to be due to the cabinet meeting being delayed because of a reported row between the health department and the Treasury. A Downing Street press conference is also expected to take place on Monday evening around 6.30pm, with the prime minister due to speak alongside England’s chief medical officer, Prof Sir Chris Whitty, and the government’s chief scientific adviser, Sir Patrick Vallance. The delayed cabinet meeting, to be chaired by Johnson, is likely to be “a call rather than in-person”, Downing Street said. Johnson’s official spokesman said cabinet was postponed “so that the prime minister could have both a security briefing and have further meetings to finalise the plan on living with Covid”. Downing Street said Monday’s cabinet meeting would have been the first time the PM’s “living with Covid” plan would have been presented to ministers. The prime minister’s official spokesman said that although “relevant cabinet ministers have been discussing this for some time now” it would have been the first time the full cabinet had discussed the proposals. The spokesman said he would not discuss who was in meetings to “finalise” the plan or what was being debated, but he added: It will obviously be signed off and agreed at cabinet but elements of it... as it is always an iterative process for these plans, it’s right to take the time to get it right. The spokesman said although the prime minister had dedicated “a lot of time” to the Ukraine crisis over the weekend, that had not prevented discussions on the Covid plan. There is still a “window for diplomacy” to resolve the crisis over Ukraine, Downing Street has said. The prime minister’s official spokesman said ministers still believe Russia intends to mount an invasion of its neighbour with elements of Moscow’s plan beginning to play out. The spokesman said: Intelligence we are seeing suggests Russia intends to launch an invasion and President Putin’s plan has in effect already begun. We are seeing elements of the Russian playbook we would expect to see in those situations starting to play out in real time. Crucially we still think there is a window for diplomacy. I think that is what we have seen in discussions over the weekend and we want to explore those. The spokesman said the defence secretary, Ben Wallace, would make a statement to MPs later on Monday. Laura Kuenssberg of the BBC says the row this morning which delayed the cabinet meeting has been resolved. There will be no more money for the Department of Health but the plan “seems instead to move money around within existing Dept of Health budget,” the political editor reports on Twitter. The cabinet meeting is still yet to be rescheduled, she said. Businesses will be liable to pay for their testing regime if they want to continue checking whether their employees have coronavirus, Paul Scully said earlier today. The business minister told Times Radio “we don’t test for flu, we don’t test for other diseases, and if the variants continue to be as mild as Omicron then there’s a question mark as to whether people will go through that regular testing anyway”. He said: But if employers want to be paying (for) tests and continuing a testing regime within their workplace, then that will be for them to pay at that point. Scully said the government was concerned about the most vulnerable but “we’re not going to be having a testing regime for the next 50 years”. The Scottish first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, said she was frustrated by the delay in signing off the “living with Covid” plan. In a tweet thread, she said: The reality of UK finance flows means this decision determines the money devolved administrations (paid for by taxpayers in Sc, Wales &amp; NI) have for testing. Expressed frustration to Michael Gove this morning that we still don’t know &amp; this delay deepens that. Ian Watson of the BBC is speaking on BBC News now. He says there seems to be a disagreement over the timescale for withdrawing free testing. Watson says sources have told him that “underlying tensions within the Department of Health and the Treasury of the £2bn monthly cost of free testing have not yet been resolved”. The timescale of withdrawing free tests and who is eligible for continued free testing is also a source of tension, Watson says. Boris Johnson’s statement in the Commons is still due to go ahead this afternoon but there will have to be a cabinet meeting before that takes place so it is unclear if it will have to be delayed. Steven Swinford of The Times says the row holding up the cabinet meeting appears to have caught the prime minister “completely off guard”. The shadow health secretary, Wes Streeting, said the delayed cabinet meeting was a sign of “chaos and incompetence”. He said: The government is paralysed by its own chaos and incompetence and the British public are paying the price. This shambles cannot continue. What confidence can the public have that the Conservatives are acting in the national interest when they can’t agree a plan for Covid? Streeting said it was clear the prime minister was “trying to declare victory before the war is over”, simply to distract from the police knocking at the door of Number 10. Several readers are pointing out that there has been a change on the government website where you can order free lateral flow tests, ahead of changes to Covid restrictions due to be announced today. The system used to restrict people to one pack order per 24 hours. Now the LFT packs can only be ordered once every 72 hours. This change appears to have been introduced today. The Department of Health has been contacted for comment. Experts have expressed particular concern about clinically extremely vulnerable people, for whom Covid still poses a more serious risk, my colleague Aubrey Allegretti reported yesterday. The specialist guidance that has been in place for much of the pandemic is not expected to continue. Gemma Peters, chief executive of Blood Cancer UK, said that the government had “deliberately abandoned” this group. Removing free lateral flow tests would “create a massive health inequality” for clinically vulnerable people whose friends, family and colleagues could not afford to take tests before contact, Peters said, while removing the requirement to self-isolate would further ramp up “risk and anxiety”. Read more on the prime minister’s Living with Covid plans: The foreign secretary, Liz Truss, has warned that a Russian invasion of Ukraine appears “highly likely” despite Joe Biden and Vladimir Putin tentatively agreeing to hold a crisis summit. The US president agreed during last-ditch diplomatic efforts against the backdrop of heightening tensions to meet his Russian counterpart on the condition Moscow does not invade. Truss, however, did not appear to be revising her concerns that the Kremlin would order an attack as she warned that the price of an invasion must be “intolerably high” for Russia. After meeting the Nato secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, in Brussels, she tweeted: Diplomacy must be pursued but a Russian invasion of Ukraine looks highly likely. The UK and allies are stepping up preparations for the worst case scenario. We must make the cost for Russia intolerably high. The prospect of talks also did little to dampen fears an attack was imminent in Washington, with the White House saying the Kremlin was continuing to prepare a “full-scale assault on Ukraine very soon”. Cabinet has been delayed to allow further discussions between the chancellor Rishi Sunak and health secretary Sajid Javid over testing budgets, the Guardian understands. Javid is understood to have accepted the case for the end to the majority of testing, but disagreement is still continuing over the extent of the rollback. A government source denied Javid was seeking new money but wanted to be able to reprioritise his existing budgets. The source said: DHSC are absolutely not asking for additional funding, they want to reprioritise within the existing budget. The reason the cabinet meeting to approve Boris Johnson’s new Covid plans has been delayed is down to an argument about money, several political journalists are reporting. Harry Cole of the Sun predicts it’s going to be a long day. Kevin Schofield of HuffPost UK says it sounds like a “proper barney” and has thrown the government’s plans for the day into chaos. Some ministers had been photographed arriving in Downing Street ahead of the planned cabinet meeting to rubber stamp the ‘Living with Covid’ plan, which has been delayed. It is understood it has not been cancelled and is still due to take place later today, after the prime minister has received further briefings, in order for the plans to be signed off. However, there are rumours that the actual reason for the delay is that there is a row going on. BBC News is reporting that sources in government have suggested it’s down to ongoing tensions between the Department of health and the Treasury. Harry Cole of the Sun has heard the same: One thing has been made clear, the reason for the delay has nothing to do with the Queen. Boris Johnson’s statement to Commons on the plan was due to take place after 2:30pm. It’s not clear if that will now be delayed. There is also due to be a press conference this evening, but the time is still to be confirmed. I’ll update you on these times as soon as I have them confirmed. A business minister suggested the £2bn spent on providing free coronavirus tests every month could be better used elsewhere. Amid reports that Boris Johnson was to scrap free Covid tests, Paul Scully told Sky News “we can’t continue forevermore spending 2 billion a month on tests”. He said: If you think what that £2bn might go towards, there’s a lot of other backlogs in the NHS, other illnesses in the NHS, that that money could otherwise go for. So for every person that is worried about a test, there may be another person that’s worried about a cancer diagnosis, for instance. Two cabinet sources say the cabinet meeting to sign off the final Covid regulations has been “pushed back” and they haven’t got a confirmed time for later. No 10 denying that it’s cancelled completely but no reason given. The Labour-led Welsh government has described any scrapping of testing programmes as “reckless.” A spokesperson said: Any decision to change the existing national testing programme would be premature and reckless. Testing has played a pivotal role in breaking chains of transmission of Covid, and has acted as a powerful surveillance tool helping us to detect and respond rapidly to emerging variants. It is clearly essential that this continues. Any decision to effectively turn off the tap on our national testing programme with no future plans in place to reactivate it would put people at risk. This is not acceptable. Paul Scully denied Boris Johnson’s expected announcement on Covid rules has been brought forward to distract from the partygate saga. Appearing on ITV’s Good Morning Britain, the business minister was asked whether the plan is a “smokescreen”, but said: No, the restrictions are all peeling back on the 22nd of March anyway, so we need to be looking at these measures and we need to be looking at the data in the round. Meanwhile, Conservative MP Andrew Bridgen told Good Morning Britain that while he welcomed the prime minister’s rolling back of measures, it did not change his decision to submit a letter of no confidence in the Tory leader. He said there is “never a bad time to do the right thing”, and added: The prime minister has done the right thing with regard to the Covid restrictions and that doesn’t change the status of my letter of no confidence. There should be a “real high bar to get rid of any prime minister”, Paul Scully has said. The business minister said he needed to “see the context” before he made any decision on Boris Johnson’s future over the partygate saga. Asked about an alleged gathering for Johnson’s birthday, Scully said: I understand this is one that’s not actually being investigated by the police... so in terms of lawbreaking, that’s not going to meet the reach the threshold of evidence. But nonetheless, that’s what I mean about context, that’s why I want to see the Sue Gray report, see what the police find and then we can work through... have that conversation at that point. I’m going to wait until I see context before I really make any more judgment on it. Ministers will reject making misogyny a hate crime in England and Wales and urge MPs to get behind controversial legislation that has been criticised for curbing the right to protest as the government seeks to push through major changes to the criminal justice system. In a move which will set up a clash with conservative backbenchers and opposition MPs when the police, crime, sentencing and courts bill returns to parliament next week, the home secretary, Priti Patel, will write to members on Monday saying the government will oppose a Lords amendment that would extend hate crimes to cover misogyny. The home office said its rejection is based on a Law Commission report, which warned that extending hate crimes to cover misogyny would prove “more harmful than helpful” to victims of violence against women and girls. The government says it is also “carefully considering” a new offence of street harassment that would criminalise the verbal abuse of women, pestering and persistent cat-calling or making lewd comments. The letter comes after the government has been forced into a series of concessions on crime and violence against women and girls over the last few months. Responding to the letter, Yvette Cooper, the shadow home secretary, condemned Patel for failing to introduce new legislation to tackle hatred against women. She said: It is shameful that the home secretary is still refusing to make violence against women and girls a strategic policing requirement so it has the same prominence as tackling organised crime. She is also still refusing to establish specialist rape units in every police force area or minimum sentence for rape and stalking, and shockingly is still resisting Labour’s proposals for action against landlords who pressurise tenants into sex for rent. Read the full story here: Paul Scully said it would be down to employers and employees to make decisions over self-isolating. The business minister told Sky News: I would say that it’s like any illness, frankly, any transmissible illness that you would say stay at home. He said if an employee had flu, they would be expected to stay at home, “but it’ll be down to themselves or down to their employer”. Asked what action employees should take if their employers tried to force them in if they were ill with Covid, Scully said: This is why we need to make sure that we’ve got really good guidance for employers. But as I say, there will come a time when the pandemic moves to more of an endemic approach to Covid, in the same way that flu and other viruses are treated, and that’s what we’ve got to get back to. But it’s a fine balance, clearly, and that’s why cabinet’s meeting this morning, to go through the science, to go through that balance and debate it and then, obviously, the prime minister (will) come before parliament to make his announcement. The public should not “work and live under government diktat for a moment longer than is necessary”, a minister has said. Business minister Paul Scully told Sky News it was important to make changes to coronavirus rules “to allow the economy to recover, to allow people to get back to a sense of normality, whilst keeping people safe, clearly”, as Boris Johnson prepared to launch his “living with Covid” plan. Scully said: Infections are coming down quite rapidly, the hospitalisations and deaths are following as well - they tend to lag behind, obviously, the case numbers - but nonetheless you can see the trend within that. Scully said the prime minister will be “looking at the best advice possible but getting the balance right”. The government’s “living with Covid” plan is due to be announced today, despite concerns from scientists, health experts and Labour that the move is premature. Johnson said the proposal would be about “finally giving people back their freedom” after “one of the most difficult periods in our country’s history”. The legal requirement for anyone with Covid to isolate will be ditched a month earlier than planned, while free PCR and lateral flow tests for everyone will be axed to rein in public spending and attempt to restore people’s confidence that life can return to normality. The tests will reportedly be kept for the over-80s. The national contact tracing service is expected to be wound down and schoolchildren will no longer be told to get tested twice a week. Fresh guidance is expected to be issued, similar to that already published about seasonal flu, designed to let individuals make their own judgments about the risk of catching or transmitting Covid, my colleague Aubrey Allegretti reports. Following meetings over the weekend the cabinet will be assembled to rubber stamp the plans today before a Commons statement by the prime minister and a press conference in the evening, likely to feature the government’s two leading pandemic advisers, Chris Whitty and Patrick Vallance. The changes will start to come into effect from later in the week, reportedly on Thursday which is being dubbed “Freedom Day” by some newspapers. Welcome to today’s politics live blog. I’m Nicola Slawson and I’ll be taking the lead today. You can contact me on Twitter (@Nicola_Slawson) or via email (nicola.slawson@theguardian.com) if you have any questions or think I’m missing something. You can also follow our dedicated Ukraine crisis blog here: Meanwhile, our global coronavirus blog is here: